Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/KWT/  Programme rationale  The State of Kuwait is  high-income country
with  per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of $33,538 in Kuwait has  total
population of 13 million, of whom approximately 30 per cent are Kuwaiti
nationals and the remainder are expatriates The oil and gas sectors account for
90 per cent of total revenue and half of GDP With surging oil prices, the Kuwait
economy experienced high levels of economic growth with per capita income
standing at $31,430 in Kuwait succeeded in converting its resource wealth into
high standard of living for its people Between 1990 and 2017, its Human
Development Index value increased by per cent to 803, putting the country in the
“very high human development” category and positioning it at 56 of 189 countries
and territories  The country’ long-term development priorities are set forth in
New Kuwait “Vision 2035” and the Sustainable Development Goal-based Kuwait
National Development Plan (KNDP), the latter prepared with UNDP support The KNDP
(2020–2025) aims to promote the transformation of Kuwait into  regional
financial hub through seven key pillars: () effective public administration; ()
economic diversification; () modern infrastructure; () sustainable living
environment; () high-quality health care; () creative human capital; and ()
enhanced global positioning  The Government is committed to achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals through implementation of the KNDP According to
the country’ voluntary national review, progress has been made for most of the
Goals but is lagging for industry/innovation (Goal ), responsible consumption
and production (Goal 12), climate (Goal 13) and life under water (Goal 14)
Kuwait has complete data only for Goal , affecting its ability to
comprehensively track progress With overall guidance from the Government,
represented by the General Secretariat of the Supreme Council for Planning and
Development (GSSCPD), UNDP supported the establishment of the National
Observatory on Sustainable Development (NOSD) to track achievement of the Goals
and an interministerial steering committee headed by the GSSCPD to guide
preparation of the voluntary national review  The key to achieving the goals of
the KNDP will be the development of policies and strengthening of institutions
to implement these policies, while also taking steps to create the policy and
regulatory environment which stimulates public-private partnerships  The
country’ natural resource-based economy presents two interrelated challenges:
the need to diversify the economy to broaden the revenue base and mitigate the
impact of potential external shocks; and managing public expenditures at
sustainable levels The drop in oil prices in 2014 led to  fiscal deficit in  of
about 15 per cent of GDP, which will require $116 billion over the next six
years to finance Kuwait has been able to absorb such shocks through domestic and
international bond issues and drawdowns from its General Reserve Fund However,
the economy could be affected at  time of external shocks by policies which
virtually guarantee public sector employment and provide generous subsidies and
cash transfers to citizens These benefits accounted for more than 50 per cent of
the total budget in ,10 which puts pressure on resources available for public
services and investments linked to the KNDP and Sustainable Development Goals
Over 70 per cent of Kuwaiti citizens are under age 34 which, in the absence of
reform, will increase fiscal pressures,11 and less than 15 per cent of  World
Bank, Trading Economics (  Ibid  Kuwait Public Authority for Civil Information (
June World Bank, Country Profile, gross national income per capita based on
purchasing power parity (PPP), Sept See also   UNDP, Human Development Indices
and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update  Government of Kuwait, Vision 2035,
October Government of Kuwait, draft voluntary national review on implementing
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development  International Monetary Fund,
Article IV Consultation  The General Reserve Fund is part of the Kuwait
sovereign wealth fund whose total assets are estimated at close to $600 billion
in 10 Tri-International Consulting Group (TICG), Increasing Private Sector
Employment of Nationals in the GCC, 11 United Nations Country Team (UNCT)
Kuwait, Kuwait Common Country Assessment, May DP/DCP/KWT/ nationals entering the
labour market over the next five years are expected to be absorbed by the
private sector12  While overall unemployment is low ( per cent in 2018),13
significant labour market reforms will be necessary to address imbalances
between public and private sector employment Approximately 80 per cent of
Kuwaiti nationals in the workforce are employed by the public sector Kuwaiti
nationals make up only  per cent of the private sector workforce,14 with the
remainder comprised of expatriates The root causes for this imbalance include
the fact that public sector work is guaranteed for nationals and better paid,
expatriate workers tend to engage in manual labour and the service industry, and
workers’ skills often are not aligned with the needs of the private sector15
Public sector employment and compensation are not necessarily effectively linked
with performance management The country stands at the forty-ninth percentile for
government effectiveness16 and ranks 41 of 193 Member States on the United
Nations -Government Development Index17 This contributes to inefficiencies and
gaps in government policy coordination, implementation and responsiveness The
current state of transparency, accountability and oversight mechanisms has
raised concerns of potential corruption across the branches of government and
public enterprises18 Kuwait is ranked 78 of 180 countries in the Transparency
International 2018 Corruption Perceptions Index, up from 85 in 19 The Government
has established  national anti-corruption authority and strengthened the anti-
corruption policy framework  The status of women highlights  disconnect between
education and employment, as significantly more women than men complete
secondary and tertiary education On the World Economic Forum 2018 Global Gender
Gap Index, Kuwait is ranked 74 of 149 countries for the educational attainment
of women and 127 of 149 for women’ economic participation and opportunity20 In
2005, the National Assembly passed the bill for women’ suffrage and the country
has demonstrated progress in narrowing gender gaps among professional and
technical workers Yet, Kuwait is ranked 146 of 149 for women’ political
empowerment,21 largely due to their underrepresentation in leadership; only 16
per cent of legislators, senior officials and managers are women22 Cultural
traditions and structural barriers continue to impede more rapid progress and
existing laws and policies have not been able to adequately address the needs of
women subjected to violence23  Rapid urbanization and waste generation have
created additional challenges that are compounded by climate change Temperature
rise above the global average has been accompanied by increased frequency of
dust storms and changing rainfall patterns24 This puts upward pressure on energy
consumption, which is one of the highest per capita rates globally, although
Kuwait is well positioned to pursue clean energies Higher industrial demand for
water could pose challenges to balancing water supply and demand, which is one
of the highest per capita rates in the world25 To address these issues, UNDP has
helped to build capacities in energy-related analysis and forecasting to produce
the Kuwait Energy Outlook report, which identified key data and policy gaps
Kuwait also has one of the world’ 12 International Monetary Fund, Country Report
No 18, January 13 World Bank  14 Tri-International Consulting Group (TICG),
Increasing Private Sector Employment of Nationals in the GCC, 2017 (table page )
15 Ibid 16 World Bank, World Governance Indicators,  17 United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations -Government Survey 18
Ibid Kuwait’ National Assembly, however, enjoys relative independence and
constitutional oversight powers, though this is limited to the actions of the
Prime Minister and ministers 19 Kuwait Times  20 World Economic Forum, The
Global Gender Gap Report ( 21 Ibid (page 149) 22 World Economic Forum, The
Global Gender Gap Report 23 UNDP Kuwait Project document: support to the State
of Kuwait in the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal  on gender
equality, 24 UNCT Kuwait, 25 Per capita energy consumption is  tons of oil (vs
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average of  source: UNDP
Kuwait Energy Outlook 2019), per capita water consumption is 478 litres/day
(source: Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Stat: Water Statistics Report in GCC
Countries  DP/DCP/KWT/ highest per capita waste generation rates, yet lacks an
integrated approach to waste management, leaving recycling business
opportunities untapped In the meantime, urban development trends and continued
prominence of the extractive sector threaten the country’ unique ecosystems and
biodiversity26 Kuwait is ranked 46 of 141 countries for overall global
competitiveness and ranked 108 for innovation capability by the World Economic
Forum Global Competitiveness Index27 To support economic and energy
diversification and public administration reforms, the civil service will
require the capacities to develop and implement innovative policies in
partnerships with the private sector and civil society The Government has
established the Kuwait Policy Appraisal Lab (innovation unit) as part of the
Kuwait Public Policy Centre (KPPC) Continued support is required for its
institutional capacity development to continue evidence-based policy analysis
and further application of innovations for effective implementation of policies
In 2014 the Secretary-General recognized the humanitarian leadership of His
Highness the Amir of Kuwait The Government has been increasing its leadership
role in the region and beyond to support crisis prevention, peacebuilding and
stabilization efforts in other countries Kuwait has successfully played the role
of mediator within the Gulf Cooperation Council and hosted mediation efforts
between the parties to the conflict in Yemen Kuwait has advanced its leadership
role in providing humanitarian support, including the hosting of international
pledging conferences for the Syrian crisis and for Iraq Kuwait also contributes
per cent of its GDP to official development assistance28 The Government is
exploring ways to build on this legacy and expand the country’ role and
prominence as  strategic donor to advance the sustainable development agenda
abroad According to an independent evaluation of the previous country programme,
UNDP has become  key partner in providing transparent project implementation
support for addressing  range of development priorities,29 including for energy
efficiency and environment (with the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP)), drug prevention and anti-corruption (with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime), empowerment of youth (with the United Nations Population Fund)
and traffic strategy and automation UNDP supported the digital strategy for
inclusion for persons with disabilities,30 which requires further support for
implementation in partnership with the private sector UNDP supported the
establishment of the KPPC to improve evidence-based policymaking processes,
continued to develop pathways for increased women’ participation and prepared
the ground for  future strategy to address violence against women (with the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-
Women)) The evaluation highlighted three key recommendations: () provide more
strategic support in  high-income country context through increased policy
advocacy and application of innovation for development impact; () employ more
nimble and responsive portfolio/project development in support of the KNDP; and
() maximize the convening role of UNDP to expand partnerships with civil
society, academia and the private sector for development dialogue and
implementation of solutions II Programme priorities and partnerships The
Government has exhibited strong national ownership of UNDP programming In
consultations about the new country programme, the Government has indicated its
continued commitment to work closely with UNDP and build on collaboration begun
under the previous programme towards the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development As  high-income country, Kuwait increasingly looks to
its international partners for cutting-edge policy advice, advocacy and
partnerships The new country programme responds to this call and will focus on
strengthening policy processes and advocacy, institutional capacities,
innovation, knowledge transfer, expanded engagement with civil 26 UNDP Kuwait,
Technical Support Mission Report: Energy and Environment, May 27 World Economic
Forum, The Global Competitiveness Report 28 $billion in Source: Independent
Evaluation Office, UNDP, Independent Country Programme Evaluation – Kuwait,
August 29 Ibid 30 UNDP, Disability-Inclusive Development in UNDP, DP/DCP/KWT/
society and the private sector, and support to the country’ regional and global
leadership initiatives The country programme is aligned to the KNDP, which is
based on the Sustainable Development Goals, and will adopt an integrated
programmatic approach to improve the inter-connectedness of interventions This
country programme will contribute primarily to the three outcomes of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), , specifically
outcome  (public administration and economy), outcome  (living environment) and
outcome  (international positioning) The country programme will also contribute
to outcome  (accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development)
and employ signature solutions , ,  and  of the UNDP Strategic Plan,  Particular
emphasis will be placed on increased South-South and triangular cooperation
between entities in Kuwait and other programme countries Collaboration with
civil society and the private sector will emphasize increasing their role as
partners in development solutions for achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals Central to all UNDP policy work will be mainstreaming the principle of
“leaving no one behind” into national policy design mechanisms by supporting the
collection of disaggregated data and application of innovations to accelerate
efficiency in achieving the Goals Supporting more effective public
administration This priority area will strengthen institutional capacities for
improved evidence-based policymaking across government institutions in general
(Goal 16), public administration reform and anti-corruption (Goal 16), women’
and youth empowerment (Goals , 10), persons with disabilities (Goal 10), and
environmental, urban, and energy sustainability (Goals , 11, 13) UNDP will
continue to strengthen the institutional capacities of the KPPC for producing
evidence- based policy briefs to inform the implementation of the KNDP;
expanding public engagement in policymaking processes; improving collaboration
across government institutions to inform cross- sectoral policies; brokering
partnerships with internationally reputed academia to ensure high-quality
knowledge management; and strengthening the link between research findings and
KNDP objectives/reforms The KPPC will experiment with sector-specific and
system-wide innovations in pursuit of custom solutions for its economic and
public administration transformation This will include providing institutional
and technical capacity-building support to the NOSD to address data gaps (in
cooperation with the Central Statistical Bureau (CSB) as required) in monitoring
progress under the KNDP and the Goals; utilization of big data and reporting;
prototyping policy innovations and establishing interinstitutional linkages for
greater cross-sectoral integration; and  feasibility study on practical
applications of artificial intelligence in pursuit of development solutions The
work will be informed by behavioural insight research to be undertaken by the
Kuwait Policy Appraisal Lab (the KPPC innovation unit) in cooperation with
regional experts in behavioural economics To support the Government in
implementing the KNDP, UNDP will also support institutional capacities to
implement policies and strategies First, UNDP will support the establishment of
technical support office within the GSSCPD to provide project management and
implementation support and project-related capacity development training for
relevant government entities Secondly, UNDP will contribute to supporting the
development and implementation of national policies and strategies in line with
the KNDP This includes  national integrity and anti-corruption strategy;
national strategy for persons with disabilities with the Public Authority for
the Disabled to increase employment of persons with disabilities; and  national
strategy to combat violence against women To advance women’ empowerment, UNDP
will work with the Women’ Research and Study Centre on increasing women’
political participation and economic empowerment; strengthen the capacity of the
CSB, upon their request, to produce disaggregated data; and, in close
partnership with UN-Women, scale up the Gender Seal initiative for public and
private sector entities to integrate gender equality considerations in their
institutional/corporate structures 31   DP/DCP/KWT/ In partnership with the
GSSCPD, UNDP support for institutional capacity development will focus on
addressing some of the underlying and root causes of challenges to public
administration This includes strengthening performance management systems to
promote  more merit-based system; supporting improved strategic planning
processes to ensure more coherent KNDP project design and screening; project
implementation support; and coordination towards the objectives of the KNDP and
2030 Agenda Through partnerships with the GSSCPD, KPPC, other national
institutions and the private sector, UNDP will provide integrated advisory
support for the Government’ multisectoral coordination role UNDP will support
the KPPC, NOSD and the Centre for Knowledge Economy to help improve national
policymaking capacities and processes regarding data, analysis, cross-sectoral
integration, coordination and implementation, particularly in pursuit of the
objectives of the KNDP and the Sustainable Development Goals, together with
other United Nations agencies Supporting the global positioning of Kuwait UNDP
will help to build institutional capacities and polices, while facilitating
national and international partnerships, for Kuwait to leverage its national
wealth and international engagement as  humanitarian leader UNDP will support
Kuwait in advancing the humanitarian, development and peacebuilding nexus and
stabilization support beyond its borders (Goal 17) together with UNHCR Key
initiatives utilizing the global UNDP networks, anchored in its field presence,
will form the core of partnerships between UNDP and Kuwait to deliver sustained
results on the ground First, UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Kuwaiti non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and foundations active in
supporting other countries to share good practices and lessons learned in the
area of conflict prevention, which in turn will contribute to informed decision-
making by Kuwaiti donor entities for replication, scale-up and greater impact
This will be accompanied by establishment of  centre to provide real-time and
demand-based analysis related to conflict prevention and resolution in
consultation with the United Nations Department of Political and Peacekeeping
Affairs (DPPA) in support of the Government’ efforts to champion humanitarian
leadership Secondly, UNDP will support the Government’ communications strategy
to inform the public about the vision for the enhanced international role of
Kuwait and the impact of its assistance to other countries This will be
accompanied by capacity-building support for the collection of relevant data on
the external assistance provided by Kuwait, and ensuring that this data is
updated and available to relevant stakeholders Thirdly, UNDP will help to
enhance recognition of Kuwait as  pioneer of renewable energy and low-carbon
development as part of its strategy to increase the share of renewable energy of
the total energy generating capacity to 15 per cent by 2030 (Goal ) by promoting
innovative public-private partnerships to promote energy efficiency UNDP will
help Kuwait to showcase its experiences in developing low-carbon solutions
through investments in renewable energy systems in other countries, in part
through cooperation with the One Planet Sovereign Wealth Fund Working Group,
whose members32 scale up investments in companies that factor climate risks into
their corporate strategies The GSSCPD and UNDP will continue to invest in the
next generation of Kuwaiti leaders in international organizations by scaling up
the Junior Professional Officer (JPO) project The country office will continue
to work with the UNDP JPO service centre, United Nations Secretariat and other
entities to give young Kuwaiti professionals the opportunity to serve the United
Nations system Partnerships with the private sector for sustainable energy and
environment UNDP will help to build the national capacities required to develop
the data infrastructure and policies to support clean energy (Goals  and )To lay
the foundations for greater diversification of the Kuwaiti economy and energy
supply and for long-term stability, UNDP, in cooperation with GSSCPD, the Higher
Council for Environment, Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research and NOSD, will
fill energy data gaps building on the success of the Kuwait Energy Outlook
initiative To promote the innovations 32 Abu Dhabi, New Zealand, Norway, Qatar
and Saudi Arabia  DP/DCP/KWT/ necessary to move Kuwait to  more low-carbon
economy, UNDP support raising public awareness and bring public and private
actors together to exchange and incubate new ideas and innovative solutions for
sustainable energy investment with  potential for scaling-up It aims to minimize
financing costs, reduce energy consumption and develop new business
opportunities in an expanding sustainable energy sector UNDP will partner with
the private sector and NGOs on creative advocacy and communication efforts to
raise environmental awareness and promote actions to achieve the national
targets for Sustainable Development Goals , 11, 12, 13 and 14 aligned with the
United Nations Communication Strategy This involves inter alia addressing the
policy gaps which have been highlighted by KPPC research papers; using
behavioural science to raise the awareness of the public and business of
recycling and environmental protection; and making Kuwaiti cities greener For
example, UNDP will help to develop  recycling strategy, leveraging the interest
of private companies III Programme and risk management This country programme
document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to
country programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and the internal control framework The programme will be
nationally executed UNDP support to the national execution modality will be
continued as an added value of this programme to lessen the operational burden
on government counterparts The harmonized approach to cash transfers may be used
if  project involves advance payment to national entities As per Executive Board
decision 2013/, cost definitions and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects UNDP will
adopt  portfolio approach to managing the country programme which will shorten
timelines for the design and approval of interventions This will help to ensure
that appropriate value- added linkages are made across areas of intervention for
programmatic coherence UNDP will leverage recent changes to corporate policies
to streamline recruitment and procurement processes to provide responsive and
timely support on policy advocacy and innovation initiatives The demand-driven
nature of the UNDP relationship with the Government of Kuwait in  net
contributor country context means that UNDP will retain programmatic and
operational flexibility to respond to emerging opportunities The successful
implementation of this country programme will require the management and
mitigation of several potential risks The first is the risk of  further drop in
oil prices which may pose  challenge to implementation of the KNDP This might
also delay progress in addressing women’ labour-force participation due to
reduced political will for reform The second potential risk is the limited
awareness on the part of the general public of environment and energy issues
UNDP will utilize behavioural insights to design tailored public awareness
activities while making an argument, based on data, that sustainable energy
makes economic sense UNDP will also strengthen the Government’ capacities for
advance planning by utilizing macroeconomic modelling established by the KPPC An
internal risk to UNDP is the potential unavailability of the technical and
substantive expertise to necessary to ensure that UNDP policy advisory services
meet the needs of Kuwait as  high-income country This will be mitigated by
increased involvement of expertise sourced from the UNDP regional and global
policy networks (especially related to women’ economic empowerment) in designing
UNDP interventions and advocacy efforts Enhanced and empowered local staff
capacity would also contribute to the shift towards more balanced support across
project planning and implementation, as well as timely provision of policy
advocacy/innovation service lines Establishment of  technical support office at
GSSCPD will help to ensure timely delivery of projects under the KNDP with
capacity development principle at  core  DP/DCP/KWT/ IV Monitoring and
evaluation Monitoring and reporting of the country programme will be done in
more integrated fashion within the broader context of United Nations support to
Kuwait UNDP will ensure that monitoring and evaluation frameworks are aligned
with programme priorities, including strengthening the capacities of
implementing partners in data collection and usage UNDP will develop results
frameworks aligned with the KNDP and UNDP Strategic Plan Outcome-level results
groups for the UNSDCF will be utilized for monitoring progress under the country
programme The results groups will prepare multi-year workplans for each outcome
in consultation with GSSCPD and engage partners in identifying key
implementation issues and emerging opportunities, undertake capacity assessments
for achievement of results, and monitor outputs and their contributions towards
the outcomes of the country programme, UNSDCF and KNDP UNDP will work with the
GSSCPD, NOSD, CSB and KPCC to strengthen capacities for the collection,
dissemination and use of data and statistics The emphasis will be on data
disaggregation for monitoring impacts on target groups, prioritizing youth,
women and persons with disabilities The country office will ensure consistent
use of the UNDP gender marker to monitor expenditures and improve gender-based
planning and decision-making UNDP social and environmental standards will be
rigorously applied inclusive, human rights-based and environmentally sustainable
that development remains to ensure To facilitate evidence-based programme design
and support the United Nations-wide engagement to broaden the debate on the
national development agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals,  multi-year
research agenda will produce policy briefs, discussion papers and periodic
reports, including the Kuwait Energy Outlook and national Sustainable
Development Goal and human development reports, on themes related to economic
and public administration transformation In order to increase the transparency,
visibility and impact of the partnerships between UNDP and the State of Kuwait
UNDP will intensify efforts to communicate its achievements and results to the
general public inside Kuwait and beyond through traditional and non-traditional
media with real-life stories, innovative and user-friendly formats and social
media tools to reach diverse audiences  DP/DCP/KWT/ Annex Results and resources
framework for the State of Kuwait () Kuwait National Development Plan (KNDP)
Goal: Effective Public Administration: Reform administrative and bureaucratic
practices to reinforce transparency, accountability and efficiency in the
government Sustainable Diversified Economy: Develop  prosperous and diversified
economy to reduce the country’ dependence on oil export revenues UNSDCF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2023, there is  policy and regulatory environment for
private-sector-led economic diversification that is transparent and promotes
fairness and technological innovation RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Indicative country
programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) UNSDCF outcome
indicator(), baselines, target()33 Data source and frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities Major partners / partnerships frameworks Indicative
resources by outcome ($)34 World Economic Forum, Transparency of government
policymaking (annual) Indicator: Existence of new/revised regulations to
facilitate key aspects of business regulations and enforcement ( starting
business, construction permits, credit access) Baseline: Target: Output :
Effective public institutions enabled to develop evidence-based policies and
systems that respond to the needs of the people Regular $  Government: » GSSCPD,
Kuwait Other Environment Public Authority (KEPA), Kuwait Foundation for the
Advancement of Sciences (KFAS), Kuwait Policy Appraisal Lab (KPAL), Public
Authority for the Disabled (PADA), CSB, Ministries of Finance; Commerce and
Industry; Labour and Social Development, Indicator : Number of policy papers for
public discussions and implementation for KNDP Baseline:10 Target: 20 Source:
GSSCPD Indicator: No New micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises registered
(non-hydrocarbon sectors) Baseline: Target: Indicator : Number of KNDP pillars
where behavioural insights is applied Baseline: Target:  Source: KPPC Indicator:
Manufacturing value added (as proportion of GDP and per capita) (Goal ) – or - %
Medium and High-tech industry value added in total value added (targeted
sectors) (Goal ) Baseline: Target: Civil Society/NGOs: » Kuwait Institute for
Scientific Research (KISR), Private sector employers and workers organizations;
Chambers of Commerce; NGOs Indicator : Number of full-time KPPC personnel
Baseline: 2No Target:  Source: UNDP FAO, ILO, IOM, Indicator: Firms with female
participation in leadership (% of firms) (World Bank) UN-Habitat, UNODC, World
Bank 33 Baselines and targets will be included upon the Government of Kuwait
approval of the UNSDCF 34 Budget allocations will be included upon the
Government of Kuwait approval of UNSDCF  DP/DCP/KWT/ Baseline: Target Output :
Effective KNDP monitoring and reporting systems established Indicator:
Proportion of population who believe decision- making is inclusive and
responsive, by sex, age, disability and population group Baseline: Target:
Indicator : Use of big data to monitor KNDP Baseline:  Target:  Source: CSB
GSSCPD (annual) Indicator : KNDP reporting system in place and improved
Baseline: No Target: Yes Source: GSSCPD Indicator : KNDP communication strategy
in line with Sustainable Development Goals in place and implemented Baseline:
Target:  (in place),  (Implemented) Source: GSSCPD Indicator : Number of KNDP
policies and strategies implemented with UNDP support Baseline:  Target: 10
Source: GSSCPD and UNDP Indicator : Number of reports developed that track
Sustainable Development Goal achievements Baseline:  Target:  Source: National
Observatory for Sustainable Development Output : Government, CSOs and private
sector entities have improved capacities to enable sustainable development
Indicator : number of entities with performance reviews and GSSCPD (biannual) 10
DP/DCP/KWT/ improved institutional governance structure Baseline:  Target: 10
Source: GSSCPD Indicator : Functional GSSCPD Technical Support Office in place
Baseline: No Target: Yes (2020) Source: GSSCPD Indicator : Number of people with
disabilities benefiting from UNDP-private sector partnerships Baseline:  Target:
250 Source: Indicator : Number of innovation initiatives for Sustainable
Development Goals jointly implemented with the private sector and KFAS Baseline:
Target:  Source: GSSCPD Output : Public institutions’ capacities strengthened
for improved talent management and performance measurement Indicator :
Government performance management strategy in place Baseline: No Target: Yes
Source: UNDP Indicator : National Integrity and Anti-corruption Strategy
implemented Baseline: No Target: Yes Source: GSSCPD 11 DP/DCP/KWT/ Indicator :
National Strategy to Combat Violence against Women developed Baseline: No
Target: Yes Source: Women’ Research and Study Centre (WRSC) Indicator : Number
of private institutions that adopt the inclusion of persons with disabilities
strategy Baseline:  Target: 10 Source: PADA and UNDP Output : Female leadership
enhanced Indicator : % of female leaders in legislative, executive and judicial
branches Baseline: 12% Target: 20% Source: WRSC WRSC (Annually) Indicator : % of
female chief executive officers (CEOs) and deputy CEOs in the private sector
Baseline: 15% Target: 20% Source: WRSC KPPC (Annually) Output : National
policymaking is developed and tested with the support of an Innovation Unit
Indicator : # of policies which are designed and implemented by applying
behavioural insights of KPAL Baseline:  Target: 10 Source: KPPC 12 DP/DCP/KWT/
KNDP GOAL: Global Positioning: Enhance Kuwait’ regional and global presence in
spheres such as diplomacy, trade, culture and philanthropy UNSDCF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2023, the State of Kuwait is  major player in global bodies
and international cooperation efforts RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Indicator: Net official
development assistance (as % gross national income) (Goal ) Baseline: Target:
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, GSSCPD, UNDP (Biannually) Government: » Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Regular $  Output : Communication for Kuwait’ development
assistance to other countries enhanced GSSCPD » Ministry of Information and
Indicator : Knowledge platform/centre established and operational for Kuwait
government entities, foundations and civil society to help them support other
countries Baseline:  Target:  (2020) Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP Kuwaiti Media
» KEPA, KFAS, Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development » Line ministries »
Parliament » Investment entities Indicator: % Change foreign direct investment
for Sustainable Development Goal-related initiatives in partner countries (Goal
) Baseline: Target: Indicator : Number of reports developed on Kuwait’
development assistance Baseline:  Target:  Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP Civil
Society/NGOs: » KISR, Universities, Policy Indicator: Dollar value of financial
and technical assistance (including through North-South, South-South and
triangular cooperation) committed to developing countries (Goal ) Baseline:
Target: Think-tanks DPPA UNHCR UNEP UN-Habitat DESA Output : South-South and
triangular cooperation initiatives promoted to contribute to development
solutions Ministry of Foreign Affairs, GSSCPD and UNDP (Biannually) Indicator :
Number of South- South initiatives established between Kuwait and counterpart
entities to support HDP nexus, stabilization and conflict prevention Baseline:
Target:  Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP Indicator : Regional or global
conferences hosted by Kuwait, with technical support from UNDP Baseline:
Target:  Source: GSSCPD, MOFA and UNDP 13 DP/DCP/KWT/ Indicator : Number of
South- South renewable energy projects implemented with technical or/and
financial support from Kuwait in other countries Baseline:  Target:  Source:
UNDP, KEPA, KPPC, KISR Indicator : Number of JPOs deployed to international
organizations Baseline:  (2019) Target: 11 per year Source: UNDP KNDP GOAL:
Sustainable Living Environment: Ensure the availability of living accommodation
through environmentally sound resources and tactics UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP: By 2023, there is stronger implementation, monitoring and enforcement of
environmental andurban policies, laws, and regulations  RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development KEPA,
KISR, CSB (annually) Indicator: Investments in energy efficiency (public and
private) as % GDP (Goal7) Baseline: Target: Output : Data infrastructure on
energy and environment, strengthened: Government: KEPA KISR Supreme Council for
Environment Indicator : Number of knowledge products produced on low-carbon
development/renewable energy Baseline:  Target:  Sources: KISR Indicator:
National recycling rate/ tons of material recycled (Goal ) Baseline: Target:
Civil Society/NGOs: EN Kuwait Diving Team UNEP UN-Habitat FAO Indicator : Number
of partnerships to generate real-time monitoring of energy and environmental
protection Baseline:  Target:  Source: KEPA and CSB Indicator: % Land area
designated as nature reserves/ protected areas for biodiversity preservation
(proxy Goal15) Baseline: % Target: 20% Indicator: Availability of data for
public expenditure on conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity (proxy
Goal15) Baseline: No (2018) Target: Yes (2023) Indicator : Number of energy
diversification and environmental management plans and projects developed
Baseline:  Target:  Source: KEPA, KISR, Higher Council for Environment 14
DP/DCP/KWT/ Indicator: Baseline: Target Output : KNDP policy on eco- cities
awareness strengthened through green building and infrustructure and smart
technology effectively supported KPPC (biannually) Indicator: Renewable energy
share in the total final energy consumption (Goal ) Baseline: Target: Indicator
: Percentage of renewable energy of total electricity demand Baseline: % (2018)
Target: 12% (2023) Source: Kuwait Energy Outlook Report Indicator : Number of
advocacy initiatives/campaigns to promote green infrastructure and smart
technology per KNDP Indicator: Energy intensity measured in terms of primary
energy and GDP (Goal ) Baseline: Target: Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP
Indicator : Number of studies on innovations in low emission technology
Baseline:  Target:  Source: KISR Output  KNDP Policy on integration of solid
waste management implemented KEPA (annually), NGOs Indicator : Value chain
analysis for recycling business in place Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP
Indicator : Number of new recycling-related businesses created with UNDP
assistance Baseline:  Target:  Source: KEPA Indicator : Existence of  national
recycling policy 15 DP/DCP/KWT/ Baseline:  Target:  Source: KEPA Output :
National/local institutions have improved policies, systems, and partnerships to
protect biodiversity and marine environment Kuwait Environment Public Authority
(annually) and the private sector Indicator : Number of joint initiatives with
CSOs and the private sector with UNDP assistance Baseline:  Target:  Source:
KEPA and the private sector 16