Table of Contents:  Programme rationale  : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships : Page:  III Programme and risk management : Page: 11 IV Monitoring
and evaluation  : Page: 13 DP/RPD/RLA/  Programme rationale  The overarching
vision of the regional programme for Latin America and the Caribbean,  is to
build productive, inclusive and resilient societies, driven by effective
governance, advancing towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals Over
previous decades, the region has seen significant poverty reduction, advancement
of human development and increased well-being across multiple dimensions As
people’ lives have improved, their countries’ economies have also grown However,
while Latin America and the Caribbean has become  middle-income region, it
remains the second most unequal region in the world, characterized by both  high
concentration of income at the top2 and  high degree of vulnerability to poverty
Structural elements that undermine the region’ progress toward the Goals
include: () Low productivity (reflecting limited technological innovation and
allocative inefficiency) is  defining feature of many economies In contrast with
factor accumulation, which to date has played the dominant role in driving
growth in the region, total factor productivity has made  null (and in some
cases,  negative) contribution to long-term growth; () Progress does not reach
all groups evenly Inequalities within and between groups persist across multiple
dimensions of well-being, including access to public goods and services, voice
and agency For example, despite women’ increased labour-force participation, the
rate still lags behind that of men (32 per cent lower on average); () The region
continues to confront  set of (often interdependent) economic, political,
environmental and epidemiological shocks Such “systemic risks” are critical for
small island developing States in the Caribbean, where hazards affect countries’
entire populations, territories and economies; () Inequalities in citizens'
influence undermine the responsiveness and accountability of Governments in the
region Currently, around three in four Latin Americans believe that their
countries are governed in the interest of  few powerful groups7 and just one in
four has some or  lot of confidence in their Government Moreover, where
governance fails to process conflict effectively, societies may turn to violence
Latin America and the Caribbean is one of the most violent regions in the world,
with particularly high rates of violence against groups such as women and girls,
indigenous peoples and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI)
persons Political parity is also  pending issue in the region, considering that
the share of women members of parliaments is below 30 per cent and only per cent
of elected majors are women (2018)10  In the context of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, structural challenges have acted as “pre-existing
conditions” that made the region more  UNDP, Regional Human Development Report
2021, Trapped: High Inequality and Low Growth in Latin America and the
Caribbean, New York, World Inequality Database (  World Bank, LAC Equity Lab:
Poverty – Poverty Rate (  Regional Human Development Report, Ibid  UNDRR (2019)
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction  Latinobarómetro Informe
Data for 2018 from the Latin American Public Opinion Project (  UNODC 2019,
Global Study on Homicide 2019 (Vienna, 2019); OECD 2020, Addressing femicide in
the context of rampant violence against women in Latin America; Global Witness
2019, Enemies of the State?: How governments and business silence land and
environmental defenders, July 2019; SinViolencia LGBTI 2019 El prejuicio no
conoce fronteras: Homicidios de lesbianas, gay, bisexuales, trans en países de
América Latina  el Caribe 2014–2019  10 UNDP and UN-WOMEN, “Surcando olas
contra-olas: una mirada paritaria  los derechos políticos de las mujeres en
América Latina”   DP/RPD/RLA/ vulnerable to the pandemic’ impacts Beyond the
disproportionately severe health crisis and loss of life,11 countries in Latin
America and the Caribbean continue to grapple with multiple economic, social and
governance crises that threaten decades of progress In 2020, real gross domestic
product (GDP) contracted by  per cent (the sharpest contraction in the world)12
and an estimated additional 22 million people were pushed into poverty13 This is
taking place in  context of increasingly constrained fiscal space As of December
2020, central government gross public debt remained elevated at per cent of GDP
in Latin America and 88 per cent in the Caribbean14 In the medium term, debt
service is expected to crowd out other expenses, and over-indebtedness could
restrict economic growth15  The joint effects of the pandemic and structural
challenges deepened many of the region’ pre-existing inequalities, as the most
vulnerable were disproportionately affected For example, this materialized in
rising domestic violence (calls to helplines spiked in the wake of lockdowns);16
growing gaps in educational access across digital divides as in-person schools
closed (66 per cent of the richest quintile have an Internet connection at home,
compared to 23 per cent of the poorest quintile);17 widening gaps in employment
and labour force participation between men and women (women are overrepresented
in sectors negatively affected by the pandemic);18 and  divide between formal
and informal workers in access to social protection schemes (between 35 and 82
per cent of the labour force are excluded from contributory social insurance)19
Beyond the pandemic, the region is facing other shocks In 2019, protests
revealed  collective “crisis of expectations” among citizens, reflecting
frustrations over unmet development goals and limited trust in institutions In
recent years, the region has also witnessed  large-scale increase in migrants
and refugees fuelled by high levels of crime and violence, fragile institutions
and inequalities Additionally, the region continues to suffer from recurrent
disasters triggered by natural hazards In 2020, Latin America and the Caribbean
faced 30 named storms, including two Category  hurricanes (Eta and Iota); in
August 2021, Haiti suffered  devastating  magnitude earthquake  In the age of
the Anthropocene, Latin America and the Caribbean face the increasingly urgent
challenge of pursuing  development agenda that balances people and the planet
Continued loss of biodiversity, degradation of ecosystems and greenhouse gas
emissions, driven by unsustainable consumption and production patterns, have
increased the region’ vulnerability to climate change alongside other systemic
risks Latin America and the Caribbean (in particular, small island developing
States) is one of the regions most affected by the cascading negative impacts of
climate change such as heatwaves, decreased crop yields, wildfires, coral reef
depletion and extreme sea-level events20 As women have less access to coping
mechanisms, they are affected disproportionately by climate change  Through the
regional programme , UNDP supported national Governments and regional
organizations to address many of the above-mentioned challenges, as concluded 11
Despite being home to less than 10 per cent of the global population, Latin
America and the Caribbean has faced almost 20 per cent of global confirmed
COVID-19 cases and over 30 per cent of confirmed deaths Authors’ calculations
based on data as of  September 2021 from Our World in Data ( 12 IMF World
Economic Outlook Update (July 2021) 13 Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean (ECLAC) The recovery paradox in Latin America and the Caribbean
Growth amid persisting structural problems: inequality, poverty and low
investment and productivity 14 ECLAC, Economic Survey of Latin America and the
Caribbean, 2021 (LC/PUB2021-/Rev), Santiago, 15 Cárdenas and Guzmán Ayala
Planning  Sustainable Post-Pandemic Recovery in Latin America and the Caribbean
UNDP Latin America and the Caribbean C19 PDS 16 UNDP Latin American and the
Caribbean, Director’ Blog: Graph For Thought "No safer place than home?: The
increase in domestic and gender-based violence during COVID-19 lockdowns in LAC”
17 Regional Human Development Report, 18 ECLAC The economic autonomy of women in
sustainable recovery with equality, February 19 Regional Human Development
Report, 20 World Meteorological Organization State of the Climate in Latin
America and the Caribbean   DP/RPD/RLA/ in the final evaluation of the programme
To boost productivity, UNDP supported countries to address underlying
determinants of low growth, including crime and violence, weak female labour-
force participation and unequal access to digital technologies To promote
inclusion, UNDP supported the design, implementation and expansion of social
protection systems To build resilience, UNDP developed green recovery plans and
integrated disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation into national
development strategies To strengthen governance, UNDP supported countries to
improve State capacities, promote women’ political participation and manage
conflict UNDP was at the forefront of delivering  comprehensive COVID-19
response, spearheading the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessments of
the United Nations system and launching  COVID-19 policy document series (in
collaboration with academic institutions) providing country-specific assessments
of the pandemic’ impacts alongside policy guidance for protecting the most
vulnerable  These results were achieved by leveraging cooperation with
institutional partners (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), International Labor Organization (ILO)) and
regional partners (Central American Integration System, Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) and the Coordination Centre for Natural
Disaster Prevention in Central America (Centro de Coordinación para la
Prevención de los Desastres Naturales en Centroamérica (CEPREDENAC); and by
fostering South-South and triangular cooperation, , between Cuba and Caribbean
countries for strengthening early warning systems The final evaluation of the
regional programme concluded that UNDP succeeded in reestablishing its strategic
position in the region, particularly through its positioning as  thought leader,
its promotion of data and evidence-based policies and the technical capacity of
its activities21  The programme for  builds on this progress and further
strengthens the regional offer by incorporating the lessons learned identified
by the evaluation, based on consultations with stakeholders The following areas
will be continued: () Adaptability and responsiveness The regional programme was
flexible in adapting and responding to country and regional needs This was
observed during the COVID-19 pandemic through the delivery of rapid assessments,
mobilization of resources and promotion of knowledge exchang  by UNDP; ()
Knowledge products and regional public goods to inform policy Stakeholders
consider that UNDP generated knowledge and tools that informed their countries'
policymaking, including the Regional Human the Sustainable Development Report,
Multidimensional Poverty Index, Development Goals Bond and the Policy Priority
Inference Tool; () Cross-cutting gender-sensitive approaches By integrating
gender equality, the regional programme accelerated development results
Stakeholders acclaimed UNDP efforts in gender mainstreaming, including the
“ATENEA” project for acceleration of women’ political participation , the Gender
Equality Seal and pedagogy spaces on domestic violence and care The following
areas will be enhanced: () Strengthen demand The regional programme was seen to
be supply-driven, especially where specific tools existed While not necessarily
considered  negative issue, stakeholders recommend to fine-tune the supply to
generate the demand22 and diversify the offer to be more adaptable to the
region’ heterogeneous country contexts 21 Center for Education and Social
Studies Evaluation of the Regional Programme for Latin America and the Caribbean
, 22 Interviews with resident representatives and regional teams   DP/RPD/RLA/
and specific development priorities (such as in small island developing States
and Haiti); () Innovation and digitalization Stakeholders called for UNDP to
spearhead innovative initiatives to accelerate development progress  more
proactive role in this area would promote the strategic positioning of UNDP and
facilitate new partnerships Consultations indicated  strong need for
digitalization and data support, which have become only more relevant in the
context of COVID-19; () Systems approach Stakeholders called for  more systemic
approach that embraces complex development challenges This implies concerted
efforts to break out of silos and to promote portfolio- and issue-based
approaches that leverage cross-border and cross-sectoral collaborations As
countries recover from COVID-19, UNDP has an opportunity to accelerate the speed
and scale of development progress in the region While COVID-19 brought new
challenges and exacerbated existing ones, it also opened new policy and
financing spaces to advance bold ideas, from inclusive digitalization to
universal social protection and greener drivers of growth Considering the
current regional context and the lessons learned, UNDP can leverage its
institutional advantage to strategically partner with internal and external
stakeholders to promote these changes and help countries get on track to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals () As  thought leader and broker of knowledge,
UNDP is uniquely positioned to deliver tailored, timely and policy-relevant
research Thus, it will leverage tools such as the Regional Human Development
Report, the COVID-19 policy paper series, the effective governance narrative and
the Latin America and the Caribbean research centres to deepen its ongoing
country support; () As  trusted partner for Governments, regional and
subregional institutions, international financial institutions (IFIs) and the
private sector, UNDP is uniquely positioned to develop partnerships for
financing green and digital transformations Consequently, UNDP will strengthen
collaborations to expand financing for development as was done with the region’
first-ever Sustainable Development Goals bond in Mexico; () As  regional
convenor, UNDP is uniquely positioned to leverage global, regional and
subregional networks to support the co-creation and implementation of local and
national solutions Regional inter-agency collaboration will be expanded to scale
up partnerships like the one established with UN-Women and the United Nations
Population Fund with the Spotlight Initiative in Latin America and the Caribbean
II Programme priorities and partnerships To contribute to the overarching goal
and help countries address the interrelated structural issues exacerbated by the
pandemic, UNDP will implement an intersectoral portfolio designed to tackle
complex systemic challenges The programme is closely aligned with the three
directions of change of the Strategic Plan and leverages the six signature
solutions and three enablers in four programmatic outcomes: inclusive and
sustainable growth; equity and inclusion; resilient sustainable development and
green recovery; and effective governance These are grounded in the “regionality
principles”23 with system-wide solutions to existing and emerging challenges
that cannot be addressed in silos and require an integrated regional approach
Promoting growth (outcome ) is critical for inclusion (outcome ), but both must
be 23 Regional public goods/services; inter-regionality; cross-border
externalities; awareness/action on sensitive and emerging issues; regional
innovation; regional and subregional partnership-building; and knowledge
generation and sharing of experience and expertise, including through South-
South and triangular cooperation   DP/RPD/RLA/ done in  way that is sustainable
in the long term (outcome ) All three of these outcomes depend on effective
governance (outcome ) as  precondition The proposed strategy was identified as
the best fit for Latin America and the Caribbean, based on analysis of the most
pressing development challenges and an extensive process of consultations with
broad range of stakeholders to prioritize key actions areas for UNDP
Consultations were conducted with the Regional Bureau Advisory Board, UNDP
resident representatives, country offices, government representatives, academia,
international and regional organizations, donors, the private sector, civil
society and Member States, both at  technical level and with Permanent
Representatives As reflected in the outcomes and outputs, stakeholders
consistently recognized the need for UNDP to tackle the drivers of low
productivity and deepening inequality and exclusion, and highlighted green,
resilient and inclusive economic recovery and effective governance as broad
priority areas for UNDP To this end, UNDP will scale up regional and global best
practices and expertise, adapting them to local contexts to complement national
efforts through South-South and triangular cooperation, innovation, evidence and
knowledge generation and advocacy while promoting systems and portfolio
approaches These efforts will be powered by the comparative advantage and
positioning of UNDP in the region and underpinned by stakeholder engagement,
donor support, the commitment of Governments to reforms and the availability of
data The programme will partner with national and regional institutions; United
Nations agencies (the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), ILO,
International Organization for Migration (IOM), United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and UN-Women)); IFIs
(International Monetary Fund (IMF), Inter- American Development Bank (IDB) and
the World Bank; bilateral and multilateral donors; and civil society In line
with the evaluation’ recommendations, country demand and the SAMOA Pathway, the
programme will deepen its engagement in the Caribbean, focusing on climate
change, institutional strengthening, citizen security and disaster risk
reduction UNDP will continue enabling and scaling up gender-responsive disaster
recovery, climate and environmental resilience in the Caribbean and promoting
laws and policies that advance the rights of women and girls Inclusive and
sustainable growth This outcome focuses on addressing structural challenges
related to low productivity and the need for stable economic recovery in the
wake of the pandemic The outcome theory of change states that: if small and
medium-sized enterprises increase their productivity and resilience and improve
their access to services, digital technologies and markets; if conditions are
enabled for equitable access to decent jobs for women and vulnerable
populations; and if public and private financing for development is expanded;
then Latin American and Caribbean countries would benefit from reinvigorated
inclusive and sustainable growth Through this outcome, UNDP will contribute to
structural transformation, one of the three “directions of change” elaborated in
the Strategic Plan, engaging with the UNDP signature solutions on poverty,
resilience and gender equality and leveraging digitalization and financing as
enablers UNDP will work with Governments to develop innovative policies, tools
and mechanisms that increase productivity, particularly of small and medium-
sized enterprises; improve access to decent work for vulnerable groups; and
expand financing for development while building national capacities and
supporting public and private partnerships UNDP will partner with national and
local institutions to ensure alignment and ownership; the private sector to
build capacities to enhance productivity; and the financial sector to find
innovative funding sources UNDP will collaborate with ILO, UN-Women, the United
Nations Global Compact and IFIs,   DP/RPD/RLA/ leveraging the experience of the
Gender Equality Seal for the Private Sector to advance gender equality and
women’ empowerment in the workplace To improve access to services, digital
technologies and markets for small and medium- sized enterprises, particularly
those led and owned by women, UNDP will: () strengthen policies, mechanisms and
incentives to improve the quality and access of financial, digital and capacity-
building services for these businesses; () strengthen normative frameworks to
incentivize start-ups and new businesses; () support the transformation of value
chains, industries and sectors towards sustainability and the circular economy;
() foster access to  reliable and affordable energy supply; and () promote
digital services for productivity and resilience UNDP will scale up partnerships
with local and national governments, the private sector and academia To enable
conditions for equitable access to decent jobs for women and vulnerable groups,
UNDP will: () promote inclusive and intersectional labour policies integrating
racial, gender, age and territorial variables; () support increased integration
of women and vulnerable groups in labour markets to mitigate exclusions deepened
by COVID-19; () advocate for the inclusion of the care economy in policies for
increased women’ participation; and () foster equal access to digital skills
UNDP will partner with ILO, leveraging its post-disaster recovery and decent
employment expertise, to strengthen social protection systems and improve
inclusive business methodologies UNDP will work with the private sector and
academia to include women in male-dominated industries, scaling up its
experience in promoting gender equality in the private sector and generating
inclusive opportunities in promising economic sectors such as renewable
energies, efficient transportation, green jobs and digital industries UNDP will
promote the expansion of public and private financing for development by: ()
facilitating access to financial instruments (including green finance),
technologies and services; () advocating for increased fiscal space; ()
promoting public and private investment in climate action for productivity and
nature-based solutions, integrated with national visions for sustainable
development and climate change, including mitigation measures; and () supporting
the development of laws and regulations that incentivize investment UNDP will
partner with UNEP on the regional taxonomy of sustainable finances and with the
IDB, IMF and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to
support financing for development Equity and inclusion This outcome addresses
structural challenges related to inequality and vulnerability that have been
deepened by the pandemic The theory of change states that if social protection
systems become universal, inclusive, fiscally sustainable and growth-friendly;
if women and vulnerable groups had greater access to decision-making, financial
and digital services and increased capacity for asset accumulation; and if
countries address social norms and practices hindering inclusion, then countries
will benefit from greater equity and inclusion, leaving no one behind The
outcome is aligned with Strategic Plan outcome , leaving no one behind, with the
signature solutions on poverty, governance and gender equality and the
innovation and digitalization enablers UNDP will craft integrated cross-sectoral
solutions by scaling up policy advice, evidence and knowledge generation,
advocacy and South-South and triangular cooperation to increase the inclusion of
women, excluded groups (indigenous peoples, Afrodescendant populations,
migrants, persons with disabilities, rural populations, LGBTI persons, people
living with HIV or AIDS) and other vulnerable groups (such people living in
poverty or vulnerable to poverty) UNDP will consult and partner with these
groups in the design of policies and actions to foster inclusion Rather than
addressing the exclusion of each group specifically, UNDP will focus on the
structural causes of exclusion and vulnerability and generate tools to increase
access to   DP/RPD/RLA/ decision-making processes and productive services,
assets and knowledge UNDP will work to understand and reduce the digital divide
that perpetuates exclusion UNDP will partner with national and local
authorities, the Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation
(Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo (AECID)) and
the World Bank to promote universal, inclusive, fiscally sustainable and growth-
friendly social protection systems It will: () improve institutional capacities
for integrated, data-driven and evidence-based policies that reach vulnerable
populations; () support countries to establish fiscally sustainable systems; ()
ensure that policies are coherent with growth and productivity strategies; and
() as  sector exacerbated by COVID-19, strengthen institutional capacities,
policies and tools for comprehensive care systems that cover women, the elderly,
youth, migrants and other vulnerable groups UNDP will work to increase the
participation of women and vulnerable groups in decision- making, access to
financial and digital services and capacities for asset accumulation It will: ()
facilitate spaces and tools to enhance inclusion in the policy arena; () support
gender- responsive policies and instruments, fostering greater access to
services and promoting increased use, control and ownership of productive and
financial resources and assets; and () contribute to developing policies and
tools that reduce the digital divide for women and vulnerable groups UNDP will
work with IFIs, the private sector and microfinance institutions to promote
women’ financial inclusion and develop tailored financial products, services and
gender-responsive financing instruments UNDP will scale up global partnerships
with ECLAC, FAO, ILO, IOM, UNICEF and UN- Women to advocate changes in social
norms and legal frameworks that generate exclusions, especially on gender and
care UNDP will generate mechanisms for  deeper understanding of the
multidimensionality of poverty and exclusion; and spearhead knowledge generation
and dialogue between different stakeholders from Governments and civil society
towards greater inclusion of vulnerable groups Resilient sustainable development
and green recovery This outcome focuses on addressing structural challenges
related to recurrent shocks and the need to balance people and the planet The
theory of change posits that if the vision, strategies and decision-making for
development in Latin America and the Caribbean are aligned with objectives for
climate change mitigation and adaptation, protecting nature, disaster risk
reduction and resilience; if financial strategies and budget allocations support
the transition of key economic sectors towards green and climate-resilient
development; and if stakeholders are equipped with strengthened capacities and
opportunities to foster sustainable development solutions and enhance their
resilience; then countries will benefit from resilient, gender- responsive and
risk-informed sustainable development and green recovery The outcome aligns with
the Strategic Plan direction of change for building resilience, the signature
solutions on governance, resilience, environment, energy and gender equality,
and the financing and innovation enablers With an emphasis on Caribbean small
island developing States, UNDP will promote the region' economic development,
considering and internalizing the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of
climate change, nature degradation and disasters UNDP will scale up practical
interventions, generate evidence and knowledge, strengthen capacities, foster
innovation and strengthen intersectorality between different levels of
government It will support policies, financing and governance for sustainable
development and green recovery that reduce power asymmetries, inequalities and
vulnerabilities, especially among women, indigenous and Afrodescendant
populations and those affected by climate change, land degradation and mining
UNDP will safeguard the resources upon which the region' current   DP/RPD/RLA/
and future economic growth and livelihoods of vulnerable populations depend,
while enhancing the region' resilience to future shocks UNDP will scale up
integrated solutions to build resilience through evidence-based, risk- informed
and gender-responsive policymaking and planning and fostering South-South and
triangular cooperation, especially in the Caribbean UNDP will work with
ministries, Parliamentary committees, academia, national disaster management
systems, CDEMA, CEPREDENAC, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction and donors like the European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid
Operations (ECHO) to promote harmonized agendas for climate change, biodiversity
and disaster risk reduction with comprehensive resilience-building approaches
and enhancement of existing human and financial resources UNDP will partner with
ministries of finance, national and regional disaster risk management systems;
development banks and funds (Global Environment Facility, Green Climate Fund));
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) (Conservation International,
the Nature Conservancy); the International Renewable Energy Agency); and with
FAO and UNEP to: () advance innovative financial de-risking mechanisms (such as
nature performance bonds, payments for environmental results, carbon pricing,
tax incentives); () support the greening of value chains and small and medium-
sized enterprises for sustainable production and consumption; and () strengthen
capacities to leverage multiple sources of investments to scale up risk-
informed, gender-responsive recovery, energy transition, climate change
adaptation and green infrastructure In partnership with IOM, UNEP, UNICEF, ECHO
and IFIs, UNDP will strengthen the capacities and engagement of sectoral
ministries, Parliamentary commissions, subregional partners such as CDEMA,
CEPREDENAC, NGOs, academia and indigenous populations for stronger policies and
behaviour change, including at the local level, to foster sustainable
development solutions and enhance their resilience UNDP will increase the
understanding of climate change as  driver of migration flows and strengthen
capacities to better understand and cope with the composite nature of systemic
risks (climate, physical and biological hazards) and put in place strong
preparedness and recovery planning UNDP will work on consensus- building and
facilitate dialogue among key stakeholders to generate the policies that would
prevent climate and environmental change risks Effective governance This outcome
focuses on addressing structural challenges related to the way actors reach and
sustain agreements to resolve conflicts and promote development The theory of
change stipulates that if mechanisms are enhanced for inclusive civic engagement
and dialogue, particularly for women, which strengthens the legitimacy of
institutions and builds trust; if solutions are enabled to strengthen the rule
of law, citizen security and access to justice for enhanced social cohesion,
peaceful coexistence and protection of human rights; and if national and local-
level capacities are increased for evidence-based decision-making and leveraging
innovation, then countries will benefit from structural transformations towards
resilient and sustainable societies, underpinned by effective governance The
outcome is aligned with Strategic Plan direction  (structural transformation),
the signature solutions on governance, resilience and gender equality and the
innovation and digitalization enablers The outcome underpins the other outcomes,
focusing on the institutional functions (such as commitment, coordination and
cooperation) needed to achieve productivity, inclusion and resilience for the
benefit of women and vulnerable populations, specifically LGBTI persons,
migrants and youth UNDP will strengthen underlying systems, processes and
structures that enhance how actors interact With  specific focus on citizen
security in Central America and the Caribbean, UNDP will scale up synergies with
regional initiatives to provide policy advice and advocacy, promote innovation,
evidence and knowledge generation within government   DP/RPD/RLA/ institutions
and build capacities while fostering interregional South-South and triangular
cooperation UNDP will work with civil society and election management bodies,
electoral assistance departments, national and subnational legislatures, the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, the
International Foundation for Electoral Systems, ParlAmericas, the Inter-
Parliamentary Union, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) and IFIs to strengthen inclusive and responsive citizen
engagement and dialogue between institutions and citizens that promotes the
reconstruction of trust and legitimacy of public institutions This will be done
by: () furthering the integrity of political representation mechanisms in Latin
America and the Caribbean; () fostering civil society oversight of public
procurement and integrity of information; () enabling free, safe and inclusive
civic spaces with strong protection of civic freedoms; and () promoting
innovative agendas on climate justice UNDP will focus on the rule of law in its
commitment to people-centred and gender- sensitive justice and citizen security
Scaling up South-South and triangular cooperation in the Caribbean and Central
America, UNDP will work with regional, national and subnational institutions,
NGOs, academia, the private sector, multilateral donors and IFIs to: () support
accessible, responsive and effective justice; () advance innovative
institutional transformation and action plans to reduce violence against women
and girls and gender-based violence in public and private spheres; and ()
facilitate dialogues and consensus-building to promote peaceful coexistence
while increasing equity and upholding human rights Partnering with national
regulators, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the private sector, media and academia, UNDP will support
institutions to be more efficient in the provision of public services,
strengthening State capacities at the national and local levels by: () producing
evidence-based policies and providing innovative, accountable public services;
() strengthening institutional capacities to curb corruption; () promoting
inclusive and transparent fiscal policies; and () fostering laws and regulations
for open data access and data interoperability Alliances and resource
mobilization strategy The regional programme will pursue client-oriented
partnerships beyond financing agreements to promote regional development focused
on inclusion, resilience, productivity and effective governance UNDP will scale
up partnerships with traditional global and regional allies and foster new
alliances with emerging partners through joint programming and cooperation
platforms, leveraging the technical, financial and political resources and
knowledge of public and private sector partners The UNDP partnership and
communication strategy presents an offer that is coherent with the external
drivers of change and addresses internal risk factors to maintain the relevance
of UNDP in the region while shifting towards  more diversified, sustainable
funding base This will be enabled through: () positioning UNDP as  thought
leader and knowledge broker across disciplines to address government needs, in
partnership with the UNDP network of research centres, the Inter-American
Dialogue and the European Union; () strengthening the position of UNDP as
trusted partner to deliver development results transparently and efficiently;
and () leveraging the UNDP position as regional convenor to mobilize finance,
develop innovative initiatives and provide technical expertise at scale across
countries UNDP will consolidate its financing partnerships with AECID, the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and European Union
and leverage regional private sector partnerships with Visa, AT& and Grupo
PRISA)/Santillana to create funding opportunities to accelerate achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will strengthen partnerships with
regional organizations like the Ibero-American General Secretariat, the Central
American Integration System, the Organization of American States,  10
DP/RPD/RLA/ Community of Latin American and Caribbean States and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) to address the root causes of structural development
challenges UNDP will continue engaging with the United Nations development
system within the Regional Collaborative Platform for Latin America and the
Caribbean and its issues-based coalitions UNDP and ECLAC, as co-vice chairs of
the platform, will set out the strategic direction for integrated and
coordinated support to countries to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
through regional and cross-border analysis and initiatives aligned with national
development needs and priorities UNDP will also continue inter-agency
cooperation, particularly regarding the socioeconomic response to COVID-In line
with the programme’ priority areas, UNDP will continue co-chairing the issue-
based coalitions on equitable growth, financing for development and governance
and institutions and the working group on youth UNDP will participate actively
in the coalitions on climate change and resilience, on crime and violence and on
human mobility; and in the thematic working group on gender equality and
empowerment of women and girls, the Peer Support Group and the Sustainable
Development Goals Data and Statistics Group UNDP will co-lead the Regional
Operations Management Team, the Knowledge Management Hub Steering Committee for
Latin America and the Caribbean (“SDG Gateway”) and the Partnerships and
Communication Group UNDP and ECLAC will support the alignment of national
development plans with the Goals and target public and private investments for
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Working with national statistical
institutions, UNDP will help countries improve statistics on social protection,
multidimensional poverty indicators and indicators for measuring progress
towards the Goals Through the UNDP integration platform for the Goals, UNDP will
partner with the World Health Organization to lead  multidimensional poverty
analysis of vaccine equity measuring vulnerability UNDP will support systemic
solutions for complex development challenges at the regional and country levels
It will develop and implement cutting-edge methodologies to understand the
interconnection, synergies, gaps and trade-offs between the Goals and to
accelerate their achievement It will also support data generation to monitor the
Goals through partnerships with the Commitment to Equity Institute at Tulane
University, which generates data on fiscal redistribution, and with the World
Bank III Programme and risk management This regional programme document outlines
the UNDP contributions to regional results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme Direction and oversight of the programme will be the
responsibility of the Director of the Regional Bureau for Latin America and the
Caribbean Under the direct supervision of the Deputy Director, the regional hub
manager in Panama will be responsible for ensuring the effective management and
monitoring of the regional programme and regional projects The regional
programme  will be implemented in consultation with country offices, mainly
through regional projects with direct implementation modality, designed to scale
up accumulated knowledge, experience and technical competencies Regional and
subregional activities will be implemented with targeted country-level
components, coordinated and agreed upon within annual workplans Design of
initiatives will imply concerted efforts towards more portfolio- and issue-based
approaches An Advisory Board (consisting of resident representatives, senior
management from central bureaux and experts as needed) will support
implementation, provide quality assurance and help validate the programme’
relevance vis--vis country and global activities External  11 DP/RPD/RLA/
oversight will be exercised as prescribed by UNDP norms, ensuring the
involvement of internal and external stakeholders Networks of existing and
emerging partners interested in sponsoring regional initiatives will participate
in programme oversight as needed The regional programme will apply UNDP
programme policies and norms for its implementation and quality assurance
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional, and headquarters levels
for the programme are prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies
and procedures and internal control framework diversified partner base,
including third-party cost sharing, multilateral donors and private sector
partnerships, will contribute to meeting the resource needs of the regional
programme and minimizing the risk generated by declining regular (core)
resources and traditional other resources (non-core) funding sources  resource
mobilization implementation plan will be used to approach new donors and funding
sources, including the private sector, leveraging opportunities identified in
the regional pipeline The total programme financing is estimated at $million:
$million in regular resources and $million in other resources In accordance with
Executive Board decision 2013, all direct costs associated with project
implementation should be charged to the concerned projects The harmonized
approach to cash transfers will be used to manage financial risks when involving
external partners as responsible parties in the implementation of regional
projects Despite the diversity of the region, common systemic challenges imply
shared programmatic and operational risks that call for integrated monitoring
and mitigation measures across all outcomes The main programmatic risks include
the deterioration of the current public health emergency, deepening economic and
political crises, weakened rule of law, climate crisis and recurrent natural
hazards, and  reduced funding landscape These risks may cause operational
obstacles to programme implementation There is also  risk of  decline in
political will for gender equality in national agendas Emergency restrictions
could have an adverse impact on the enjoyment of human rights Risks will be
monitored through analytical and early warning mechanisms, embedded in risk logs
and programme and project monitoring tools While the regional programme does not
envisage any potential risks to the rights of vulnerable populations or the
environment as  result of UNDP activities, UNDP will apply risk-informed
programming through regular context analysis, adaptive learning and management
to detect and mitigate early signs thereof Risks will be mitigated by applying
UNDP social and environmental standards, accountability structures and grievance
mechanisms The UNDP enterprise risk management policy’ contingency measures will
ensure that any significant changes in circumstances, including reduced regular
resources funding, can be mitigated in an adequate and timely fashion by scaling
down development interventions and deliverables in coordination with
stakeholders and prioritizing the implementation of the Goals, crisis prevention
and post-disaster recovery efforts Other measures include: course corrections
through adaptive management and revisions of the theory of change to maintain
programme relevance; maximizing synergies among initiatives, providing virtual
modalities for technical assistance and accelerating ownership transfer to
stakeholders to mitigate risks to programme effectiveness, efficiency and
sustainability; facilitating political dialogues, building  coherent United
Nations narrative and supporting the development of regional gender equality
frameworks developed at various regional forums, to tackle human rights concerns
and political crises; and increasing resource mobilization efforts to address
funding considerations  12 DP/RPD/RLA/ IV Monitoring and evaluation Following
the evaluation’ recommendations, the regional programme will improve monitoring
Programme outcome indicators will connect regional-level interventions with
global objectives and capture the UNDP value added of “soft” assistance beyond
tangible outputs The programme’ monitoring framework includes outcome and output
indicators, which: () are relevant to the programme’ focus and priorities; ()
are aligned with the selected Sustainable Development Goal indicators and the
UNDP Strategic Plan integrated results and resources framework, ; and () can be
measured and monitored efficiently using varied sources of data to capture
interconnections among results Consideration was given to ensuring that the
output indicators demonstrate regional contributions, including beneficiary
groups Progress toward the programme’ planned results and resources will be
monitored quarterly and annually in planning, budgeting and monitoring exercises
The programme and projects will be subject to institutional processes consistent
with UNDP standards and commitments Annually, the programme will report progress
and achievements in the results- oriented annual report of the Regional Bureau
At least one project evaluation per outcome will be conducted in tandem with the
programme’ final evaluation to report progress against planned results and
provide necessary corrective actions The regional programme will use the gender
markers on regional projects to monitor investments (15 per cent budget) and
improve accountability, tools and indicators to measure gender results Efforts
will be made to minimize the number of small investments in gender projects and
help them incorporate gender actions and results into their planning and
budgeting At least  per cent of programme budget, proportionately charged to
projects, will be allocated for monitoring, evaluation and communication multi-
year policy research and knowledge management agenda is reflected in the results
framework through the planned activities and expected results This agenda will
be updated through  continuous engagement with development partners, academia
and think tanks In this regard, UNDP will continue collaboration with its
established network of research centres from across the region to provide
cutting-edge knowledge and expertise to Governments to better inform policies
13 DP/RPD/RLA/ Annex Results and resources framework Related SDG: ,,,,,,10,11,
12,13,17 REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #: Reinvigorated inclusive and sustainable
growth, through enhanced productivity, resilience and digital transformations
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated,
particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions Outcome indicator(),
baselines, target() 24 Data source and frequency of data collection Indicative
regional programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) Indicative
resources by outcome ($) Major partners SDG  Database, Annually  Proportion of
small-scale enterprises with  loan or line of credit (IRRF) Baseline (2019):
Target (2025): 50 Regular $,300,000 AECID USAID European Union KfW Government of
Qatar Global Affairs Canada Paypal, Proctor and  : Policies and tools that
enable increased productivity and resilience of small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) and improved access to services, digital technologies and
markets Other $,250,000 World Development Indicators, Annually  Labour-force
participation rate by sex Baseline (2020): Female: %, Male: % Target (2025):
Female: 53%, Male: 80%  Number of SMEs supported to boost productivity (owned by
men, women and mixed ownership) Baseline (2021):  Target (2025): 40 (Women: 25,
Men:10, mixed: ) Source: UNDP, Annual Gamble  Share of individuals using the
Internet Baseline (2021): 68% Target: 90%  Number of sustainable value chains
strengthened Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  Source: UNDP, Annual  Number of
entrepreneurs supported to develop digital literacy (disaggregated by sex)
Baseline (2021): 900 (Men: 500, Women:400) Target (2025): ,000 Source: UNDP,
Annual  : Policies and tools that enable conditions for equitable access to
decent jobs for women and vulnerable populations  Number of policies or tools
adopted to: () Foster equitable and inclusive employment 24 IRRF = Integrated
results and resources framework of the UNDP Strategic Plan  14 DP/RPD/RLA/ ()
Support the development of digital skills Baseline (2021): ()  ()  Target
(2025): ()  ()  Source: National policy documents, UNDP, Annual  Number of
policies or tools that improve the matching between employers’ demand for skills
and employees’ abilities Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  Source: UNDP, Annual
: Tools and mechanisms enabled to expand public and private financing for
development  Number of instruments supported to leverage public and private
finance for the SDGs (Regional-level IRRF): Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):
Source: UNDP Annual  Number of partnerships with private sector partners to
advance the SDGs Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  Source: UNDP Annual Related
SDG: ,,,,,,10,11,13,16 REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #: Increased inclusion of
women and vulnerable groups through meaningful participation and access to
assets, services and social protection, leaving no one behind RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities
and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development  Number of
legal frameworks in place to promote, enforce and SDG  Database, annually AECID
USAID Regular $,300,000  15 DP/RPD/RLA/ monitor equality and non- discrimination
based on sex about: () Overarching legal frameworks and public life ()
Employment and economic benefits (IRRF) Baseline 2020: () % () % Target (2025):
() 75% () 80% Global Affairs Canada Swedish International Other $,492,400  :
Social protection systems enhanced to become universal, inclusive, fiscally
sustainable and growth-friendly Development Cooperation (SIDA)  Number of new or
strengthened policies, legislations, and institutional capacities in place to
increase access to social protection services by country (IRRF) Baseline (2020):
Target (2025):12 Source: UNDP Annual Korea International Cooperation Agency
(KOICA) European Union Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Development
Bank of  Number of new or strengthened policies, legislations and regulations
adopted to enhance investment and coverage/usage in national care systems by
country (IRRF) Baseline (2020): Target (2025): Source: UNDP Annual Latin America
(CAF)  Number of countries that have increased coverage of social protection
services (IRRF) Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  UNDP annually Pirelli Uber,
LinkedIn, Cortana, AT&, and Visa Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Ford
Foundation  : Policies and tools for increased participation of women and
vulnerable groups in decision-making, greater access to financial and digital
services, and capacities for asset accumulation  Number of countries assisted in
improving policies and programmes (IRRF-): () Digital Services () Financial
Services Baselines (2020): ()  ()  Targets (2025): ()  ()  Source: UNDP Annual
Number of countries assisted with measures to advance women’ leadership and
equal participation in decision-making in (IRRF):  16 DP/RPD/RLA/ () Public
institutions () Elected positions, including parliaments Baseline (2020): ()  ()
Target (2025): () 15 ()  Source: ATENEA Annual  : Solutions enabled to help
countries address social norms and practices that hinder inclusion  Number of
initiatives supported that address harmful social norms and gender
discriminatory roles and practices (IRRF) Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):
Source: UNDP Annual  Number of countries supported to develop and implement
integrated and targeted interventions to include migrants, LGTBI, and vulnerable
populations Baseline (2020): Migrants:  LGBTI:  Target (2025): Migrants:15
LGBTI:10 Source: UNDP Annual Related SDG: ,,,,,,,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17
REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #: Green recovery based on principles of sustainable
development reflected by integrated, equitable, gender-responsive and risk and
resilient informed policies, financing and governance frameworks RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and
risk  Number countries with policies and strategies integrating  : Development
vision, strategies and decision-making aligned with climate change European
Union Regular $,300,000  17 DP/RPD/RLA/ inclusive solutions for green recovery
(IRRF) Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  Other $11,723,600 Governments of United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), annually mitigation and
adaptation, nature protection, disaster risk reduction and resilience objectives
Denmark, Norway, Germany, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Switzerland Flanders
(regional government)  Number of countries with risk-informed gender-responsive
national adaptation plans in place Baseline (2021):10 Target (2025):11 Source:
UNFCCC Frequency: Annual  Volume of investment leveraged for green recovery,
reflected through (IRRF): () Fiscal spending () Repurposing of fossil fuels IMF
“World Economic Outlook Update” June 2020, annually USAID International Climate
and agricultural subsidies Initiative Oxford University Are We Building Back
Better? Evidence from 2020 and Pathways for Inclusive Green Recovery Spending
Baseline (2020): () % ()  (TBD) Target (2025): () 10% () -10% SIDA AECID JICA
Global Affairs Canada KOICA Development banks Peacebuilding Fund Partnership for
Action on Green Economy  Number of countries with climate and nature agendas
that promote: () Nationally determined contributions and nature targets in
macroeconomic planning () Climate change mitigation potential of the forest and
land-use sector in national planning () Blue Carbon in nationally determined
contributions () Perverse subsidies' reforms Baseline (2021): ()  ()  ()  ()
Target (2025): ()  ()  ()  ()  Source: Low-emission development strategy in
Latin America and the Caribbean, PROCaribe+ Frequency: Annual  : Mechanisms and
tools to support financial strategies and budget allocations for the transition
of key economic sectors towards green and climate-resilient development  Number
of financial policies for green recovery based on methodologies such as: ()  18
DP/RPD/RLA/ climate public expenditure and institutional review; () investment
and financial flow analysis; () private climate expenditure and institutional
review; () climate budget tagging; or () the Biodiversity Finance Initiative
Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 11 Source:(), (), () () above, annually  Number
of countries with financial solutions to enhance: () Finance for biodiversity
and climate change () Capacities to access carbon markets finance () National
decarbonization plans Baseline: 2020 (), 2021 (, ): ()  ()  ()  Target (2025):
() 15 ()  ()  Source: UNDP, Annually  : Diverse stakeholders equipped with
strengthened capacities and opportunities to foster sustainable development
solutions and enhance their resilience  Level of understanding of climate change
as driver of migration flows and associated risks Baseline: TBD through UNDP
scorecard survey) Target: Tentative increase by 10% Source: UNDP Scorecard
Survey, Annual  Number of consensual policies for the prevention of
environmental and climate-related risks Baseline (2021):246 Target (2025): 446
Source: UNDP Quarterly  19 DP/RPD/RLA/ Related SDG: All REGIONAL/GLOBAL
PROGRAMME OUTCOME #: Structural transformations underpinned by effective
governance to shape resilient and sustainable societies RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive
and digital transitions : Percentage of trust towards institutions and perceived
corruption index (CPI) Baseline (2018): () Trust 30%, () CPI 43 Target (2025):
() Trust: 60% () CPI 30 Latinobarómetro, Transparency International Index,
annually  : Mechanisms enhanced for inclusive civic engagement and dialogue,
particularly of women, that strengthen the legitimacy of institutions and build
trust AECID CAF KOICA European Union Regular $,300,000 Other $25,230,000 Spanish
Decentralized  Number of countries with: () Electoral management bodies with
strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive, peaceful, and credible elections ()
Parliaments with improved capacities to undertake inclusive, effective and
accountable law-making, oversight and representation (IRRF) Baseline (2021): ()
()  Target (2025): () 10 ()  Source: UNDP, Annual Cooperation (Madrid,
Andalucia, Baleares, Catalunya)  Rate of victims of intentional homicide and
femicide per 100,000 population, in () Central America and () Latin America and
the Caribbean (IRRF) Baseline: Homicide (2020): () %; () % Femicide (2019): ()
%; () % Target (2025): Homicide: () %; () 16% Femicide: () %; () % SDGDatabase,
INFOSEGURA regional project, annually SIDA Global Affairs Canada Government of
the United Kingdom UNOPS USAID World Bank, IDB, United Nations Trust Fund to
Eliminate Violence against Women and Girls  Number of countries with
strengthened capacities to: () Promote and protect civic space () Promote the
integrity of information ecosystems Baseline (2021): ()  ()  Target (2025): ()
()  Source: UNDP, Annual  Number of countries whose vulnerability to crisis has
improved Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):  Risk Index, European Commission,
annually : Number of multi-stakeholder mechanisms to strengthen public sector
agility, collaboration, and transparency (IRRF) Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):
20 DP/RPD/RLA/ Source: UNDP Annual  : Solutions enabled to strengthen the rule
of law, citizen security and access to justice for enhanced social cohesion,
peaceful coexistence and protection of human rights  Number of countries
supported to increase access to justice and no discrimination through: ()
Initiatives of -justice () Measures to improve justice services centred on
people () Measures to advance women´ leadership and equal participation in
decision-making in the judiciary Baseline (2021): ()  ()  ()  Target (2025): ()
12 () 12 ()  Source: UNDP, Annual  Number of countries with strengthened
capacities to implement evidence-based legislation, policies, action plans and
initiatives to prevent and respond to violence against women and girls,
including femicides (IRRF) Baseline (2019): 16 Target (2025): 21 Source:
Spotlight, UNDP, Annual  Number of countries with cross-border, regional,
national initiatives, policies and strategies to protect and promote the
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations
Baseline (2021):  Target (2025):   21 DP/RPD/RLA/ Source: OHCHR, Annual  :
National and local-level capacities increased for evidence-based decision-making
and leveraging innovation for improved sustainable development outcomes  Number
of institutions with strengthened public administration and core government
functions for (IRRF): () Improved centres of government and data models ()
Improved delivery of people-centred basic services () Improved State and civil
society engagement platforms Baseline (2021): () 25 ()  ()  Target (2025): ()
() 16 () 12 Source: UNDP, Annual  Number of countries supported to strengthen
policies and public services with evidence-based and gender-sensitive approach
(social protection, education, health, citizen security, judiciary services)
Baseline (2021): 12 Target (2025): 18 Source: UNDP, Annual  22