Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships   : Page:  III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV
Monitoring and evaluation: Page:  DP/DCP/GUY/  UNDP within the United Nations
Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  In 2016, Guyana was
reclassified as an upper middle-income country following the discovery of large
oil and gas reserves, which is expected to increase economic growth
significantly in the short to medium term Primarily due to oil and gas revenues,
Guyana recorded  high growth rate of per cent in 2020 (International Monetary
Fund, April 2021), despite the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic In addition, the country’ short- to medium-term prospects seem to be
very favourable as economic growth is projected at rates of , and per cent for
2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively Its estimated recoverable resource stands at
over  billion oil-equivalent barrels (Oilnowgy)  The country has made
significant development advances in the last two decades In 2020, Guyana was
recorded as having  Human Development Index of 682 which ranked it 122 of 189
countries The last multidimensional poverty index () showed that only  per cent
of the population was classified as multidimensionally poor In 2021, the
percentage of people living in extreme poverty (less than $90 per day) was  per
cent,  percentage points higher than the target of  per cent for the eradication
of extreme poverty set in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development More
importantly, the country has extended awareness of the need to prudently manage
the proceeds from the oil and gas sector to secure  development path that leaves
no one behind while managing the sector in an environmentally sustainable manner
In parallel, Guyana is updating its Low Carbon Development Strategy, which
includes appropriate adaptation measures for  country highly vulnerable to
climate change risks Moreover, benefits to be accrued from this initiative are
expected to earn the country significant financial resources from the provision
of its environmental services to the world through the Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) programme These resources will be
used for development interventions such as education, health, agriculture,
housing, water and sanitation, infrastructure and energy  Guyana thus presents
promising development context, and this decade could well prove to be
transformational for fair, inclusive and resilient development conditions across
the country Nonetheless, challenges remain, exacerbated by the joint onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic and severe flooding during 2021, both clear reminders of
the value of preventive resilience in national policies Vulnerable groups
include indigenous communities, female-headed households, people with
disabilities, migrants and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex persons5 (National Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Policy, 2018)
These groups have experienced exacerbated economic hardship as  result of the
pandemic  For the economy to provide sufficient, sustainable and dignified
livelihoods, the non-oil sectors need to diversify and enhance their
productivity and competitiveness  key government strategy is to accelerate job
creation, given that the unemployment rate in the second quarter of 2021 was per
cent While the oil and gas industry is __________________  International
Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook, October Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund  United Nations Development Programme and Oxford Poverty and Human
Development Initiative Multidimensional Poverty Index, United Nations
Development Programme, New York, and Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative, Oxford, UK  Sustainable Development Goals Report 2021: Guyana
Profile  World Bank Guyana Systematic Country Diagnostic, “LGBTI+” comprises
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex and non-binary or other
gender denominations  Guyana Labour Force Survey Bulletin, Second quarter,  /16
DP/DCP/GUY/ projected to create about ,850 direct jobs and 23,100 indirect jobs
by 2025 ( and  per cent of the workforce)  large share of new jobs will require
investment in non- oil sectors Low value-chain development and quality standards
in micro, small and medium-sized enterprises should be addressed, helping these
groups to access export markets, given the small domestic market  Guyana is
highly vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters, given its
geographical location According to the United Nations Satellite Centre, the
coastal plains, where 90 per cent of the population live, are prone to floods
and storm tides Consequently, Guyana needs to invest in climate-resilient
infrastructure and adopt climate-smart practices as part of its climate
adaptation measures Moreover, sustainable management of the country’ rich
natural resources is critical for tangible development progress While reduced-
impact logging is the norm, forest inventories are ongoing for managing,
monitoring and international reporting Progress on the country’ low-carbon
trajectory commitments is hindered by energy inefficiency and limited access to
renewable energy systems There is limited management of toxic and ozone-
depleting chemicals Mercury pollution remains  concern for mining in the
hinterlands, affecting miners, indigenous peoples and indigenous women in
particular Guyana has committed to reducing the consumption of
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by at least 35 per cent from  Social protection
programmes and effective public health services provided by the State are key
for well-being and reduced social inequality, and need to be expanded to cover
groups including informal sector workers The public health system was
substantially challenged to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic One in ten
households could not access medical treatment/services, mainly because health
facilities lacked supplies  HIV/AIDS continues to be  public health challenge10
and people living with HIV and AIDS continue to be subjected to significant
levels of stigma and discrimination Improved health outcomes require better
supply chain management of supplies and medicines (procurement, distribution and
tracking), including the effective roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines Mental health
is another major issue: Guyana had the highest rate of age-standardized suicide
mortality in the Americas in 2019, at per 100,000 (Pan American Health
Organization 2019)  Another issue to address is that data on gender-based
violence is fragmented among key actors, rendering analysis for decision-making
difficult Constitutional reform remains important for most political
stakeholders and requires consensus on issues/challenges  Throughout its long
history in Guyana, UNDP has developed its ability to work and partner with  wide
range of government and local institutions and international organizations,
while drawing on the strength of the United Nations country team For example,
UNDP has partnered with the Ministry of Human Services and Social Security, the
National AIDS Programme Secretariat and civil society organizations (CSOs) for
variety of interventions including the National Dialogue on HIV and the Law;
improved delivery of services during the pandemic for persons living with HIV
and AIDS; and the implementation of the Business Unusual Fund through the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) Multidimensional support was
provided by UNDP to Amerindian communities, in partnership with the Ministry of
Amerindian Affairs, the Office of the Prime Minister, __________________  World
Bank Guyana Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2020,  HCFC phase-out management plan
approved by the Multilateral Fund for the implementation of the Montreal
Protocol  COVID-19 socioeconomic impact assessment (2020) 10 Guyana First
Voluntary National Review, July  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ the Government of Norway and
United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) It included initiatives on livelihood
opportunities, land titling, energy services and extending Internet access
notable example was the Amerindian Development Fund project, which provided
micro-capital grants to over 150 communities to develop and execute community
development plans for economic/productive ventures (, village shops,
transportation, forest-based artisanal crafts, fisheries, etc), benefiting over
56,000 Amerindian persons (half of them women) number of lessons were learned
during the previous programme, as identified in the country programme
performance summary Policy support is important for addressing systemic issues
that can compromise the sustainability of results, particularly in the
hinterland and other remote areas Building institutional capacities in
government entities should be  common part of projects involving them, from
inception to exit strategies, to achieve and maintain expected outcomes The
protracted period of political instability that delayed the transition of the
new Administration (December 2018 to August 2020) showed the value of
relativizing programme delivery while rebuilding trust and reactivating the
special partnership status of UNDP with the Government Finally, the
developmental effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in Guyana, as in most countries,
are significant and will continue to be felt for some time The three directions
of change articulated in the new UNDP Strategic Plan,  (structural
transformation, leaving no one behind, building resilience) and key enablers
like digitalization will guide UNDP Guyana towards an effective pandemic
response as it looks ahead to the 2030 Agenda Going forward, UNDP will support
key areas of the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNMSDCF), , economic resilience, safety and security,
environment/natural resource management and equality/well-being UNDP will build
on its comparative advantages, for instance, having used  multidimensional
strategy to address environmental sustainability and resilience in the last
cycle with several ministries and agencies Through its integrator role, UNDP
supported United Nations system-wide efforts led by the Resident Coordinator,
for example leading the assessment of the socioeconomic impact of the pandemic
on households UNDP will continue to leverage its innovation expertise through
its Accelerator Lab for country-to-country solutions stimulated by local
innovators11 It will engage the UNDP Strategic Innovation Unit to support
partners with systemic transformation To support national progress on digital
transformation, it will draw from knowledge/tools in the new UNDP Digital
Strategy and support from the UNDP Chief Digital Officer II Programme priorities
and partnerships The strategy of UNDP Guyana to advance human development is
based on reducing economic, social and gender inequalities; supporting effective
governance and social protection; and enabling sustainable low-carbon
trajectories (including climate change adaptation), all supported by digital
transformation and strengthened data This strategy is based on national
development priorities, which include: ()  diversified and resilient productive
sector, with emphasis on job creation and support to small and medium-sized
businesses; () catalytic and transformative infrastructure; ()  low-carbon
development strategy consistent with oil and gas production, and environmental
management and resilience; () enhanced and expanded social services,
__________________ 11 Peach, , et al, (2021) Collective Intelligence for
Sustainable Development: Getting Smarter Together  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ particularly
in health and education; () improved governance, safety, security and the rule
of law; and () navigating and responding to COVID-19 as long as necessary 12 The
new country programme for the period  is closely aligned with the UNDP Strategic
Plan,  and designed to contribute to the common outcomes of the UNMSDCF Thus, in
addition to the four programme areas described below, UNDP will aim to
contribute to initiatives led by other United Nations agencies, such as with
UNICEF on water, sanitation and hygiene for hinterland communities; with the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) on reducing gender-based
violence; and with UNAIDS on the provision of services to persons living with
HIV/AIDS and key population groups who are vulnerable to HIV Area  Economic
resilience and shared prosperity The theory of change for this outcome is that
if sustainable livelihood opportunities are provided to vulnerable groups, then
the country will generate  more productive business ecosystem that improves
people’ standard of living This could be achieved by promoting more diversified
businesses (in the context of  growing oil and gas sector), and if there is
increased access to Internet and -government services UNDP will contribute to
enhancing access to sustainable livelihoods and entry points for decent work for
people in vulnerable groups by building capacities in official entities and
civil society to deliver effective programmes For example, it will continue to
work with the Ministry of Amerindian Affairs in the land titling process to
increase the number of Amerindian communities with institutional measures in
place to generate and strengthen livelihoods In this effort, UNDP will work with
the Ministry of Labour and United Nations agencies, including the International
Labour Organization Towards  greater diversification of the non-oil economy,
UNDP will collaborate with the Ministry of Tourism, Industry and Commerce and
the Small Business Bureau to strengthen policies that promote business
development and the integrating of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises
into value chains and markets (via certification, business formalization and
training) UNDP will work with the Office of the Prime Minister to support
digital transformation, , through access to connectivity and -services
(including electronic money transfers), especially for the hinterlands and the
poor in other remote communities, and pursue the reduction of the gender digital
divide and the financial inclusion of women Critically, the Office of the Prime
Minister will be directly responsible for connectivity services in target
communities and the Ministry of Tourism, Industry and Commerce for hosting
services for micro, small and medium- sized businesses, while the Ministry of
Amerindian Affairs will be responsible for executing land titling arrangements
Indigenous people, women and youth, among others, will benefit from expanded
livelihood and small business services, particularly through online platforms
Area  Safety and security The theory of change for this outcome is that if State
and non-State actors involved in the justice sector operate with greater
transparency, participation and effectiveness, and they are enabled by improved
capacities (including for data collection and analysis) to better address and
reduce crime (including specifically from gender-based violence), then there
should be  reduction in crime (particularly from gender-based violence)
__________________ 12 President’ address to 12th Parliament and Budget Speech
(12 February 2021)  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ through prevention and timelier access to
more effective justice services In the longer term, this will translate into an
improved environment for security and social inclusion Building on the judicial
system needs assessment conducted in , UNDP will support the Guyana Police
Force, prosecutors and the courts to strengthen mechanisms for the
administration of justice, including the incorporation of advanced digital
tools, to increase effectiveness and accountability in exercising the rule of
law UNDP will support State and non-State actors involved in systemic reform,
human rights and social inclusion To reduce crime and violence, UNDP will
support  comprehensive approach to gender-based violence to address the root
causes of violence against women and girls, with an emphasis on prevention UNDP
will work with the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Human Services and
Social Security, UNFPA, UNICEF and UN- Women (these last three within the multi-
agency Spotlight programme) to introduce and expand preventive measures, address
legislative and policy gaps, improve institutional capacities and augment
service delivery systems, especially in remote communities It will enhance data
collection and systems and encourage  stronger civil society response Judicial
stakeholders will contribute to designing required mechanisms, while the
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Human Services and Social Security will
advance improved data collection systems Women and girls experiencing multiple
forms of violence (including discrimination) are expected to benefit from
enhanced policies to prevent gender-based violence Area  Natural resource
management and resilience to climate change The theory of change for this
outcome is that if national and local authorities have improved capacities and
legal frameworks for natural resource management (including in the oil and gas
sector) and for handling chemicals and other pollutants, and there is increased
access to renewable energies and recycling technologies, and there are adequate
policies and community mechanisms for climate change mitigation and adaptation,
then the resilience of the country’ natural resources and ecosystems will be
improved, as will the resilience and prosperity of the people who depend on them
UNDP will support strengthening institutional management capacities and
legal/policy frameworks to manage natural resources and handle toxic chemicals
and pollutants It will support the Hydrometeorological Service of the Ministry
of Agriculture to implement the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on
alternative refrigerants for the cooling sector With the Environmental
Protection Agency, UNDP will strengthen enabling frameworks for mainstreaming
biodiversity and mercury reduction in small-scale gold mining operations It will
support the Ministry of Natural Resources in the national forest inventory
methodology and data platform The Ministry and the Environmental Protection
Agency will promote the adoption of environmentally responsible mining and
sustainable forest management UNDP will continue to strengthen the capacity of
the Ministry of Natural Resources to manage natural resources sustainably and
update related policies and frameworks Regarding climate change mitigation and
adaptation, UNDP will support the evolution and implementation of the national
Low Carbon Development Strategy, working with the Office of the President and
the Ministry of Public Works to advance sustainable energy access and policies,
for example, by mainstreaming low-emission technologies It will support forest
monitoring to advance land-use and environmental services, including through
REDD+ UNDP will promote gender-responsive disaster risk reduction initiatives
with the Civil Defence Commission and local administrations, expanding
community-based early warning systems and policies The Commission and  /16
DP/DCP/GUY/ the Ministry of Agriculture will adopt advanced technology/tools,
such as early warning models, to limit the impact of extreme weather events
These interventions will enable informed decision-making that reduces risks and
increases productivity for farmers and other groups Area  Equality and well-
being The theory of change for this outcome is that if national institutions
strengthen their capacities to deliver health services via improved information
and supply chain systems, and government and civil society actors enhance their
social protection policies, mental health and HIV services, then people in
Guyana will have better access to universal, shock-responsive and quality health
care UNDP will work with the Ministry of Health and the Georgetown Public
Hospital to support universal access to quality health services by strengthening
health management systems through introducing digital solutions and better
handling of supply chains for medical products It will partner with the National
AIDS Programme Secretariat, which provides technical oversight for HIV services,
expanding access to such services for persons living with HIV/AIDS and their
caregivers, including through CSOs UNDP will support the Ministry of Health in
developing an investment case for expanded mental health services benefiting
Guyanese society The Ministry will lead the design of new health management
system components and the mental health investment case UNDP will collaborate
with the Ministry of Human Services and Social Security to develop policies for
more comprehensive social protection system that includes more women, persons
with disabilities and informal sector workers, among others, to help individuals
better withstand crises at any stage throughout their lives The Ministry will
design social protection options consistent with those policies III Programme
and risk management The main risks to the successful implementation of this
programme are financial, operational and environmental/sanitary The financial
risks refer to funding limitations for achieving programme goals As an upper-
middle-income country with emerging oil wealth, Guyana has seen its traditional
donor space shrink and this is expected to continue The bulk of the programmatic
finances for the last two country programmes came from government cost sharing,
including the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund UNDP will continue to engage the
Government on transformative projects and promote the country’ participation in
regional and subregional initiatives (, within the transboundary Amazon basin)
to achieve the intended programme results  redesigned resource mobilization
strategy will encompass traditional donors (Global Environment Facility,
European Union, the Governments of Japan, Norway and the United States) and new
ones Operational risks present potential difficulties in managing the programme
and its actions The country office will conduct an objective assessment of its
capacities to identify areas where support or training may be required Lessons
learned from the previous programme will help the office to critically address
possible formulation and implementation challenges, including the choice of
delivery modalities for new initiatives Strengthened capacities of some national
partners to manage interventions will be explicitly included in project design
wherever assessed relevant for enhanced execution and sustainability through
clear exit strategies Political risks in the near future are not deemed
significant but could exacerbate operational risks that arose during the
previous country programme The vote of no  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ confidence in late
2018 and the delay in the announcement of the results of the 2020 elections
caused delays in political decision-making that carried over to the technical
domain and resulted in  slowdown in the implementation timeline of some projects
In terms of environmental and health risks, UNDP will seek in the short-term to
support the Government through the Civil Defence Commission and in collaboration
with the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
in conducting  damage and loss assessment as part of its response to the floods
of June-July The COVID-19 situation is likely to continue to affect community-
based initiatives, , curtailing travel, particularly in the hinterland where
health systems are more vulnerable UNDP will heed national COVID-19 guidelines
while seeking to partner with stakeholders on the ground in supporting project
execution where possible, including using digital resources wherever feasible
UNDP plays an active role in the United Nations Emergency Technical Team
responding to potential disasters in the country In the longer term, UNDP Guyana
will continue to work with other UNDP offices in the Caribbean subregion towards
enabling gender-responsive disaster recovery, climate and environmental
resilience To ensure that the programme addresses gender inequality risks
globally, UNDP will design  gender strategy that includes  gender analysis for
each project (both for ensuring positive outcomes for women and men and
substantial participation of women in project implementation), and strengthened
capacity on gender and development for staff and partners UNDP will incorporate
participatory elements into programme governance Its design has considered
diagnostic assessments in the 2019 voluntary national review of progress towards
the Sustainable Development Goals, the 2021 Caribbean Common Multi-country
Analysis and national development priorities and lines of action defined by the
Government It was informed by consultations with key stakeholders from the
Government, civil society and United Nations agencies UNDP will maintain this
participatory multi-stakeholder approach during the programme’ implementation,
as well as participate in the results group monitoring the country
implementation plans which operationalize the UNMSDCF This country programme
document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at the country level Accountability of
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country
programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies
and procedures and internal control framework The grievance mechanism will be
available to institutions, communities and beneficiaries to address any
perceived adverse effects or concerns derived from UNDP actions in the country
The programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may
be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable
response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used
in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial
risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects IV Monitoring and
evaluation The need for robust data remains  cross-cutting challenge for
successfully implementing this programme and advancing the country’ sustainable
development processes Challenges in the availability, quality and timeliness of
data and capacities for data analysis are significant hurdles for planning and
policy formulation and in the 2019 voluntary national review targeted
interventions, as indicated  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ Strengthening data systems needs to
be addressed head on to enhance data collection, analysis and reporting
capacities Strengthening data will be mainstreamed across the programme’
interventions and actions One possibility will be to collaborate with
neighbouring UNDP country offices facing similar challenges UNDP can leverage
its participation in the Global Partnership improve capacities and methodologies
in the country to harness quality development data UNDP will support the
Ministry of Finance in conducting data gap analysis and data development plans
of key government units to improve data available for monitoring and evaluation
The United Nations Guyana Inter-Agency Monitoring and Evaluation Group will
support collective monitoring and reporting on the UNMSDCF indicators for
Sustainable Development Data to UNDP Guyana views monitoring and evaluation as
developmental tools that can generate added value for UNDP To improve monitoring
and evaluation competencies in the office and with implementing partners, UNDP
will deliver training in results- based management, data collection, management
and analysis to enhance development effectiveness The UNDP gender marker will be
used to monitor programme performance and improve planning and decision-making
to ensure gender equality is well integrated into programmes UNDP will utilize
recommendations and findings from independent evaluations to strengthen project
design, monitor connections among programme priorities and make course
corrections to the overall programme UNDP will ensure the evaluation plan
follows the Independent Evaluation Office guidelines (regarding project budget
and duration) and ensure that each evaluation is funded The programme builds on
robust theory of change supported by individual outcome-level theories of change
to facilitate monitoring and evaluation and  clear line of accountability The
programme will be tracked at outcome and output levels parallel to activity
monitoring and spot checks for individual projects Digital tools and processes
will enhance data/information gathering and analysis, particularly in light of
the travel restrictions due to COVID-For example, Kobo toolboxes and other
mobile-based digital tools will be piloted and scaled up as appropriate
innovation in monitoring Knowledge management, including research, is central to
the work of UNDP Access to the UNDP global knowledge network is  key attribute
of the UNDP comparative advantage The Guyana office will access the experience
and knowledge resources of other country offices, communities of practice like
the Global Policy Network and experts through the UNDP regional and global
rosters  knowledge management strategy for the Guyana office can provide better
leverage for its knowledge products and assets, including those from research
and technical assistance  /16 DP/DCP/GUY/ Annex Results and resources framework
for Guyana () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  diversified and resilient productive
sector, with emphasis on job creation and support to small-medium businesses;
catalytic and transformative infrastructure SDGs , , 17 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF : More productive and competitive business
ecosystems designed to improve people’ standards of living and well-being
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Structural transformation accelerated
Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and
frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Indicative country programme
outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) Major partners / partnerships
frameworks Estimated cost by outcome ($) Indicator  Proportion of youth (aged
years) not in education, employment or training (SDG , IRRF11)13 Baseline: %
(2021) Target: 32% (2026) Bureau of Statistics Annual Output : National and
subnational institutions and civil society systems have strengthened capacities
to improve, provide and deliver effective, sustainable livelihood programmes to
women, youth, persons living with HIV and AIDS, migrants and other vulnerable
groups Ministry of Labour Ministry of Tourism, Industry and Regular $626,500
Commerce (MINTIC) Other $17,500,000 Ministry of Amerindian Affairs (MOAA)
Ministry of Human Services and Social Security (MOHSSS) Office of the Prime
Minister (OPM) Indicator  Proportion of individuals using the Internet (IRRF)
Baseline: 37% (2017) Target: 50% (2026) International Telecommunication
Indicator : number of communities with institutional measures in place at the
subnational levels to generate and strengthen employment and livelihoods
(disaggregated by sex, age, region) Baseline: 123 (2021) Target: 142 (2026)
Source: MOAA, Annual Union Small Business Bureau Guyana Telecommunications
Agency Saint Francis Community Developers CSOs Annual Private Sector Commission
National Toshaos Council Indicator : number of programmes focusing on women,
youth, migrants, Indigenous people and other groups that promote and support the
development of export quality products (disaggregated by sex, age, region)
Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MINTIC, MOAA, Annual ILO IOM UNFPA
UNHCR __________________ 13 Integrated results and resources framework from the
UNDP Strategic Plan   DP/DCP/GUY/ Output : National and subnational
institutional mechanisms, structures and policies strengthened to promote
diversification and MSME development in an oil economy Indicator : number of
programmes to expand and diversify MSMEs based on sustainable production
technologies Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MINTIC, Annual Output :
Citizens have increased access to Government services through information and
communication technology (ICT) at the national and subnational levels Indicator
: number of unserved communities/villages with ICT connectivity Baseline: 62
(2021) Target: 200 (2026) Source: OPM, Annual Indicator : number of public
institutions that leverage digital technologies in ways that improve people’
lives: (IRRF214) Baseline (2021): () Nationally  () Subnationally  Target
(2026): () 10 ()  Source: OPM, Annual __________________ 14 Enabler  in the
Strategic Plan  11 DP/DCP/GUY/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Improved governance,
safety, security and the rule of law SDGs , 10, 16 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF : Regional and national laws, policies, systems and
institutions improve access to justice and promote peace, social cohesion and
security RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  No one left behind United Nations
Human Rights Indicator  Independent national human rights institutions with
improved capacity for compliance with the Paris Principles (SDG)15 Baseline:
(2021) Target:  (2026) Regular $626,500 Ministry of Legal Affairs (MLA) Ministry
of Home Affairs MOHSSS Guyana Elections Commission Judiciary Parliament Output :
Government and non- government institutions working on access to justice and
fulfilment of human rights enabled to improve effectiveness, transparency and
participation Council Government of Guyana  years Other $,800,000 Indicator :
Number of institutions with enhanced capacities to support the fulfilment of
nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations: • the rule of
law and justice • Human rights (IRRF) Baseline16:  (2021) Target:  (2026)
Source: MLA, Annual Guyana Human Rights Association Electoral Reform Group
Women’ groups MOHSSS Guyana Police Force Annual Indicator  Proportion of ever-
partnered women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual,
verbal or psychological violence by  current or former intimate partner in the
previous 12 months, by form of violence and by age (SDG, IRRF) Baseline:  in 10
(2019) Target:  in 15 (2026) UNCTAD UNFPA UNICEF UNODC Indicator : Number of
services and mechanisms developed and in place for enhancing access to justice
in the judicial sector enabled by digital technologies Baseline:  (2021) Target:
(2026) Source: MLA, Judiciary, Annual Output : Government institutions and CSOs
have strengthened their capacities to address and reduce gender-based violence
Indicator : Number of entities with strengthened capacities to collect, analyse
and utilize data to implement policies and __________________ 15  = Not in
place,  = Capacity low,  = Capacity neither low nor high,  = Capacity high,  =
Capacity very high 16 Same as previous footnote 12  DP/DCP/GUY/ initiatives to
prevent gender-based violence (IRRF) Baseline: () National entities  ()
Subnational entities  () CSOs  Target: ()  ()  ()  Source: MOHSSS, Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  national Low Carbon Development Strategy consistent
with oil/gas production, and environmental management/resilience; catalytic and
transformative infrastructure SDGs , 12, 14, 15 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF : Caribbean countries manage natural resources and
ecosystems strengthening their resilience and enhancing the resilience and
prosperity of the people and communities that depend on them RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME:  Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
Indicator  Degree to which country has  policy and regulatory frameworks and
capacities (data etc) for waste management Using these criteria representing key
bottlenecks in waste management • presence of hazardous waste policies • waste
characterization assessments conducted17 Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) EPA
MNR MOA Annual Output : Environment agencies and local government authorities
have improved their management capacities of natural resources, chemicals, and
contaminants Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
MOAA Office of the President Regular $626,500 Other $,200,000 Civil Defence
Commission (CDC) Environmental Protection Agency Indicator : Areas of landscapes
or territories under improved practices, excluding protected areas (in hectares)
(IRRF) (EPA) Department of Environment and Climate Change Baseline:  (2021)
Target: 220 (2026) Source: EPA, Annual Ministry of Local Government and Regional
Development Guyana Forestry Commission Guyana Lands and Surveys Indicator
Megawatts of new installed renewable energy in the country Baseline: 0215 (2021)
Target:  (2026) Indicator : Number of metric tons of reduced mercury released
and used in Artisanal and small-scale mining Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026)
Source: MOA, EPA Annual Commission Ministry of Public Works (MPW) Guyana Energy
Agency (GEA) Annual Hydrometeorological Department- MOA GEA Municipalities
__________________ 17  = Not in place,  = Started,  = In progress,  = Almost
complete,  = In place  13 DP/DCP/GUY/ Indicator  Level of establishment or
operationalization of an integrated policy/strategy/plan which increases the
country’ ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change, and foster
climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development in  manner that
does not threaten food production (including national adaptation plan,
nationally determined contribution, national communication, biennial update
report, etc) (SDG)18 Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) National voluntary
report, Paris Output : Effective institutional frameworks in place for
sustainable use of natural resources Guyana Women Miners Organisation Guyana
Gold and Diamond Miners Agreement Every two years Office of the President
Association Private Sector Commission Indicator : Number of institutional
frameworks for natural resource management developed Baseline: 10 (2021) Target:
14 (2026) Source: MNR, Annual Output : The MNR has strengthened its capacities
to monitor and enforce sustainable oil/gas sector regulations Indicator : number
of policies, legislation and institutional frameworks developed for the
management of hydrocarbons Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MNR, Annual
Indicator  Number of disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015– 2030 (SDG) Baseline:  (2021) Target:
(2026) CDC Annual Output : Business enterprises and communities have increased
access to clean, renewable and affordable energy Indicator : number of service
providers offering clean, renewable and affordable energy services Baseline:
(2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MPW, Annual Indicator : Number of people, who
benefited from services for clean, affordable and sustainable energy
(disaggregated by sex, region) (IRRF) __________________ 18  = Not in place,  =
Started,  = In progress,  = Almost complete,  = In place 14  DP/DCP/GUY/
Baseline: () Urban ,000 () Rural  Target: () 10,000 () ,500 Source: Office of
the President, Annual Output : National and subnational governmental entities
institute effective policies, and local communities put in place effective
mechanisms for improved, gender-responsive disaster risk management Indicator :
Early warning and preparedness measures in place to manage the impact of
disasters (IRRF) Baseline19:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: CDC, MOA, Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced and expanded social services, particularly
in health and education; navigating and responding to COVID-19 as long as
necessary – SDG , 10 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF
People in the Caribbean equitably access and utilize universal, quality and
shock- responsive, social protection, education, health and care services
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  No one left behind, Indicator  Number of new
HIV infections per ,000 uninfected population, by sex, age and key populations
Baseline: 500 (2018) Target: 26 (2026) National AIDS Programme Secretariat
(NAPS) HIV service providers Annual Output : National institutions have improved
health management systems MOHSSS Regular $626,500 NAPS Other $250,000 Indicator
: Degree of introducing  digital solutions package for vaccine delivery and
supply chain management systems (IRRF) Baseline: 220 (2021) Target:  (2026)
CSOs: Persons living with HIV and AIDS, LGBTI+ __________________ 19  = Not in
place,  = Started,  = In progress,  = Almost complete,  = In place 20  = Not in
place,  = Work started,  = Work in progress,  = Work almost complete,  =
Introduced/deployed  15 DP/DCP/GUY/ Source: MOH, Annual Output : National and
subnational institutions and CSOs have systems and policies in place to deliver
HIV and mental health services Indicator : number of CSOs providing HIV and
services to key population groups Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source:
NAPS, Annual Indicator : existence of an investment case to provide mental
health services Baseline: No Target: Yes Source: MOH, Annual 16