Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/JOR/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
is  small, natural resource-poor, semi-arid, upper- middle-income country in
Western Asia, nested in  conflict-ridden neighbourhood Its population of over 11
million (per cent urban) is largely culturally homogenous, and young (per cent
below 30) Jordan enjoys  strong track record of human development, with  high
human development index rating of 729 (102 out of 189 countries)  The country’
overarching development challenges include dramatic depletion of natural
resources; increasing socioeconomic vulnerabilities and inequalities; influx of
refugees; COVID-19; and the transnational threat of violent extremist groups The
economy is exhibiting signs of recovery following   per cent contraction in
2020, growing by  per cent in Per capita growth in the past decade declined
sharply, non-tax public revenues decreased owing to revenue reclassification,
and general government debt increased from to per cent of gross domestic product
(GDP) from 2019 to Young people and women have little voice in political
processes and are largely excluded from the labour market, facing high
unemployment rates (per cent for men and per cent for women) Female labour force
participation is among the lowest globally (14 per cent in 2021) The country’
multidimensional poverty index headcount is  per cent, with another  categorized
as vulnerable, and an inequality coefficient of per cent  Jordan is considered
mixed economy, governmentally regulated, rent reliant and implementing partial
liberal economic policies of an aspiring market economy Jordan remains dependent
on fluctuating foreign aid The private sector is dominated by micro, small and
medium enterprises (MSMEs), often informal, contributing 40 per cent of GDP
Employing 70 per cent of workers7, MSMEs depend on low-skilled and migrant work,
mostly placed in low-paid vulnerable employment conditions The informal sector
constitutes 41 per cent8 of total employment  Although not  signatory to the
1951 Refugee Convention, Jordan is  top refugee hosting country per-capita The
country hosts more than more than  million Palestinian refugees, alongside
760,000 refugees and asylum seekers from Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Sudan and Somalia
This reality shapes external and domestic policies of Jordan and impacts
political and socioeconomic complexities  Chronic challenges, structural
weaknesses and unresolved vulnerabilities were further aggravated by the
COVID-19 pandemic, placing democratic institutions under stress After an initial
surge in popularity early in the crises, trust in government dropped from 63 per
cent in September 2020 to 43 per cent in March 10 The reasons cited include
reduced transparency and accountability of governmental response to
unemployment, poverty and low wages Recovery from COVID-19 is expected to be
protracted, slow and uneven, especially for vulnerable households, senior
citizens, women, young people, persons with disabilities, migrants, refugees and
informal workers Jordan needs rapid progress in achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  Several
ambitious reform initiatives addressing the trust gap have been set in motion by
national authorities The priorities of the Royal Committee to Modernize the
Political System focused on the political participation of women and youth These
reforms aim to build  Jordan Department of Statistics: Population Projections
for the Kingdom’ Residents  World Bank: Jordan Economic Monitor, Fall Ministry
of Finance: Government Finance Bulletin, March Department of Statistics:
Unemployment Statistics, Q4-International Labour Organization: Decent Work for
Women Report, Q1-United Nations Development Programme: Human Development Report,
Central Bank of Jordan: Guide for Small and Medium Enterprises, Q2- Jordan
Strategy Forum: Informal Employment in Jordan, Q2-United Nations Population
Fund: Jordan Humanitarian Emergency, 10 Arab Barometer: Jordan Country Report
/16  DP/DCP/JOR/ stronger political parties through  revised electoral system,
the facilitation of  vibrant political party life and lowering parliamentary
office eligibility age to  One of the most water-scarce countries in the world,
with annual per capita availability less than 100 m³/year, Jordan sinks far
below the international poverty threshold of 500 m³/year11 Shortfalls result
from over-pumping renewable groundwater that depletes water tables sharply
Ninety-three per cent of the country’ energy is imported at  per cent of GDP,
placing additional strain on the economy Natural disasters, risks and artificial
hazards are growing, while national systems for disaster risk reduction are
nascent The water-food-energy nexus security is  challenge, and risks are likely
to increase due to the impacts of climate change  The national climate change
policy, , adopted several key targets, including reducing emissions by 31 per
cent, increasing the percentage of electricity generated from renewables to more
than 35 per cent by 2030, exhibiting green circular economy commitments and
creating new sustainable green jobs  UNDP enjoys extensive in-country presence,
long-standing, trust-based relationships with government and partners, and
exceptional capacity to develop and implement multisectoral, integrated
interventions for diverse contexts that pursue the development pathways of
partners’ choice In addition to its strong national and local partners network,
UNDP is globally acknowledged as the highest-ranked multilateral in terms of
value for money, the most- influential United Nations organization by Aid Data
(2017), the most transparent by Aid Transparency, and it is recognized for
upholding social and environmental standards Notable successes from the midterm
review of the country programme include: () strengthened institutions: leading
to an 80 per cent increase in subnational tax collection through  tailored,
digitized and unified UNDP-powered system, supported national and subnational
institutions to advance business continuity, technical assistance for
regulatory social entrepreneurship environment, and national early warning
systems for prevention of violent extremism () empowered people: by introducing
energy efficiency mitigation interventions in buildings and resilience-building
for communities and national partners, improving livelihoods, supporting self-
employment through vocational training and job placements; () enhanced
opportunities for the operationalization of the humanitarian- development-peace
nexus; supported the first public institution tracking exercise under the
Regional Refugee Resilience Plan/Jordan Response Plan, analysed international
financial institutions funding flows and investments, and developed an ecosystem
for impact investment through private sector partnerships Underlined weaknesses
include limited capacity to influence the national governance agenda without
defined reform trajectory and accepting short-term funding The midterm
recommended women’ economic empowerment, youth empowerment, green growth, local
economic development and decentralization as signature markers where UNDP is
well-positioned to deliver review The country programme was further informed by
the accelerator lab’ partner consultations to identify top development
challenges with the government and donors, strategy and process influencers,
frontliners, and community members Specifically, these consultations focused on:
local economic development, decentralization and green growth; solid waste
management; preventing violent extremism and human security; and strengthening
local administration and citizen participation The United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), 2023- 2027, will contribute to
national goals by investing in four outcome areas, drawing on evidence from the
CCA, thereby strongly anchoring the United Nations within the evolving
development context Derived from these outcome areas, the UNDP country programme
will invest in three outcome areas as shown in the attached results and
resources framework,  Ministry of Water and Irrigation, /16  DP/DCP/JOR/ The
country programme, , is consistent with the 2030 Agenda, the UNDP Strategic
Plan, , and the UNSDCF, , and developed in line with the National Vision It is
also aligned with the indicative executive programme, ; the economic priorities
programme, ; the economic reform matrix; the national political modernization
outlook; and the economic modernization vision in addition to  host of national
sectorial strategies The UNDP integrator role will be maximized to safeguard the
principle of leaving no one behind, and institutions will be strengthened to
reach those furthest behind first, while powerfully leading on voluntary
national reviews UNDP wields comparative advantages that support the
mainstreaming and localization of the SDGs in national plans and reporting on
SDG progress II Programme priorities and partnerships To support the country’
priorities, UNDP will implement  human-centric integrated programme by
reinforcing the rule of law, ensuring equal opportunities, increasing engagement
in policy planning, achieving financial sustainability, boosting institutions,
enhancing active citizenship, and fostering the commitment of citizens, the
Government, the private sector and civil society The country programme will
provide robust interventions that increase people' equal access to sustainable
resources, enhance green growth opportunities, and advance democratic
governance, implementing  portfolio approach cutting across three outcomes
focused on systematic transformation in three priority areas: () prosperous and
productive people; () green and safe future pathways for climate action; and ()
holistic and transformative systems/policies and capacities across all sectors
Resilience will be mainstreamed across all portfolios, allowing
people/communities to withstand economic and climatic shocks and enable
institutions to serve people at the national and subnational levels
Participatory, adaptable and agile solutions will be promoted to strengthen men
and women’ agency, increase trust in government, advance multidimensional human
security, promote safety and protection, and enhance preparedness for crises The
National Vision 2025 and the SDGs furnish opportunities to address inequalities
and ensure no one is left behind The country programme will attain its desired
results working with the Government, United Nations organizations, development
partners, the private sector, civil society and local communities Reducing
inequalities and eradicating poverty will be addressed using data-informed and
localized policy design and implementation, ensuring the inclusion of women,
youth, persons with disabilities and the most vulnerable The country programme
results framework and theory of change are anchored in the UNSDCF, the UNDP
Strategic Plan, , and its six signature solutions – poverty and inequality,
governance, resilience, environment, energy, and gender They also draw on the
2021 country programme midterm review, the sense-making exercise, stakeholder
consultations and the UNDP value proposition, stimulating multidimensional
interventions through  three portfolio approach to deliver across three key
UNSDCF priority outcomes for 2023–2027, as follows Prosperous and productive
people If vulnerable people living in Jordan are able and equipped to become
self-reliant, applying leaving no one behind principles and  human rights-based
approach, and if economic growth is beneficial for people, and if there is
equitable access for all people to skills and opportunities, and if relevant
sectors and businesses are supported towards the transition to inclusive low-
carbon development pathways; then people living in Jordan will be productive
contributors to inclusive, gender transformative and sustainable economic growth
(Goals , , , , , 17) /16  DP/DCP/JOR/ UNDP will endeavour to enhance people’
resilience by nurturing skills development, employability, productivity and
livelihoods towards an inclusive, gender-equal, resilient, safe and productive
society UNDP will formulate development policies and the future of work pathways
that shape people’ capacities and leverage opportunities to realize their full
potential in an equitable and resilient economy in service sectors including in
tourism and information and communication technology, fostered on SDG-aligned
opportunities, and in line with the national employment programmes Local
economic development pathways that embrace innovative circular economy models
and area-based integrated development plans that reflect green growth components
will be advanced and decent jobs creation programmes built The scaling up of
green businesses that replicate successful models for -waste collection and
primary processing will be supported Through key policies, the programme will
nurture MSMEs, boost business resilience, sustain volunteerism pathways and
skills development, facilitate green job creation, economic diversification,
growth, and cultivate  conducive business environment The programme will address
multidimensional poverty and inequalities by employing integrated methods that
normalize the intersectionality of needs and data usage to inform policy and
programme design, budgeting, and financing, with intentional focus on women,
youth, persons with disabilities, and the most vulnerable The programme will
economically empower women, based on intersectional gender analysis to inform
advocacy and adopt  gender-responsive approach to economic growth challenges It
will support women and girls becoming agents of change in light of the
priorities of the national women’ strategy Value- chain regularizations in the
informal economy will be embraced to promote  holistic approach to enabling
protection, decent work, productivity and resilience-building The programme will
support the country’ efforts to meet and implement its international human
rights obligations, deliver on the Goals in line with the UNDP mandate, and
operationalize the recommendations of the universal periodic review, with an
emphasis on those relating to independent monitoring institutions UNDP will
further strengthen private sector engagement, expand networks, develop public-
private partnership models, introduce innovative financing schemes, particularly
for climate action, and supporting the acceleration towards the Goals, focused
on green economic transformation Cooperation with  wide range of partners will
be used to raise public awareness of ‘all- job’ appreciation and improve the
public’ recognition of the circular economy Cooperation will also advance the
rights of vulnerable groups and reduce consequential stigma and gender- based
violence The programme will strengthen engagement with national women’ led
machinery to promote contextual and impactful women’ rights, and it will
mainstream gender equality seal principles and gender-responsive polices in
public administration In order to foster sustainable development and increase
livelihoods opportunities, UNDP will work with the Department of Statistics and
the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation,
among others, intentionally linking with and complementing national employment
structures To empower vulnerable groups and strengthen institutional capacities,
UNDP will partner with the International Labour Organization (ILO), the World
Food Programme (WFP) and others Green and safe future pathways If renewable and
non-renewable natural resources are efficiently and sustainably managed through
responsible practices, and if systems, capacities and actions are in place to
prevent, mitigate and respond to risks, including climate and natural disasters,
then transformative change towards  green and safe future will be initiated
(Goals , , , , , 11, 12,13, 14, 15, 17) /16  DP/DCP/JOR/ UNDP will build and
advance infrastructures and systems resilient to climate change and disaster
risks for effective prevention, mitigation, and response to crisis, conflict,
natural disasters and climate change impacts, while protecting natural
ecosystems and mainstreaming green recovery Implementing climate change
adaptation and mitigation policies, green recovery, updated nationally
determined contributions, adoption and application of action instruments towards
net-zero carbon economy will be prioritized and supported by partners, including
the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, and
private sector actors Capacity enrichment programmes for national partners on
implementing the national long- term transportation strategy, the national solid
waste management strategy and on promoting sustainable practices of (municipal
and hazardous) waste management will be championed UNDP will safeguard natural
ecosystems against environmental challenges, supporting the adoption and
mainstreaming of strategic environmental assessments, applying nature- based
green infrastructure solutions and community-based nature conservation to
protect national resources, including through gender-responsive approaches
Resilience work will focus on developing policies and programmes that enhance
capacities to prepare for and respond to shocks, while vigorously promoting
awareness and delivering on the national disaster risk reduction strategy and
the formulation of national and subnational action policies for crises and
disaster risk management Prioritizing the water sector, UNDP will strengthen
engagement with all stakeholders on the water-food-energy nexus to safeguard
integrated planning for governance, design and management of scarce natural
resources based on the principle of leaving no one behind Advocacy for
ecological and agricultural tourism, protected area management and green
recovery through collaborative design and implementation of nature-based
solutions for land restoration and protection will be championed with the
National Centre for Security and Crises Management, the Aqaba Special Economic
Zone Authority and the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities, along with all
relevant actors The mainstreaming of climate action and disaster risk management
will take place through partnerships centred on strengthening existing UNDP
engagements with Capacity for Disaster Risk Management Initiative partners This
will focus particularly on leading the United Nations country team under  United
Nations Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR) framework and promoting
transformational, gender-responsive and empowering approaches to rethink the
roles of public and private actors, tackling multidimensional risks, and COVID-
19 lessons Holistic and transformative systems and capacities If duty-bearers
and oversight bodies at national and subnational levels are equipped with
capacities and systems to operate in an independent, participatory and
accountable manner, and if equal access to justice and services are in place,
with systematic, participatory implementation and reporting mechanisms for
delivering on human rights obligations, the SDGs and the leaving no one behind
principle, then rights-holders are able to claim their rights and participate in
decision-making processes that affect them (Goals , , 10, 16, 17) This
portfolio’ thrust lies in proactively engaging and supporting national reform
efforts to build agile, accountable, resilient, anticipatory, responsive and
cohesive people-centred and service-oriented systems to achieve inclusive,
ethical, sustainable and digitally resilient societies to help bridge the
widening trust gap UNDP support to reforms aims to strengthen national
monitoring and evaluation initiatives, and build instruments for delivering on
human rights obligations, the SDGs, local economic development, decentralization
and leaving no one behind UNDP will support policy advocacy for participatory,
consultative and developmentally- geared modernization reform process,
facilitate pro-poor legislation, and enhance voice, /16  DP/DCP/JOR/ agency and
awareness of complaints, referral and feedback mechanisms UNDP will continue to
emphasize women’ participation in decision-making positions, address systematic
gender inequalities, and strengthen the active participation of youth in
political life The humanitarian-development-peace nexus will be incrementally
expanded, building on existing government structures, and the experience of the
Jordan Response Plan, into  wider development context by coordinating and
supporting national and international efforts to strengthen resilience and
enhance national institutional planning, assessments, resilience monitoring
Increasing awareness of political rights and devising political participation
pathways to ensure broader citizen engagement and decentralized processes will
be mainstreamed across the country programme portfolios Local organizations,
including persons with disabilities and women-led civil society organizations
(CSOs), will be empowered as advocates representing the rights, needs and
obligations of communities By leveraging signature solutions on governance and
gender equality, with its enablers, UNDP will capacitate subnational
institutions and CSOs in participatory planning, inclusive election and policy
development processes UNDP leadership around digital transformation will
address: () national and subnational operational systems; () vulnerable groups’
literacy; () infrastructure; and () platforms linking tiers of government Data
will be utilized to refine policies, interventions and decision-making
processes, inform SDG and localization progress, and enhance monitoring and
evaluation of policies and their impact UNDP will work with United Nations
organizations to harmonize and strengthen national monitoring and evaluation
systems and capacities and bridge data gaps UNDP will strengthen consolidated
partnerships for sustainable development towards achieving planned results with
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), and the Office
of the Resident Coordinator, together with lead government institutions, the
Ministry of Digital Economy among others Strategic communication partnerships,
including with the Ministry of State for Media Affairs and the media, will focus
on mobilizing public support for national reforms and country programme
priorities including All portfolios will be supported by the accelerator lab to
explore and experiment in open- ended and fail-safe spaces premised on strategic
innovation, digitalization and development financing III Programme and risk
management Donor fatigue and funding sustainability is  constant risk that could
affect results delivery To mitigate this, UNDP will strengthen ongoing
partnerships with development partners and endeavour to diversify its resource
mobilization efforts, establishing new partnerships with non-conventional
donors, including academia, think tanks, the private sector and international
financial institutions Resource mobilization plans focus on expanding
development services agreements with the Government, implementing joint projects
with United Nations organizations; taping into thematic trust funds, pursuing
increased government cost-sharing, enlisting non-traditional donors, and
continuing ongoing private sector engagement supporting SDG financing Offsetting
the negative impact on the sustainability of development solutions/offers, UNDP
will engage in transformative partnerships with the private sector based on co-
creating development solutions and shared values, capitalizing on untapped and
underutilized local economic development opportunities that maximize local
ownership Partnerships based on corporate policies and practices with the
private sector will guide UNDP engagement and augment its understanding of the
developmental role the private sector plays in nurturing /16  DP/DCP/JOR/
sustained and effective partnerships that leverage financing for the SDGs
Enterprise resource management will be applied and encompass all interventions
to ensure foresight and risk- informed decisions Successful innovative
programming instruments will continue to be mainstreamed, including development
services, engagement facilities, initiation plans and customary development
projects, while pursuing South-South and triangular cooperation through planned
projects Cooperation is planned with Egypt and Saudi Arabia on the new programme
supported by Global Fund for Coral Reefs, with Tunisia and Lebanon on coastal
zone Management, and with Egypt, Turkey and Lebanon on scaling up sustainable
cooling technologies Social and environmental standards, accountability and
grievance mechanisms will be methodologically applied The trust gap, economic,
financial and fiscal instability, the dearth of economic opportunities, gender
inequality, water scarcity and climate change present additional risks to the
country programme These risks will further intensify the socioeconomic
consequences of COVID-19 in the medium and long term The country programme
theory of change anticipates risks in  comprehensively designed mitigation plan
that seizes opportunities and accounts for assumptions These include how
multistakeholder engagement and inclusion of marginalized populations improve
decision- making; political commitments to reform policies and structural
transformation; women’ and young people’ active economic and political
participation; disaster risk reduction and climate action These will have
multiplier effects on sustainable development at the national and subnational
levels Frequent reshuffles and shortened tenures of national governments, the
cascading effect of policies focused on thinning the government bureaucracy,
lack of women’ participation in decision-making positions all contribute to
weakening governance mechanisms and reveal government capacity challenges This
country programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as
the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment
and resources assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels, with respect to the
country programme, is prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies
and procedures and the internal control framework The programme will be
nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure
harmonized approach to cash transfers, will be used in  coordinated fashion with
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged
to the concerned projects The joint steering committee for UNSDCF will be the
programme management mechanism providing guidance and oversight for the duration
of this Programme IV Monitoring and evaluation UNDP rights-based and
participatory approaches to monitoring and evaluation The results and resources
framework is aligned to the UNSDCF monitoring and evaluation plan and
prioritizes gender-disaggregated data with quantitative-qualitative indicators
to capture structural changes It is constructed on the enterprise resources
planning policy, social and environmental standards and the United the extent
possible, evidence will use Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy To
official/national sources rigorously follows gender-transformative, /16
DP/DCP/JOR/ The country programme rests on  robust theory of change  country
programme midterm review will assess effectiveness in delivering the intended
results and adjust focus, if needed Correspondingly, UNDP will adopt  results-
based management approach to review the relevance and progress of propositions
formulated in the sense-making exercise The UNDP gender marker monitors gender
gaps and guarantees that 15 per cent of the programme budget will go to
mainstreaming gender-equality, women’ empowerment and  gender analysis An
additional 15 per cent is guaranteed for monitoring and evaluation and
communication Evaluations will be gender-responsive, measure the differential
impacts of interventions on women and men and on gender-equality progress where
relevant The evaluation plan will ensure systemic, independent midterm and final
assessments of interventions and outcomes All monitoring and evaluation,
communication and audit costs will be embedded in project budgets and integrated
across documents and workplans Formative evaluations constitute the central
modalities and references to update and analyse multidimensional challenges UNDP
will sharpen decision-making, scale up solutions and promote innovation
Innovative and digital monitoring to enhance data/information gathering and
analysis (such as Kobo toolboxes and mobile-based tools) will be piloted,
replicated, standardized and scaled up, starting at the project level The
country office will retrieve, utilize and adapt lessons and knowledge resources
from other country offices, the Global Policy Network and experts, regional and
global rosters, as well as the early signals of change self-assessment tool
developed by the UNDP Green Commodities Programme to monitor the effectiveness
of the country programme towards positive systematic transformation and change
tools, processes and practices /16  DP/DCP/JOR/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Jordan () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Green growth national action
plan, the Jordan economic priorities plan , the national social protection
strategy, 2019-COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP :
Enhanced inclusive, gender-responsive and green growth in Jordan that provides
access to entrepreneurship and decent work opportunities, life-long learning,
and market-relevant skills with  focus on leaving no one behind RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: No one left behind centring on equitable access to
opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE
COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) MAJOR
PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME (United States
dollars) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() Regular:
00 million  Green economic opportunities Score on GGI Baseline: 13 (VERY LOW)
Target: 20 (LOW) United Nations Frequency: Annual Responsible: UNDP Output
Strengthened national and subnational capacities to enhance gender responsive
and inclusive eco-system on future of work for sustainable growth Government
Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MoPIC) Ministry of
Environment (MoENV) Ministry of Interior (MoI) Ministry of Digital Economy and
Entrepreneurship (MoDEE) Ministry of Local Administration (MoLA) Ministry of
Tourism and Antiquities (MoTA) Ministry of Labour (MoL) Ministry of Social
Development (MoSD) National Aid Fund (NAF) Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
Ministry of Transport (MoT) Ministry of Investment (MoINV) Ministry of Finance
(MoF) Ministry of Youth (MoY) Greater Amman Municipality (GAM) Central Bank of
Jordan (CBJ) Social Security Investment Fund (SSIF) Higher Council for the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities (HCRPD) Cities and Villages Development Bank
(CVDB) Petra Development and Tourism Region Authority (PDTRA) Jordan National
Committee for Women (JNCW) Al Hijaz Railway Corporation Municipalities Other:
million ILO Frequency: Annual Responsible: UNDP  Jordan ranking in economic
participation and opportunity indicator in the global gender gap index Baseline:
133 Target: 130  Number of government institutions that participate in the
gender seal certification process Baseline:  Target:  MOLA Frequency: Annual
Responsible: UNDP  Percentage of people accessing financial services and assets
(by gender, income, informal sector workers, refugees, age, persons with
disabilities) Baseline: 33% (27% women; 38% men) Target: 40% (40% women; 40%
men)  Number of government institutions that have adopted policies on promoting
decent work and social-entrepreneurship Baseline:  Target:   Number of
new/scaled up/replicated inclusive and gender-responsive capacity-building
programmes to support local economic development, entrepreneurship and
investments in green businesses (by type/location/phase) Baseline:  Target: 12
MoINV Frequency: Annual Responsible: MoINV Output  Financing and partnerships
strengthened to facilitate investments in the SDGs UNDP Frequency: Annual
Responsible: UNDP  Number of UNDP supported public-private partnerships
established between the Government and the private sector to support alignment
of business models Baseline:  Target:  Development International Financial
Institutions (IFIs) United Nations/private sector/municipalities 10  DP/DCP/JOR/
Frequency: Annual Responsible: UNDP World Bank European Union KFW United Nations
organizations Japan Canada Green Climate Fund (GCF) Spanish Agency for
International Development Cooperation (AECID) European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) Islamic Development Bank (IDB)  Number of development
projects partially/fully funded by the private sector at the municipal level (by
location/sector/population served) Baseline:  Target: 10 MoENV/GAM/NDC reports
Frequency: Annual Responsible: MoENV World Bank/UNDP/MOPIC Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: UNDP  Number of businesses and investors adopting impact
measurement and Management principles Baseline:  Target:  Others Private sector,
banks, digital and telecom, think-tanks, academia, cooperatives, municipalities,
United Nations Economic and Social Council, Crown Prince Foundation (CPF), King
Abdullah Fund for Development (KAFD), community-based organizations Non-
Government Organizations (NGOs)  Number of transformative institutional models
promoting responsible production and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
Baseline:  Target:   Number of innovative green financing mechanisms established
Baseline:  Target:  Output  Enhanced equitable and inclusive access to financial
services, and digital solutions to support self-reliance DOS Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: DOS  Percentage of people accessing financial services and
assets, (by gender, income, informal sector workers, refugees, age, persons with
disabilities) Baseline: 42% Target: 45% CBJ Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
CBJ UNDP Frequency: Annual Responsibility: UNDP  Number of women of 18 years and
older using mobile financial solutions (by institution/account type/service
type/age) Baseline: 250 Target: ,500 UNDP/micro-finance institutions (MFIs)
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MFIs  Number of socioeconomically vulnerable
people with access to digital services for 11  DP/DCP/JOR/ improved self-
reliance (by gender, age, persons with disabilities, refugees) Baseline: 106
Target: ,500  Number of people benefiting from capacity- building on digital
skill/financial inclusion and literacy (by gender, age, persons with
disabilities, refugees, platform, skills) Baseline: 106 Target: 15,000 Output
Improved access of socio- economically vulnerable populations in Jordan to
employability and livelihoods opportunities for self-reliance
UNDP/municipalities/partner reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility: UNDP
UNDP/MoDEE Frequency: Annual Responsibility: UNDP  Number of job opportunities
created (by gender/ age, persons with disabilities, location, refugees)
Baseline: 40,000 Target: 70,000 UNDP Frequency: Annual Responsibility: UNDP
Number of MSMEs established/sustained/scaled up (by gender, income, formality,
type of business, age, persons with disabilities, location, refugees) Baseline:
860 Target: ,500  Number of women over 18 years earning regular income Baseline:
18,900 Target: 33,900  Number of awareness campaigns promoting all-job
appreciation and gender equality Baseline:  Target:  12  DP/DCP/JOR/ NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Jordan national disaster risk management strategy, the climate
change adaptation plan, Vision 2025 and indicative executive programme,
2021-COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : Enhanced
national resource management models that ensure equitable access to water, food,
and clean energy for all, address climate related and other risks, and empower
local communities as agents of change for responsible production and consumption
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Resilience built to respond to systemic
uncertainty and risk  Number of national laws, policies, reforms, strategies and
practices that increase resource efficiencies, reduce disaster and climate risks
and are in line with international environmental standards, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) gender action plan, and the
updated Jordan nationally determined contributions Baseline: TBC Target: +
Output  Strengthened institutional systems for sustainable resources management
and resilience to disasters and climate risks Government MoENV MoLA MoA MoTA
National Centre for Security and Crisis Management (NCSCM) GAM PDTRA ASEZA
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MPWH) Ministry of Water and Irrigation
(MWI) Public Security Directorate (PSD) Land Transportation Regulatory
Commission (LTRC) Jordan Cooperative Cooperation (JCC) MoENV/GAM Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: MoENV Regular:  million Other: million NCSCM Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: NCSCM  Number of interventions supported by UNDP to
facilitate sustainable management of renewable and non-renewable natural
resources Baseline:  Target:  MOLA Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOLA
Number of new strategies/plans/measures adopted based on risk analysis Baseline:
Target:  NCSCM Frequency: Annual Responsibility: NCSCM  Level of engagement of
local communities in waste management (: low, : moderate : high) Baseline:
Target:   Number of municipal solid waste annually diverted from landfills
through recycling and reuse Baseline: % Target: 10% Development Global
Environment Facility (GEF) GCF United Nations organizations Swiss Development
Cooperation (SDC) Canada  Number of early warning systems/crisis prevention
mechanisms for natural disaster risk reduction Baseline:  Target:  Others
Municipalities NGOs Academia Media Private sector Royal Society for the
Conservation of Nature (RSCN) MOA Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MoA Output
Biodiversity conservation, ecosystem restoration and nature-based people-centred
solutions adopted MoENV/ASEZA/RSCN Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MoENV
Number of interventions aiming at restoration of natural ecosystems/carbon sinks
implemented with support from institutions and grassroots organizations
Baseline:  Target:  13  DP/DCP/JOR/  Number of government-declared protected
areas Baseline: 12 Target: 14 NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2025 and the
indicative executive programme, ; the youth strategy, the prevention of violent
extremism national action plan, the digital transformation strategy, , and the
open government data policy COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : Enhanced accountability and responsiveness of Jordanian
institutions and their partners, and especially women and youth are increasingly
and meaningfully involved in policy choices and decisions that affect their
lives RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated,
particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions Government MoI DOS MoLA
MOPIC MoF MoDEE MoY MoENV MoTA MoSD PSD HCRPD NCSCM JNCW Preventing Violent
Extremism Unit at Prime Ministry Coordinator for Human Rights Ministry of
Political and Parliamentary Affairs (MoPPA) Independent Elections Commission
(IEC) National Centre for Human Rights (NCHR) Jordan Integrity and Anti-
Corruption Commission (JIACC) Higher Council for Population (HCP) National
Council for Family Affairs (NCFA) MoI Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MoI :
Governorate, municipality and civil society capacities increased to collect,
analyse and utilize data to improve participatory and inclusive planning,
accountability and decision-making  Proportion of population who believe
decision-making is inclusive and responsive, by gender, age, disability,
population group Baseline: % Target: 15% Regular: 826 million Other: million MoI
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MoI  Number of local development plans and
budgets collaboratively developed (by type/sector) Baseline:  Target: 12
Corruption perceptions index score: Baseline: 49 Target: 55 DOS Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: DOS MOPIC/DOS Frequency: Annual Responsibility: DOS
Percentage of registered voters voting in parliamentary/local elections (by
gender/age/location/persons with disabilities)  Local development index adopted
by the Government Baseline: No Target: Yes Baseline (2020): parliamentary
elections Total: % Women: % Target (2024) Total: 33% Women: 29%  Number of
governorates with systems supporting regularly updated data collection to
monitor progress towards the SDGs and support decision-making Baseline:  Target:
Baseline (2022): local elections Total: 64% Women: 08% Target (2026) Total: 33%
Women: 18%  Coordination mechanism for humanitarian- development-peacebuilding
nexus Baseline: No Target: Yes Development European Union Norway World Bank
United Nations organizations UNDP Frequency: Annual Responsibility: UNDP Output
Enhanced institutional capacities to mobilize, manage and account for resources
to facilitate uninterrupted, equitable and inclusive service delivery  Number of
women/youth MOPIC 14  DP/DCP/JOR/ Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOPIC Others
Municipalities NGOs Academia Think-tanks candidates in parliament/local
elections:  Number of development service agreements signed with stakeholders to
strengthen capacities for improved service delivery Baseline:  Target:  MoF
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOF Baseline (2020): parliamentary elections
Total: ,674 Women: 360 Youth: 221  Number of national and subnational government
entities with business continuity and risk management action plans Baseline:
Target: 10 Target( 2024) Total: 2000 Women: 420 Youth: 300  Fiscal information
documents publicly accessible to the population Baseline: No Target: Yes
Baseline (2022): local elections Total: ,644 Women:846 Youth:461 MODEE
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MODEE Output  Strengthened digital governance
for participatory planning, accountability, transparency and institutions’
responsiveness Target (2026) Total: ,000 Women: 900 Youth: 500 MODEE Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: MODEE  Number of institutions that initiate transition to
information and communications technology/digital service platforms Baseline:
Target:  NCHR Frequency: Annual Responsibility: NCHR MODEE Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: MODEE  Number of institutions with active digital
referral/complaints/feedback systems (by type/sector) Baseline:  Target:
Number of people using digitized complaint mechanism to report human rights
violations (by gender, age, persons with disabilities, refugees) Baseline:
Target: ,000 15  DP/DCP/JOR/  Number of people using digitized referral systems
to provide feedback on access to and quality of services Baseline:  Target:
25,000 Output  Legislative and structural barriers reduced to promote peoples’
engagement in decision-making Office of the Prime Minister Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Office of the Prime Minister  Number of people consulted to
inform reform process (by sector/methodology/location) Baseline:  Target: ,000
Parliament Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Parliament  Number of pro-poor and
participatory legislation and regulations drafted Baseline:  Target:  16