                  THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN                :
February 2021 Please adjust the spine based on the   thickness of the inside
pages    © IRENA 2021 Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may
be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that
appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder
Material in this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject
to separate terms of use and restrictions, and appropriate permissions from
these third parties may need to be secured before any use of such material
Citation: IRENA (2021), Renewable Readiness Assessment: The Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi ISBN: -- About IRENA
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental
organisation that supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy
future and serves as the principal platform for international co-operation,
centre of excellence and  repository of policy, technology, resource and
financial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption
and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy – including bioenergy,
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy – in the pursuit of
sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic
growth and prosperity Acknowledgements This report was prepared by IRENA in
close collaboration with the Government of Jordan, as represented by the
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR) The report benefited from the
input of various experts, notably from Denis Korchunov (UNDP), Stephen Gitonga
(UNDP), Reem Al Masri (EDAMA), Ahmed Bassam (JREEEF), Rasmi Hamzeh (JREEEF),
Yacoub Marar (MEMR), Ziad Hammoudeh (MEMR) and Ziad Jebril (ex MEMR) IRENA
colleagues who provided valuable review and support include: Abdulmalik Oricha
Ali (ex-IRENA), Imen Gherboudj, Dolf Gielen, Nadeem Goussous, Ricardo Gorini
Main Contributors: Zoheir Hamedi, Reem Korban, Gürbüz Gönül, Divyam Nagpal
(IRENA consultant) and Samer Zawaydeh (National Co-ordinator) Disclaimer This
publication and the material herein are provided “as is” All reasonable
precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material
in this publication However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents,
data or other third-party content providers provides  warranty of any kind,
either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or liability for
any consequence of use of the publication or material herein The information
contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of all Members of
IRENA The mention of specific companies or certain projects or products does not
imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in preference to others of
similar nature that are not mentioned The designations employed and the
presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on
the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers
or boundaries THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM OF JORDAN Foreword from the Minister of
Energy and Mineral Resources The contribution of renewables to Jordan’
electricity mix has grown impressively in recent years, rising from just % in
2014 to 13% in Renewable energy systems feeding into the national power grid
reached  558 megawatts (MW) by 2019 and have since swelled to some  200 MW, or
20% of our overall electricity mix The integration of renewables reflects
extensive preparation via the legislative and procedural framework, coupled with
the progressive strengthening of human capacity and formation of partnerships
with the private sector Jordan’ recently launched National Energy Strategy for
aims to ensure energy security, affordability and sustainability, along with
increased use of domestic energy resources After close consideration of various
possible scenarios for 2030, the strategy promotes  high independence scenario
as the most compatible with achieving broader strategic objectives These include
diversifying our energy sources, boosting the use of domestic energy resources,
increasing energy efficiency and reducing energy costs throughout the national
economy, and continuing to develop the Jordanian energy system The strategy
calls for increasing renewables to 21% of power generation within the year and
31% by the end of the decade The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, adopted
in 2014, created the Jordan Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency Fund (JREEEF),
which helps farmers, households, industries, hotels, mosques, churches, schools
and communities optimise their energy consumption and use more renewable power
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has helped us evaluate our
current position, including successes and achievements, as well as our
challenges The resulting Renewables Readiness Assessment outlines key measures
and solutions to enable us to move forward and meet our renewable energy targets
The recommendations are consistent with our  energy strategy Moreover, the
groundwork behind this report is reflected in our latest implementation plans
Our ambitious targets for the energy sector require  strong partnership between
the public and private sectors We are eager, also, to work with international
friends and partners to make renewables  prominent pillar of Jordan’ energy
system Hala Zawati Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources, Jordan
Foreword from the IRENA Director-General As governments plan for the post-COVID
future, the transition to renewable energy offers the prospect of rapid job
creation, intensified economic development and enhanced social equity and
welfare For Jordan, diversifying the energy mix and reducing energy costs with
renewables promises to strengthen long-term socio-economic and industrial
development, without putting added strains on public finance For  country with
abundant renewable energy resources, the envisaged transition would improve
energy security and reduce costs to consumers, as well as improving
environmental preservation Jordan’ energy strategy for the decade reinforces the
diversification policy with an updated target of 31% renewable power capacity by
Renewables Readiness Assessment: Jordan, prepared in collaboration with the
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR), identifies key challenges as
the country pursues environmentally and economically sustainable power and heat
It offers recommendations in seven key action areas, aiming to scale up
renewables for power generation, transport, industrial uses and the heating and
cooling of buildings The net result would be greatly increased renewable energy
use, improved energy security and lower costs While Jordan made major strides
over the past decade, the linkages and synergies could be strengthened between
renewables and efficiency measures, as well as with grid upgrades, domestic
industrial development, and the diversification of energy sources for transport
and mobility National financing institutions and project developers need their
capacity built up to unlock faster investment in renewables Since 2011, nearly
40 countries, spanning the Middle East, Africa, Asia and the Pacific, Latin
America and the Caribbean, have undertaken similar assessments, exchanging
knowledge and fostering international co-operation to accelerate the deployment
of renewables Each process has been country-led, with IRENA providing technical
expertise, highlighting regional and global insights, and facilitating
consultations among  range of national stakeholders IRENA appreciates the vital
input and engagement of the MEMR team on this study Numerous national
stakeholders and international partners also made valuable contributions
sincerely hope the present report helps to accelerate Jordan’ shift to
sustainable energy future Francesco La Camera Director-General, IRENA  Contents
Figures  Tables  Boxes  Abbreviations and acronyms  Executive summary 12
Introduction 16 Energy sector landscape 18  Energy sector institutions and
responsibilities 18  Trends in primary energy supply 22  Trends in the power
sector 23   Trends in final energy consumption 27 • Industry 27 • Transport 28 •
Households 28  Drivers for energy diversification 29 Renewable energy resources
and use 31  Renewable energy resources 31 • Solar 31 • Wind 31 • Bioenergy 33  •
Geothermal 33 • Hydropower 33  Renewables in the power sector 33  Renewables in
heating/cooling and transport 36  Conclusion 37          Renewable energy
policies and investment: Current landscape and emerging issues 38  Adapting the
policy and regulatory environment for future renewables growth 38 • Plans and
target 39 • Policies and regulations for deployment 40 • Power sector: Direct
proposal submissions 41 • Power sector: Government-owned projects 42 • Power
sector: Wheeling and net metering projects 42 • Power sector: off-grid and
cross-sector projects 44 • Heating/cooling 44 • Transport 46  • Policies and
regulations for integration 46 • Transmission and distribution infrastructure 47
• Storage 48 • Sector coupling and load-shaping 49 • Policies and regulations to
maximise benefits 49  Catalysing investments to meet renewables ambition 51 •
Financing utility-scale renewable energy projects and infrastructure 52 •
Financing self-consumption and small-scale renewables 54 • Financing renewable
energy enterprises 55  Conclusion 56 Key challenges and recommendations 58
Provide the conditions for renewables grow in the power sector 60  Foster the
continued growth of renewable power generation 61  Plan for the integration of
higher shares of renewable power 64   Incentivise the use of renewables for
heating and cooling 67  Support renewable options for transport and mobility 68
Catalyse Renewable Energy investment 69  Strengthen local renewable energy
industries and job creation 71 References 74  Figures Figure ES1 Overview key
recommended action areas 13 Figure  22 TPES, by fuel () Figure  23 Installed
capacity in the power sector, by source () Figure  24 Total electricity
generated, by fuel Figure  25 Electricity consumption, by sector () Figure  26
Total electricity consumption, by sector (2018) Figure  27 Final energy
consumption, by sector Figure  28 Final energy consumption in industry, by fuel
(2018) Figure  29 Total final energy consumption in households, by fuel (2018)
Figure  30 Comparison of solar PV bids under three rounds with average cost of
power procurement (USD/kWh) by NEPCO Figure 10 32 Spatial distribution of global
solar irradiation in kWh/m2 resource maps for Jordan Figure 11 32 Spatial
distribution of wind irradiation in Jordan Figure 12 34 Renewable energy
capacity, by source () Figure 13 34 Renewable energy generation, by source ()
Figure 14 39 Policy mix to reach substantially higher shares of renewable energy
Figure 15 47 Measures to integrate high shares of variable renewables in the
power mix Figure 16 51 Investment in renewable energy in Jordan () Figure 17 59
Overview of key thematic areas of recommendations Figure 18 64 Innovative
solutions in power system                Tables Table  Overview of selected
institutions in Jordan’ energy sector 19 Table  TPES shares by fuel 22 Table
Solar PV and wind project status (as of January 2020) 34 Table  Overview of
stakeholders and main areas of financing activities 52 ,        Table  Insights
on financing structure of selected utility-scale projects 53 Boxes Box
Transmission grid development to facilitate renewable energy integration 35 Box
Bylaws and instructions for the implementation of the Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency Law No 13 of 2012 40 Box  Facilitating development of
distributed solar on public buildings 43 Box  Addressing energy poverty through
renewable energy: The case of the Schools Heating Program and refugee camps 45
Box  Assessment of pumped water storage 48 Box  Revolving fund for solar water
heaters: The case of UNDP-GEF and SEED project 50 Box  Framework for energy
efficiency in Jordan: Key aspects and emerging issues 55 Box  Contextualising
Jordan’ energy transition within Covid-19 recovery 57  Abbreviations ° Degree
Celsius CBJ Central Bank of Jordan CBO Community based organisation CEGCO
Central Electricity Generating Company CO2 Carbon dioxide CSH Concentrated solar
heat CSP Concentrated solar power DEG German Development Bank DLS Department of
Land and Survey EBRD European Bank of Reconstruction and Development EDCO
Electricity Distribution Company EESCO Energy efficiency service company EMRC
Energy and Minerals Regulatory Commission EPC Engineering, procurement and
construction ESCO Energy service company EU European Union FMO Netherlands
Development Finance Company GAM Greater Amman Municipality GDP Gross domestic
product GEF Global Environmental Finance GIS Grid impact study GWh Gigawatt-hour
IDECO Irbid District Distribution Company IFC International Finance Corporation
IPP Independent power producer IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency JCI
Jordan Chamber of Industry JEDCO Jordan Enterprise Development Corporation JEPCO
Jordan Electric Power Company JGBG Jordan Green Building Guide JICA Japan
International Cooperation Agency JISM Jordanian Institution for Standards and
Metrology JNBC Jordan National Building Council 10             JOD Jordanian
dinar JREEEF Jordan Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund -Exim Export-
Import Bank of Korea  km Kilometre ktoe Kilotonne of oil equivalent kW kilowatt
kWh Kilowatt-hour kWp Kilowatt- peak LED Light-emitting diode LNG Liquefied
natural gas m2 Square metre MEMR Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources MENA
Middle East and North Africa / metre per second MSW Municipal solid waste mtoe
Million tonnes of oil equivalent NDC Nationally determined contribution NEEAP
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan NEPCO National Electric Power Company
NREAP National Renewable Energy Action Plan & Operation and maintenance PPA
Power purchase agreement Proparco Promotion and Participation for Economic
Cooperation PV Photovoltaic REES Renewable Energy Establishments Society RRA
Renewables Readiness Assessment RSS Royal Scientific Society SCADA Supervisory
control and data acquisition SEED Sustainable Energy and Economic Development
SEPCO Samra Electricity Power Company SHAMCI Solar Heating Arab Mark and
Certification Initiative SME Small and medium-sized enterprise TPES Total
primary energy supply TWh Terawatt-hour UNDP United Nations Development
Programme USD US dollar 11 Executive summary Rapid population growth is bringing
the economy under immense pressure in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan New
engines of economic development must be found, along with long-term spill-over
benefits for the current population of million as well as future generations
While Jordan’ economic challenges are further compounded by the COVID-19 health
crisis, the country is resolved to advance the use of domestic energy resources
Renewable energy in Jordan: Drivers and status Jordan’ most abundantly available
renewable energy resources are solar and wind, with smaller potentials for
bioenergy, hydropower and geothermal The Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Law No 13 of 2012 and its amendments form the backbone of Jordan’ policy
landscape for renewable energy and energy efficiency Bylaw (79) year 2019 for
Climate Change set requirements for stakeholders to report greenhouse gas
emissions Indeed, energy is central to the growth of the Jordanian economy,
which relies on imports to meet energy needs This reliance strains the economy
and poses energy supply security risks These vulnerabilities drove the
development of the Master Energy Strategy 2007 2020, which called for greater
utilisation of domestic resources, including renewable energy Jordan’ nationally
determined contribution (NDC) commits to  14% reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions by The NDC’ actions include developing and utilising renewable energy
sources while encouraging investments in renewable energy The share of
electricity from renewables in Jordan grew from % in 2014 to over 13% in 2019,
making Jordan  regional front-runner in renewable energy The country has
established the necessary policies and regulations to support renewables,
including solar photovoltaic (PV) and onshore wind development Purely from  cost
perspective, substantial reductions in the cost of renewable energy technologies
over the past decade offer  compelling case for the government to pursue
greater role for renewables in the future energy mix In Jordan, the results of
the latest (third) round of direct proposal submissions in 2018 yielded bids as
low as USD 03 (US dollars)/ kWh (kilowatt-hour) In comparison, the average cost
of electricity purchased by National Electric Power Company (NEPCO) in 2018 was
(USD 114/kWh) The updated Master Strategy for the Energy Sector , developed by
the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR), calls for  sustainable
future energy supply, diversification of the national energy mix, increased
dependency on the share of domestic energy resources, enhanced energy security,
and reduced energy dependence and cost of electricity supply The strategy
targets  31% share for renewables in total power generation capacity and 14% of
the total energy mix by Jordan’ record shows that decarbonisation of the energy
mix can be achieved while securing  reliable energy supply In 2018, electricity
generated from solar PV and wind avoided nearly  million tonnes of carbon
emissions Renewable energy use for heating/ cooling applications has been
limited – and based mostly on solar water heaters – the launch of the Jordan
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund (JREEEF) has catalysed the market
for these heaters The Renewables Readiness Assessment report prepared by,
prepared by the International Renewable in close co-operation Energy Agency
(IRENA) with MEMR highlights existing challenges and key opportunities as the
country aims for greater energy security, supply diversity and sustainability
Recovery plans amid the COVID-19 crisis could also align closely with clean
energy and other sustainability goals In addition, the government supports the
adoption of electric vehicles, even while expansion of the charging
infrastructure is needed 12 To achieve high shares of renewables in the energy
mix and low energy costs, integrated plans and policies for electricity demand
stimulation through the electrification of end-uses should be pursued between
ministries, cross-sector applications improved, and energy poverty alleviated
Partnerships among ministries, distribution companies and municipalities can
help to achieve this Advancing renewable energy in Jordan Renewable energy
solutions will be instrumental in improving energy security, reducing the cost
of energy supply, advancing environmental preservation and strengthening Jordan’
recovery from the COVID-19 crisis To support the next phase of renewables
growth,  broader policy mix focusing on deployment, integration and enabling
conditions at the sector level is needed Demand creation and electrification of
end-uses will also be crucial : Foster continued growth of renewable power
generation The report gives key recommendations for Jordan to realise the full
economic, social and environmental potential of renewables in seven key areas,
with applications spanning power, transport, and heating/ cooling for buildings
and industry Renewable energy investments and local industry development and job
creation are also addressed, as illustrated in Figure ES1 The outcome is for
renewables to comprise  much higher share of Jordan’ energy mix while improving
energy security and reducing the cost of supply Shorten approval processes and
project timelines that add to risks and transaction costs While utility- and
small-projects are affected differently, the time needed between expressing
interest and project commissioning can be several years Steps are needed to
establish  fixed milestone-based timeframe Standardising land acquisition
processes by pre- developing sites – including the development of grid
interconnection infrastructure, conduct of sector- specific environmental and
social impact assessments (, bird migration studies in the case of wind) and
completion of land acquisition – can level the playing field for private
participation in future tender processes : Provide the conditions for renewables
to grow in the power sector Clarify the trajectory for renewables in Jordan’
energy mix The Master Strategy for the Energy Sector provides  long-term vision
for the evolution of the country’ energy sector However, the indefinite
suspension of new projects over  megawatt (MW) since January 2019 has introduced
uncertainty to the sector Government programmes have also been launched to
deploy rooftop solar PV systems for small residential consumers currently under
national welfare schemes Such programmes should be scaled up to increase social
impact, reduce consumer energy expenditure and limit government subsidy costs
The electricity Figure ES1 Overview key recommended action areas Incentivise
Plan Support Provide Foster Strengthen Catalyse 13 tariff design and charges (,
wheeling rates) for renewable energy projects should accurately reflect the true
cost of the services delivered by the network Improve load management through
demand-side solutions The increasing share of variable renewable power in
Jordan’ electricity mix will require active measures to match demand and supply
in  manner that reduces overall system costs and incremental integration
infrastructure investment  renewable energy peak-load strategy must be developed
and implemented to address peak demand in buildings and industry through solar
PV and storage, when this is competitive with expensive peaking plants In
parallel, the feasibility of time-of-use tariffs must be assessed to facilitate
demand shifting towards low- load periods Strengthen linkages to energy
efficiency Despite numerous bylaws enacted to advance energy efficiency measures
– as well as the JREEEF and the Jordan Chamber of Industry’ targeted financing
programmes for energy audits – renewable energy penetration has been limited
Therefore, the industrial sector’ capacity could be developed to implement
energy efficiency (and renewable energy) measures and institute industry-
specific benchmarks and best practices In power generation, for instance,
combined heat and power applications can dramatically improve efficiencies and
can offer cost-effective energy alternatives, especially industries where both
in electric and thermal energy are consumed Pilot projects already exist, such
as in Wadi Shalala in Irbid; therefore, dedicated regulations are needed to
scale up the adoption of such solutions : Incentivise the use of renewables for
heating and cooling Support greater adoption of renewable solutions in buildings
and industry Solar water heating applications remain the most mature forms of
renewable usage in heating/cooling, but deficiencies in targets for deployment,
enforcement of mandates and codes, and  long-term financial incentive programme
addressing end users’ present challenges The development of  clear, long-term
solar water heater penetration strategy for the residential, commercial and
industry sectors is recommended, as is annual reporting of the data collected
from the sales of such systems : Plan for the integration of higher shares of
renewable power Strengthen national transmission and distribution infrastructure
The lack of capacity to handle higher shares of renewables in the transmission
and distribution infrastructure is  key hurdle for further growth Tools – such
as the IRENA FlexTool – are available to analyse  power system’ flexibility
needs, determine least-cost solutions and integrate them into the strategy
Liaising with other ministries related to industry, agriculture, transport and
water is crucial for identifying regions with existing and upcoming power demand
potential : Support renewable options for transport and mobility Start to
diversify energy use in the transport sectorThe transport sector – Jordan’
largest energy consumer – relies mainly on diesel and gasoline Government
efforts to decrease energy use in the sector rely on incentivising high-
efficiency vehicles However, the development of charging infrastructure has
lagged An improved business case for the private sector’ participation in
charging infrastructure development is needed urgently Time-of-use pricing
should also be enacted to avoid additional burden on the grid In the short-term,
Jordan should identify priorities for the distribution network, mobilise
investments to strengthen infrastructure and unlock network capacity to
integrate renewables and other loads, such as those from electric vehicle
charging stations : Catalyse renewable energy investment Introduce  storage code
for grid management at the transmission and distribution level Storage brings
substantial value for grid management, whether as  stand-alone asset or when
integrated with  renewable power supply Therefore, the formulation of  dedicated
storage code provides regulatory guidance for the development of battery storage
infrastructure at the generation, transmission, distribution and end user
levels, as well as instructions to connect to the grid These actions must be
taken at the ministerial level in consultation with the system operator,
distribution companies and other stakeholders Build the capacity of local
financing institutions and project developers Local financial institutions have
low involvement with utility-scale renewable energy financing On lending and
risk mitigation facilities by international financing institutions can increase
local banks’ experience and mobilise larger shares of domestic capital for
renewable energy development Moreover, developing the capacity of green lending
units in local commercial banks will improve the implementation of programmes
from JREEEF and the Central Bank of Jordan, as well as widen access to 14
additional international financing These actions can be undertaken in
collaboration with the Association of Banks range from operation and
maintenance, design, engineering and financial services to innovative industrial
automation, smart solutions such as metering and hydrogen infrastructure :
Strengthen local industries and create jobs in renewables The sector must build
adequate skills to meet the needs of  rapidly growing renewable energy sector by
partnering with training institutes, universities and industry in  manner that
ensures  gender-equal workforce Leverage capacity from other sectors and
maximise renewable energy job creation Achieving the benefits of  renewable
energy-based energy transition requires  broad mix of policies beyond those that
focus on deployment alone These include industrial policies, skills development,
and research and development Finally, abrupt policy changes – such as the
suspension of new projects over  MW – negatively impact the market growth
potential of local enterprises While  local content regulation is in place, its
definition, effectiveness, and influence on cost and quality need to be closely
assessed Beyond the manufacturing of renewable energy technologies, new
opportunities for value creation 15 Introduction The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
is located in the heart of the Arab world with  population of over million
people (Jordan Department of Statistics, 2020a) The country is divided into 12
governorates Over the past decade, the Jordanian economy has weathered several
challenges, such as the financial crisis of 2009, instability due to regional
conflicts, an energy crisis following the natural gas supply disruption in 2011,
closure of trade routes and an influx of over  million refugees (Economic Policy
Council, 2017; Chan and Kantner, 2019) Economic growth in the kingdom slowed
from an average of % between 2000 and 2009 to % from 2010 to 2016, reaching
under % in the third quarter of 2019 (Jordan Department of Statistics, 2020b)
Unemployment has been rising In the first quarter of 2020, the unemployment rate
stood at % compared to % in 2010 (Jordan Department of Statistics, 2020c) The
country’ social services system and its economy are under heavy stress from
sudden population growth, and the Covid-19 health crisis has further compounded
the Kingdom’ economic challenges To meet these challenges, the country needs to
identify new engines of growth, generate employment and create prosperity for
all The services sector has consistently accounted for  majority of the gross
domestic product (GDP), exceeding  60% share for most of the last six decades
The manufacturing sector contributes about 20% of GDP (Jordan Department of
Statistics, 2020b) Jordan’ Economic Growth Plan  strongly emphasises developing
key infrastructure and economic sectors, such as water, energy, transport,
industry, tourism, agriculture, and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises,
as well as social development aspects related to education, labour rate
participation and health care (Economic Policy Council, 2017) Sectors such as
agriculture, pharmaceuticals and tourism are also seen as central for rapid
recovery from the Covid-19 economic crisis (Royal Hashemite Court, 2020) As
Jordan reinvigorates economic growth and long-term development, energy will play
crucial enabling role  secure, stable, affordable, environmentally sustainable
and inclusive energy system underpins the social and economic development
objectives The lack of domestic fossil fuel resources has resulted in Jordan
relying exclusively on imports for meeting its energy needs, which places
substantial strains on the economy and poses risks for the security of supply in
terms of affordability, reliability and accessibility In 2018, Jordan imported
92% of its primary energy needs, with the cost accounting for about 10% of its
GDP (2019a) The disruption in the supply of natural gas in 2011 –  mainstay of
Jordan’ energy mix – resulted in the use of expensive alternatives, such as
heavy fuel oil and diesel, for several years and led to substantial financial
losses for the state-owned off-taker NEPCO, severely burdening the economy This
illustrates the vulnerability of the Jordanian economy to disruptions in fossil
fuel supplies and has strengthened the resolve to advance domestic energy
resources at  brisk pace 16 Mineral Resources (MEMR), benefitted from  country-
led, consultative process It provides  platform for multi-stakeholder dialogue
to identify challenges to renewable energy deployment and to devise solutions to
existing barriers It comes in tandem with the background of the government’
National Energy Strategy , released in June The Master Strategy for the Energy
Sector 2020- 2030 positions renewable energy as  central pillar of the energy
diversification agenda Backed by strong policy and regulatory action, the share
of electricity generated from renewables reached over 13% in 2019 over  short
span of time Rapid reductions in technology costs have made renewables, in
particular solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind, substantially more competitive with
conventional energy options Even under the current trajectory of renewables
growth, Jordan will have successfully integrated 20% of electricity from
renewable energy by 2021 (Marar, 2019) This growth has been impressive, making
Jordan  frontrunner in attracting renewable energy investment in the region
Jordan now has  unique opportunity to further accelerate the scale-up of
renewables use in the energy sector to reduce energy costs for consumers,
enhance energy security, increase the competitiveness of local industries and
advance environmental preservation objectives This report presents the outcomes
from the RRA Jordan process It highlights the key trends and challenges in the
energy sector and the drivers for energy diversification (Chapter ) Chapter
discusses trends in renewable energy adoption, focusing on applications in the
power, heating/cooling and transport sectors Chapter  delves deeper into the
emerging issues and challenges in renewable energy policy and regulations, as
well as investments The report concludes with  set of short- and medium- term
recommendations and priority action areas for the government to support
accelerated renewables development and maximise socio-economic benefits (Chapter
) The recommendations have been validated through several rounds of multi-
stakeholder consultations To support future renewables growth, actions will be
needed by different stakeholders to support grid integration, increase use for
heating/cooling and transport, pursue deep electrification of end- use sectors,
and leverage energy management technologies at both the supply-side and demand-
side, such as storage and smart grids This Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA)
for Jordan provides  comprehensive evaluation of the conditions for renewable
energy and identifies the actions needed to further raise renewables’ share in
Jordan’ energy mix This assessment, conducted by the International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA) on request from and in co-operation with the Ministry of
Energy and The RRA benefitted from the valuable guidance of the MEMR and other
relevant public and private sector entities Extensive stakeholder consultations
were organised These included an in-depth survey and face- to-face interviews
with around 40 experts, followed by an expert consultation workshop co-organised
by IRENA and the MEMR in October The findings from the RRA were validated in
workshop organised in January Renewables and COVID-19 crisis management Amid the
coronavirus (COVID-19) health and economic crisis, recovery plans can be most
effective if linked closely to the advancement of clean energy and other
sustainability goals Investments in renewables, energy storage and grid
modernisation, along with building efficiency retrofits, can strengthen socio-
economic resilience, provide immediate economic relief, reduce carbon dioxide
(CO2) emissions and lay the foundations for  decarbonised, climate-safe society
17 Energy sector landscape Energy represents  central pillar of Jordan’ economy,
both as  key input for growth and development as well as  major cost Between
2014 and 2018, final energy consumption grew by 22% and electricity use by 14%
(MEMR, 2019b) Devoid of domestic fossil fuel reserves, energy demand has largely
been met through reliance on imports About 92% of Jordan’ energy supply in 2018
was imported (MEMR, 2019b) This comes at  substantial cost to the economy – 10%
of GDP in 2018 – as well as concerns over long-term energy security to support
sustainable economic growth and development This chapter analyses Jordan’ energy
sector, providing insights on the institutional landscape and trends in primary
energy supply, the power sector and final energy consumption It aims to provide
insights on fuel supply and consumption across different sectors of the economy,
and highlights key risks and opportunities for the long-term security of energy
supply It concludes with an analysis of the key drivers of the government’
energy diversification objective and renewable energy’ role in this drive
Energy sector institutions and responsibilities The institutional landscape of
Jordan’ energy sector involves multiple stakeholders across the power,
petroleum, gas and minerals sectors Table  provides an overview of the key
institutions in the energy sector and their responsibilities At the top of the
institutional hierarchy lies the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources
(MEMR), which provides the strategic vision for the development of the energy
sector in terms of planning, policy formulation and implementation It takes on
the responsibility for developing the Jordan National Energy Strategy and the
subsequent laws, bylaws and instructions for implementation It is entrusted with
ensuring the development of various energy resources and providing the
conditions for attracting investments in electricity generation, oil production
and refining, and utilisation of domestic resources, including renewable energy
and oil shale The MEMR is also responsible for energy efficiency in Jordan and
the management of the Jordan Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund
(JREEEF) Several other ministries play crucial roles in the effective
implementation of strategies and policies introduced by the MEMR The Ministry of
Environment, Ministry of Public Works and Housing, Ministry of Transport, and
Ministry of Industry and Trade and Supply, as well as local municipalities, are
all significant partners in the institutional framework of Jordan’ energy sector
The regulatory function is fulfilled by the Energy and Minerals Regulatory
Commission (EMRC), which is  legal entity with financial and administrative
independence established under Law No () for the year 2017, Law of Energy and
Minerals Regulatory Commission As  result of the government institution
restructure plan in 2014, the EMRC is  legal successor of the erstwhile
Electricity Regulatory Commission, the Jordan Nuclear Regulatory Commission and
the Natural Resources Authority It serves as the regulatory and monitoring body
for the electricity, nuclear safety and security, and mining sectors, and
therefore ensures 18 the application and enforcement of laws, by-laws,
instructions and directives specific to the regulation within these sectors as
manager of the cross-border electricity grid with neighbouring countries NEPCO
is also responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance (&) of the
transmission network in Jordan In the power sector, the generation segment is
unbundled with  mix of public and private sector participation The generation
segment comprises companies with public and private sector holding, such as
Central Electricity Generating Company (CEGCO), state-owned Samra Electricity
Power Company (SEPCO), and renewable and other independent power producers
(IPPs) Other sources of electricity generation include large industries, imports
and small- scale solar PV connected to the distribution network The three
distribution companies – Jordan Electric Power Company (JEPCO), Irbid District
Distribution Company (IDECO) and Electricity Distribution Company (EDCO) – are
all public shareholding companies licensed to service the central, northern and
southern parts of the country, respectively Together they accounted for 90% of
all electricity procured from NEPCO in 2018, with JEPCO accounting for the
largest share The National Electric Power Company (NEPCO),  state-owned company,
is  single-buyer, single-seller of electricity It also manages the transmission
system Under power purchase agreements (PPAs) with “take- or-pay” clauses, NEPCO
procures power from the generation companies and sells to bulk consumers in
industry and three distribution companies that service different parts of Jordan
NEPCO is the single importer of liquefied natural gas (LNG), pipeline gas and
oil products for electricity generation, as well Beyond the power sector,
publicly owned companies are responsible for oil and natural gas exploration and
the operation of refineries in Jordan The Jordanian Egyptian Fajr for Natural
Gas Transmission & Supply Co Ltd builds, operates and owns the pipeline to
collect natural gas from Aqaba to the north of Jordan Several non-governmental
entities are also key stakeholders in the energy sector, including industry
associations, non-profits and international financing institutions Table
Overview of selected institutions in Jordan’ energy sector Segment Institution
Mandate Planning, policy making and regulation Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Resources (MEMR) Responsible for strategic vision of country in terms of
planning and policy formulation for the development of energy and mineral
resources Responsible for the Environment Impact Assessment for renewable energy
and other energy projects, as well as for climate change mitigation and
adaptation efforts, including nationally determined contributions (NDCs)
Ministry of Environment Responsible for the Jordan National Building Council
(JNBC), which issues the Building Codes In addition to the Jordan Green Building
Guide, 23 codes related to energy have been issued Ministry of Public Works and
Housing Planning and policy making Responsible for formulation of policies to
enhance relationships with donors and international financial institutions, and
liaising between relevant ministries and government institutions Ministry of
Planning and International Co-operation Facilitator for the implementation of
the Jordan Response Plan 2020- 2022, which includes the promotion of renewable
energy and energy efficiency to the Zaatari and Azraq camps and other vulnerable
areas Control building zoning and solar PV projects installed on buildings,
including installation of solar water heaters in new construction according to
the instructions issued on  April Municipalities 19 Segment Institution Mandate
Planning, policy making and regulation Energy and Minerals Regulatory Commission
(EMRC) National entity mandated to develop laws, legislation and executive
decisions governing energy, electricity tariffs for consumers, sale price of
electricity between NEPCO and distribution companies and minerals sectors,
including those of relevance to renewable energy Regulation Electricity sector
National Electric Power Company (NEPCO) Single importer of LNG, pipeline gas,
and oil products for electricity generation, for its own gas-fired generation
and IPPs Upstream fuel supply Central Electricity Generating Company (CEGCO)
Majority private holding generator Contributed % of total electricity generated
in Samra Electricity Power Company (SEPCO) State-owned generator Contributed 37%
of total electricity in IPPs (Amman East, Qatrana Power Company, Amman Asia, AES
Levant, Attarat Power Company – under construction) Private generators
Contributed 39% of total electricity in Generation Renewable energy power
producers Solar PV, wind, hydro and biogas generators accounting for 13% of
total generation in Large industries generating power accounting for % of total
generation in Industrial sector Imported electricity through interconnections,
accounted for about % of generation in Electricity imports On-site renewable
energy generation by consumers Accounted for 590 gigawatt-hours (GWh) in 2018,
representing about % of electricity consumption Transmission network System
operator, transmission provider and market operator Single state-owned
transmission system operator and the only authorised energy off-taker at the
wholesale level Responsible for management of interconnections NEPCO System
operator Jordan Electric Power Company (JEPCO)  20-year licensed public
shareholding company that distributes electricity in central Jordan Accounted
for 55% of total electricity consumption in Irbid District Distribution Company
(IDECO)  25-year licensed public shareholding company that distributes
electricity in northern Jordan Accounted for 17% of electricity consumption in
Distribution and retail Electricity Distribution Company (EDCO)  25-year
licensed public shareholding company that distributes electricity in southern
Jordan Accounted for 18% of electricity consumption in 20 Segment Institution
Mandate Electricity sector Provides  set of financial products, such as
revolving credit, grants, loan guarantees and equity financing, to advance
renewable energy and energy efficiency solutions Jordan Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency Fund (JREEEF) Provides soft loans with subsidised interest
rates with the support of the central bank Financing1 Provides capacity building
for professionals in renewable energy financing Central Bank of Jordan Provides
concessional financing for renewable energy up to JOD  million (Jordanian
dinars) Oil, petroleum, gas, and mineral ore institutions National Petroleum
Company  public company owned by the government in the concession area
responsible for prospecting oil and gas in Northeast Jordan Oil and gas
extraction Jordan Petroleum Refinery Company Operates the only operational
refinery in Jordan to produce various products, including asphalt, fuels, lube
oil and special products Refining Jordanian Egyptian Fajr for Natural Gas
Transmission & Supply Co Ltd  limited liability company which builds, operates
and owns the gas pipeline from Aqaba to northern Jordan Collects natural gas in
Aqaba through the Arab gas pipeline and transfers and sells the gas to power
plants and industries Natural gas transmission and supply Provides supply of
pipeline natural gas from the Leviathan Gas Field to NEPCO under  15 year
agreement Noble Energy Non-governmental entities EDAMA is  business association
comprising private sector entities in the green energy and water sector EDAMA
Renewable Energy Establishments Society (REES) REES was established in 2014
under the purview of the Ministry of Environment It provides  platform for
companies, advocacy and market improvements Industry association JCI was
established in 2005 to support the growth and development of industries and
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in Jordan It is leading  100 MW solar
PV project specifically for industry Jordan Chamber of Industry (JCI) RSS
provides expert testing services for technology quality as well as standards,
consultations, training, and information and communications technology services
Royal Scientific Society (RSS) Non-profit  global platform of researchers,
entrepreneurs, and decision makers tasked to create awareness and facilitate
technology transfer and expertise Also promotes nationally recognised education
and training in renewable energy technologies Jordan Renewable Energy society
International organisation or non- governmental organization (NGO) United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Management of refugee camps and
development of associated energy supply infrastructure For instance,  MW plant
at Za’atari Camp provides 80 000 refugees with electricity   number of
international finance institutions, commercial banks and micro-finance
institutions are also present in the sector to deliver financing for energy
projects at different scales Note: This is not an exhaustive list of
institutions in the energy sector Several others are involved in various
capacities, including the Jordan Engineers Association, Jordan Construction
Contractors Association, Department of Antiquities, Civil Aviation Authority,
Council of Ministers, Higher Council for Science and Technology, Customs
Department, Jordan Institute for Standards and Metrology, Royal Jordanian
Geographic Center, Industrial Zones Authority, Ministry of Municipalities,
Ministry of Transport, Aqaba Special Economic Zone, Department of Land and
Survey, Chamber of Commerce, and Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature 21
of high-priced oil products to bridge the energy gap has had far-reaching
consequences for the financial health of NEPCO, highlighting the case for
pursuing diversification through domestic energy resources (discussed further in
Chapter , Section )  Trends in primary energy supply Total primary energy supply
(TPES) grew at an average annual pace of % between 2010 and 2017, reaching 10
million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe) in 2017 (Figure ) In 2018, it fell by %,
reaching  mtoe due to stagnating consumption across certain end-use sectors This
is discussed further in Chapter , Section  Oil accounted for more than half of
all energy supply in 2018, followed by natural gas and electricity Crude oil and
its derivates are predominantly used in the transportation sector, where fuel
demand has grown rapidly amid population growth, increasing urbanisation and
greater economic activity towards the Driven by strong policy action
diversification of energy supply, the share of renewables in TPES has gradually
grown from around % in 2009 to about % in Since 2013, the coal supply has also
grown – due to rising use in industry – with its share ranging between % and %
of TPES Despite  reduction in 2017, the MEMR estimates that primary energy
supply will grow from  mtoe in 2018 to mtoe in 2020 and mtoe in 2030 (MEMR,
2019b) The import dependence of TPES has remained high over the past decade,
peaking in 2014 to reach % and 92% in The Master Strategy of the Energy Sector
aims to increase the share of domestic energy resources in primary energy to %,
primarily through the use of renewable energy and oil shale The share of natural
gas in TPES has varied greatly over the past decade, falling from 40% in 2009 to
% in 2014 and rising to 35% in 2018 (MEMR, 2019) The fluctuation is  result of
supply disruptions in imported natural gas in The reduction in natural gas share
in TPES was compensated with oil products, such as heavy fuel oil and diesel,
for use primarily in the power sector Resorting to imports Table  TPES shares by
fuel Energy source % share in 2009 % share in 2018 Natural gas 40% 35% Average
annual growth of TPES at % Oil share 58% 55% Coal share - % Renewable energy
share %  Figure  TPES, by fuel () 12 10          2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2015 2016 2017 2018 Oil Coal Natural Gas Electricity Solar energy Bioenergy
Source: MEMR (2019b) 22 supply for domestic electricity generation Until 2009,
natural gas accounted for nearly 80% of total electricity generation in Jordan
Following disruptions in 2011, Jordan turned to greater use of heavy fuel oil
and diesel fuel for electricity generation  Trends in the power sector By the
end of 2018, the total installed power capacity in Jordan was  GW, growing from
GW in 2014 (Figure ) Combined cycle power plants accounted for the largest share
of installed capacity at over 50% Diesel accounted for  marked share of total
installed capacity at 16% in The share of renewable power capacity has grown,
rising from under % in 2014 to over 20% in It is expected to reach 31% by 2030
(MEMR,2019a) The rise in renewables’ share of total installed capacity is driven
primarily by capacity additions of wind and solar PV (utility-scale and
distributed) The summer peak load in Jordan in 2018 was  GW compared to  winter
peak load of  GW In January 2020, due to extreme cold weather, the peak load hit
historical high of  GW (NEPCO, 2020a) As  result, by the end of 2014, diesel and
heavy fuel oil accounted for over 90% of the electricity mix, while the share of
natural gas had fallen to  little over % With imports of LNG through the port of
Al-Sheikh in Aqaba beginning in mid-2014, the share of natural gas in
electricity generation was restored to over 80% by In January 2020, pipeline
natural gas supply from the Leviathan Gas Field began trials as part of  15-year
agreement with Noble Energy (Jordan Times, 2020a) investments Making in new
power generation infrastructure has been  key priority for the government New
natural gas-based power projects are under development through partnerships with
the private sector as IPPs Recently, the 485 MW new Zarqa combined-cycle power
station was commissioned and developed by ACWA Power using natural gas as the
primary fuel and diesel oil as the secondary fuel Total generation in Jordan’
power sector has also grown steadily over the past decade from about 15
terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2010 to nearly 21 TWh in 2018 (Figure ) The fuel mix has
changed dramatically during this period owing to changes in the regional
geopolitical conditions and their impact on fuel Figure  Installed capacity in
the power sector, by source ()  000  000 )   (                  000  000
000  000  2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Steam Natural gas Combined cycle Diesel Hydro
Wind Solar PV Biogas Source: NEPCO (2019a) 23 Figure  Total electricity
generated, by fuel 25 000 20 000 )    (                    15 000 10 000   000
2010 2018 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Natural gas Diesel Heavy Fuel Oil
Hydro Biogas Solar PV Wind Based on: NEPCO (2019a, 2018) 235 MW – which are
being constructed for direct burning of oil shale for power generation It is
estimated that oil shale will meet up to 15% of Jordan’ electricity needs by
2021 (Jordan Times, 2019) The growing reliance of the power sector on  single,
largely imported fuel has resulted in concerns for long- term energy security
and the affordability of supply In recognition of these concerns, the government
has taken important steps towards the diversification of the energy mix, as
exemplified in the updated National Energy Strategy 2020-It sets  target for
increasing the share of renewable energy in the electricity mix to 31% by 2030 (
200 MW), up from 20% by 2020 ( 400 MW) (MEMR, 2019a) Grid interconnection with
neighbouring countries and the region broadly is also an important pillar of
diversification for Jordan The interconnection of 500 MW capacity is the
strongest in terms of volume of electricity traded in recent years In 2018,
electricity imports amounted to over 188 GWh, up from 51 GWh  year earlier but
down substantially from 604 GWh in 2015 (NEPCO, 2019b; NEPCO, 2018) In promoting
Arab and regional electrical interconnection, NEPCO has recently signed
memorandums of understanding with the Gulf Electrical Interconnection Commission
and the Saudi National Electricity Transmission Company Backed by strong policy
support, renewable energy, especially solar PV and wind, has grown tremendously
over the past few years in the power sector Total electricity generated from
renewable sources has grown multifold, from 125 GWh in 2015 to  188 GWh in 2018,
driven in large part by the development of solar and wind projects (discussed in
greater detail in Chapter ) In light of the low growth in electricity
consumption domestically and  strong pipeline of power projects due to come
online over the next two to three years, cross-border electricity exports are
key part of the strategy for stimulating demand In October 2019 the National
Electricity Company of Jordan signed an agreement with the Jerusalem local
electricity company to increase its export capacity of electricity from 30 MW to
100 MW (NEPCO, 2020b) In 2019, the volume of exported electricity increased by %
to about 98 GWh (NEPCO, 2020c) The government is also pursuing diversification
through other fuels The National Energy Strategy  includes  share of % of total
electricity generation coming from coal by 2030, in line with the % share
presently available Accordingly, work is underway for the development of  30 MW
capacity coal power plant – the first of its kind in Jordan (Ghazal, 2016)
Additionally, the Kingdom is looking to exploit its oil shale reserves for power
generation The Attarat Power Company project comprises two generating units –
each with  capacity of about 24 From an electricity consumption perspective, the
per capita annual consumption of electricity has fallen from  MWh in 2014 to
MWh in 2018 primarily as  result of rapid population growth This compares to
world average of  MWh per capita (IEA, 2017) Per capita household electricity
consumption was around 77 MWh in 2018, suggesting that  large proportion of the
population lives in energy poverty Energy poverty is also seen in refugee camps,
which often lack access to sufficient, reliable and affordable energy services
for electricity and heating (UNHCR, 2019a) Distributed renewable energy
solutions are increasingly deployed to provide immediate energy access
(discussed further in the next chapter) The low per capita consumption leaves
substantial scope for electricity consumption growth According to data from
MEMR, households accounted for nearly half (46%) of total electricity
consumption in 2018 (MEMR, 2019a) (Figure ) Industry is the second largest
consumer, accounting for about  quarter of total consumption Among the major
industries that account for  considerable share of electricity use are cement,
phosphate and fertiliser The commercial sector consumes about 14% of all
electricity Water pumping is also  significant electricity consumer, accounting
for 15% of total consumption Jordan is one of the most water-scarce countries in
the world, so the sector is highly energy-intensive to meet needs for
extraction, transport and treatment of water To reduce the energy costs of water
pumping, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation aims to improve energy efficiency
by reducing the specific power consumption for water supply by 15% by 2025 and
raising the share of renewable energy in power consumption to 10% by Several
other programmes have also been implemented to deploy solar-powered solutions
for water pumping in the agriculture sector (discussed further in Chapter ) As
water demand grows and energy-intensive solutions are needed (, Red Sea-Dead Sea
water conveyance project, desalination), coupling affordable renewable energy
supply with water infrastructure will become crucial, as seen increasingly
across the Middle East Electricity consumption has grown at an average annual
pace of about % since However, in 2018 the growth stagnated, reaching TWh
(Figure ) Several factors are potentially behind the slowdown, including energy
efficiency and the rise of distributed generation for captive use Under the
second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, the target is to reduce
electricity consumption to  000 GWh per year over  four-year period () Figure
Electricity consumption, by sector () 20 15 )    (                       10
2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2011 Commercial and hotels 2010 Domestic and
government building Agriculture and water pumping Industry Street Lighting
Source: MEMR (2019a) 25 Figure  Total electricity consumption, by sector (2018)
NEPCO through tariff adjustments and other measures (Fairbanks, 2019) In
December 2017, the EMRC started applying  new tax called Fuel Price Increase
This is an additional expense for all electricity consumers consuming above 300
kilowatt-hours (kWh)/month The amount of this tax is based on the fluctuation of
international fuel prices It is announced by the EMRC at the end of each month %
15% 46% 14% During the first few months of 2018, the tariff increase was on
average USD 034/KWh, but in 2019 it was reduced to USD 014/KWh (IMF, 2019) The
response of the public to growing energy prices and electricity tariffs led the
government to suspend some increases and even lower tariffs in the second half
of 2018 and early Furthermore, high tariffs for large consumers negatively
impacted the competitiveness of local industries, and have incentivised some to
invest in renewable power for self-consumption, leading to  loss of high-paying
consumers 22% Household Water pumping Commercial Industry Street lighting
Source: MEMR (2019a) The retail tariffs in the power sector are presently
structured differently for 18 consumer groups, including domestic, commercial,
agriculture, small and medium industries, the telecommunication sector, and
hotels  stepped-up tariff design is in place with varying tariff levels
depending on monthly consumption For medium-size industries and agriculture, day
and night tariffs are in place, as are peak load charges (JOD per peak kW per
month) In general, cross-subsidies from industry and large consumers are used to
keep tariffs for low-income households at affordable levels Currently, the
average tariff is almost at cost-recovery but still insufficient for debt
service of the state-owned NEPCO In its 2018 Annual Report, NEPCO reported
annual losses of JOD 106 million (~USD 150 million) (NEPCO, 2019a) Addressing
NEPCO’ legacy debt and long-term financial sustainability will be critical for
the growth of Jordan’ power sector and its macro-economic stability The World
Bank Group and the International Monetary Fund are supporting  Roadmap for
Financial Sustainability of the Electricity Sector that includes  host of
measures, including rationalising the cross-subsidised tariff structure,
adopting cost- reflective charges, restructuring debt and addressing the
accumulation of money owed by NEPCO Looking ahead, MEMR has estimated that
electricity demand will grow at an average annual pace of % until 2030 (MEMR,
2019b) The recent stagnation in electricity demand, likely to be further
compounded by Covid-19 impacts, points to the importance of several factors that
drive demand growth, including cost of supply that catalyses industrialisation
and economic growth Therefore, reaching electricity demand projections and
ensuring utilisation of power capacity will require several measures, including
reducing energy costs to stimulate demand and promoting the electrification of
different end-uses, including in industry and transport To shore up electricity
demand, in October 2019, the government introduced preferential tariffs for
those industries that increase consumption over the previous year as part of the
financial incentive package NEPCO has accumulated substantial debt (~18% of
national debt) due to high crude oil prices between 2011 and 2014 and imports of
expensive fuel alternatives as  result of disruptions in the supply of natural
gas High consumer subsidies and the “take or pay” structure of contracts with
power generators have resulted in NEPCO absorbing  large part of the increases
in energy supply costs Even as crude oil prices have plummeted in recent years,
natural gas supply has resumed and new LNG supply options have become available,
there is  continued focus on ensuring cost-recovery for 26 In an effort to
reduce the burden of the energy bill on industries and improve their
competitiveness, the government has been encouraging industry to switch to
natural gas Recently, NEPCO signed an agreement with the Jordanian-Egyptian Fajr
Company to provide natural gas to the Southern Industrial Complex of Jordan
Phosphate in Aqaba and the Al Sanawbar Sanitary Paper Manufacturing
Company/Nuqul Group The use of natural gas is estimated to reduce energy costs
in factories by %, depending on the type of fuel substituted The special tax on
natural gas for industries has been reduced from 16% to %, and the companies
that switch to natural gas are exempted from the special tax imposed on natural
gas for three years, according to criteria set by the Ministry of Industry
(NEPCO, 2019c) Solar thermal technologies are also being deployed to meet
heating/cooling needs in industry and, while its use is still in nascent stages,
it offers tremendous potential to displace non-domestic fuel use in  growing
sector (discussed further in Chapter , Section )  Trends in final energy
consumption The final energy consumption in Jordan grew from  mtoe in 2009 to
nearly  mtoe in 2018 (Figure ) The transport sector is the largest energy
consumer, primarily of crude oil derivatives, including gasoline and diesel The
share of households and the services sector largely in final energy consumption
has remained constant Meanwhile, energy consumption in industry has fluctuated
with limited growth over the past decade  closer look at the final energy
consumption by sector provides insights on the slowdown observed in energy use
in Compared to 2017, industry registered  % growth in energy consumption in
Meanwhile, the household, service and transport sectors all saw declines Energy
consumption in the household sector reduced by % year-on-year (MEMR, 2019b)
Electricity remains  key fuel for industry – electricity costs as  share of all
operating costs can be nearly half for the plastic and rubber sector, and over
quarter for the construction, food, packaging, furniture, mining, and leather
and garments sectors (Ali Ayasrah, 2018) The largest bulk industrial consumers
of electricity include cement, and phosphate and potash mining and processing
These industries consumed over 970 GWh of electricity in 2017, accounting for
almost % of the country’ total consumption (NEPCO, 2019a) In an effort to reduce
electricity costs and environmental impact, several large industries are turning
to solar PV to meet part of their electricity needs Lafarge Cement, for
instance, has completed construction of  MW solar PV project to cover part of
the electricity needs at the Rashadiya cement plant (LafargeHolcim, 2017)
Industry Industry is the third-largest energy user in Jordan and the second-
largest consumer of electricity Low-cost, reliable energy is  critical input for
industry and it strongly influences the competitiveness of Jordanian products
and services at the local, regional and global levels Most of the industries in
Jordan have high thermal energy demands which are predominantly supplied through
fuel oil, diesel and coal (Figure ) In the cement sector, the high cost of
energy has prompted some producers to shift away from fuel oil towards coal to
reduce operating costs (USGS, 2019) Figure  Final energy consumption, by sector
2009 2018 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Industry Transport Household
Services Others Non-energy use Source: MEMR (2019b) 27 Figure  Final energy
consumption in industry, by fuel (2018) Electric mobility is also being piloted
for public transportation in tourism sites (, Petra archaeological park) Some
challenges faced in accelerating electric vehicle adoption include, but are not
limited to, raising awareness about the cost effectiveness and benefits of such
vehicles and the large-scale development of charging infrastructure (El Issa,
2017) Opportunities for the development of liquid and gaseous biofuels, as well
as hydrogen, have not been explored at scale yet 35% 43% TFEC in industry (2018)
Households 954 ktoe The residential sector in Jordan accounts for 21% of total
final energy consumption and 46% of electricity consumption (MEMR, 2019b)
Urbanisation, growing population and improvements in living standards are
driving up demand for energy in households Electricity accounts for the largest
share of energy consumed in the sector for lighting and powering appliances such
as refrigerators, air conditioners and water heaters (Figure ) Jordanian
households own an estimated  million refrigerators,  million TV sets,  million
washing machines and 205 100 freezers As much as 61% of households surveyed as
part of  demand load survey in 2015 owned electric water heaters (USAID, 2015)
22% Oil Coal Electricity Note: ktoe = kilotonne of oil equivalent Source: MEMR
(2019b) Transport The transport sector is the largest consumer of energy in
Jordan Gasoline and diesel use account for nearly 90% of all final energy
consumption Rising population numbers and greater movements of passengers, goods
and services all result in the significant use of these fuels in the sector
Between 2007 and 2018, the number of operating vehicles doubled from 842 000
million (Jordan Department of Statistics, 2019) Over 70% of the vehicles are
saloons, followed by vans and trucks, which account for 18% Private ownership
vastly dominates public ownership, accounting for 93% of all vehicles Vehicle
ownership is expected to continue, largely relying on fossil fuels Reducing
Jordan’ reliance on imported fuels will depend on  substantial shift in energy
use patterns in the transport sector Some efforts are being made to tap into
alternative energy sources in the transport sector, including the promotion of
hybrid and electric vehicles Solar water heating solutions are used in  growing
number of households for the provision of hot water, providing around % of final
energy consumption in households The growth of solar water heaters is  result of
large-scale programmes by JREEEF in partnership with other donors that has led
to the deployment of over 26 000 installations so far (discussed further in
Chapter , Section ) More than 60% of energy consumed in households is used for
space heating and cooling In high-income areas, central heating using diesel oil
and air conditioners using electricity are common, while in lower- income areas,
small stoves using kerosene or LPG are used (Al-Sallami and Al-Hinti, 2017) to
Energy poverty among households is  key area of concern Several programmes are
in the process of addressing low- income households living in energy poverty For
instance, programmes for the adoption of solar PV systems have been launched,
including for 85 000 households under national welfare programmes Public
infrastructure, including schools and clinics, also suffers from poor energy
access, which impacts the delivery of services such as education and healthcare
The Royal Initiative for Heating in Schools seeks to address this challenge (see
Box ) Furthermore,  large population of refugees live in non-permanent
settlements with limited access to energy for heating and cooling Various
programmes have been launched to support solar-based solutions for lighting and
water heating in these settlements Electric vehicles were piloted in Jordan in
2014 with the establishment of the first electric charging station Since then
the number of electric vehicles has grown from  that year to 18 000 in 2018 and
up to 30 000 by the end of 2019 (Khalaileh, 2017) The government introduced
several incentives, including waiving of import duties on the vehicles and
components for charging infrastructure, as well as instructions for installing
dedicated electricity meters for electric vehicles providing electricity at USD
19/kWh 28 Figure  Total final energy consumption in households, by fuel (2018)
There is  strong case for leveraging this momentum and further accelerating
renewables adoption in the power sector, as well as penetrating other end-use
sectors , heating/cooling and transport: % 11%  Energy security: The majority of
Jordan’ energy comes from imports This comes with substantial economic costs,
supply disruption risks and price fluctuation vulnerabilities Disruptions and
their implications for the fiscal health of both NEPCO and the government
demonstrate the importance of diversifying energy sources (, import of natural
gas from other sources) and energy fuels (, developing domestic resources such
as renewables and oil shale) Renewable energy solutions benefit different
elements of energy security: availability, accessibility, affordability and
long-term permanence Dependence on imports for meeting energy needs has
decreased in the past few years from 99% to 94%, in part due to the
implementation of energy efficiency and renewable energy measures 38% TFEC in
household (2018)  464 ktoe 47% Oil Electricity Solar energy Bioenergy Source:
MEMR (2019b)  Drivers for energy diversification The Master Strategy for the
Energy Sector 2020- 2030 has set out clear objectives to be pursued:  Economics:
Substantial reductions in the cost of renewable energy technologies over the
past decade offer  compelling case for governments to pursue  greater role for
renewables in the future energy mix In most parts of the world today, renewables
are the lowest-cost source of new power generation secure  sustainable future
energy supply  ii diversify the national energy mix and increase dependency on
domestic energy resources iii achieve sustainability iv reduce the cost of
electricity supply In Jordan, the results of the latest (third) round of direct
proposal submissions in 2018 yielded bids as low as USD/kWh In comparison, the
average cost of electricity purchased by NEPCO in 2018 was 081 JOD/kWh USD 114
/kWh) The cost of electricity purchased from renewable energy averaged 076
JOD/kWh USD 11/kWh) compared to 082 JOD/kWh USD 12 /kWh) from conventional
sources (NEPCO, 2019a) It is important to note that the renewable energy
projects from the third round have not yet been commissioned and, therefore, are
not reflected in NEPCO’ cost of procurement Purely from  cost perspective, the
economics of renewable energy, especially solar PV, are favourable in the power
sector (Figure ) and, combined with decreasing costs of storage, offer  viable
alternative to both imported and domestic fuel- based solutions The economic
case for renewables in the heating/cooling and transport sectors is also strong,
especially for solar water heaters and solar heat solutions for industry These
mutually reinforcing objectives are critically important to “recapture the
growth momentum and realise Jordan’ development potential” as targeted in the
Jordan Economic Growth Plan  (Economic Policy Council, 2017) and ensure  rapid
recovery from the impacts of the Covid 19 crisis The new engines of economic
growth in Jordan, including manufacturing, transport, construction and
agriculture, will require access to low-cost, reliable, secure and
environmentally sustainable energy to ensure competitiveness  key pillar of the
energy diversification strategy will be the development of renewable energy
technologies It contributes to all four objectives of the Master Strategy
outlined above The Strategy targets  31% share of total installed capacity by
2030 (MEMR, 2019a)  Jordan implemented the first National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan (NEEAP) in 2013 and reduced to 400 GWh The second NEEAP () is
expected to reduce electricity consumption to  000 GWh, in addition to
decentralised solar PV and 20 000 solar water heater (SWH) in 2018-This has
reduced electricity demand by % in 2018, according to NEPCO  In 2019, global
electricity costs from utility-scale solar PV fell 13% year-on-year, reaching
USD 068 per kWh Onshore wind fell about % year-on-year, reaching USD 053/kWh for
renewable energy projects, especially solar PV (IRENA, 2019a)  Lithium-ion
battery costs have reduced 85% in the  period, according to Bloomberg New Energy
Finance (2019a) 29 Figure  Comparison of solar PV bids under three rounds with
average cost of power procurement (USD/kWh) by NEPCO 250
193 200 176 175 PV EOI#, 167 158 150 )    /    ( 118 115 099 089 100 PV EOI#,
069 050 PV EOI#, 026 - 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 PV EOI# 2017 PV EOI# 2018
PV EOI# Average power procurement cost for NEPCO (USD/kWh) Note: EOI =
Expression of interest Based on: NEPCO (2019a); NEPCO (2018) for cost of
procurement  Socioeconomic benefits: Diversification of the energy mix brings
opportunities for job creation and the development of new industries The socio-
economic dimension of renewable energy is critically important for emerging
economies looking to maximise the benefits from the transition in terms of job
creation and local value creation Since 2013, close to 300 licensed companies
have been established in solar PV design, procurement, installation and &,
providing full-time employment to several thousands of people For  50 MW solar
PV plant, for instance,  total of 229 055 person-days are needed & workers are
needed throughout the project lifetime, and therefore represent the bulk of the
labour requirements (56% of the total) Equipment manufacturing (22%) and
installation and grid connection (17%) also require significant labour inputs
(IRENA, 2017) The jobs exist across the value chain in Jordan, including in
manufacturing Philadelphia Solar,  company involved in solar PV module assembly
and mounting structure manufacturing, employs 250 people full- time Across the
segments of the value chain for different renewable energy technologies, such as
solar PV, onshore wind and solar water heaters, varying skills and material
inputs are required systems, storage vessels, coating, connection boxes and
cables (IRENA and ESCWA, 2018) To maximise the socio-economic benefits of
renewable energy, different measures are needed, such as visibility on long-term
deployment, targeted incentives for domestic manufacturers, enterprise- and
human- capacity development, and partnerships in technology transfer and
research and development Across the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region,
jobs in the renewable energy sector have the potential to expand from an
estimated 542 000 in 2017 to  million in 2030 and  million in 2050, accounting
for nearly 30% of all energy sector jobs (IRENA, 2020d)  Climate and NDCs:
Jordan, in its NDC, committed to  reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions by
14% up to 2030 (% through its own resources and % conditional on the receipt of
international financial aid and support) (UNFCCC, 2015) Bylaw (79) year 2019 for
Climate Change set requirements for the different stakeholders to report their
greenhouse gas emissions The development of renewable energy is  central pillar
of decarbonising the energy mix while also securing  reliable energy supply In
2018 alone, electricity generated from solar PV and wind avoided nearly  million
tonnes of carbon emissions Substantial additional benefits of diversification
are also recognised in terms of reduced air pollution in urban areas from
increased adoption of hybrid and electric vehicles and the use of electricity
and cleaner fuels for heating and cooling Existing industries can be leveraged
and integrated into renewable energy supply chains to create local value In the
development of CSP, for instance, at least 30% (by value) of  project could be
manufactured locally, including steel support structures, piping  IRENA’
Leveraging Local Capacity series quantifies the labour and skills needs, as well
as material inputs required, for the development of illustrative renewable
energy projects, including solar PV, onshore wind, offshore wind and
concentrated solar power (CSP)  Based on  grid emissions factor of 690 grams of
carbon dioxide (CO2) per kWh and accounting only for emissions during
electricity production stage 30 RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES AND USE Jordan is
front-runner in the region in terms of the speed and scale with which it has
deployed renewable energy, especially in the power sector Renewables accounted
for over 13% of total electricity generated in 2019, up from  near-zero share in
The growth has been made possible largely due to strong government commitment
and action to diversify the primary energy mix The potential for renewable
energy to contribute to Jordan’ energy mix is much greater The next phase of
renewables growth in Jordan could focus on building the right enabling
conditions for integrating higher shares of electricity from renewables in the
power sector Electricity also represents only 22% of final energy consumption as
noted in the previous chapter To diversify Jordan’ energy mix, reduce reliance
on imports and bring down energy costs, renewables in non-power end-use sectors
– heating/cooling and transport – will absolutely need to be scaled up
substantially from current levels This chapter discusses the renewable energy
sector in Jordan, analysing the trends in deployment in the power,
heating/cooling and transport sectors It sets the stage for an in-depth
discussion in the next chapter on policies and regulations –  key enabler for
adoption and integration – and the investment landscape to identify gaps and
challenges that need to be addressed to scale up renewable energy adoption
Renewable energy resources The presence of abundant resources is  crucial
starting point for the development of renewable energy It greatly influences the
operational performance and financial viability of projects Owing to its
geographical position, Jordan’ most abundantly available renewable energy
resources are solar and wind, with potential also for bioenergy, hydropower and
geothermal Solar Average daily solar irradiation ranges between  and  kWh/square
metre (m2), with about 300 sunny days per year, which corresponds to an annual
average solar irradiation of  400- 300 kWh/m2 (Figure 10) The favourable climate
conditions have allowed Jordan to benefit from some of the most conducive solar
sites at the regional and international levels This is also reflected in the low
cost of electricity generated from new projects Wind Jordan has significant wind
energy resources to exploit for electricity generation Average wind speeds are
site-specific and generally range from  metre per second (/)to  / in good
locations in the Kingdom (Marar, 2019) (Figure 11) According to  study carried
out by the MEMR and the Royal Scientific Society, approximately 16% of the total
country’ land are suitable for wind power production, with  total technical
potential of  GW (AlRahahleh, 2018) 31 Figure Spatial distribution of global
solar irradiation in kWh/m2 resource maps for Jordan Legend Jordan_ghi_annual
(kWh/m2) 2038 2074 2111 2147 2183 2219 2256 2289 2317 Based on: IRENA Global
Atlas, Solar PV Map Data: World Bank Group, 2018, Global Horizontal Irradiation
kWh/m2 World  km Figure Spatial distribution of wind irradiation in Jordan
Legend Wind speeds at 100m height in / 2038 2074 2111 2147 2183 Based on: IRENA
Global Atlas, Wind Map Data: Technical University of Denmark Global Wind Atlas,
Average Wind Speed  km at 100  height 32 Dead Sea also provides  potential hydro
resource of an estimated of  MW, which could be exploited via the proposed Red
Sea Dead Sea Canal project Meanwhile, to improve power system flexibility, MEMR
has recently conducted feasibility tests on Jordan’ existing dams and reservoirs
with  view to establishing pumped storage hydro power projects (see Box )
Bioenergy Bioenergy resources in Jordan exist primarily in the form of municipal
solid waste (MSW) The amount of municipal waste is rapidly growing as  result of
the increasing population and represents an important resource  pilot plant
using MSW with  capacity of  MW has been operational since The Greater Amman
Municipality plans to implement  biogas project by using the methane gas
captured in the Ghabawi landfill, the main solid waste landfill in Amman With
the expansion of the landfill, the capacity is expected to reach  MW in 2020 and
MW in The opportunity to utilise biogas from waste for the transport sector also
exists  Renewables in the power sector Renewable energy in the power sector has
existed since 1998, with the first wind energy farm of 125 MW operational at
Hofa in northern Jordan  strong impetus for the adoption of renewables for
electricity generation came in 2012 with the introduction of the Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency Law (13) Until 2014, the total installed capacity
of renewables in the country’ power sector stood at about 14 MW, comprising
predominantly hydropower Total renewables capacity had grown to about 500 MW in
2016 and to over  GW by early 2020 (Figure 10) Renewables now account for over
quarter of total installed power capacity in Jordan This rapid growth has
primarily been driven by capacity additions of onshore wind and solar PV
technologies Animal waste also has potential for utilisation – albeit with
lower resource potential compared to municipal waste – on  smaller scale for
heating/ cooking purposes More than 80% of total manure production, mainly from
cattle, poultry and sheep, is concentrated in four northern governorates: Al
Zarqa, Amman, Al-Mafraq and Irbid (Barilaro, 2019) Jift –  waste product from
olive oil harvesting – is also available in Irbid and Al-Mafraq It can be used
either as fuel or feed Estimates suggest that the total jift supply in these
regions is around 19 000 MT annually (Mercy Corps, 2017) In 2015, the 117 MW
Tafila wind project came online, followed by the 80 MW Ma’an wind project in In
the same year, solar PV projects from the first round of direct offers
comprising 200 MW of capacity were commissioned In 2018, the second- round
projects – along with the 103 MW Quweira plant – were commissioned, taking the
total solar PV capacity up to nearly 700 MW By the end of 2019, solar PV
installed capacity had risen to about  GW and wind capacity hit 373 MW Of the
total solar and wind capacity installed, about 985 MW are connected to the
transmission system, while about 573 MW are connected under the net metering and
wheeling schemes (MEMR, 2020) Geothermal7 Jordan has several thermal water
resources (springs and wells) spread along the Rift Valley, in addition to
thermal wells in the central and eastern plateau The geothermal gradient map of
Jordan shows two distinct regions with high gradients up to 50°/km (degrees
Celsius per kilometre) – one in the immediate vicinity of the east Dead Sea
escarpment and another in the Northeast of the country The former represents
locally available energy resource for heating along the eastern margin of the
Dead Sea Rift, where temperatures range from °, with many hotels and resorts in
the vicinity As the capacity of renewables in the power sector has grown, so has
generation Total electricity generated from renewables reached  187 GWh in 2018,
accounting for about 11% of all generation Solar PV represented well over half
(65%) of all electricity generated from renewables, followed by onshore wind
(32%), hydropower (%) and biogas (%) (Figure 11) Hydropower Jordan’ hydropower
resources are currently limited to the King Talal Dam – the country’ only
hydropower plant – with  MW of installed power capacity Aqaba Power Station has
been equipped with hydropower turbines with  MW of total capacity using the
available head of returning cooling sea water The elevation difference between
the Red Sea and the  Based on Saudi and Swarieh (2015)  Based on MEMR
presentation (January 2020) 33 Figure Renewable energy capacity, by source ()
800  600  400  200 )   (          000  185 800 699 600 400 396 286 200 373 280
198 198 118 2015  2014 2016 2017 2019* 2018 Hydropower Onshore wind Solar
photovoltaic Biogas * Reported as of January Note: Hydropower and biogas
generation capacity remained the same throughout the reporting period at 12 MW
and  MW, respectively Source: NEPCO (2019a); MEMR(2019b) Figure Renewable energy
generation, by source () 12%  500 ) % (   )    (   10%  000         %
500  441       %  000  907          %        421 500 % 720 448 391 121 %  2014
2015 2016 2017 2018 % share Hydropower Onshore wind Solar photovoltaic Biogas
Based on: Data from NEPCO and MEMR Note: In 2018, hydropower generation amounted
to 23 GWh, while biogas supplied  GWh Table  Solar PV and wind project status
(as of January 2020) Energy source Under construction Operational Utility- scale
wind 247 MW 373 MW Utility-scale solar (direct proposal) 250 MW 612 MW Wheeling
solar projects - 222 MW Distributed solar PV net metering projects - 351 MW 34
The pipeline for utility-scale renewable energy projects is composed primarily
of solar PV and wind About 250 MW of solar PV and 247 MW of wind projects are
currently under construction (not including net metering and wheeling projects)
Besides stand-alone utility- scale renewable energy projects, multi-fuel IPPs
are also integrating solar PV projects into the fuel mix to reduce conventional
fuel use during peak-load hours AES Jordan’ 250 MW IPP project was commissioned
in 2014 and was originally designed to be tri-fuel using heavy fuel oil, light
fuel oil and natural gas However, 46 MW of solar PV is anticipated to be
connected to the existing plant to reduce engine use and associated fuels during
peak solar generation and to cut emissions (Wartsila, ) of the expanded 23
MW/MWh solar PV plus storage project began in the Al-Mafraq region This is the
first utility-scale solar and storage combined project in the MENA region It
demonstrates the value of storage to support integration by smoothing out
variability and allowing load-shifting MEMR had also announced  30 MW MWh
project in Ma’an for which proposals have been received (MESIA, 2019) Qualified
bidders were announced in January 2020; however, in April 2020 it was confirmed
to have been cancelled (Colthorpe, 2020) Raising the share of renewables beyond
the current pipeline of projects has raised grid integration concerns  Cabinet
Resolution dated  January 2019 was issued to suspend granting approvals for
renewable energy projects exceeding  MW until the MEMR has studied the ability
of the grid to absorb additional power and included appropriate integration
measures into its long-term strategy (EDAMA, 2019a) Raising the share of
renewables in the electricity generation mix will require efforts to stimulate
demand, as well as integration measures such as storage, electrification of end-
uses and demand-side management These will be discussed in greater detail in
Chapter  Targeted policy support through net metering and wheeling projects
(discussed in depth in Chapter ) has provided further impetus for investments in
renewable energy solutions for self-consumption projects More than 15 300
applications have been approved so far by distribution companies (Jordan Times,
2020b) Under the Fils Al Reef initiative, over  000 solar PV systems of  kW size
are also being installed in households that are under national support and that
have electricity consumption of under 200 units Figure 13 shows that electricity
generation from renewables has grown rapidly over the past four years, reaching
around 11% of total supply mix from  negligible starting point With nearly 500
MW of utility- scale solar PV and wind projects under construction and due to
come online by 2021, as well as already approved net metering and wheeling
projects, the share of renewable electricity is estimated to continue to rise
Box  Transmission grid development to facilitate renewable energy integration
facilitate the To integration of utility-scale solar PV and wind, measures are
being taken the development of adequate to support transmission infrastructure
Green Corridor project is underway that includes the construction of  new
substation in Ma’an (400) kilovolt (kV), and the expansion of the Qatrana and
the airport substations (132) kV in addition to constructing the necessary
transmission lines for connecting these substations Jordan has so far managed to
integrate the rapidly growing share of electricity generated from renewables
through various measures including the development of  dedicated transmission
grid infrastructure to evacuate power from resource-rich regions to load centres
and the reinforcement of existing grid networks (Bellini, 2018) The Green
Corridor Project, presently under development, is one such example (Box ) The
Kingdom has also been  pioneer in the MENA region in the development of grid-
scale energy storage projects In February 2019, commercial operations Source:
NEPCO (2018)  Based on MEMR presentation (January 2020) 35 The solar thermal
program in the  energy strategy set  target to increase household penetration
from 15% to 25% by 2015, but the target has not been met (Abu-Dayyeh, 2015) This
has primarily been  result of  lack of enforcement of regulations that came into
effect in 2013 which made it solar water heaters installation mandatory for
households, apartments and offices above  specific area Off-grid renewable
energy solutions are also being deployed for the provision of electricity
services in villages, border points, telecommunication stations, desert camps
and rural communities in Jordan Although the national electrification rate is
close to 100%,  number of households located in remote areas are unconnected to
or under-served by the grid For those areas, off-grid solutions are deemed
suitable and economical to deliver basic electricity services Besides solar
water heaters, concentrated solar heat (CSH) applications for the provision of
process heat in industries has been piloted In 2015,  CSH Fresnel collector
pilot was installed in Sahab It had  thermal capacity of 223 kWh and provided
process steam at 160 degrees with suitable applications for drying and
sterilisation processes in the pharmaceuticals industry (Solar Concentra, 2017)
JTI (Jordan), the largest cigarette manufacturer in Jordan, has installed  solar
steam generation unit which covers 85% of the annual steam consumption and 30%
of cooling and heating needs It saves over  GWh of LPG energy consumption and
GWh of electricity per year (JTI, 2018) Distributed renewable energy solutions
are also increasingly being adopted across sectors such as agriculture and water
Under the European Union (EU)-funded Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency II
Programme, 214 solar pumps were installed in the Jordan Valley and 106 in the
Highlands The project was developed by the National Energy Research Centre and
the Ministry of Environment The energy costs of large water conveyance projects,
such as the Red Sea Dead Sea project, can be prohibitively high The Ministry of
Water and Irrigation has taken steps to tap into low-cost renewable energy,
reducing its electricity costs In February 2020, the Solar Heating Arab Mark and
Certification Initiative (SHAMCI) mark and certification for solar thermal
systems was endorsed SHAMCI is the first Arab certification scheme providing
regional industrial and regulatory compliance for policy makers, industry and
end-consumers (RCREEE, 2020)  Renewables in heating/cooling and transport
Renewable energy use for heating/cooling applications has been limited compared
to that of the power sector The market for renewable energy heating in Jordan is
based mostly on solar water heaters dating back to the 1970s The solar water
heater industry is well developed, catering to domestic, industrial and
commercial applications The domestic sector dominates, with solar meeting hot
water requirements for residential use Other applications include those for
swimming pools, hospitals, hotels, universities, schools and sports facilities,
as well as for space heating In industry, solar heating solutions deliver
process heat and pre-heating systems (, in dairy) (CRES, 2008) Geothermal-based
heating and cooling solutions have also been piloted The American University of
Madaba, about 50 km south of Amman, has deployed two geothermal systems to meet
the cooling load of  680 kW and heating load of  350 kW of two buildings It is
estimated to reduce CO2 emissions by 223 tonnes annually,  47% reduction
compared to conventional chiller/LPG boiler (Laylin, 2012) The transport sector
accounts for nearly half of all energy consumed in Jordan Direct renewables use
in transport is very limited Jordan inaugurated its first solar-powered charging
station for electric cars as early as 2012 at El Hassan Science City Incentives
have been offered for the adoption of hybrid and electric vehicles although
these are not coupled with renewable power for charging Jordan has experienced
surge in the adoption of electric vehicles, from around  000 in 2016 to 18 000
in 2018 with  compounded annual growth rate of up to 34% by 2025 (Friedrich-
Ebert-Stiftung, 2019) In 2016, the total number of solar water heaters reached
500 systems with the installed capacity of water collectors reaching nearly 880
Megawatt- thermal (MWth)) (IEA-SHC, 2019) This number almost tripled, reaching
16 000 installed solar water heaters by the end of 2018 with at least 24 000
systems now in place (JREEEF, 2020) The market for solar water heaters grew
organically for several decades and was catalysed with the launch of dedicated
financing programmes The JREEEF financing programme for the installation of over
22 000 solar water heaters was completed in 2019 with the next phase being
rolled out in partnership with commercial banks (discussed further in Chapter )
(Jordan Times, 2019b) 36 The Greater Amman Municipality (GAM) has set up 120
charging stations (five utilising solar to cover part of the consumption) and is
working on installing fast charging stations GAM has also worked with taxi
operators and provided incentives (, fee exemptions, use of public charging
infrastructure) to reach 30% of fleet size with electric vehicles 2012 to 20% by
the end of Concurrently, of total electricity generated in Jordan, renewables’
share has risen rapidly to over 13% during the same timeframe (MEMR, 2020)
Sustaining continued growth of renewables in the power sector will call for
stronger look at  portfolio of short-, medium- and integration solutions as the
share of renewables in the electricity mix grows Under the present conditions in
the power sector, the future growth of renewables is contingent upon the growth
of electricity demand, which has been slow in recent years and is further
compounded by the Covid-19 crisis Demand stimulation requires cross-sector
policy making and strategies aimed at demand stimulation and electrification of
end-uses long-term Besides electrification, renewable energy potential for
fuelling transport through biogas generated with municipal waste and liquid
biofuels also exists Given the excess power generation scenario in Jordan,
energy carriers, such as hydrogen, may also be relevant as they can create new
electricity demand while also facilitating storage and integration in industry
and transport sectors Non-electricity end-use sectors comprise over 60% of final
energy consumption and, therefore, reducing reliance on imported fuels will
inevitably require much greater adoption of renewables-based heating and
transport Mature renewable energy applications, such as solar water heating
systems, as well as new solutions, such as CSH for industrial applications and
electric vehicles, are already present in the market  Conclusion Jordan has
abundant domestic renewable energy resources, in particular for solar and wind
Developing these resources supports all four pillars of the Master Strategy for
the Energy Sector : to secure  sustainable future energy supply, diversify the
national energy mix and increase the share of local resources, reduce dependence
on external energy resources, and enhance environmental protection The next
chapter tackles emerging issues facing the further expansion of the renewable
energy sector in Jordan and the measures available to address the current
barriers and accelerate progress towards much higher shares of renewables in the
primary energy mix Backed by strong government action, the renewable energy
sector has seen rapid growth since 2012, especially in the power sector
Renewables’ share in total installed power capacity grew from under % in Al-
Rajif wind plant 86 MW  Photograph: MEMR 37 RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICIES AND
INVESTMENT: CURRENT LANDSCAPE AND EMERGING ISSUES As seen in the previous
chapters, Jordan has made remarkable progress over  short span of time in
deploying renewable energy, especially in the power sector  robust deployment
policy has played  crucial role in driving the development of utility-scale and
distributed renewables capacity, as well as selected applications across end-use
sectors (, solar water heaters) This chapter will discuss the policies and
investment frameworks that will be instrumental for achieving  much deeper
penetration of renewables in Jordan’ energy mix It will analyse the present
landscape, identify the emerging issues and challenges, and highlight the
pressing issues that require action  Adapting the policy and regulatory
environment for future renewables growth The policy and regulatory landscape
strongly influence the appeal of the renewable energy sector to attract
investments and scale up deployment Country experience has shown that to harness
the full potential of renewables and reach majority shares of renewables in the
electricity and energy mix, deployment policies alone are not sufficient  wider
policy mix is needed, as illustrated in Figure 14, that also includes policies
for integration of renewables in the energy system and for supporting long- term
sector development and maximising local benefits This holistic view of the
policy and regulatory environment is particularly crucial in the context of
Jordan, which is on track to reach  relatively high share of renewables in the
electricity mix and whose future growth will rely strongly on demand growth and
implementation of  wide range of integration measures across the energy sector
This chapter will first discuss planning and target setting, followed by
detailed assessment of the policy mix in Jordan needed to achieve  much deeper
penetration of renewables in the coming decades 38 Figure Policy mix to reach
substantially higher shares of renewable energy     ilit         Behavioral
policies Integrating Policies Sector coupling  &  Deployment Policies
ll  Enabling Policies Fiscal and ﬁnancial Industrial policies Labour  social
protection policies arket and      ill   ti      li        Source: IRENA, IEA
and REN21 (2018) and the mechanisms for reaching the set targets Through follow-
on regulations, end-user sector targets can be further disaggregated (, specific
to industry, households, public buildings) for effective policy making,
monitoring and enforcement The data and information base guiding planning and
target-setting also needs to be strengthened, especially for industry By law,
the Department of Statistics is authorised to gather data, and sector-specific
efforts are needed to standardise and gather energy end-use data In the specific
case of industry, for instance, the Chamber of Industry and MEMR would be the
key stakeholders to conduct  nationwide effort such as this Plans and target The
Jordan National Energy Strategy  set an objective of reaching % of renewable
energy contribution in the primary energy mix by 2015 and 10% by As part of the
updated  Master Strategy for Energy Sector, the target was updated to 20% of
renewables share in the electricity generation mix by To advance the
implementation of the  strategy, the government of Jordan, with the technical
assistance of the EU, undertook the task of developing the National Renewable
Energy Action Plan (NREAP) for the period 2018-However, the NREAP was not
adopted in light of the recent update to the National Energy Strategy for
2020-The successful design and implementation of the policy mix illustrated in
Figure 14 rests on  cross- sector and multi-institutional approach For instance,
integration of variable renewables the effective in the power sector, as will be
elaborated upon in Chapter , Section , “Policies and regulations to maximise
benefits”, requires cross-sector policies for the electrification of end-use
sectors such as transport The National Energy Strategy must incorporate the
cross-sector interlinkages (, electrification of transport, water, agriculture),
consider emerging technologies (, storage, electric vehicles and other
decentralised applications) and provide the optimum roadmap to reach higher
shares of renewable energy in the primary energy mix The National Energy
Strategy for  was developed and released in June The strategy provides long-term
clarity on the evolution of the energy sector and includes an updated target
that renewables will make up 31% the total installed power generation capacity
by This involves setting  vision for improving flexibility of the electricity
system (, through storage), demand stimulation and harnessing synergies with
energy efficiency (MEMR, 2019a) The updated National Energy Strategy would pave
the way for  NREAP, which would provide greater insights on the vision for the
renewable energy sector to 2030 39 others (electricity wheeling) and for
wheeling charges (costs of the electricity wheeling) Box  Bylaws and
instructions for the implementation of the Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Law No 13 of 2012  The instructions issued based on Article  of
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law 13 for the reference pricelist record
for the calculation of electrical energy purchase prices from renewable energy
sources Several bylaws, instructions and directives have been issued to support
the implementation of the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law No 13 of
These address different aspects of renewable energy development, including
conditions and procedures for developing, connecting and remunerating projects
of different scales and applications Some important bylaws and instructions
issued are:10  Bylaw No 49 concerns the establishment of the Jordan Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund, which aims to provide funding for the
preparation of projects and programmes for the purpose of exploiting,
implementing and developing renewable energy sources  Bylaw No 50 of 2015 and
its amendment in 2016 sets the conditions and procedures of the renewable energy
direct proposal submission and connection to the grid  Bylaw No 10 of 2013,
amended in 2015, 2017 and 2018, concerns tax exemptions for renewable energy and
energy efficiency systems and equipment  locally manufactured equipment is
attached to the bylaw  Instructions for costs of connecting renewable energy
sources to the distribution system in the cases of competitive bidding and
direct proposals related to the Article / of the Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Law imported and list of  Intermittent Renewable Resources
Distribution Connection Code at Medium Voltage: MEMR has set the rules and
designed  contract for projects interconnecting renewable energy with the
transmission network  Instructions governing the sale of electrical energy
generated from renewable energy systems related to the Article 10/ of the
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law (net metering system)  Guidelines for
interconnection of renewable energy sources on distribution and transmission
grids as well as on electric meters for net metering apply to both distribution
and transmission grids  Instructions governing electricity wheeling for energy
generated from renewable energy sources, for consumption purposes and not for
sale to 10 In addition to those listed, several other important bylaws and
instructions were issued, including the mandatory Environmental Impact
Assessment by the Ministry of Environment; Mandatory Licensing of companies
working in RE by EMRC; Mandatory Licensing of Solar companies working in
construction by the Jordan Construction Contractors Association; Optional
Certification of Design and Supervision Engineers working in Solar PV by the
Jordan Engineers Association; and the Mandatory Zoning check by Greater Amman
Municipality and the municipalities The policy and regulatory framework for
renewables deployment in the power sector is among the most advanced and
elaborate in the MENA region Renewable energy projects are mainly developed
through three routes: direct proposal submission (build-own-operate through
projects competitive bidding), government-owned (offered as engineering,
procurement and construction [EPC] contracts for the private sector) and self-
consumption (wheeling and net metering projects) Off-grid projects, including
those for solar water pumping, are also being pursued Each of these will be
discussed in depth in this section, followed by the policy and regulatory
landscape for renewables deployment in heating/cooling and transport end-use
sectors Policies and regulations for deployment The policy and regulatory
landscape for renewable energy in Jordan is composed mainly of laws whose
implementation is undertaken through  series of supporting bylaws, instructions
and directives The Electricity Law No 64 of 2002 lays down general rules for
generation, transmission and distribution activities There is no specific Heat
Law that guides the utilisation and retailing of heat The Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency Law No 13 of 2012 and its amendments form the backbone of the
policy landscape for renewable energy and energy efficiency in Jordan (Box )
offered 40 Bylaw (50) year 2015 and Bylaw (66) year 2016) were undertaken based
on the lessons learned since To attract the private sector to participate in the
tenders, the government took additional steps to address key investment risks
First,  government guarantee backed the PPAs to address off-taker risks Second,
template contractual documents were made part of the tender package, including
the PPA, Land Lease Agreement, Grid Connection Agreement and the Government
Guarantee Agreement Power sector: Direct proposal submissions Under the direct
proposal submission route, investors can identify and develop grid-connected
renewable energy projects and propose these to MEMR The direct proposal
submission by the private sector takes place in rounds defined by the MEMR
considering the capacity to be contracted The Direct Proposal Committee was
established by the provisions of the Direct Proposal Bylaw 50 to identify the
appropriate opportunity to conduct  new round Each round comprises  two-stage
tender process: the pre-qualification stage to confirm developer experience and
ability, and the tender stage for short- listed developers to prepare proposals
and submit tariff bids For the first round, the submitted tariffs must be lower
than the ceiling reference price, which is calculated based on  methodology
issued by the EMRC Third,  slew of preferential taxation schemes have been
introduced These include, for instance, 75% relief from income tax normally
levied on the project company (from resource assessment to construction) for ten
years; exemption from all customs and other duties, taxes, fees, returns and
levies; exemption from stamp duties; exemption from general sales tax and
withholding tax on income relating to local or imported goods, material and
services; exemption for non- Jordanian investors and financiers from income tax
and general sales tax that may arise on interest payments, fees and any
instalments resulting from financing activities interest The first expression of
in 2012 offered  feed-in tariff Twelve solar PV projects with  cumulative
capacity of about 200 MW were approved (Infrastructure Journal, 2013) Further,
the PPA for the first wind direct proposal submission for 117 MW at Tafila was
signed in The 20-year PPAs were signed for USD 12/kWh for wind and USD 169/kWh
for solar PV (barring the MW Ma’an project, which was awarded at USD 148/kWh) In
the first round, MEMR focused on the southern region of Ma’an, which was
attractive from  resource standpoint as well as the applicable regulatory and
administrative regime in the Ma’an Development Area The Direct Proposals Bylaw
prioritises the use of private land for renewable energy, and developers often
have to negotiate directly with local communities rather than through formal
institutions, which poses risks of project delay and disruption Further,
developers are required to pay  fee for change in the “type of use” for the land
which ranges from JOD - per square metre Public lands are managed by the
Department of Land and Survey (DLS) in Jordan and where such land is required
under the Direct Proposal Scheme, developers should approach MEMR which will in
turn liaise with DLS The exact leasing price is determined by  special committee
in the DLS and has to be approved by the minister of finance The second round
was launched in August 2013 and switched from  feed-in tariff to competitive
bidding It awarded four projects of 50 MW each at record- low prices of USD /kWh
(New Energy Update, 2015) The projects focused on the northern and eastern parts
of the Kingdom to ease pressure on the grid MEMR required interested parties to
identify the project location and ascertain from the relevant transmission or
distribution company whether the site was deemed suitable for grid
interconnection (Infrastructure Journal, 2013) At the end of 2016, the third
round of tender was launched, planning to develop 200 MW of solar PV in the
Ma’an area and 100 MW of wind projects in the south of the country In September
2018, the results of the Round  auction were announced and  record-low bid of
USD /kWh was submitted (RES4Med, 2019) The current pipeline of utility-scale
projects provides an outlook to 2021, beyond which subsequent rounds of direct
proposal submissions need to be issued to benefit from electricity from
renewable energy that is substantially cheaper than the NEPCO’ current average
cost of electricity procurement Indeed, several factors are contributing to
slowdown in the issuance of subsequent rounds, including uncertainty related to
the overall electricity demand growth, available grid infrastructure capacity
and existing take or pay contracts with IPPs Without demand growth measures,
such as incentivising electricity consumption, reducing energy poverty and
electrification of end-uses, future rounds of direct proposal submissions are
unlikely to take place The rounds of direct proposal submissions have been
strong driver of renewables growth in the power sector Regular updates of the
bylaw (, the Direct Proposal 41 However, important steps have already been taken
to ensure the benefits of low-cost electricity from renewable energy can be
passed on to sectors presently most vulnerable to high energy costs Industries,
for instance, can already benefit through earmarked renewable energy projects
The 100 MW solar project in East Amman is an example in this regard where land
has been allocated for lease to generate low-cost solar power to improve the
competitiveness of industries (Jordan Times, 2020c) It is, however, important to
ensure equitable access to low-cost renewable power for small and medium
enterprises, including those most at risk due to high energy costs Power sector:
Wheeling and net metering projects The development of renewable energy projects
for self-consumption is guided by the wheeling and net metering programmes
depending on the location of the generation facility with respect to the
consumption site The capacity of projects under the programmes grew from around
250 MW at the end of 2018 to 573 MW in January 11 At over 35%, Jordan has among
the highest percentages of wheeling and net metering projects relative to total
renewable installed capacity Existing and future industrial zones should pursue
dedicated renewable power supply coupled with energy efficiency and storage The
expedited development of renewable and storage projects as well as strategically
positioned development of new projects such as these can facilitate deployment
with limited stress on the grids for integration The Electric Power Wheeling
Scheme has been devised to encourage large consumers to develop for self-
consumption with  renewable energy view to reducing energy costs and increasing
competitiveness The scheme allows the user to install the renewable energy
system in  different location of the consumption facility and connect it to the
transmission or distribution grid The directive for the scheme was issued in
2013 and later amended in 2015 (EMRC, 2015) As of January 2020, wheeling
projects totalled  capacity of over 222 MW,12 with strong interest from large
consumers The Jordanian telecom operator Orange Jordan, for instance, has
announced  37 MW solar project to help meet part of its electricity needs The
capacity is spread across three sites in the King Hussein Bin Talal Development
Area, the Mafraq and the Amman governorate (Willuhn, 2019) Power sector:
Government-owned projects Renewable energy projects developed under this route
include those that are government-owned and publicly financed through grants and
loans provided by governments and development agencies For such projects, MEMR
issues  tender to select an EPC contractor The EPC contractor is responsible for
all activities from design to engineering, procurement, construction,
commissioning and transferring the renewable energy plant over to MEMR However,
renewable energy developers licensed by EMRC must apply for government tenders
in partnership with an accredited contractor listed by the MEMR Beyond
commercial entities and industry, refugee camps have also been able to benefit
from the wheeling scheme, with the Azraq and Zaatari camps meeting  large share
of total electricity needs through solar projects (UNHCR, 2020) The solar plant
in Azraq refugee camp was inaugurated in May 2017 while the one in Zaatari camp
opened in November The Azraq refugee camp is now powered by   MW solar PV
project which covers 70% of the total electricity required In the case of the
Zaatari refugee camp, the solar project connects all shelters in the camp and
provides 12 hours electricity per day The projects help UNHCR save an average of
USD  million annually in electricity costs while bringing an improved
electricity supply to those living in these camps (UNHCR, 2019b) The total
installed (or under construction) capacity of government-owned commercial power
plants has reached 149 MW from PV and 169 MW from wind Besides solar PV and
wind, either government-owned or through public-private partnerships, projects
focused on biogas and hydro have also been developed in the past The Jordan
Biogas Company has  landfill project in Rusaifa, with further plans by the
Greater Amman Municipality to implement  biogas project using the methane gas
captured in the Ghabawi landfill 11 Based on MEMR presentation (January 2020) 12
Based on MEMR presentation ( January 2020) 42 The Net Metering scheme is focused
on the development of renewable energy, mainly solar PV, for all metered
consumers to cover up to 100% of their own consumption and connect the system
mostly to the distribution grid The scheme is based on the Directive Governing
the Sale of Electrical Energy Generated from Renewable Energy Systems, which
provides guidance on the conditions for existing and new users, as well as
specifies the mechanism for billing and remuneration for users under this scheme
Net metering is most attractive for high-consuming residential consumers and
public buildings (Box ) that are paying high electricity tariffs (reaching JOD
30 [USD 42] per KWh) Box  Facilitating development of distributed solar on
public buildings The implementation of renewable energy and energy efficiency
measures for public buildings holds immense potential for reducing electricity
costs While several mandates and programmes have been launched, enforcement has
remained  key challenge The lack of transparency in available budget in existing
areas on electricity bills inhibits public buildings from conducting energy
audits and implementing renewable energy and energy efficiency measures The
Ministry of Public Works and Housing, which is responsible for all government
buildings, has  methodology for energy efficiency It has implemented the same
with the Ministry of Education and Health covering over 500 buildings For net
metered users, the distribution company undertakes monthly billing and annual
settlement between the electricity consumed from the grid and exported to the
grid For the total installed capacity to be connected to the grid, the expected
generation must not exceed the average monthly consumption (IEA, 2020) For the
monthly billing, if the electricity consumed from the grid is higher than
renewable electricity exported, then the consumer pays for the extra consumed
electricity to the distribution company according to the prevailing tariff
structure In case export is higher than consumption, then the excess electricity
is rotated to the next month, also known as “banking of power” The annual
settlement can be either on  financial basis (capped to 10% of the electricity
imported from the grid) or on an energy basis, where the surplus is rotated to
the next year The tariff for purchasing surplus renewable electricity by the
distribution company is set at 12 JOD per kWh (USD 17 per kWh) for solar PV
systems It is important to note that the exodus of high-paying commercial and
industrial electricity consumers from the electricity grid risks undermining the
cross- subsidisation mechanism (Vinter and Norman, 2019) Incentives can be
introduced for managers of public buildings to adopt renewable energy and energy
efficiency measures through dedicated financing schemes Energy service companies
(ESCOs), which carry out energy performance contracting, allow savings from
annual electricity bills to be utilised for other budget lines, as well as
ensure that buildings are able to connect to the grid without paying dues Under
both the wheeling and net metering schemes, projects mostly connect to the
distribution network However, owing to uncertainties in grid capacity to absorb
further generation, new projects over  MW on the distribution network have been
suspended until the completion of technical studies to assess the capacity of
the electrical grid to integrate further capacities Even those under  MW are
reportedly often not approved, or approval is granted for only part of the
capacity applied for, by the distribution companies owing to limitations on the
grid The private sector has strongly noted the importance of communicating
information regarding where capacity is available on the grid and for
distribution companies to consider providing conditional approvals for projects
This includes, for example, conditions regarding integration of storage or
limits on electricity exports to reduce stress on the grid Substantial interest
in self-consumption (wheeling and net metering) programmes has resulted in rapid
capacity deployment, as well as several implementation-related challenges
Applications are generally submitted to distribution companies, which then
undertake  review and conduct the requisite technical and grid impact studies
(GISs) Distribution companies are faced with high loads of applications and are
unable to increase capacity to address this The potential for  one-stop shop for
project proponents is being explored to complete all necessary processes, as is
the use of online platforms where possible (EDAMA, 2019b) Simplified processes
may also be designed for small and zero feed-in systems 43 Wheeling and net
metering projects will play  fundamental role in the growth of Jordan’ renewable
energy sector Such projects allow end-consumers to benefit directly from the low
cost of electricity from renewable energy and, in the case of large private
sector entities, improve the competitiveness of products and services The freeze
on projects over  MW due to grid limitations highlights the need to identify
pathways through which wheeling and net metering projects can continue to
expand, while integration challenges are addressed (discussed in greater detail
in Chapter , Section , “Policies and regulations for integration”) The
transition also brings challenges for incumbent distribution companies and bulk
power suppliers as high-paying commercial and industrial end-users essentially
utilise only the carriage (network) and reduce power consumption from
traditional suppliers In this context, it is important to ensure that the
allocation of costs is fairly distributed across the end-consumers In addition,
several cross-sector projects have also been developed In June 2017, the
Jordanian Ministry of Agriculture signed an agreement with the National Energy
Centre of the Royal Scientific Society to develop over 320 solar water pumping
systems on farms in the Jordan Valley and valleys of the south and 100 on the
high plateaux (Azraq, Mafraq, Madaba) While the majority operate in an off-grid
configuration, some are connected to the grid under the net metering programme
(MEDENER, 2019) As discussed in Chapter , water pumping accounts for 15% of all
electricity consumed in Jordan Electricity is  major cost for water utilities,
and the Ministry of Water and Irrigation has pursued the development of solar
projects to cover its electricity costs However,  50 MW proposed solar project
was cancelled in light of the technical challenges related to the grid and the
prevalent oversupply situation in the power sector  joint committee between the
Ministry of Water and Irrigation and MEMR has been constituted to discuss
several issues related to the management of water and energy, (pumped) storage
and desalination Since 2012, even as electricity generated from renewable energy
has grown substantially, the electricity tariff structure has remained unchanged
Tariffs need to appropriately reflect the grid usage of self-consumption
renewable energy projects (net metering and wheeling) to ensure proper
allocation of network costs with other consumers and the distribution companies
As renewables continue to grow, the distribution companies will face greater
challenges EMRC will need to adapt regulated tariff design structures to ensure
viability for the distribution companies in the long-term, even as distribution
companies also evolve business models with the changing structure of the energy
system Heating/cooling Chapter , Section  discussed the diversity of in the
heating/ renewable energy applications cooling sector These included solar water
heating for domestic, commercial and industrial applications, as well as
geothermal and solar for space heating Several projects already exist, with
strong presence of local system manufacturers and installers, and demonstrated
benefits in terms of reduced energy consumption, decreased expenditures,
improved reliability of supply and emissions reduction Power sector: Off-grid
and cross-sector projects Despite the potential, the policy and regulatory
landscape for renewable energy in heating/cooling is not as developed as that of
the power sector The adoption of solar water heaters has grown gradually over
the past decades with  number of local enterprises deploying systems for
residential, commercial and industrial applications Partnerships with financing
institutions were developed to deliver end-user financing for such systems With
the NEEAP and JREEEF programme, the sector received  strong impetus with end-
user financing available through  network of community based organisations
(CBOs) The JREEEF programme deploying 22 000 systems concluded in 2019, with the
next phase in partnership with the commercial banks in the early stages of
implementation With rapidly decreasing technology costs and scalability of
solutions, diverse renewable energy applications are also emerging in off-grid
and cross- sectoral contexts The first zero feed-in project of  MW was recently
given approval From  regulatory perspective, zero feed-in systems are
permissible with the approval of the distribution company, with EMRC developing
relevant bylaw As battery storage costs continue to fall, it will become
increasingly competitive for certain categories of consumers (, commercial
establishments with majority day-time loads) to transition towards zero feed-in
distributed solar To facilitate this, instructions will need to be issued by
distribution companies and design codes 44 In follow-up to the Renewable Energy
and Energy Efficiency Law No 13 of 2012, mandates were also issued to deploy
solar water heaters on all new buildings exceeding  pre-defined area Solar water
heaters became compulsory for apartments with an area greater than 150 m2
Commercial offices with less than 100 m2 and private dwellings with less than
250 m2 were exempted Renewable heat use, including solar water heaters,
currently that provides local suppliers visibility into the future market,
especially given the dependence on public programmes (and accompanying
subsidies) for deployment To improve reporting on the progress, the data
collected from the sales of such systems should be collected and reported
regularly as part of the Annual Report of the MEMR target long-term lacks  clear
In addition, in 2013, the Ministry of Public Works and Housing Council issued
the first Jordan Green Building Guide (JGBG), providing the basis for  local
green building rating system The incentive programme gives extra floor area
ratio for buildings that achieve high levels of energy and water savings
(Zawaydeh, 2018) Renewable energy integration in buildings is mentioned in the
guide, and users can acquire eight points for integrating more than 20%
renewable energy Box  Addressing energy poverty through renewable energy: The
case of the Schools Heating Program and refugee camps In February 2015, the
Schools Heating Program (King Abdullah II Initiative) was launched to provide
heating in public schools The project was envisaged to roll out in two phases In
the first phase, central heating would be installed in 50 schools located in
extreme cold conditions The second phase would expand the scope of the project
to over  700 of Jordan’ public schools The programme has been implemented
through the JREEEF, and has now covered over 134 public schools At the
municipality level, the Greater Amman Municipality issued  special regulation in
2015 regarding solar system installation requirements on building rooftops,
vacant lands and parking lots This regulation ensures that installed systems to
satisfy zoning requirements An updated version of the requirements will be
issued and released by the end of The schools have been equipped with solar-PV
based space heating and cooling units along with solar water heating solutions
In addition, energy efficiency improvements have been made to school buildings
by improving insulation, changing windows, installing energy efficient lights
and upgrading electrical wiring Awareness campaigns for students, teachers and
the community on energy conservation and renewable energy applications is also
being conducted  key challenge for solar water heater penetration in Jordan has
been the enforcement of existing mandates, the lack of stringent penalties and
the lack of capacity to ensure compliance Furthermore, the focus of the next
phase of the JREEEF programme on partnerships with commercial banks to provide
end- user financing, as opposed to CBOs in the first phase, has led to
substantial slowdown in the adoption of solar water heaters, especially in the
domestic segment Each market segment requires  tailored financing approach to
support solar water heaters While the delivery of end-user financing through
CBOs for domestic consumers was effective, commercial and industrial consumers
may benefit from dedicated financing lines through commercial banks Renewable
energy solutions have also been applied to address energy poverty in refugee
camps and infrastructure (, associated public service education, healthcare) The
Norwegian Refugee Council, for instance, initiated  Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Program in It installed grid-connected solar PV systems in 34 public
schools, thus reducing the cost of additional shifts for refugee students, as
well as improved energy efficiency Additionally, 710 solar water heaters were
installed in refugee households, reducing the cost of living and improving
tenure security In industry, several projects using heat from renewable energy
sources already exist CSH applications have been deployed in pharmaceutical and
cigarette production as process heat In addition to the financing needs
discussed earlier, capacity building initiatives focusing on local suppliers and
manufacturers is needed to improve awareness of renewable energy- based
heating/cooling technology applications Source: MEMR (2019c), MESIA (2018),
Royal Hashemite Court (2015), NRC (2020) 45 Coupling the electrification of
transport with renewable power will be important to diversifying energy use in
the sector This will require strong co ordination between the Ministry of
Transport and MEMR, as well as  holistic strategy or long-term roadmap which
sets targets for the electrification of private vehicles, fleets and public
transportation It should further guide the development of complementary
infrastructure and skill sets Municipalities, such as GAM, have taken steps to
set targets for taxi fleets Transport The transport sector accounts for the
largest share of energy consumption in Jordan Efforts to diversify the energy
mix in the sector have focused mostly on incentivising the purchase of hybrid
and electric vehicles through sales tax and customs exemptions Fiscal incentives
have been used extensively as  tool to facilitate adoption Electric vehicles
were exempted from clearance taxes on import for five years until the end of
2018, which improved their attractiveness substantially and has driven adoption
However, the clearance tax of 25% was reinstated in April 2019, which reduced
sales sharply In November 2019, the government reintroduced the incentives based
on the battery capacity of the electric vehicles Those with  capacity of 250
kilowatts (kW) and lower (which represent 95% of the electric vehicles in
Jordan) saw clearance taxes reduce from 25% to 10% Meanwhile, taxes on vehicles
with  capacity above 251 kW were reduced to 15% (Xinhua, 2019; Zeidan, 2019) The
impact of this tax reduction on electric vehicle sales remains to be seen;
however, stability in policy support is seen to be crucial for the sustained
growth of the sector Policies and regulations for integration The integration of
higher shares of variable renewables has emerged as  primary concern holding
back is continued growth of the sector By 2021, anticipated that renewable
energy will account for 30% of total installed power capacity and 20% of
electricity generated in Jordan (Marar, 2019) Concerns over the ability of the
grid to integrate renewables beyond the existing pipeline have led to the
suspension of new projects above  MW since January This has contributed to
uncertainty in the sector and, importantly, not allowing large consumers to
benefit from  low-cost energy supply from renewable energy it To support the
adoption of electric vehicles, simultaneous efforts are needed to expand the
charging infrastructure The EMRC currently provides licenses to public and
private electric vehicle charging stations So far, the commission has issued
licenses to 16 charging stations and announced intentions for all new gas
stations to have electric charging facilities To achieve large-scale and rapid
electrification of the vehicle fleet in the Kingdom, the rollout of charging
infrastructure has to be substantially accelerated Some steps have been taken
towards integration in Jordan, which has enabled the integration of  rapidly
growing share of electricity generated from renewables over the past few years
These have largely focused on developing and strengthening the transmission and
distribution infrastructure, as well as introducing dedicated regulations for
injecting renewable power into the grid However, further growth in the share of
renewables in the electricity generation mix requires  wider range of actions to
improve overall system flexibility in the short-, medium- and long-term As
illustrated in Figure 15, the measures range from reinforcing transmission and
distribution infrastructure to increasing storage, managing the demand side, and
incentivising flexible generation, as well as introducing sector coupling
(IRENA, 2018; IRENA, OECD/IEA and REN21, 2018) The optimum mix of measures
varies from context to context and should form part of  holistic strategy to
improve system flexibility in  least-cost manner and be backed by dedicated
regulations to guide deployment and operation13 The economics of electric
mobility are fast evolving with rapidly decreasing costs of storage technologies
and improving maturity of applications across the different transport segments
In the specific case of electric buses, for instance, these have been found to
be  technically and financially feasible option with substantial co-benefits in
terms of reduced air pollution and GHG emissions, as well as dependence on
imported diesel fuel (GGGI, 2018) Pilot projects across specific routes will
improve the understanding of operational viability of electric buses for intra-
and inter-city transport 13 The IRENA FlexTool is  detailed tool that analyses
the flexibility needs of  power system covering traditional options (, flexible
thermal and hydro generation with high ramping capability and very low start-up
time), as well as other innovative technologies (, flexible demand, energy
storage and sector coupling) The FlexTool is capable of analysing current system
operations and performing future analysis with high penetration of variable
renewables, thereby proposing the optimum possible flexibility solutions
Country-level analysis has so far been conducted for Colombia, Panama, Thailand
and Uruguay (IRENA, 2018) 46 Figure Measures to integrate high shares of
variable renewables in the power mix Generation Heat Distribution  Power System
Flexibility Sector coupling Gas (,Hydrogen) Transmission Electric Vehicles
Storage Demand-Side Management Source: IRENA (2018a) Effective co-ordination
between MEMR, NEPCO and the distribution companies can ensure optimum network
management during the transition towards higher shares of variable renewables in
the electricity mix Integration measures can also be mainstreamed into
deployment policy design by setting up renewable energy projects in areas of
close proximity to loads (, industrial zones) or regions with available grid
capacity Hybrid projects (, solar-wind, solar- on site storage) can further
support integration by smoothening generation, increasing network utilisation
and enabling load shifting Transmission and distribution infrastructure The
expansion and strengthening of grid infrastructure have to keep pace with
renewable energy development The scope of infrastructure work needed for
effective integration varies from constructing dedicated transmission corridors
between renewable resource- rich regions to load centres (, the Green Corridor)
to strengthening the distribution infrastructure through upgradation of
equipment (, transformers) and improved system management While the National
Energy Strategy provides an outlook to 2030, grid infrastructure needs to plan
for the longer term  much higher share of renewables also needs to be assessed
and planned for NEPCO’ network expansion and development strategy should offer
blueprint for stakeholders, including the private sector and other ministries,
to develop the necessary infrastructure, raise capital and devise  time-bound
plan  similar exercise will need to be conducted by the distribution companies
to identify network bottlenecks that require investments for upgradation and
modernisation This is particularly crucial given the growth of electric vehicle
sales and the associated charging infrastructure Investments in smart grid
systems, including metering, across the distribution network can help implement
tailored approach to managing renewables integration at the transformer level
The scope of infrastructure work needed for effective integration varies from
constructing dedicated transmission corridors between renewable resource- rich
regions to load centres to strengthening the distribution infrastructure through
upgradation of equipment and improved system management 47 Pumped hydropower
storage is being closely considered, with several sites being studied for
development (Box ) Key issues remain to be resolved between MEMR and the
Ministry of Water and Irrigation in terms of ownership of water resources and
regulations to govern the operation and remuneration of services provided by the
pumped hydro facility Storage Managing the increasing share of renewable energy
in Jordan’ electricity mix will require active measures to match (existing and
new) demand and supply in an optimum manner that reduces overall system costs (,
need for peaking plants) and incremental integration of infrastructure
investment Energy storage costs are expected to decrease by With rapid
construction times and lower social and environmental impacts, energy storage
could be  solution to some of the challenges of integrating renewable energy
(IRENA, 2020b) In Italy, for instance, Terna installed MW MWh sodium sulphur
batteries for transmission investment deferral Over 330 MW of such projects had
been deployed by 2017 and are expected to reach around GW by 2026 (IRENA, 2020b)
Grid-scale energy storage infrastructure can provide  wide range of grid
services The benefits are already demonstrated by the solar PV Li-ion battery
storage project in the Al-Mafraq region The level of flexibility storage can
offer for Jordan’ power system needs to be studied closely Broadly, two storage
options are available – battery storage and pumped hydro – each offering its
unique set of characteristics and flexibility services Developing battery
storage at the transmission and distribution levels and on the demand side can
increase self-consumption and reduce variability for the grid When combined with
renewable power and energy efficiency, storage can reduce peak-load demand and
help achieve “zero-to-grid” configuration for buildings, commercial sites and
industries In the specific case of the residential sector, which accounted for
46% of total electricity consumption in 2018, the daytime peak-demand load can
be reduced through energy efficiency measures, coupled with growing solar PV
generation and storage, thus reducing the need for expensive peaking plants
Having  renewable energy peak strategy with targets is critical to cover part of
the peak requirements Box  Assessment of pumped water storage Under the EU-
funded Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency II programme, an assessment of
pumped-hydro storage was conducted for five reservoir/dam sites in Jordan Among
the sites assessed, Wadi Mujib, Wadi Arab and King Talal reservoirs were found
to have the highest potential for pumped-hydro development The turbine capacity
at each site is 215 MW, 95 MW and 225 MW, respectively, and the assessment was
conducted based on the energy storage capacity, fulfilment of grid service re
equipments (NEPCO) and potential transmission line losses Wadi Mujib was found
to have the highest potential among all dams in Jordan Grid-scale energy storage
infrastructure can provide  wide range of grid services, including renewables
smoothing, arbitrage and ancillary services The benefits are already
demonstrated by the solar PV Li-ion battery storage project in the Al-Mafraq
region While bids for  larger solar-storage project are in the evaluation stage
by MEMR, there is presently no long-term strategy or target for storage
deployment in the Kingdom There is also no regulatory framework to facilitate
and guide storage deployment at the transmission, distribution and end-user-
level With storage costs falling, the business case for storage adoption will
become strong, both at the utility scale and behind the meter, and enabling
regulations will be needed for rapid adoption The distribution company, JEPCO,
began receiving applications for storage in January Given that Jordan is  water-
stressed country, the development of pumped-hydro infrastructure has to equally
consider other uses of the dam such as supply of water for irrigation, industry
and domestic purposes Mujib Dam, for instance, is  multipurpose water source and
serves as an important water supply source in central western Jordan Co
ordination between MEMR and the Ministry of Water and Irrigation will be needed
to address issues related to water resources and minimise conflict between
different end-uses Further, EMRC will need to issue adequate codes for the
operation and remuneration of services provided by pumped-hydro storage 48
control, safety, commissioning and operation and maintenance (EDAMA, 2019c) Many
existing lines companies have established new business to respond to the growing
domestic market for renewable energy, in particular for distributed solar PV
systems and solar water heaters Sector coupling and load-shaping In an
environment of slow demand growth, deploying new renewables capacity to lower
energy costs will still pose challenges for NEPCO and the distribution companies
given existing tariff structures and nature of “take or pay” contracts in the
sector The government took measures in 2019 to stimulate demand through reduced
tariffs for the industry As noted, steps towards incentivising the adoption of
electric vehicles have been taken; however, the scale of adoption has been
limited in the absence of stricter mandates and complementary infrastructure
Other opportunities such as utilising excess low-cost electricity for the
production of energy carriers, such as hydrogen, for use in transport and
industry are yet to mature and be fully explored (IRENA, 2018b) Jordan’ existing
domestic manufacturing base for renewables is strong in many areas – modules,
cables, mounting structures and solar water heaters – although the limited size
of the local market is  significant constraint Instability in the policy
environment – such as the suspension of new projects over  MW connected to the
distribution network that has been in place since January 2019 and the changes
in the design of financing support programme for the solar water heaters –
strongly impact the sustainability of businesses and investments in capacity
augmentation and product/service diversification in Jordan’ renewable energy
sector The electrification of end-use sectors can potentially drive demand
growth However, its management needs to be accompanied by strategies for demand-
side management and load shaping The growth in new electricity demand, for
example from growing electric vehicles in the transport fleet, may not
necessarily coincide with peak renewable generation Load shaping includes
measures to match electricity demand to variable supply with demand-side
management (IRENA, IEA and REN21, 2018) Time- of-use tariffs are important
market signals to shift certain loads during times of low loads, thus also
reducing peak-load demand Jordan’ tariff structure is currently fixed-
consumption based for various consumer groups Increased digitisation of systems
will be also be crucial to enable load shaping There is substantial potential
for leveraging the strength of the existing domestic manufacturing base to meet
the sector’ requirements domestically as well as internationally Domestic module
manufacturers – such as Philadelphia Solar, which has  combined module
manufacturing capacity of 800 MW – are already exporting products and delivering
EPC in markets such as the United States To support the local industry,
comprehensive industrial policy is needed that provides an actionable vision for
the development of  robust, local industry around  changing energy sector
through dedicated incentives, creation of industrial clusters and facilitation
of joint ventures and technology transfer Such  policy should build on the
rounds of incentive packages introduced by the government in 2019 to stimulate
the economy Recent packages encompass programmes to support industry and
introduce incentives for exports which benefit all industries, including
renewable energy Policies and regulations to maximise benefits The share of
domestic energy sources in primary energy is targeted to grow from % in 2017 to
15% by 2020 and 40% by Import substitution of energy fuels with domestic energy
resources offers the opportunity to localise segments of the energy value chain,
develop new industries and create employment opportunities – key political
priorities in the Kingdom and the region (EIB and IRENA, 2015) Beyond
manufacturing of renewable energy technologies, new opportunities for value
creation also exist in operation and maintenance, design, engineering and
financial services, and development of new solutions such as smart grids and
metering The competitiveness of existing industries (, cables) can be
strengthened through incentives, such as exemptions and concessional loans, that
level the playing field for competition in domestic and international markets By
leveraging regional agreements, such as the Joint Arab Market, Jordan could
become an important exporter of the various products and services demanded to
drive the energy transition Presently, hundreds of companies are working in the
renewable energy and associated sectors in Jordan More than  000 people are
estimated to be working in the supply chain, ranging from design, procurement,
electrical, mechanical and civil Installation to quality Domestically, the scale
and structure of utility-scale projects can often crowd out local suppliers,
developers and financiers While  local content requirement is in place – and the
share has gradually been increased to 35% with each subsequent round – its
definition 49 and effectiveness needs to be closely assessed It was reported
that the 35% requirement can be fulfilled by procuring the necessary value of
the project through local contractors even if the products and services are
being imported The design of tenders, both public and private, are also known to
introduce challenges for local enterprises to actively participate in due to
barriers such as the inclusion of material origin requirements When possible,
these should be reviewed to ensure  level playing field for local technology and
service providers to participate in the sector’ development third-party testing
and certification centres need to be accessible for renewables equipment, as
well as for raising awareness among consumers on product standards available in
the market (, through labelling of solar water heaters) Building adequate skills
for the growing renewable energy sector is crucial to ensuring quality
installations and long-term permanence Identifying the current and future skills
needs and partnering with training institutes, universities and industry are
important for the development of curricula and delivering quality training for
the workforce (Box ) With the expansion of the renewables sector in the recent
past, skills availability in the sector is projected to be satisfactory with
several universities having integrated energy- related programmes Standards and
quality assurance frameworks are crucial for  sustainable and renewable energy
market New regulations issued in July 2019 mandate the testing of all modules at
the Jordan Institute for Standards and Metrology and the Royal Scientific
Society Affordable, shows that 56% of the total jobs are in &, 22% are created
in manufacturing and 17% are in installation and grid connection Notably, while
jobs in manufacturing and installation are temporary, those created in & last
throughout the lifetime of the project Box  Assessing skills needs across value
chain: The case of solar PV IRENA’ Leveraging Local Capacities studies assess
skills and occupational requirements along the renewables value chain For solar
PV, IRENA analysis Distribution of human resources required along the value
chain for the development of  50 MW solar PV plant by activity  %  %
Decommissioning Project planning TOTAL 22 % 229,055 Manufacturing and
procurement person-days  % 56 % Transport Operation and maintenance 17 %
Installation and grid connection Source: IRENA (2017) 50 The share of foreign
investment in the sector is high at 75%, with limited participation of the local
financial in the utility-scale segment institutions especially
(Climatescope/BNEF, 2019) The key actors involved in the renewable energy
financing ecosystem in Jordan vary greatly depending on the scale and nature of
the project These usually involve local and international commercial banks,
development finance institutions, the Central Bank of Jordan, NEPCO, the Jordan
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund and enterprise development entities,
as well as  number of donor agencies such as Foundations and National
Development Banks Table  provides an overview of the main stakeholders and the
main areas of financing activities  Catalysing investments to meet renewables
ambition Investment flows into the renewable energy sector have grown
substantially since the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law (13) of 2012
was passed Beginning from  negligible base in 2012, investments rose in 2013 to
USD 300 million, rising to USD 935 million in 2016 and reaching USD 580 million
in 2018 (Figure 11)  large share of the investments were targeted at solar PV
and wind projects being developed under the various schemes discussed in the
previous section Figure Investment in renewable energy in Jordan () 1000 900 800
700 600 500 400           300 200 100  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2018 Source: Climatescope/BNEF (2019) 51 Table  Overview of stakeholders and
main areas of financing activities Technical assistance and capacity building
Transmission and distribution infrastructure SME financing Utility-scale
Distributed Local commercial banks (, Cario Amman Bank, Bank al Etihad, Arab
Bank, Bank of Jordan)    International commercial banks (, Standard Chartered,
Shinhan Bank)  Development finance institutions (, EIB, EBRD, Netherlands
Development Finance Company FMO, German Investment Corporation – KfW DEG, ADFD,
IFC, JICA)     Government grants (, EU, Spain)    Foundations/Donor agencies (,
IKEA Foundation, NRC)     (on-lending) Central Bank of Jordan NEPCO  JREEEF
Jordan Enterprise Development Corporation   Jordan Chamber of Industry Factories
Support Programme  Note: denotes relevant area of financing activity commercial
banks (, Europe Arab Bank) and development finance institutions (, Development
Energy Bank, Netherlands Development Finance Company [FMO], Proparco [subsidiary
of the French Development Agency]) The International Finance Corporation (IFC)
has also played  key role in the financing of renewable energy projects in
Jordan as  direct financier as well as  lead arranger for project financing
Financing utility-scale renewable energy projects and infrastructure
International development finance institutions have actively participated in the
financing of utility-scale renewable energy projects Unless developed under
government-to-government agreements, the majority of the utility-scale plants
have been developed under  project financing structure Table  provides an
overview of the financing structure of selected utility- scale solar and wind
projects in Jordan, as well as the Green Corridor transmission project local
banks are co-financing While some large projects with multilateral development
banks, the local financial institutions are still not very actively involved
with utility-scale renewable energy financing, especially related to non-
recourse financing that requires larger volumes of investment, longer tenor and
unique documentation Over time, capacity is being developed as the understanding
of the sector improves Increasingly, local banks are involved in refinancing
projects that initially received international financing The European Bank of
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) has played  key role as  financier of
renewable energy projects and infrastructure in Jordan EBRD has committed over
USD 350 million so far for  total of 392 MW of utility- scale wind and solar
projects in Jordan15 The majority of the investments are in the form of senior
secured loans, in partnership with other financiers involving 15  52 Table
Insights on financing structure of selected utility-scale projects Type of
project Project Financing structure MW King Hussein Bin Talal development area,
Mafraq region Two USD 27 million loans:  loan from EBRD and  loan from FMO
Mafraq  received financing from the IFC, FMO and the Europe Arab Bank MW FRV Al
Mafraq Mafraq II received financial support the EBRD and the Society for
Proparco EBRD provided  senior secured limited recourse loan of up to USD
million The German Development Bank (DEG) and Arab Bank met the rest of the
financing requirements 50 MW Risha Solar PV An IFC-arranged financing package
included  USD 54 million loan from the IFC and USD 134 million from other senior
lenders, including Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) Other lenders
included FMO, Europe Arab Bank, the OPEC Fund for International Development and
DEG 200 MW Baynouna The project is funded by MEMR through  grant from the Abu
Dhabi Fund for Development 103 MW Al Quweira Up to USD 70 million senior secured
loan split between EBRD and FMO 51 MW Al Safawi 50 MW New Tafileh Wind – “Korea
Southern Power Company Ltd” & “Daelim Energy Company Ltd” The IFC is ) providing
USD 10 million loan for its own account; ) structuring an equity bridge loan of
USD 26 million – its first in project financing; and ) mobilising loans of USD
26 million from its Managed Co-Lending Portfolio Programme, as well as USD
million from Standard Chartered Bank and USD  million from Korea’ Shinhan Bank
USD  million direct loan by the Export-Import Bank of Korea (-Exim) and  USD 52
million -Exim covered facility provided by Mizuho Bank Ltd and Sumitomo Mitsui
Banking Corp Europe Ltd Equity bridge facilities of  combined USD 81 million are
being funded by commercial banks Onshore wind MW Fujeij EBRD approved  USD 68
million loan, while Proparco provided USD 50m project financing  USD 19 million
loan will later be provided by DEG 82 MW Al-Rajef Provision of  senior secured
loan by EBRD of up to USD 52 million 45 MW Shobak EBRD extended  USD 72 million
loan, Proparco provided  USD 55 million soft loan, NEPCO contributed USD
million, and the EU provided  grant of USD million Transmission infrastructure
Green Corridor Source: Rahim and Eid (2017); Carvalho (2018); EBRD (2016);
Maisch (2017), EBRD () 53 JREEEF implements dedicated public financing
programmes for renewable energy and energy to efficiency JREEEF offers financial
support consumers through loan guarantees, interest rate subsidies and grants
for solar water heaters and PV systems, as well as for implementing energy
efficiency measures (, solar streetlights, energy audits in industries) JREEEF
had  programme that offered loan guarantees and covered interest on loans, while
also offering grants of up to 50% for solar water heaters and 30% for solar PV
(up to  kilowatt -peak (kWp) through 220 local CBOs building on the experience
of the Global Environmental Finance (GEF) Small Grants Programme (Box ) Over 24
000 solar water heaters have been installed under the now-concluded programmes
(JREEEF, 2020) Financing self-consumption and small-scale renewables The scale
of self-consumption renewable energy projects can vary from tens of megawatts of
wheeling projects to  few kilowatts of net metered installations for use by
households or public buildings/institutions With the exception of  few large
wheeling projects – such as the 37 MW Orange Jordan project, which follow
similar financing structure to large utility-scale projects – self-consumption
projects generally see  stronger participation of local financing institutions
Such projects also benefit from several government finance promotion programmes
by the Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ) and the JREEEF Since 2011, the CBJ has
offered  credit facility with reduced interest rates to support economic
activities in nine key sectors, including renewable energy and energy efficiency
It offers  low interest rate to local banks of around 75% for projects in Amman
and % for projects outside Amman, allowing these banks to on-lend at final
interest rates up to % for projects up to  limit of JOD  million (USD  million)
As part of the post-Covid-19 recovery plan for Jordan, interest rates of around
75% are offered inside Amman and % outside Amman The facility offers the loan
for  period that can reach ten years with  one- year grace period As of December
2018, more than 270 renewable energy and energy efficiency projects have been
financed, amounting to JOD 182 million (USD 257 million) The CBJ’ concessional
financing scheme can only be accessed by the beneficiary and not the project
implementor With certain beneficiaries unwilling to take debt against their
balance sheets, several developers have asked the CBJ to consider expanding the
programme for them to take loans on behalf of end-users  new programme for 30%
support on solar water heater and solar PV systems up to  kW was issued in
November 2019 (Bellini, 2019) For this phase of the programme, JREEEF is
partnering with local commercial banks, such as the Jordan Islamic Bank, for the
provision of soft loans for renewable energy systems including household PV
systems and solar water heaters (Bank of Jordan, 2017) The banks offer
attractive loans to cover 70% of the system costs, while JREEEF takes % of the
cost of the system or the full grant for end-users with limited creditworthiness
so that the beneficiaries receive almost interest-free loans  key difference
between the subsequent JREEEF programmes has been that end-users are now able to
select among different accredited technology suppliers and access financing by
approaching various commercial banks This compares to the earlier case wherein
single supplier had been selected through  competitive process to supply all
systems deployed through CBOs  key challenge with the new phase has been that
the customers looking to secure financing from commercial banks are not able to
meet the bankability requirements, which are more stringent compared to lending
through CBOs Further, limited experience among participating banks and the
challenge faced by installers to unlock financing available for end-users
through the new JREEEF programme have been identified Targeted capacity building
programmes are needed to strengthen Green Lending Units within financing
institutions by improving awareness of technologies and financing programmes (at
the branch-level) and understanding of accurately estimating the risks and costs
of renewable energy projects While the CBJ programme for renewable energy and
energy efficiency is part of  broader package to support economic activities, it
serves as an important blueprint for tailored financing programmes for sectors
covering specific end-use sectors and applications (, dedicated funding line for
industries, portfolio financing of developers) Such programmes will support the
objective of local banks being more aggressively involved in financing non-
utility-scale renewable energy projects  key lesson from the CBJ programme has
also been the need to focus on capacity building of project proponents on
project documentation preparation, including costings and feasibility analysis
54 JREEEF also provides financial support to industry for conducting energy
audits It covers 50% of the cost of the audit There are lessons that can be
extracted from the energy audits with the opportunity to develop industry-
specific recommended energy- saving measures and energy-use indexes Box
Revolving fund for solar water heaters: The case of United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)-GEF and Sustainable Energy and Economic Development (SEED)
project The GEF Small Grants Programme provides grants of up to USD 50 000
directly to local communities including CBOs and other NGOs to set up revolving
funds to finance renewable energy projects In addition, the grants focus on
building awareness and capacity among local communities on the benefits of
renewable energy solutions Through the programme, over 435 solar water heaters
and 100 kW solar PV systems have been developed since The use of the revolving
fund financing instrument – small grants of USD 50 000 – has mobilised over USD
579 000 (JOD 406 000) worth of investments in renewable energy systems The
impacts of the programme have been multifold: lower expenditure on traditional
fuels, reduced deforestation and emissions, improved health outcomes and
biodiversity conservation Another public financing instrument that has been
established is the Rural Electrification Fund (Fils Il Reef) The MEMR has issued
the first round out of several to install  113 solar PV systems of  kW size that
will be installed at no cost for applicants with sufficient roof space, those
who are on national support (approximately 85 000 families) and have monthly
electricity consumption under 300 kWh Financing renewable energy enterprises
Renewable energy enterprises have varying funding needs depending on the part of
the renewable energy value chain they are part of Jordan has established
entities that offer equity products to new and established companies The Jordan
Enterprise instance, Development Corporation (JEDCO), for supports start-up
companies by allowing up to 80% of equity in renewable energy projects, as well
as SMEs The cost of equity is significantly reduced because JEDCO requires only
10% return on any profits However, the fund has not seen great take- up (RCREEE,
2018) The World Bank also launched the Innovative Startups Fund Project in
Jordan with  USD 50 million investment complemented by USD 49 million in co-
financing from the CBJ It has been designed to provide early stage financing for
start- ups across several sectors, including green energy (World Bank, 2017)
SEED is  programme funded by the Global Affairs Canada and JREEEF from 2016 to
It aims to improve the livelihoods, well-being and resilience of poor and
disadvantaged groups in the Jordan Valley and Ajloun regions through uptake of
renewable energy and energy efficiency measures SEED worked in partnership with
local CBOs to design  financing programme for solar water heaters and solar PV:
the beneficiary pays 25% as down-payment, 50% is capital subsidy and the
remainder is paid in instalments to the local CBO The proceeds from the
instalments create  revolving fund for CBOs to continue supporting the community
after the project concludes So far, over  300 solar water hearing systems and
987 on-grid solar PV systems have been installed In addition, six public schools
and five health clinics were equipped with 150 kWp on-grid PV systems and 12
solar water heaters  non-refundable capital subsidy for small industrial
enterprises looking to install either solar PV or solar water heaters is offered
by the Jordan Chamber of Industry Factories Support Program The programme’
objective is to familiarise industry with the technology by installing small
projects The subsidy covers up to 50% of the product costs if the product is
made in Jordan and up to 35% if the product is imported (IRENA, 2018; RCREEE,
2018) The development of dedicated enterprise funds can play  catalytic role in
supporting local industry and facilitating innovation in the renewable energy
sector as well as complementary technologies such as storage, smart grids,
demand side management and digitisation 55 As argued in this chapter, to support
the next phase of growth for renewables in Jordan,  broader policy mix will be
needed that focuses on deployment, integration and the enabling conditions at
the sector level to maximise benefits (, local industry development, skills)
Further, to unlock future growth of renewables, efforts for demand creation and
electrification of end-uses will be crucial Based on the analysis and extensive
stakeholder engagement, the next chapter summarises the key recommendations for
policy makers to scale up renewables deployment Renewable energy should be seen
in tandem with energy efficiency as mutually reinforcing components for Jordan
to reach higher shares of local energy resources in the energy mix and reduce
dependence on imported fuels Box  outlines the current framework for energy
efficiency in Jordan, highlighting the key aspects and emerging issues
Conclusion The renewable energy sector in Jordan has grown rapidly over the past
decade on the back of  robust policy and regulatory framework The sector is at
an important juncture There is  strong track record of deploying renewables in
the power sector, with  growing number of applications being demonstrated in
heating/cooling and transport Jordan can leverage the momentum and deepen the
energy transition towards renewables  continuing pursuit of renewable energy
promises that  more secure, resilient and environmentally sustainable energy
system can also be affordable, support industrialisation and bring  wide range
of socio-economic benefits Risha PV plant 50 MW Photograph :MEMR 56 specific
audit specialists should be pursued With regard to the energy efficiency of
industry equipment, incentives can play an important role in ensuring that
certain standards are followed (, import exemptions for equipment meeting set
energy efficiency standards) without compromising the competitiveness of the
industry Box  Framework for energy efficiency in Jordan: Key aspects and
emerging issues The Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law (13) of 2012
underlines the importance of pursuing renewable energy and energy efficiency in
tandem In addition to improving the reliability, security and cost-effectiveness
of energy supply,  key objective of the National Energy Strategy  was also to
improve energy efficiency to reduce imports and postpone the need for new
investment In buildings, the Jordan National Building Council is responsible for
the development of the building codes The JGBG was issued in 2013, and an
incentive programme for the adoption of green buildings was approved in The
building guide has four levels ( to ), each offering  specific incentive in
terms of increase in floor area ratio Meeting Level  under the JGBG also ensures
compliance with all other mandatory codes, such as the Jordan Thermal Insulation
Code and Jordan Energy Efficiency In 2019, MEMR and JREEEF Building Codes
launched  programme to replace 150 000 units of lighting in homes (Khaberni,
2019) Energy labels have also been introduced for large household appliances
since Despite  comprehensive set of codes and incentives, enforcement has been
key challenge that requires putting in place enforcement mechanisms and capacity
for ensuring compliance, awareness and stronger incentives In 2013, Jordan
adopted its first NEEAP, which covered the period 2012-It set  target of
reducing energy consumption by % by 2014 (relative to the average consumption
between 2006 and 2010) The target was divided across sectors: residential,
industrial, commercial, water pumping and street lighting The programme met with
some success, reaching about 40% of the reduction originally targeted (Hamzeh,
2018) Jordan decided to update the NEEAP for the period , setting  target of
reducing electricity consumption by % by 2020 ( 975 GWh) compared to the annual
average electricity consumption of the five- year period 2010-Half of the
reductions will be delivered from the residential sector, followed by industry
and commercial and services Energy efficiency programmes have already been
rolled out by several ministries covering public buildings The Ministry of
Industry and Trade and Supply conducted audits for 17 institutions to identify
energy efficiency interventions The Ministry of Public Works and Housing, which
manages all government buildings, has rolled out energy audits and efficiency
measures across more than 500 buildings Recommendations have been for energy
audits and efficiency measures to be succeeded by renewable energy installations
to reduce system sizing and costs Light-emitting diode (LED) labs have been
established at the Jordanian Institution for Standards and Metrology (JISM) and
RSS to regulate the quality of LED lights imported into Jordan Bylaw 73 (2012)
mandates energy audits for all large consumers However, enforcement has been
key challenge The JREEEF and Jordan Chamber of Industry have targeted financing
programmes for energy audits; however, the penetration has been very low due to
lack of enforcement and awareness Industry-specific expertise is also lacking to
conduct energy audits and draw meaningful lessons to develop tools such as
sector-specific energy-use index With lack of awareness and end-users’ hesitance
to spend on energy audits, improving the regulatory environment for energy
efficiency service companies (EESCOs) and developing the capacity of industry-
57 KEY CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS Diversification of Jordan’ energy mix and
reductions in the cost of energy are fundamental to ensure long-term industrial
and socio-economic development The Master Strategy for the Energy Sector
targets  share of % of primary energy from domestic sources, up from about 15%
in 2019 (MEMR, 2020) Further, it sets  target of reaching  31% share of
renewables in the electricity generation mix by 2030 (MEMR,2019a) With
increasing cost-competitiveness and abundantly available resources, renewable
energy solutions will be instrumental in achieving the objectives of improving
energy security, reducing the cost of energy supply for consumers and advancing
environmental preservation The transition to low-cost renewable energy will also
strengthen Jordan’ recovery from the Covid-19 crisis (Box ) Box  Contextualising
Jordan’ energy transition within Covid-19 recovery The Covid-19 pandemic is
compelling governments to simultaneously manage  health crisis of unprecedented
proportions and the subsequent economic and social fallout As governments
deliberate on recovery plans amid significant public financing constraints,
especially in emerging economies, strategic investment choices need to be made
that yield long-term socio-economic dividends In particular, the plans must
foster economic development and job creation, promote social equity and welfare,
as well as advance resilience to future shocks Due to  significant decrease in
energy consumption as  result of the Covid-19 pandemic, the renewable energy
sector has been negatively impacted Following the lockdown, the network has been
exposed to technical challenges which were the result of  decrease in
electricity consumption at  time when there was an increase in electricity
supply from renewables This greatly affected the network and led to increased
volatility and threatened the stability of the network In addition, NEPCO
reduced electricity consumption from government- owned renewable energy projects
during the first period of Covid-19 to alleviate impact on the grid Faced with
this situation, renewable energy systems have been disconnected from all the
sectors, including the health, tourism and communication sectors, which has
resulted in great economic and financial losses for renewable energy companies
To mitigate these effects, MEMR is working with all relevant stakeholders to
reconnect renewable energy projects The wheeling-based renewable energy systems
were progressively reconnected and became fully operational over the period of
March to May 2020, as the country eased Covid-19 restrictions and energy demand
increased As the economy gradually reopens, Jordan is continuing to pursue its
efforts to achieve  needed energy transition and reap its socio-economic
benefits (EDAMA, 2020) 58 The acceleration of  renewables-based energy
transition in Jordan is in alignment with its economic recovery plan, which
centres on building up the manufacturing, transport, construction and
agriculture sectors  low-cost, secure and less-volatile renewable energy supply
will also catalyse domestic industries, job improve their competitiveness and
support creation throughout the economy Savings from displaced imported fuels
and  lower risk of supply disruption over the long-term can also be significant
With the impressive gains made over the past decade, the building blocks of such
transition are already in place in Jordan The country is well positioned to
leverage the transition and serve as  lighthouse for emerging economies globally
in the energy mix in line with the targets and reducing the cost of supply will
require continuing efforts to deploy and integrate renewables in the power
sector, as well as in other end-use sectors (heating/cooling and transport),
which account for over 75% of Jordan’ energy consumption the country’ Building
on an assessment of renewable extensive energy stakeholder engagements, the RRA
presents the key recommendations for Jordan to realise the full economic, social
and environmental opportunity that renewable energy presents It offers
recommendations under seven thematic areas that address renewables applications
in the power sector, for heating/cooling in buildings and industry, and
transport Renewable energy industry development local and job creation are also
addressed, as illustrated in Figure recommendations presented under each
thematic area are seen to be mutually reinforcing – the collective outcome of
which is for renewables to reach  much higher share of Jordan’ energy mix while
improving energy security and reducing the cost of supply and landscape With the
necessary policies and regulations to support renewable energy development now
in place, Jordan has experienced an impressive increase in the share of
electricity from renewables, jumping from % in 2014 to over 13% in The Kingdom
has in fact become one of the most attractive markets for renewable energy
globally (Bloomberg NEF, 2019b) However, increasing the share of domestic
resources investments, The actions and Figure Overview of key thematic areas of
recommendations Incentivise Plan Support Provide Foster Strengthen Catalyse 59
Provide the conditions for renewables Recommended actions: • Provide  vision for
renewable energy sector development with medium- and long-term targets for
renewables in the overall energy mix and end- use sectors (power,
heating/cooling and transport) The long-term vision for renewables must include
just transition Therefore, employment, economic welfare and land-use models
should be integrated within the Master Strategy for the Energy Sector to grow in
the power sector The Master Strategy for the Energy Sector provides  long-term
vision for the evolution of the energy sector in Jordan It identifies the key
objectives for the energy sector; sets targets; and defines priorities for
different domains of the energy sector, including oil and gas, renewable energy,
energy efficiency, and transmission and distribution infrastructure The update
of the Master Strategy provides an outlook for the sector to 2030 and 2050 while
also setting intermediate targets • Formulate disaggregated renewable energy
targets for the industry, building, residential and transport sectors and
integrate these within the NREAP for the implementation of the Master Strategy
Action : Clarify the trajectory for renewables in Jordan’ energy mix • Devise
plan for electricity demand stimulation through the electrification of end-uses,
especially in industry, residential and transport, improving cross-sector
applications (, in water, agriculture) and addressing energy poverty The release
of the updated Master Strategy provides stakeholders in the sector with clarity
on the trajectory of renewable energy in the short-, medium- and long- term The
indefinite suspension of new projects over  MW since January 2019 has added to
the uncertainty in the sector • Strengthen multi-stakeholder consultation,
especially with the private sector, civil society and cross-sector entities,
during the formulation of the action plans, implementation bylaws and
instructions For example, Chile’ Ministry of Energy incorporates citizen
participation in every step of the long-term energy scenario (LTES) development
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom,  co ordinated process is in place for both
energy and climate (IRENA, 2019b) On the one hand, renewables are key to meeting
the government’ objective of increasing the share of domestic energy sources in
the energy mix and reducing the cost of the energy supply However, the renewable
energy sector also faces several challenges to further expansion due to
confluence of factors at the level of the energy sector: sluggish electricity
demand growth, high capacity margin and limited capacity on the grid • Pursue
integrated plans and policies between ministries to reach the objectives of
having high shares of renewables in the energy mix and  low cost of energy
Examples include partnerships between MEMR and the Ministry of Public Works and
Housing to address enforcement challenges; MEMR and the Ministry of Water and
Irrigation to develop pumped-hydro storage and replace diesel pumps with
renewable energy; MEMR, distribution companies and the Ministry of Transport to
develop  roadmap to strengthen distribution grid infrastructure to support
electric vehicle charging stations; and with municipalities to advance urban
planning that promotes the electrification of mobility and mass transport The
likelihood that renewable energy will reach much higher shares of Jordan’
primary energy mix is closely intertwined with the trajectory of the broader
energy sector The Master Strategy addresses critical holistic issues, including
the trajectory towards long-term viability of the power sector enabled by
regulations that ensure cost-of-service recovery at all stages; electricity
demand stimulation (, through electrification of end-use sectors, elimination of
energy poverty, cross-sector integration in water, agriculture, transport);
rapid roll-out of storage and demand side management for smooth grid
integration; as well as the incorporation of future fuels such as green hydrogen
• Study the long-term potential of energy carriers, such as green hydrogen, and
its use in industry and transport, where direct electrification and other
renewable applications may not be feasible 60 measures (, storage, network
upgradation), demand generation (, electrification of end-uses) and energy
efficiency For instance, combining storage with on-site generation can help
address variability and grid management issues for projects developed to cater
to specific demands (, industrial parks) Existing (, in Qastal, Madaba and
Sahab) and future industrial zones could pursue dedicated wheeling projects
coupled with storage, building on the model followed for the Ma’an Development
Area For industry-specific wheeling projects,  key challenge is to ensure that
the available grid capacity is equally accessible for all, including SMEs, non-
energy entities (, water utilities) and those most vulnerable due to the high
cost of energy supply  Foster the continued growth of renewable power generation
The power sector in Jordan has seen rapid uptake of renewable energy facilitated
by enabling policies and regulations Utility-scale projects have advanced
through subsequent rounds of direct proposals, and substantial capacity is being
deployed under the wheeling and net metering scheme, which is focused on the
self-consumption of various end-consumers such as industries, commercial
enterprises, public buildings and households The impressive growth since the
enactment of Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law No 13 of 2012 has
highlighted the scale of opportunity in Jordan, with access to low- cost
electricity from renewable energy as well as challenges related to integration
With significant annual electricity subsidies for agriculture, low-income
households and SMEs, cost- effective distributed renewable energy solutions
could represent  win-win solution for consumers and governments Rooftop solar
has substantial untapped potential in public buildings, including government
offices, mosques, hospitals, commercial entities and residences Government
programmes have also been launched to deploy rooftop solar PV systems for small
residential consumers currently under national welfare schemes Such programmes
should be scaled up to increase social impact, reduce consumer energy
expenditure and limit government subsidy costs The electricity tariff design and
charges (, wheeling rates) for renewable energy projects should accurately
reflect the true cost of the services delivered by the network Advancing further
renewables growth in the power sector will require wide-ranging actions that
focus on expanding the pipeline of projects under the various schemes with
focus on effective integration, as well as on addressing project development
challenges and linkages to energy efficiency Action : expand the project
pipeline through direct proposal, net metering and wheeling schemes The current
pipeline of utility-scale projects under the direct proposal scheme provides an
outlook to The latest (third) round of the direct proposal auction took place in
2018, achieving record-low prices for solar PV (USD 0255/kWh); however, these
are not reflected in the electricity mix yet The realised prices for new solar
are substantially lower than the average cost of electricity procured by NEPCO
Since the third round, there have been no further rounds This is  result of
several factors, including reduced power demand growth and excess capacity in
Jordan’ power sector Under the right conditions, subsequent rounds of direct
proposals could establish  pipeline of low- cost electricity from renewable
resources, which could contribute to decreasing bulk supply costs in the long-
term and positively impact electricity tariffs while also shoring up power
demand Recommended actions: • Implement subsequent rounds of direct proposals to
develop  long-term renewable energy project pipeline, and reduce bulk power
costs and tariffs for end-consumers Subsequent rounds will be conditional upon
an increase in electricity demand and the availability of grid capacity for
large-scale projects • Support the development of dedicated areas for new
wheeling projects for large consumers, building on the model of the 100 MW
community solar PV for the industrial sector Ensure available capacity on the
grid is equally accessible, including for SMEs and those most vulnerable to the
high cost of energy Given the apparent limitations on the grid for integrating
renewables and the oversupply in the power sector,  holistic approach may be
needed to accommodate further renewables covering integration 16 Annual
electricity tariff subsidies for the agriculture sector amount to JOD 40
million, while those for small-scale industries are JOD 29 million and medium-
sized industries are around JOD 50 million (Jordan Times, 2020b) 61 • Support
the development of small-scale renewable energy projects to maximise social
impact and reduce energy expenditure For utility-scale projects, land
acquisition can be  challenge for developers Standardising land acquisition
processes by pre-developing sites – such as the Ma’an Development Area and
Mafraq Development Area for utility-scale solar PV projects – including the
development of grid interconnection infrastructure, sector-specific
environmental and conduct of social impact assessment (, bird migration studies
in the case of wind) and completion of land acquisition, can level the playing
field for the private sector participating in future tender processes At
present, the private sector integrates perceived land acquisition costs into
their bids, which may affect fair competition • Design renewable energy projects
with  focus on effective grid integration through hybrid solutions (, solar-
storage, solar-wind) building on lessons from existing storage projects in
Jordan IRENA finds that renewable energy hybrid projects have higher capacity
utilisation factors and make more use of the grid, thereby reducing grid
integration costs In 2018, India’ Ministry of New and Renewable Energy issued
National Wind- Solar Hybrid Policy that sought to optimise the utilisation of
infrastructure and better match the generation of renewable energy with the
demand profile Not only was the project able to meet  capacity factor of 30%,
the bids received for the nationwide auction were as low as USD /MWh (IRENA,
2019a)17  key challenge for the development of net metering projects is the
waiting period for applications and subsequent smart-meter installations
Applications for the development of projects are submitted to the distribution
companies, which then undertake  review and conduct the requisite technical and
grid impact studies Waiting periods for applications, GIS and smart metering
installations can be time-intensive (up to three months) even for smaller
projects (, 10 kW) Distribution companies are faced with high loads of
applications, having approved over 15 300 applications by the end of Developers
could potentially bring in third-party studies; however, there are several
challenges to this such as lack of data and software availability with third
parties and  trust issue wherein studies conducted by the distribution companies
are preferred • Activate existing bylaws and instructions for the adoption of
rooftop solar PV and energy efficiency in government buildings through
solutions combination of incentives and enforcement In this regard, address the
challenge of outstanding bills to distribution companies that inhibits
government buildings from connecting rooftop solar PV to the grid through
tailored repayment schemes or public financing outlay • Assess and support
renewable energy other than solar PV and wind, including geothermal and waste-
to-energy for municipalities, as well as applications across sectors (,
replacement of diesel pumps for irrigation, water supply pumping systems)
Recommended actions: • Consider the use of online platforms for project
developers of net metering and wheeling projects to complete all necessary
processes Simplified processes and  separate grid code may be designed for small
and zero feed-in systems Action : Address project development challenges •
Introduce  clear plan to reduce the waiting period for applications and smart
metering installation Consider augmenting in-house capacity within distribution
companies to undertake GIS and reduce time for processing Lengthy approval
processes and project development timelines increase developers’ transaction
costs and risks These affect utility-scale and small-scale projects differently
The time between an expression of interest and project commissioning can be
several years, and efforts are needed to establish  fixed milestone-based
timeframe For renewable energy projects where interaction with distribution
companies is required, it is important that EMRC ensures the processes are
streamlined across the companies and simplified for small and zero feed-in
systems • Improve access to outcomes from grid impact studies and consider
conditional approvals for projects based on certain pre-requisites (,
integration of storage, control systems) 17 In May 2020,  record-low bid of INR
(Indian rupee)  per kWh (USD 038 per kWh) for the first year (with % escalation
each year) was received for 400 MW of “round-the-clock” supply through wind,
solar or hybrid solutions with storage:  • Separate city planning requirements
from the process of securing  connection to the distribution grid for small-
scale renewable energy projects efficiency framework, challenges of enforcement
remain to be addressed Large-scale improvements in efficiency across the energy
sector and the wider economy directly impact primary energy needs, thereby
directly reducing the need for fuel imports In power generation, for instance,
combined heat and power applications can drastically improve efficiencies and
offer cost- effective energy alternatives, especially in industries where both
electric and thermal energy is consumed Pilot projects already exist, such as in
Wadi Shalala in Irbid However, dedicated regulations are missing to scale up the
adoption of such solutions • Engage local communities around project sites to
maximise social impact In this context, IRENA’ Renewable energy auctions: Status
and trends beyond price (IRENA, 2019a) finds that community involvement can
increase social acceptance and minimise land acquisition processes In South
Africa, project developers are required to submit evidence to support community
engagement and benefit sharing guideline that includes  social risk analysis,
community engagement strategy,  benefit sharing program, and letters of support
as well as reporting, monitoring and evaluation plans (IRENA, 2019a) On the
consumption side, progress has been made on energy efficiency through dedicated
programmes to deploy LED street lighting in municipalities and replacement of
inefficient lighting in households The Ministry of Public Works and Housing,
which is responsible for all government buildings, has also rolled out an energy
audit and energy efficiency programme Benefiting from the experience, energy
efficiency programmes can be substantially scaled up with substantial cost-
saving opportunities for end- users, especially government buildings • Develop
and issue instructions for land use for renewable energy projects For utility-
scale and wheeling projects, pre-developing sites and allowing entities like the
Ma’an Development Authority to provide infrastructure management can level the
playing field for the private sector participating in the auction process Action
: Strengthen linkages to energy efficiency Recommended actions: • Renewable
energy and energy efficiency should be pursued in tandem The Energy Efficiency
Bylaw No (73) for the year 2012 and the NEEAPs have provided the foundations for
advancing energy efficiency measures in the Kingdom Some linkages between
renewable energy and energy efficiency were made by design, with the Energy
Efficiency Bylaw No (73) making compulsory the instalment of solar water heaters
from April 2013 on pre-specified buildings Enforcement, however, has been  key
challenge, as discussed further in Chapter , Section  Improve compliance of
industry, commercial and public buildings, as well as households, with existing
codes and the Energy Efficiency Bylaw This can be achieved through  combination
of well-designed strict penalties and incentives devised by MEMR • Ensure
effective implementation of the NEEAP  and reporting on periodic basis while
also working towards issuing the update to the NEEAP beyond Bylaw No (73) also
mandates energy audits for all large consumers The JREEEF and JCI have targeted
financing programmes for energy audits; however, the penetration has been
limited  key challenge has been that the bylaw outlines that MEMR bear
responsibility for reviewing the audits, but MEMR has limited capacity to review
thousands of energy audits annually Shifting this responsibility to entities
with sufficient capacity, such as JISM, may be considered • Incentivise
compliance with JGBG in Jordan’ building sector Support insulation inspection
for new construction in co ordination with the UNDP’ ongoing programme in Jordan
thermal • Improve compliance with energy audit requirements for large industry
consumers MEMR should ensure that multiple licensed and specialised entities are
available to specific industries to undertake the audits For buildings, the
building codes issued by the National Building Council need to be enforced The
JGBG was issued in 2013, with an incentive programme for the adoption of green
buildings being approved in Meeting Level  of the JGBG is equivalent to abiding
by all the codes Despite Jordan’ comprehensive energy • Develop capacity within
the industrial sector to implement energy efficiency (and renewable energy)
measures Based on findings from energy audits, consider development of industry-
specific benchmarks and best practices 63 • Encourage the adoption of energy-
efficient equipment in industries with due consideration for their market
competitiveness Addressing the integration challenge will require  wide range of
actions to improve overall system flexibility in the short-, medium- and long-
term In Jordan’ context, these include building and upgrading transmission and
distribution infrastructure, deploying battery and pumped-hydro storage,
promoting incentivising demand-side management, electrification of end-uses
These measures cannot be pursed in silos and must form part of  holistic
strategy to improve the flexibility of the power system to integrate higher
shares of renewables Several tools are now available to analyse the flexibility
needs of  power system (, IRENA’ FlexTool) and identify the least-cost
flexibility solutions and integrate within the strategy • Scale up the adoption
of energy-efficient streetlights and inefficient residential lighting, building
on the programmes being undertaken by municipalities and MEMR replacement of and
• Introduce dedicated regulations and codes for combined heat and power
applications that can substantially increase energy efficiency by building on
existing pilot projects  dedicated heat law would enable NEPCO to sell heat as
commodity as with electricity, thus equipping itself with the ability to supply
industrial areas with electricity and heat through combined heat and power The
integration challenge requires  wide range of actions to improve system
flexibility These include building and upgrading transmission and distribution
infrastructure, battery and pumped-hydro storage, promoting demand-side
management, and incentivising electrification of end-uses  Plan for the
integration of higher shares of renewable power The share of electricity from
renewables in Jordan’ power mix has grown rapidly over the past decade Concerns
have emerged over the ability of the power system to integrate renewable shares
well beyond 25%, resulting in the suspension of new projects over  MW and no
additional direct proposal rounds since The integration challenge is further
exacerbated by slow electricity demand growth and the nature of “take or pay”
PPAs with conventional IPPs, resulting in capacity charges and adding to
integration costs Figure Innovative solutions in power system Information ﬂow
Interconnections Aggregators Distributed generation Battery storage Smart
metters Smart charging GENERATION TRANSMISSION DISTRIBUTION PROSUMERS Source:
IRENA (2019c) 64 • Identify priority areas within the distribution network –
especially in industrial zones – with high congestion, in the short-term
Mobilise investments to strengthen infrastructure and unlock further network
capacity to integrate renewables and other loads such as from electric vehicle
charging stations Action : Strengthen national transmission and distribution
infrastructure The lack of transmission and distribution infrastructure capacity
to handle higher shares of renewables is  key hurdle to further growth
Strengthening networks involves the development of dedicated transmission
corridors between areas with high concentrations of renewable energy projects
and load centres, upgrades to existing distribution infrastructure to
accommodate higher shares, as well as improvements in grid management to reduce
losses and enable active load management • Increase the rate of penetration of
smart meters to improve grid management, building on the successes of
distribution companies such as IDECO • Upgrade NEPCO control centre and,
building on rollout of smart meters, issue regulations and bylaws for smart grid
implementation These measure should be led by EMRC, in consultation with NEPCO
and the distribution companies, to improve grid monitoring and maintenance and
thereby to reduce losses and downtime As seen in the case of the yet-to-be-
commissioned Green Corridor project for transmission of renewable power from the
south of the Kingdom, the development timeframe for such infrastructure is long
(usually five to six years) Therefore, long-term planning is needed to align the
timelines of infrastructure development with those of new utility-scale projects
and load centres (, industrial zones) to ensure power is evacuated in  timely
way With the Kingdom faced with sluggish demand growth and high capacity
factors, measures for demand creation and enhancement of regional electricity
trade building on existing agreements The majority of the net metering and
wheeling projects connect to the distribution grid, large parts of which are
congested Strengthening distribution networks, coupling generation with storage
and adopting digital technologies (, smart meters, supervisory control and data
acquisition [SCADA] systems) can support integration of higher shares of
renewables These measures can also allow effective load management, which is
necessary with large-scale electrification of end-use sectors such as transport
• Develop  strategy for data and knowledge management to leverage data emerging
from smart meter rollout and better understand consumption Such data form the
bedrock for the implementation of smart grids and facilitates reaping the full
benefits of grid digitisation Action : Introduce storage code for grid
management at the transmission and distribution level Storage brings substantial
value for grid management as  stand-alone asset as well as when integrated with
renewable power supply Battery and pumped- hydro storage can reduce the
variability of renewables, increase self-consumption (even enabling “zero-to-
grid“ installations in some cases), reduce peak-load demand and allow load-
shifting When deployed as part of  holistic strategy, storage also has the
potential for reducing the investment needs in transmission and distribution
infrastructure to integrate higher shares of electricity from renewable energy
Recommended actions: • Upgrade the transmission network and system management to
manage future increases in the share of renewable energy and electrification of
end-uses Other ministries related to industry, agriculture, transport and water
are crucial for identifying regions with existing and upcoming power demand
potential While Jordan has had  23 MW/MWh Li-ion solar-battery project operating
since February 2019, the main shortcoming for the future growth of storage in
the Kingdom is the lack of  regulatory framework to support large-scale
deployment at the generation, transmission, distribution and end-user levels The
current scope of energy storage projects is largely utility-scale, with high
untapped potential for combining storage with distributed renewables in
buildings (public, private and commercial), and small and medium-sized industry
The regulation is important to guide investments in storage with private sector
participation, as well as to create • Expedite the commissioning of the Green
Corridor for transmission of renewable power generation from the south of the
Kingdom Greater focus is infrastructure requirements in the east for future
renewable energy projects needed on transmission • Continue to focus on regional
infrastructure development to facilitate electricity trade, building on recently
signed agreements with different countries 65 market mechanisms for storage
solutions to provide additional grid services related to demand response, ramp
controls, ancillary services and power quality integration infrastructure
investment At present, there is no peak-load strategy, which leads to expensive,
flexible generation (, diesel, oil-fired generators) being procured during high-
load times to balance demand and supply This increases the overall cost of
electricity supply and, if passed on to consumers, would be reflected in rising
consumer tariffs Recommended actions: • Conduct  comprehensive flexibility needs
assessment to identify least-cost storage solutions, including battery storage,
pumped-hydro needed at the transmission, distribution and end-user levels, and
supply-side flexibility (, CSP with molten salt storage) Further demand-side
management measures could shift parts of the load to non-peak times of the day
with use of incentives such as time-of-use tariffs With the growth in demand for
electric vehicles, for instance, offering lower charging tariffs during high
solar generation/low-load times (11  to  ) can facilitate load shifting and
reduce peak load demand At the same time, the cost of charging can be
substantially higher during off-peak solar periods, leading to increased
revenues for the electricity companies • Formulate  dedicated storage code to
provide the regulatory guidance for the development of battery storage
infrastructure at the generation, transmission, distribution and end-user-levels
and instructions to connect to the grid The actions have to be taken by MEMR and
EMRC in consultation with the system operator (NEPCO), distribution companies
and other stakeholders with relevant experience Recommended actions: • Develop
and implement  renewable energy peak- load strategy to address peak demand in
buildings and industry through solar PV and storage, when competitive with
expensive peaking plants • Integrate utility-scale and distributed energy
storage into the overall Energy Sector Master Strategy, including targets, which
clarifies the services storage can provide within the power sector (, spinning
reserve, arbitrage, load- shifting, peak shaving) and the remuneration models •
Set targets for renewable energy and storage to meet  certain share of peak-load
demand • Assess the feasibility of time-of-use tariffs to facilitate demand
shifting low-load periods Incentivising electric vehicle charging and high
industrial loads during low-load/high- renewable generation periods with low
tariffs, and correspondingly higher tariffs during high-load periods, can
support integration efforts • Prioritise the development and financing of
combined renewable energy and storage projects in regions where grid congestion
is high and low- cost energy supply is  priority (, industrial zones, SMEs,
public buildings) towards • Take steps towards the implementation of  project in
collaboration with the Ministry of Water and Irrigation Building on outcomes of
the assessment of reservoirs for developing pumped-hydro storage conducted under
the EU-funded Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency II Programme • Create new
demand streams from electric water heaters In Oregon,  smart grid enables water
heaters to be fitted with  two-way communication response system such that
“fleet” of water heaters can be used as  virtual battery (Routefifty, 2020)
Action : Improve load management through demand side solutions  Incentivise the
use of renewables for heating and cooling The increasing share of variable
renewable power in Jordan’ electricity mix will require active measures to match
(existing and new) demand and supply in an optimum manner that reduces overall
system costs (, need for peaking plants) and incremental As discussed in earlier
chapters, the power sector accounts for less than  quarter of Jordan’ final
energy consumption Increasing the share of domestic resources in the Kingdom’
energy mix and reducing the cost of energy requires  stronger focus on the 66
use of renewables for meeting energy needs for heat across different end-use
sectors The use of renewables to meet heating energy needs has largely involved
solar water heating systems for domestic applications and, to  lesser extent,
concentrated solar heating solutions to provide process heat in industry Despite
successful programmes, there is still large untapped potential for renewables
use for heating/cooling improving insulation of school buildings, among other
infrastructure upgrades The programme has the potential to be scaled up to
include other public buildings and households faced with energy poverty
Recommended actions: • Develop  clear, long-term solar water heater penetration
strategy for the domestic, commercial and industry sectors backed by targets
building the programmes on implemented in 2018 and The data collected from the
sales of such systems should be collected and reported regularly as part of the
Annual Report of the MEMR Action : Support greater adoption of renewable
solutions in industry and buildings learned lessons from Solar water heating
applications remain the most mature form of renewable use for heating/cooling,
mainly in the domestic sector The solar water heater programmes in Jordan have
successfully installed over 26 000 systems (as of 2018), and these should be
supported to continue deployment in the domestic sector Some of the challenges
faced include the lack of targets for deployment, lack of enforcement of
mandates and codes, and absence of long-term financial incentive programmes for
end-users • Develop  programme for incentivising and enforcing existing and new
facilities that are using conventional boilers for heat (, in swimming pools and
industrial processes) to shift towards renewable energy • Address enforcement
challenges by developing  mechanism to improve compliance with existing mandates
through  combination of penalties, incentives and creating sufficient capacity
within institutions (, training of staff/inspectors on the use of Monitoring,
Reporting and Verification (MRV) protocols) There is also substantial untapped
potential across other end-use segments such as commercial and public
infrastructure (, hotels, swimming pools) This is also the case in industry,
with CSP and CSH solutions meeting process heat needs Several installations are
already in place in pharmaceutical and tobacco plants, among others In industry,
such solutions have the potential to substantially reduce the need for
traditional fuels such as LPG, electricity and coal On the one hand, awareness
of the economics and applications of renewable heat in industry and commercial
sectors is limited on the part of both end- users and local vendors • Implement
the JGBG (Level ), which includes compliance with all mandatory building codes •
Support capacity building of architects for the development of solar roofs •
Gather data from industries using renewable energy solutions, including CSH and
water heaters, industry-specific techno-economic to conduct feasibility studies
to increase awareness and inform target setting On the other hand, there is
lack of  dedicated heat bylaw to provide long-term targets for various renewable
heat applications across domestic, industry and commercial sectors and to lay
out the mechanisms for deployment The enforcement of the Bylaw for Energy
Efficiency and the Jordanian Code for Thermal Insulation, among others, plays
complementary role by reducing loads and sizing of systems, as well as by
facilitating energy audits and raising awareness • Improve awareness among local
suppliers and energy-based manufacturers on applications, heating/cooling
specifically in industry renewable technology Given Jordan’ climatic conditions,
meeting heating and cooling requirements in areas faced with energy poverty is
key challenge • Make accessible and affordable infrastructure for testing and
certification of technology through specialised entities such as the RSS Quality
marks and logos, such as the SHAMCI developed for solar water heaters jointly by
MEMR, NERC, JSMO and RCREEE, need to be devised for various technological
applications The Royal Initiative for Heating in Schools represented an
important step to tackle this challenge, utilising distributed for delivering
heating and cooling services, while also renewable solutions energy 67 • Build
on the success of the Royal Initiative for Heating in Schools by expanding the
coverage of renewable energy solutions among buildings and households where
energy poverty is prevalent The development of charging infrastructure –
critical feature of the electric vehicle ecosystem – has lagged EMRC was the
first in the region to introduce instructions for licensing electric vehicle
charging stations in 2014, but their rollout has not kept pace with the
requirements necessary to meet  rapidly growing market segment There is an
urgent need to improve the business case for private sector participation in
charging infrastructure development in partnership with distribution companies
and municipalities  Support renewable options for transport and mobility The
transport sector is the largest energy consumer in Jordan and is reliant mainly
on crude oil derivatives such as diesel and gasoline Government efforts to
decrease energy use in the sector have primarily relied on incentivising high
efficiency vehicles, including non-plug-in hybrids and fully electric vehicles
While the adoption of hybrid and electric vehicles has grown rapidly over the
past few years, they still represent  small share of the overall transport fleet
Rapidly scaling up the use of hybrid and electric vehicles will require
holistic approach that focuses on different vehicle segments, concurrent
charging infrastructure development and smooth integration with the grid
Additionally, other domestic energy sources also need to be tapped, including
gaseous and liquid biofuels, as well as green hydrogen in the long-term The
rapid growth of electric vehicle adoption offers both challenges and
opportunities Incentivising electrification of the transport sector provides the
benefit of coupling with cost-effective renewable power and addressing slow
electricity demand growth However, increasing charging load during non-solar
peak hours will place additional burdens on the grid Through measures such as
time-of-use pricing, charging can be incentivised to take place during low- load
hours and peak solar PV generation With smart metering and digitisation,
electric vehicles also have the potential to participate actively in providing
grid services, including storage Action : Start to diversify energy use in the
transport sector To harness these opportunities, however,  long-term energy
diversification strategy for the transport sector is necessary that also
considers other alternatives such as biogas for large municipality vehicles and
green hydrogen The Ministry of Transport will be the nodal agency at the
national level responsible for integrating alternate mobility solutions within
the national transportation strategy Experience from emerging economies is now
available on designing holistic electric vehicle policies that include long-
term targets (by segment), incentives for vehicles, models for private and
public charging infrastructure development, vocational training, and research
and development Furthermore, end-of-life management of batteries also needs to
be considered for sustainable recycling and disposal The absence of such
strategy and the lack of  clear roadmap with targets and siloed policies are
substantially slowing down the energy transition in the transport sector To
reduce reliance on imported fuels and tackle environmental pollution, the
government has since 2008 offered varying levels of incentives to support the
adoption of hybrid and electric vehicles This resulted in the purchase of over
30 000 such private vehicles by the end of However, this represents  small
fraction of the overall fleet of road transport in the Kingdom The adoption of
electric vehicles remains highly sensitive to fiscal incentive schemes
introduced by the government, and sales have fluctuated with changes in policy
The economic and environmental case for electrifying fleet vehicles, in
particular public buses and fleets, is stronger than the case for private
vehicles It offers the opportunity to benefit from economies of scale, higher
utilisation of vehicles and displacement of polluting vehicle stock (, public
buses) Aside from initiatives taken by various municipalities, there is
presently no incentive or regulation that encourages the shift Furthermore,
awareness of the techno- economic and environmental opportunity presented by the
electrification of fleets is limited This lack of awareness potentially impacts
key decisions related to upcoming public transport procurements, including the
Amman Bus Rapid Transit Recommended actions: • Devise  long-term energy
diversification action plan for the transport sector in line with Jordan’ Master
Strategy for the Energy Sector and the Long-Term National Transport Strategy18
The plan should include targets for an appropriate mix of alternative fuels such
as renewable electricity, liquid and gaseous biofuels, as well as green 68
hydrogen Such  strategy should be backed by stable policies and incentives
municipality vehicles) and green hydrogen for segments of the transport sector,
such as large freight, for which electrification is not feasible • Develop
holistic electric vehicle policy to facilitate adoption and reduce air pollution
The policy should include targets and stable incentives for the electrification
of public transport, fleets and private vehicles and address charging
infrastructure development and capacity building for &  Catalyse Renewable
Energy investment With the expansion of the renewable energy sector since 2012,
investment flows have grown rapidly, reaching  cumulative USD  billion by the
end of 2019 (MEO, 2020) The bulk of investments have been from international
sources, involving both commercial and development finance Several factors have
limited the mobilisation of domestic financing for the sector These factors
include  lack of capacity and skills within local banks to project-finance
utility-scale renewable energy projects, the scale of investments required, and
the ability of international project developers to secure more attractive
capital from external sources However, with strong support from donors and
development finance institutions, local commercial banks and co-operatives have
played  catalytic role in the implementation of public financing schemes for
small-scale renewable energy applications, such as rooftop solar PV and solar
water heaters, through the CBJ and the JREEEF programme Financing has also been
made available to conduct energy audits in large energy consumers • Introduce
mandates for large fleet owners to transition to electric vehicles and put in
place adequate measures to facilitate the transition, building on the experience
of GAM • Conduct  comprehensive techno-economic and environmental assessment of
electric public buses and undertake pilot projects to inform decision- making
regarding upcoming public transport procurements • Identify the most appropriate
business models for rapidly scaling up public and private charging
infrastructure development led by the private sector, distribution companies (as
non-core business) and municipalities • Integrate electric mobility within the
Jordan National Building Code, incentivising existing and new buildings to
develop necessary infrastructure for distributed charging To scale up renewable
energy adoption, much greater levels of domestic capital will need to be
mobilised in both the utility-scale and distributed power sectors, as well as in
transport and heating/ cooling sectors Substantial investments will also be
needed in energy efficiency and complementary infrastructure development, such
as electric vehicle charging infrastructure, transmission and distribution
grids, and storage With  strong track record of international financing
institutions participating in Jordan’ renewable energy sector, focused attention
is needed to increase the capacity of local financing institutions to mobilise
greater capital for the sector • Adapt the licensing instructions issued by EMRC
in 2014, as well as the electricity tariff structures for charging stations to
improve the business case for private sector investments • Adopt  holistic
strategy to effectively integrate electric vehicles into the power system by
offering low-cost tariffs for charging during peak solar PV between 11  and
Furthermore, devise an electric vehicle-to-grid strategy that integrates
electric vehicles into providing grid services, including storage and demand-
shifting, enabled by smart metering and digitisation Action 10: Build the
capacity of local financing insitutions and project developers • Plan for end-
of-life management of lithium-ion batteries with increasing electric vehicles
and associated capacity building, including re-use for stationary electricity
storage applications (stand- alone or grid-connected applications) local banks
are co-financing While some large projects with multilateral development banks,
local financial institutions are still not very actively involved with utility-
scale renewable energy financing This is especially true of financing related to
projects that • Support the development of alternative fuels such as liquid and
gaseous biofuels (, for large 18  69 require larger volumes of investment,
longer tenor and unique documentation Over time, capacity is being developed as
understanding of the sector improves On-lending and risk mitigation facilities
by including multilateral development banks and national development banks, can
play  key role in increasing the experience of local banks and mobilising larger
shares of domestic capital for renewable energy development national development
banks, to establish co- lending and risk mitigation facilities to increase the
experience and exposure of local banks to the renewable energy sector
international financing institutions, • Design capacity-building initiatives for
developers on the preparation of bankable project proposals and business plans
covering renewables, energy efficiency and emerging (, storage) technologies
Beyond financing renewable energy projects, large investment needs exist for
energy efficiency (, LED lighting, industrial equipment replacements) and
complementary infrastructure development (, distributed storage, electric
vehicles, charging infrastructure) The distributed nature of these investments
means that local financing institutions will have to play  fundamental role in
designing financing products to meet these investment needs For instance,
vehicle financing departments within banks must consider dedicated lending lines
for electric vehicles, home loan financing to be linked with rooftop solar and
enterprise financing with energy efficiency investments The lack of capacity
within local banks to understand emerging financing opportunities strongly
inhibits their ability to design tailored products and services for various
consumers • Consider lending requirements for local banks to meet in certain
priority sectors, including renewable energy Action 11: Improve access to public
financing programmes To support the implementation of Law No 13 of 2012
concerning the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law and subsequent
revisions, several public financing schemes have been established with the
involvement of the CBJ, JREEEF, co-operatives, commercial banks and donors The
CBJ’ concessional financing facility is delivered through commercial banks for
an amount up to JOD  million  challenge faced in accessing the financing is that
the loans can be accessed only by end-consumers and not by the project
developers themselves Some end-consumers are unwilling to take on debt leading
to less uptake, while the programme also does not benefit from portfolio lending
to project developers Other challenges faced by project proponents are the
varying levels of awareness among local bank branches on the terms of the
programme and their capacity to evaluate proposals in  timely manner Finally,
the due diligence standard applied while assessing project applications is the
same, irrespective of the magnitude of financing sought, leading to long lead
times and higher transaction costs for smaller projects Capacity gaps also exist
among developers and proponents of renewable energy projects The limited skills
to prepare project documents, develop business plans, undertake accurate project
costing and seek financing are low-quality proposals reaching financing
institutions leading to Recommended actions: • Develop the capacity of green
lending units in local commercial banks with regard to renewable energy and
energy efficiency as well as new technologies infrastructure, (, storage,
electric charging energy efficiency in industries) The increased capacity should
implementation improve the of programmes from JREEEF and CBJ, as well as access
to additional international financing (, climate finance) This can be undertaken
in collaboration with the Association of Banks Regardless, the CBJ concessional
lending facility has received  strong response and has played  catalytic role in
developing projects not large enough for project financing and yet not small
enough for alternative financing programmes by JREEEF and donors Tailored
lending facilities with higher investment limits and provisions for allowing
portfolio lending could play  crucial role in accelerating the deployment of
renewables and energy efficiency across sectors (, in industry, commercial,
transport) • Increase awareness among financing institutions (including branches
of banks) on the scope of technologies covered under various financing
programmes • Encourage institutions, international financing including
multilateral development banks and JREEEF’ scope of coverage applies to small-
scale 70 is systems and largely capitalised by domestic funds and contributions
from international financing institutions and donors JREEEF has successfully
implemented  number of financing programmes covering solar water heaters;
rooftop solar for households, public buildings and commercial entities; heating
for schools; and energy audits for industry In implementing the financing
programmes, JREEEF has partnered with several entities including CBOs for
installing over 20 000 solar water heaters In the next phase of the programme
for solar water heaters, JREEEF is partnering with commercial banks, which is
presenting challenges given the lack of awareness and capacity within banks to
implement small-scale lending programmes industries and job creation Renewable
energy technologies offer the opportunity to reduce the cost of energy in
Jordan, while also contributing to energy security and environmental
preservation objectives The benefits of the energy transition can be maximised
by ensuring the active participation of the local renewable energy industry,
thus contributing to job creation and wider socio- economic benefits Jordan’
renewable energy industry has strong foundations, with hundreds of registered
companies employing several thousand people across different segments of the
value chain Targeted actions can ensure that local industry has the right
ecosystem to provide the diverse products and services needed for the energy
transition in Jordan, as well as on the regional and global scale Recommended
actions: • Design tailored lending facilities with higher investment limits and
provisions for allowing portfolio lending to support deployment across specific
sectors (, in industry, commercial, transport) in partnership with development
finance institutions and building on the experience of the CBJ programme Action
12: Leverage capacity from other sectors and maximise renewable energy job
creation  renewable energy-based energy transition offers the opportunity to
develop new manufacturing and non- manufacturing industries and generate
employment opportunities Achieving these benefits requires  broad mix of
policies beyond those that focus on deployment alone These include, for
instance, industrial policies, skills development, and research and development
• Develop differentiated due diligence standards for proposals seeking financing
from commercial banks depending on the size of the project to reduce time and
transaction costs for smaller projects • Introduce sector-specific funding
facilities for renewable energy applications, such as solar water heaters,
building on the JREEEF experience and under various models such as ESCO The
Kingdom has implemented several initiatives to support local industry
development, including the introduction of local content requirements The
existing domestic manufacturing base for renewables is strong in some areas –
modules, cables, mounting structures and solar water heaters – with several new
opportunities (, solar water heating with PV, single axis tracking and bifacial
modules) • Design incentives for renewable energy solutions based on
instruments, such as revolving funds, that reduce uncertainty for the private
sector and consumers and contribute to long-term market development Lessons can
be drawn from the implementation of the revolving fund for solar water heaters,
such as in the projects of Co-Water in Ajloun and Deir Alaa to face local
enterprises continue However, several challenges  key determinant of domestic
manufacturing’ attractiveness is the size of the local and export market At the
local level, abrupt policy changes, in particular the suspension of new projects
over  MW, have negatively impacted the market growth potential of local
enterprises The updated Master Strategy for the Energy Sector is expected to
offer clarity for domestic and international investors to plan for capacity
augmentation locally, as well as product/service diversification to cater to
local and regional markets While  local content regulation is in place,19 its
definition, effectiveness, and influence on cost and quality need to be closely
assessed • Increase awareness among consumers on the new programme launched by
JREEEF for solar water heaters in October • Ensure capitalisation of existing
funds, such as international long-term market JREEEF, utilising domestic and
financing development support to  Strengthen local renewable energy 71 Industry,
Trade and Supply The master plan should identify future skills needs across the
renewable energy value chain, including manufacturing and &, as well as
complementary technologies such as battery storage and electric vehicles Aside
from the manufacturing of renewable energy technologies, several new
opportunities for value creation exist These range from various &, design,
engineering and financial services to the development of new solutions such as
industrial automation, smart metering and hydrogen infrastructure  key challenge
for the sector is also building adequate skills to meet the needs of  rapidly
growing renewable energy sector Identifying future skills needs and partnering
with training institutes, universities and industry are important steps for
developing curricula and delivering quality training for the workforce Skills
development and training opportunities should be equally accessible to both men
and women, with  view towards greater participation of both genders in the
renewable energy workforce • Focus on education and training programmes and
partnerships between universities and industry to ensure skills availability in
the sector Action 13: Raise awareness and strengthen the information base on
renewable energy The lack of awareness among different stakeholders on the
costs, benefits and opportunities of renewable energy solutions is  key
impediment for the expansion of the sector The sector is rapidly evolving, with
costs falling and new technologies and applications emerging for residential,
commercial, industry and transport end-uses, leading to information asymmetry
among policy makers, industry and consumers This directly impacts effective
decision-making and the uptake of renewable energy solutions despite  strong
economic case for adoption Lack of awareness is also seen among consumers
regarding existing policies and financial incentives offered by the government
Integrating much higher shares of variable renewables, creating end-user
awareness, changing behaviours and fostering the ability to adopt new
technologies (, electric vehicles) will be crucial for successfully diversifying
Jordan’ energy mix Recommended actions: • Devise  comprehensive industrial
policy providing  vision for the development of  robust local industry
(manufacturing and non-manufacturing, including &) around renewable energy,
energy efficiency and complementary solutions (, storage, smart grids, green
hydrogen) • Provide  longer-term outlook for renewables demand to enable the
private sector to plan for capacity augmentation and product/service
diversification • Review existing public procurement processes to identify
design features, such as origin of equipment requirements, that present
challenges for local suppliers to participate in the sector Access to up-to-date
data is important for planning, effective decision-making and developing
awareness programmes Yet disaggregated data related to energy use and
consumption at the subsector level is not easily accessible In industry, for
instance, access to plant-level energy use data can be instrumental for national
and regional benchmarking, for informing planning processes at the national
level as well as for assessing the viability of renewable energy and energy
efficiency measures The enforcement of requirements for energy audits under the
Energy Efficiency Bylaw No (73) for the year 2012 already provides  sound basis
to gather standardised data disaggregated at the industry level • Strengthen the
export incentives available for local renewable energy products and services,
building on regional agreements such as the Joint Arab Market • Assess how local
content regulations and their definition, effectiveness, and influence on cost
and quality can be optimised • Develop innovation hubs and pilot projects to
address solutions needed for renewable energy integration across sectors to
build knowledge and experience Recommended actions: • Convey the convincing
business case for renewable energy in Jordan and its long-term socio-economic
and environmental benefits This key message should be effectively communicated
by both • Create  national master plan for the development of local job creation
in the renewable energy industry in collaboration with the MEMR, the Ministry of
Higher Education and Scientific Research, the Ministry of Labour, the EMRC and
the Ministry of 19 Currently set at 35% for utility-scale solar PV and 20% for
wind projects 72 governmental and local-level decision makers such as those at
MEMR, the Ministry of Environment and other relevant institutions • Design
tailored public awareness raising campaigns around the available renewable
energy options, their costs and benefits, as well as accessible financing
schemes • Design focused outreach programmes and campaigns aimed at high
potential end-user groups, such as in industries, commercial businesses (,
hotels), residential and water sector, to share opportunities for renewables
adoption supported with case studies of benefits realised • Increase outreach
through media and public information agencies on the socio-economic and
environmental benefits of renewable energy • Strengthen the data and information
base on energy use at the subsector level, especially in industry By law, the
Department of Statistics is authorised to gather data; for industry,
collaborative effort with MEMR and the Chamber of Industry and Commerce is
needed to conduct  nationwide effort to standardise and gather industry-specific
energy data 73 References Abu-Dayyeh,  (2015), From energy mess to energy
management: Jordan as  case study (), Friedrich- Ebert-Stiftung, Amman,  Ali
Ayasrah,  (2018), Overview of the potential for renewable energy in the
industrial sector in Jordan, Energy and Environmental Sustainability Unit,
Jordan Chamber of Industry,  ALRahahleh,  (2018), “The current situation of the
renewable energy in Jordan”, Publications of Karelia University of Applied
Sciences : Reports, 54, Joensuu, Finland,  Al-Sallami,  and  Al-Hinti (2017),
“Potentials and barriers of energy saving in Jordan’ residential sector through
thermal insulation”, Jordan Journal of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
Vol 11/, pp ,  Barilaro,  (2019), Waste-to-energy outlook for Jordan, EcoMENA,
Bank of Jordan (2017), Bank of Jordan and JREEEF sign cooperation agreement,
Bank of Jordan,  Bellini,  (2019), Jordan renews solar rebates for residential
PV, pv magazine,  Bellini,  (2018), Jordan gets $265 million loan to improve
grid capabilities, integrate more solar, pv magazine,  Bloomberg New Energy
Finance (2019a), Energy storage investments boom as battery costs halve in the
next decade,  Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2019b), Climatescope 2019: Emerging
markets outlook 2019,  Carvalho,  (2018), Abu Dhabi’ Masdar seals $188 mln
funding for Jordan solar project,  emirates-jordan-renewables/abu-dhabis-masdar-
seals-188-mln-funding-for-jordan-solar-project-idUSL8N1PC3RP Chan,  and  Kantner
(2019), Employment trends, challenges and opportunities for refugees in Jordan,
Abdulla Al Ghurair Foundation for Education, Dubai,  Scope/BNEF (2019), Clean
energy investment – Jordan,  CRES (2008), Market analysis study – Jordan,
Solarbuild - WP3,  Delhi Department of Transport (2018), Delhi Electric Vehicle
Policy 2018,  EBRD (2016), EBRD supports solar power in Jordan, European Bank of
Reconstruction and Development,  EBRD (), Risha solar PV project, European Bank
of Reconstruction and Development,  Economic Policy Council (2017), Jordan
Economic Growth Plan 2018 2022,  EDAMA (2020), The future of the renewable
energy sector in Jordan following COVID-19 (in Arabic), EDAMA Association,  74
EDAMA (2019a), The Cabinet Resolution on suspending approvals for renewable
energy projects, EDAMA Association,  Renewable-Energy-Projectspdf EDAMA (2019b),
Decentralized solar in Jordan: Streamlining administrative procedures to
maximise socio-economic benefits, EDAMA Association,
Europe_EDAMA_Decentralised-Solar-in-Jordanpdf EDAMA (2019c), Renewable energy
sector opportunities & challenges, EDAMA Association,  EIB and IRENA (2015),
Evaluating renewable energy manufacturing potential in the Mediterranean Partner
Countries, European Investment Bank and International Renewable Energy Agency,  
Agency/Publication/femip_study_evaluating_renewable_energy_manufacturing_potenti
al_enpdf El Issa,  (2017), Reasons behind the mushrooming of electric cars on
Jordan’ roads [&], Wamda,  EMRC (2015), Renewable energy regulatory tools &
directives, Energy and Minerals Regulatory Commission,
pdf?IDUNI=hz2iavexeyuhmnk1qiwnzbxz42 Fairbanks,  (2019), Jordan’ Nepco: An end
to operating losses?, MEES,  finance/jordans-nepco-an-end-to-operating-
losses/0f28d890-83a8-11e9-885a-4d6a9a764eb2 Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung (2019),
Recommendations on -mobility in Jordan,  GGGI (2018), Sustainable transport in
Jordan: GGGI makes the case for electric BRT buses in Amman, Global Green Growth
Institute,  Ghazal,  (2016), Jordan signs deal for coal-fuelled power plant,
Hall,  (2020), Jordan switches off unsubisidized solar projects, pv magazine,
Hamzeh,  (2018), Developing and implementing EE programs for the household
appliances and the refrigeration and air conditioning sector (MENA region),  IEA
(2020), Energy policies Jordan, International Energy Agency,  the-sale-of-
electrical-energy-generated-from-renewable-energy-systems-net-metering (2017),
Electricity Energy IEA Agency,  Capita&mode=chart&dataTable=INDICATORS capita,
World consumption International 2017, 1990 per IEA-SHC (2019), Solar heat
worldwide: Global market development and trends report 2018, International
Energy Agency Solar Heating & Cooling,  IMF (2019), Jordan – Sector review, IMF
Country Report No 19, International Monetary Fund,  Infrastructure Journal
(2013), Jordan launches Round  of direct proposals process for renewable energy,
Renewable-Energypdf IRENA (2020a), Power sector planning in Arab countries:
Incorporating variable renewables, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu
Dhabi,  75 IRENA (2020b), Electricity storage valuation framework: Assessing
system value and ensuring project viability, International Renewable Energy
Agency, Abu Dhabi,  (2020c), Renewable power generation costs in 2019,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  (2020d), Global renewables
outlook: Energy transformation 2050, Middle East and North Africa regional
factsheet, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,
Apr/IRENA_GRO_R07_MENApdf?la=en&hash=B8636B0BE086FE7033F120A6E9AA385F21A48747
IRENA (2019a), Renewable energy auctions: Status and trends beyond price,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA (2019b), Long-term
energy scenarios for the energy transition, International Renewable Energy
Agency, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2019c), Innovation landscape for  renewable-powered
future: Solutions to integrate variable renewables, International Renewable
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2018a), Power system flexibility for the energy
transition, Part : Overview for policy makers, International Renewable Energy
Agency, Abu Dhabi,  Power_system_flexibility_1_2018pdf IRENA (2018b), Hydrogen
from renewable power: Technology outlook for the energy transition,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2017), Renewable energy
benefits: Leveraging local capacity for solar PV, International Renewable Energy
Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA and ESCWA (2018), Evaluating renewable energy
manufacturing potential in the Arab region: Jordan, Lebanon, United Arab
Emirates, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  Evaluating-
renewable-energy-manufacturing-potential-in-the-Arab-region IRENA, IEA and REN21
(2018), Renewable energy policies in  time of transition, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development/International Energy Agency and REN21 Jordan Department of
Statistics (2020a), Department of Statistics homepage,  (accessed  April 2020)
Jordan Department of Statistics (2020b), % GDP growth rate at constant prices in
the third quarter in 2019,  Jordan Department of Statistics (2020c), % the
unemployment rate during the fourth quarter of 2019,  Jordan Department of
Statistics (2019), Statistical Yearbook of Jordan 2018,  Jordan Times (2020a),
NEPCO begins gas pumping trial run from Noble Energy,  Jordan Times (2020b),
Jordan to harness solar energy to power street lights — Zawati,  Jordan Times
(2020c), Industrial sector to benefit from solar energy scheme,  Jordan Times
(2019a), Oil shale power station to generate 15% of Jordan’ electricity needs by
next May,  76 Jordan Times (2019b), JREEEF implements JD50m worth of renewable
energy projects in four years – Zawati, www jordantimescom/news/local/jreeef-
implements-jd50m-worth-renewable-energy-projects-four-years-—-zawati JREEEF
(2020), Solar water heaters community based programme – Equator Prize 2020
nomination submission, Jordan Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund,  JTI
(2018), Unlocking our growth potential: Jordan factory & project overview, JTI,
Khaberni (2019), Zouati: Replacement of 150,000 home lighting units (in Arabic),
(2017), Jordan positioning itself as  leader in EVs in the MENA region,
LafargeHolcim (2017), LafargeHolcim signs agreement to construct  solar power
plant in Jordan,  Laylin,  (2012), MENA Geothermal’ largest system in the Middle
East is complete,  Maisch,  (2017), Fotowatio reaches financial close for 133 MW
Jordan solar projects, pv magazine,  Marar,  (2019), Renewable Energy Program
Workshop, jordan_-_memr_-_marrar_0pdf in Jordan presentation at ESCWA REGEND
Project  MEDENER (2019), 300 solar water pumps for Jordanian farmers,  MEMR
(2019a),Energy 2019 – Facts & Figures,  MEMR (2019b), Energy 2019 – Facts &
figures, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources,  MEMR (2019b), Energy
balances (), Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources,
echobusv3/SystemAssets/0edac322-4a88-405c-ac43-61714753b730pdf MEMR (2019c),
Within the Royal School Heating Initiative (in Arabic), Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources,  Middle East Online (MEO,2020), Jordan making strides in
renewable energy production,  Mercy Corps (2017), Market system assessment of
the olive oil value chain: Irbid and Mafraq governorates, Jordan,  (2019), Solar
outlook report 2019, Middle East Solar Industry Association,  MESIA (2018),
Schools Heating Program / His Majesty’ Initiative implemented by JREEEF wins
Best MENA Project Award of 2018, Middle East Solar Industry Association,
majestys-initiative-implemented-by-jreeef-wins-best-mena-project-award-of-2018/
NEPCO (2020a),  new record for electrical load, National Electric Power Company,
An Agreement to Increase the Electric Energy Exported, National Electric Power
Company,  77 NEPCO (2020c), % is the increase in electricity exports in 2019,
National Electric Power Company,  (2019a), NEPCO Annual Report 2018, National
Electric Power Company,  NEPCO (2019b), Bulletin, National Electric Power
Company,  NEPCO (2019c), NEPCO and Fajr sign agreements to supply Phosphate
Company and Nuqul Group with gas, National Electric Power Company,  (2018),
NEPCO Annual Report 2017, National Electric Power Company,  Reuter’ Events
(2015), Jordan PV tariffs drop 50% in second tender round,  Norwegian Refugee
Council (NRC) (2020), Personal communication, Lama Gharaibeh Rahim,  and  Eid
(2017), Energy projects in Jordan,  projects in Jordanpdf RCREEE (2020), Jordan
adopts SHAMCI mark and certificate for solar thermal products: Granting
instructions issued in official gazette, Regional Center for Renewable Energy
and Energy Efficiency,  adopts-shamci-mark-and-certificate-solar-thermal-
products-granting-instructions-issued RES4Med (2019), Scaling-up renewable
energy development in Jordan, Renewable Energy Solutions for the Mediterranean,
Jordanpdf Royal Hashemite Court (2020), King stresses importance of quick
economic recovery from COVID-19 impact,  Royal Hashemite Court (2015), King
orders providing public schools with central heating,  Routefifty (2018), How
the humble home water heater could play big role in storage,  cities/water-
heaters-power-grid-storage/ (accessed 14 September 2020) Saudi,  and  Swarieh
(2015), Geothermal energy resources in Jordan, country update paper,  Solar
Concentra (2017), Solar heat for industrial processes,  Solar-
ConcentraGT_Media_TemperaturaSituación-MercadoSHIP_pdf Tawalbeh, ,  Abusamaha
and  Al-Salaymeh (2020), “Demand side management and its possibilities in
Jordan”, Journal of Ecological Engineering, Vol 21/,  UNFCCC (2015), Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC), United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,  First/Jordan INDCs Finalpdf
UNHCR (2020), Jordan: Innovation in refugee response and protection, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,  UNHCR (2019a), Global Strategy for
Sustainable Energy:  UNHCR Strategy 2019 2024, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees,  UNHCR (2019b), Jordan – Fact Sheet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees,  78
sites/default/files/UNHCR%20Jordan%20Fact%20Sheet%20-%20November%202019_0pdf
USAID (2015), National Household Load Survey Report 2015, United States Agency
for International Development,  USGS (2019), 2015 Minerals Yearbook – Jordan,
United States Geological Survey,  Vinter  and  Norman (2019), Jordan – Back to
the future, Project Finance International,  Wartsila (), IPP4 – engine-solar PV
hybrid: Jordan 250 MW Smart Power Generation + 46 MW solar PV,  Weiss,  and
Spörk-Dür (2020), Solar heat worldwide: Global market development and trends in
2019,  Willuhn,  (2019), Orange Jordan adds 37 MW of solar under ‘wheeling’
scheme, pv magazine,  World Bank (2019), GDP growth (annual %) – Jordan, World
Bank database,  World Bank (2017), Over 200 innovative start-ups in Jordan to
benefit from early stage financing,  org/en/news/press-
release/over-200-innovative-start-ups-in-jordan-to-benefit-from-early-stage-
financing Xinhua (2019), Jordan announces measures to boost economy, ration
spending,  Zawaydeh,  (2018), Green Building rating system in Jordan,  Zeidan,
(2019), New gov’ measures in automobile sector will primarily benefit citizens,
news/local/%E2%80%98new-govt-measures-automobile-sector-will-primarily-benefit-
citizens%E2%80%79                   THE HASHEMITE        KINGDOM OF       JORDAN
:                            February 2021 80 Please adjust the spine based on
the   thickness of the inside pages