 GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF BOTSWANA NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY MINISTRY OF
MINERAL RESOURCES, GREEN TECHNOLOGY AND ENERGY SECURITY APRIL 2021 Foreword This
National Energy Policy (NEP) is intended to guide the management and development
of Botswana’ energy sector, especially the penetration of new and renewable
energy sources into the country’ energy mix in order to attain energy self-
sufficiency and increased security of supply The NEP is expected to create
conducive environment that will not only facilitate investment in the energy
sector but also add value to export revenues, facilitate production in other
sectors of the economy and create employment within the energy sector It also
sets  foundation that will steer the utilization of locally available energy
resources optimally and efficiently to ensure that Botswana attains  sustainable
and low carbon economic development Botswana has experienced some constraints in
the energy sector in recent years, which to some extent have negatively impacted
on the country’ economic development prospects  devastating power supply and
demand mismatch was encountered between the years 2008 and 2014, and this
breached the country’ power supply security This encounter, and other such
misfortunes have motivated this Policy to outline the principles, prospects and
choices that are required to optimise the role of energy in the economy and
maximise Botswana’ potential for the desired economic growth in line with the
country’ Vision The NEP contributes towards achievement of national prosperity
and economic diversification It envisages Botswana’ transition from being  net
energy importer to being self-sufficient and having surplus energy for export
into the region Botswana has got strong relations with her neighbours in the
SADC region and has been involved in  number of regional energy-related
initiatives to promote regional integration This Policy recognises the need for
the country to continue seeking regional synergies, which will enable it to
pursue sovereign development objectives The Policy also advocates for the need
to harmonise Botswana’ key policies in order to promote competitiveness,
increase access to regional and global markets and to enable socio- economic
development for all Batswana Effective implementation of this Policy requires
legislation and/or regulations for robust development of the new and renewable
energy subsector,  powerful communication strategy to manage public anxiety and
expectations and  prominent institutional framework that will drive the sector
development Therefore,  strategic plan and  policy monitoring framework will be
designed in this regard to aid continued work and consultations with key
stakeholders throughout the policy implementation process  Table of Contents
Foreword   List of Tables  iii List of Figures  iii Abbreviations & Acronyms  iv
Glossary of Terms  vi Executive Summary  viii  INTRODUCTION    POLICY FOUNDATION
The Rationale    The Formulation Process   AN OVERVIEW OF THE ENERGY SECTOR
Organisational Setup and Regulatory Framework   Electricity Subsector    The
Petroleum Subsector    Key Local Energy Resources    Coal and coal bed methane
Solar and wind energy potential   Biomass and waste energy potential    Energy
Conservation and Demand Side Management    The Global Context 10  Energy and
environment 10  Energy and gender  10  THE FRAMEWORK OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY  11  Policy Guiding Principles  12  Economic development  12  Equity  12
Environmental Responsibility  12  The Policy Direction  13  The vision and
overall policy goal  13  Policy objectives  13  Policy Issues and Related Policy
Statements  14  Electricity subsector  14  Petroleum subsector  15  Coal and
coal bed methane  16  Renewable energy  17 ii  Biomass and waste energy  17
Energy efficiency and demand side management  18  Energy and environment 19
Energy and gender  19  Energy research and development  20 10 Information
management and planning  20 11 International cooperation 21 12 Monitoring and
evaluation  21  POLICY STATEMENTS AND RELATED HIGH LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION
STRATEGIES  22  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEP  30  Actors involved in policy
implementation  30  Capacity development for transition  31  Investment in the
energy sector development  31  Convergence with other government policies  31
Communication and awareness raising  31 List of Tables Table : Regulatory
instruments governing the energy sector   Table : The NEP policy statements,
objectives and high level strategies for 2020 - 2040  22 List of Figures Figure
: An overview of the NEP development process   Figure : Actual and projected
domestic electricity generation and imports for 2010 –   Figure : Liquid fuels
consumption for 2010 – 2019 period   Figure : Cumulative effect of efficiency
improvements in Botswana Source: Danish Energy Management (2018)   Figure : The
Botswana energy sector actor arrangement  30 iii Abbreviations & Acronyms BEMP
Botswana Energy Master Plan BERA Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority BOBS
Botswana Bureau of Standards BOL Botswana Oil Limited BIH Botswana Innovation
Hub BITRI Botswana Institute of Technology Research and Innovation BIUST
Botswana International University of Science and Technology BPC Botswana Power
Corporation BUAN Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural Resources CBM
Coal Bed Methane CFL Compact Fluorescent Lamp CTL Coal to Liquids DOE Department
of Energy GEF Global Environment Facility GHG Greenhouse gas IEP Integrated
Energy Planning IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency JICA Japan
International Cooperation Agency LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas MCM Morupule Coal
Mine MDG Millennium Development Goals MJ Mega joules Mtpa Metric tonnes per
annum MJ/m² Mega joules per square metre MMEWR Ministry of Minerals, Energy and
Water Resources MMGE Ministry of Minerals Resources, Green Technology and Energy
Security MSW Municipal Solid Waste MW Megawatt iv MWh Megawatt hour MOCs
Multinational Oil Companies NDC Nationally Determined Contributions NDP National
Development Plan NEES National Energy Efficiency Strategy NEP National Energy
Policy NESC National Electricity Standard Connection NGO Non-Governmental
Organisations NRSE New and Renewable Sources of Energy OECD Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development PV Photovoltaic RSEB Renewable Energy
Strategy of Botswana SACU Southern African Customs Union SADC Southern African
Development Community SAPP Southern African Power Pool SDGs Sustainable
Development Goals SWH Solar Water Heater UNDP United Nations Development
Programme  Glossary of Terms  number of terms are used in this document and
their meaning, as they appear in this document, is as defined below; Affordable
measure of the cost relative to the amount that the purchaser is able to pay and
the consumer’ capacity to afford the commodity Energy access Access to
electricity in the context of this document is determined by; (number of
households connected) (average number of heads per household) National
population Bio-energy Final energy carrier produced from biomass or any other
organic material, waste or otherwise Clean energy Energy source that causes
minimal or no pollution to the environment when consumed Cooperative
cooperative is an autonomous association of persons who voluntarily cooperate
for their mutual social, economic, and cultural benefit Cooperatives include
non-profit community organizations and businesses that are owned and managed by
the people who use its services and/or by the people who work there Economies of
scale The increase in efficiency of production as the number of goods being
produced increases Typically,  company that achieves economies of scale lowers
the average cost per unit through increased production since fixed costs are
shared over an increased number of goods Energy security  condition in which the
economy has access to sufficient energy resources for the foreseeable future at
an acceptable risk level Energy policy  set of policy decisions and actions
adopted by the Government and the legislators, to lead the development of the
energy sector in the country over the upcoming decade The policy can be amended
as the to implementation progresses international and environmental conditions
and requirements After its adoption, the energy policy is to be delineated into
legal dispositions, investments (infrastructures, production, transport,
distribution, governance and economic measures) and projects to achieve its set
goals  substance (energy form) or sometimes  phenomenon (energy system) that
contains energy that can be later converted to adapt Energy carrier vi to other
forms such as mechanical work or heat or to operate chemical or physical
processes Gas Refers to all gaseous fuels excluding liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) Integrated energy planning Integrated energy planning involves estimating
how much energy all the different sectors (for example industry or households)
will need in the future to deliver certain services; and then identifying  mix
of appropriate sources and forms of energy to meet these energy service needs in
the most efficient, socially beneficial and sustainable manner Acceptor of
market prices as  result of the inability to influence them Price taker Reserve
margin Available capacity over and above capacity needed to meet normal peak
demand levels Self-sufficiency To be able to maintain oneself or itself without
outside aid hence minimising imports by increasing the use of indigenous energy
resources Sustainable Long-term maintenance environmental, economic encompasses
the responsible management of resource use responsibility which dimensions of
and has and social vii Executive Summary  Introduction Since 1985, Botswana’
energy sector developments have been guided by the Botswana Energy Master Plan
(BEMP), which was last reviewed in Since this last review, developments have
progressed without any primary guiding instrument for almost 15 years now This
National Energy Policy (NEP) therefore, outlines the government’ intents for an
effectively harmonized development and management of the energy sector post the
BEMP period It is founded on three guiding principles being economic
development, equity and environmental protection, with  view to contribute
towards achievement of National Prosperity, Sustainable Economic Development and
Sustainable Environment in line with the country goals outlined in the Botswana
Vision 2036 and the eleventh national development plan (NDP 11) These two
documents are the country’ core high level planning instruments for the period
and  respectively The custodian of the NEP is the Ministry of Mineral Resources,
Green Technology and Energy Security and its implementation is spearheaded by
the state-owned utilities; Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) for electricity and
Botswana Oil Limited (BOL) for liquid petroleum fuels Regulation matters are
handled by the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) Other actors involved
in the sector include private sector, academia and research institutes, non-
governmental organisations and communities  Situational Analysis Electricity
Subsector For  long time, Botswana used to import almost 80% of her electricity
from neighbouring countries, mainly from the Republic of South Africa Currently,
the country’ installed generation capacity stands at 732MW (600MW from Morupule
and 132MW from Morupule ) against  peak demand of 600MW An additional capacity
of 160MW also exists two diesel-generated peaking plants Both Morupule  and
Morupule  power plants have not operated at full capacity since 2018 due to
varying challenges hence local generation still does not meet the local demand
Coal is the main source of electricity generation in the country, followed by
diesel However, Botswana has ample renewable energy potential to augment
generation from coal Currently, solar energy contributes insignificantly to
electricity generation despite the abundance of the resource There is also wind
and coal bed methane potential which have not been fully explored The NEP
acknowledges that Botswana is capable of being self-sufficient in electric power
supply by utilizing the locally available energy resources optimally viii
Petroleum Fuels Botswana is highly reliant on imports of refined petroleum
products to meet the liquid fuels demand since the country does not have any
proven crude oil reserves/refineries By far,  large amount of liquid fuels
supply comes from South Africa As at 2018, the local consumption of petroleum
products stood at about  billion litres per annum for petrol, diesel and
illuminating paraffin combined, and about 20 million litres of aviation fuels
per annum The strategic storage capacity for liquid fuels stands at
approximately 18 days of national consumption against the international standard
strategic storage capacity of 90 days Commercial buffer stock stands at less
than  days of national consumption against the standard of 14 days’ cover The
adopted modes of transporting petroleum products are rail and road which are not
economic for the country The industry is dominated by multinational oil
companies and the prices for petrol, diesel and illuminating paraffin are
controlled by the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) This Policy
acknowledges the importance of increasing security of supply of petroleum
products, facilitating the participation of local companies and ensuring that
petroleum products are priced in  manner that will satisfy the players in the
industry Energy Resource Availability Botswana has abundant coal resources,
estimated at about 212 billion tonnes Estimates of 196 trillion cubic feet of
coal bed methane (CBM) have also been recorded and there is ongoing exploration
of this resource Most of the coal extracted goes to power generation at Morupule
power plant and the remaining small percentage is shared between local
industrial use and export For CBM, commercially viable gas exploration is
required to firm up resource quantification and associated development programs
around this resource Botswana receives over ,200 hours of sunshine per year,
with an average insolation on  flat surface of 21MJ/m2 Satellite images have
revealed that Botswana has abundant countrywide irradiation presenting the
highest values of direct normal irradiance (DNI) and global horizontal
irradiance (GHI) the western and south-western regions, with  slight decrease
towards the east The lowest values of irradiation are in  range of about ,000
kWh/m²/annum (~, kWh/m²/day) DNI and GHI on average This amount of insolation is
among the highest in the world, making solar energy  promising renewable energy
resource for Botswana Reasonable wind speeds exist within the country with the
highest wind resources potential located in the South-West, Central and Eastern
parts of the country, with averaging wind speeds above 7m/, wind power density
above 200W/m2 and annual energy production above  GWh/year The wind potential
has not been fully explored and has primarily been used on windmills for water
pumping by farmers Botswana has theoretical biomass energy potential of 32
million GJ per year, estimated from  considerable biomass potential of 20
million tonnes per year The use of livestock residues (cow-dung) seems to offer
the highest practical opportunity for energy production ix in Botswana, while
municipal solid waste (MSW) can also contribute to the improvement of energy
generation, especially at the city level Other residues such as crop and agro-
industrial residues, only offer  limited energy potential that could be tapped
by rural communities  feasibility study for production and use of biofuels in
Botswana has revealed the potential for liquid bio-fuels production; mainly
biodiesel from Jatropha curcas and ethanol from sweet reed Effective energy
efficiency and conservation measures can save Botswana  significant amount of
energy, especially from the demand side management point This can offset carbon
emissions from the country’ coal dominated power generation The NEP seeks to
promote and facilitate optimal usage of available energy resources to increase
access to modern energy services to power economic growth and improve the
livelihoods of Batswana Energy and the environment Botswana is  party to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Having adopted
the Paris Agreement, in 2015 the government has made  voluntary commitment
through its first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to reduce the
country’ total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 15% by the year 2030, with
reference to 2010 emissions Furthermore, the country is working towards
providing affordable and clean energy to its general population in order to
align with UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals, especially SDG7 The
policy acknowledges that Botswana is bound to formulate and implement policies
that protect the environment and improves human livelihoods Energy and gender In
Botswana it is estimated that 55% of households are headed by women Batswana
women play  predominant role the informal sector, mostly in subsistence
agriculture This sector is unstable and limits their chances of economic
empowerment hence most female- headed households are poor because they do not
have access to or control over productive resources The government is thus
focusing on mainstreaming gender into its operations in order to realize gender
equality and empowerment of women This NEP recognises the different energy needs
of men and women and calls for the inclusion and consideration of these gender
differences into energy strategies and programmes during formulation and
implementation  Energy research and development Like it is in most countries,
energy is the most contributing sector to Botswana’ greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions Studies conducted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) have
demonstrated that the most effective way to reduce atmospheric emissions
requires  transition from reliance on conventional fuels to increasing the use
of renewable energies and improving energy efficiency of energy systems  number
of solutions are being explored in this regard Since energy transition does not
take the same form in each country, each individual country ought to develop its
own unique transition pathway because country situations vary The energy
transition process involves fundamental changes in the existing structures,
cultures and practices of  societal systems Since the energy sector depends
highly on new technologies, it is important to accumulate knowledge that can be
converted into technological progress and innovation in order to effectively
transform Botswana’ energy system This Policy recognises that innovation and &
plays  critical role in shaping energy transition pathways and supports energy
research and development Energy planning and data management Energy planning
entails the process of developing long-range policies to help guide the future
of the energy system For Botswana, this process is conducted within government
although to some extent the state-owned entities like BPC can also carry out
this kind of planning Ideally, planning ought to be carried out with input from
different stakeholders drawn from government agencies, private sector or
industry, academia, and other major actors in the energy sector Botswana has
adopted the integrated energy resource planning (IEP) approach, which considers
both the provision of energy supplies in order to attain energy self-sufficiency
Considering that energy planning should always reflect the outcomes of
population growth and economic development, it is critical to have sufficient
data in hand to carry out relevant planning The NEP acknowledges that there is
inadequate energy planning in the country and seeks to support development of an
energy data management system that is required to facilitate the desired
integrated energy planning xi  The Policy Direction The Vision of this Policy is
to create an energy system that would ensure secure and reliable supply of
modern energy services for all the sectors of the economy and to significantly
reduce energy-related atmospheric emissions by the year The overall Goal of the
NEP is to provide energy security for the country and to improve access to
reliable and adequate supply of energy in order to facilitate  sustainable and
low carbon economic development This NEP acknowledges that any future
developments in the energy sector of Botswana will be shaped by the realities of
the past development performances of the sector, the availability of energy
resources and the global context within which the government operates On this
note, 20 Policy Statements have been crafted in this regard Specific objectives
have been deduced for each Policy Statement to guide enactment, and the
objectives are further broken down into high level implementation strategies
Table ES1 presents the NEP policy statements xii Table ES1: The policy
statements for Botswana’ national energy policy Subsector Policy Statement P1
Electricity will be generated optimally from locally available energy resources
to meet local demand and to ensure self-sufficiency P2 Transmission and
distribution infrastructure will be enhanced to facilitate economic growth and
universal access to electricity P3 Electricity tariffs will be cost-reflective
in order to balance the interests of the investors, consumers and the
environment P4 Petroleum products will be sourced and stored in  reliable and
sustainable manner to ensure security of supply P5 Prices for petroleum products
will be set in  manner that will balance the interests of suppliers, retailers
and consumers P6 Citizen participation in the petroleum subsector will be
facilitated to ensure economic countrywide supply of fuels P7 Adequate primary
transport and secondary distribution infrastructure will be provided to increase
access to petroleum fuels P8 Measures will be put in place to exploit the vast
coal resources using clean coal technologies in order to derive maximum benefit
for sustainable economic diversification P9 An enabling environment will be
created in order to facilitate investments and to fast-track developments in the
gas sector P10 The government will support and facilitate the development of on-
grid and off-grid solar in order to increase the contribution of solar energy in
the energy supply mix P11 The government will explore the potential for wind and
facilitate wind power development  Electricity  Petroleum Fuels  Coal and Coal
Bed Methane  Solar & Wind Energy  Biomass & Biofuels P12 The Government will
ensure sustainable and efficient use of wood fuel to reduce resource and to
protect the environment P13 Initiatives related to production and use of energy
derived from biodegradable materials to offset the country’ carbon footprint
xiii P14 Energy efficiency and conservation initiatives will be supported with
view to minimize energy wastage and to offset emissions from conventional power
generation  Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management  Energy & the
environment  Energy gender P15 Energy extraction, production, transport and use
will be done with minimal negative impacts on human health and on the
environment P16 Gender mainstreaming in the energy sector will be promoted to
ensure alignment of gender concerns with appropriate health, safety and
environmental standards P17 Research and development will be intensified to
guide effective harnessing of the country’ indigenous energy resources and
efficient production and use of energy P18 An effective integrated energy
planning will be ensured in order to achieve optimal use of locally available
resources to drive sustainable economic growth and low carbon development
Energy Research and Development  Information Management & Planning
International Cooperation  Monitoring & Evaluation P19 The NEP will promote
regional energy trade and international cooperation in the energy sector P20
There will be continual monitoring, regular review and evaluation of the impact
of various policy positions and provisions to ensure that these remain relevant
xiv  INTRODUCTION Botswana’ energy sector developments have, since 1985, been
guided by the Botswana Energy Master Plan (BEMP) The BEMP was subsequently
reviewed in 1996 and 2002, and ever since the end period of the last review,
Botswana’ sector development has progressed without any overarching guiding
instrument for more than 15 years To date  lot has transpired in the energy
sector coupled with critical challenges centred mainly on the need to; increase
access to modern energy services, provide affordable energy services, increase
energy security, and deliver energy products and services in  manner that would
not harm the environment As such,  national energy policy is required to ensure
that Botswana effectively addresses these challenges This is the National Energy
Policy (NEP) of Botswana It is outlined as follows: Section  presents the Policy
foundation; Section  gives an overview of Botswana’ energy sector Section
outlines the policy framework which presents the policy guiding principles, the
policy vision, goal and objectives as well as underlying policy issues and their
related policy statements Section  summarises the policy direction as it
outlines the policy objectives and the related high level strategies that will
facilitate toe government to realize these objectives  POLICY FOUNDATION  The
Rationale The National Energy Policy (NEP) outlines the government’ intents for
an effective development and management of the energy sector going forward It
gives  framework for the principles, prospects and choices that are required to
optimise the role of energy and maximise Botswana’ potential for  sustainable
economic development The NEP contributes towards achievement of national
prosperity and economic diversification in line with the goals outlined in the
Botswana Vision 2036 and the eleventh National Development Plan (NDP 11) Aligned
to the pillars of Vision 2036, the NEP seeks to contribute towards Sustainable
Economic Development and Sustainable Environment by ensuring optimal usage of
locally available energy resources This will be realised through the extraction
and beneficiation of available energy resources, distribution and transmission
thereof and the sustainable utilization of the available energy Further, in
order to facilitate transformation from an upper middle-income country to  high-
income country by 2036 as stipulated in the Vision, the NEP builds  foundation
for an energy sector that is relevant and competitive at national, regional and
global levels by exploiting new opportunities that are provided by globalization
As the first medium term plan towards the implementation of Botswana’ Vision
2036, the NDP 11 () is built on the theme ‘inclusive growth for the realisation
of sustainable employment creation and poverty eradication’ to be realised
through six national priorities This theme was informed by the development
challenges faced by the country during implementation of NDP 10 hence calling
for strategies to promote growth and create employment opportunities in the
economy Amongst the six national priorities outlined in NDP 11, those that are
directly linked to energy sector development are; economic diversification,
social development and sustainable use of natural resources With regards to
this, the NEP presents opportunities to diversify the economy by promoting
business in the energy sector, increasing national access to modern energy
services and ensuring that energy resources are exploited in  sustainable manner
The Formulation Process When the BEMP period came to an end, the then Ministry
of Minerals, Energy and Water Resources (MMEWR) tasked the Department of Energy
(DOE), which is the organ responsible for coordinating developments in the
energy sector of Botswana, to oversee and steer the process of developing the
country’ energy policy The DoE drafted the Terms of References for the policy
and appointed  consultancy team to assist with the stakeholder engagement
process and development of the policy The output of the consultancy was  zero
draft National Energy Policy, which highlighted the main policy challenges that
needed to be addressed in the to-be developed energy policy Figure  shows the
process of the NEP development Figure : An overview of the NEP development
process The zero draft NEP was shared with key energy stakeholders including
government ministries, the private sector, non-governmental organisations, and
the research and academic institutions for their approval and ownership
Incorporating of their comments gave rise to the first draft NEP One key element
that was highlighted in the  first draft NEP was to establish  national oil
company hence in 2013 Botswana Oil Limited (BOL) was established This came prior
to tabling of the First Draft before the National Parliament This therefore,
called for another review to take into account new developments that had taken
place, including formation of BOL This review was done by  Policy task Force
that was appointed by the Permanent Secretary of MMEWR The Task Force
constituted representatives from Botswana Institute for Development Policy
Analysis (BIDPA), BOL, Botswana Power Corporation (BPC), Department of Water
Affairs (DWA), Department of Meteorological Services-Climate Change Unit,
Attorney General’ Chambers (AGC), and was led by the DOE The resulting document,
the second draft NEP was then approved by Cabinet in August This second draft
NEP was then tabled in the National Parliament sitting of November 2016 but was
not debated as Parliament had to address other pressing matters at the time It
was deferred for resubmission at  later date In 2018, whilst awaiting to take
the draft to Parliament again, the Ministry facilitated the development of two
subsector strategies towards acceleration of green technology development and
low carbon energy development The Renewable Energy Strategy of Botswana (RESB)
and the National Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) were developed in The
outcomes of these strategies as well as the changes that took place in the
sector motivated  further review of the draft to prepare the final draft NEP
version for tabling before the National Parliament in July  AN OVERVIEW OF THE
ENERGY SECTOR  Organisational Setup and Regulatory Framework The Ministry of
Mineral Resources Green Technology and Energy Security (MMGE) through the DOE,
as the government organ responsible for directing and coordinating overall
developments in the energy sector, is the NEP custodian The DOE is the lead
policy-making authority of Government on all energy supply and demand matters
The Department is responsible for, among other things;  Development of policies,
strategies and plans that ensure national energy security ii Rural
electrification planning, funding and implementation iii Defining procurement
and off-take of responsibilities for new generation iv Setup and administration
of various energy funds  Import control of petroleum products The DOE is
reinforced by state-owned entities in implementing its mandate, mainly through
government-supported projects and programs Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) is
the country’ state-owned power utility, which is mandated to generate, transmit
and distribute electric power Currently, BPC owns and operates the country’
major power stations, Morupule  and  coal-fired plants, as well as the
transmission grid The Electricity Supply Act (ESA) was amended in 2016 to allow
for Independent Power Producers (IPPs) participation in the generation of power
However, BPC enjoys the monopoly for transmission and distribution of electric
power The national oil company, Botswana Oil Limited (BOL) ensures security of
supply of petroleum products, operation and management of the government
strategic petroleum reserves and is also mandated to promote citizen
participation in the petroleum fuels value chain The Botswana Energy Regulatory
Authority (BERA) on the other hand handles regulatory issues of the entire
energy sector BERA currently regulates the technical and economic aspects of the
electricity sector, administers licences for sector activities and makes
recommendations to the Minister of MMGE regarding issuance of licences With
regards to petroleum fuels, BERA regulates pump prices, issuing of licenses and
granting of permits for construction of new facilities and ensures that that
service standards are met In the absence of an Energy Act, the Botswana energy
sector is currently governed by  number of statutory instruments, some not
specific to energy Table  shows some of these instruments which guide activities
in the sector Table : Regulatory instruments governing the energy sector
Subsector Guiding statutory instrument Electricity Electricity Supply Amendment
Act, BERA Act and BPC Act Oil and Gas Oil and Gas Bill, Safety Guidelines, and
BERA Act Biomass & biofuels Forest Act (Chapter 38:03), BOBS standards, Biofuels
Guidelines Solar BOBS Standards, Rooftop Guidelines Coal BERA Act, The Coal
Roadmap This NEP recognises that in order to ensure effective implementation of
the policy,  national energy act will be required to provide for  number of
matters  Electricity Subsector Since the BEMP period, the government of Botswana
has been striving for self- sufficiency in electricity For  long time, about 80%
of Botswana’ electricity was imported from neighbouring countries, especially
from the Republic of South Africa (RSA) until the commissioning of Morupule
power plant in Currently, most of the country’ electricity requirements comes
from local generation through  state-  owned entity, Botswana Power Corporation
(BPC) Figure  shows an increasing trend of domestic electricity generation
versus declining amounts of imported electricity over   year period 12000
Generation Import 10000 8000    6000 4000 2000  2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 Year Figure : Actual and
projected domestic electricity generation and imports for 2010 – 2040 Botswana’
current total electricity demands stands at about 4505 GWh This demand comprises
demand from all economic sectors including mining, industry, service sector and
households The demand is expected to grow up to 8637 GWh by the year 2040,
growth that is proportional to the growth of the economy (average GDP growth of
%) Against this demand, Botswana has got two coal thermal power plants,
(Morupule  and Morupule ) and two diesel-operated peaking plants,
(Matshelagabedi and Orapa) Morupule , whose lifetime ends in 2026 delivers on
average around 35 GWh electricity per annum Morupule  Power plant, which was
commissioned in 2014, has not worked to its full capacity, and to date gives
around GWh of electricity on annual basis The plant is under remedial works,
expected to be complete by the year Successful completion of these works will
increase generation from Morupule  plant to the expected 05 GWh annually Orapa
has an installed capacity of 90MW and Matshelagabedi 70MW All these four
generation plants are operated by BPC Due to Morupule  and  having not been
operating at full capacity due to their varying challenges, local demand could
not be fully satisfied As such, there are instances when the Orapa and
Matshelagabedi generation plants are operating on fulltime basis as opposed to
being used as peaking plants to augment the supply shortage Where the peak
demand cannot be met, the shortages are augmented through imports from Southern
African Power Pool (SAPP) mainly Republic of South Africa and Namibia These
imports are not only costly to the economy, but are also compromising the energy
security of the country  The overall national electricity access rate is sitting
at 58% (56% in urban areas, and 60% in rural) In order to increase access to
electricity, the Government is engaged in  Rural Electrification Programme,
which was established in 1975 to facilitate new connections and grid network
extension In 2010 the National Electricity Standard Connection Cost (NESC) was
introduced with  view to increase household connections to the grid NESC is
uniform cost for new household connections within the boundaries of  network
supply area which eliminates situations whereby customers in the same supply
area would pay different connection amounts depending on their proximity to the
electricity backbone infrastructure  The Petroleum Subsector Botswana has no
proven crude oil reserves and no crude oil refineries hence highly reliant on
imports of refined petroleum products to meet the liquid fuels demand By far,
large amount of supplies comes mainly from RSA and the rest from alternative to
enhance security of supply routes Procurement, supply and distribution of the
products is done by the private sector, which is largely comprised of the
multinational oil companies including Namibia and Mozambique As at 2018, the
local consumption of petroleum products (petrol, diesel and illuminating
paraffin) stood at about  billion litres per annum and about 20 million litres
of aviation fuels per annum The annual average rate of increase in petroleum
products demand stood at approximately % between 2006 and 2017 as presented in
Figure  00 00 00 )  00    (  00    00 00 00 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
2017 2018 2019 Year Petrol Diesel Paraffin Figure : Liquid fuels consumption for
2010 – 2019 period  The petrol, diesel and illuminating paraffin prices are
regulated by the Botswana Energy Regulatory Authority (BERA) whilst the price of
other products such as aviation fuel and LPG are currently not regulated
although the Act provides for their regulation The strategic storage capacity
for liquid fuels stands at approximately 18 days of national consumption against
the international standard for strategic storage capacity of 90 days In the same
vein, commercial buffer stock currently stands at less than  days of national
consumption against the preferred minimum of 14 days cover At present, rail and
road is used for transportation of petroleum products Since the liquid fuels
industry is about economies of scale, dividing the already small demand into
many small import ‘parcels’ results in very high import prices for the country
Key Local Energy Resources Botswana has  variety of indigenous energy resources
that can be exploited to satisfy the local demand Amongst these are coal,
natural gas (coal bed methane), solar potential, wind potential, biomass
potential, and waste  Coal and coal bed methane Botswana’ coal resources are
estimated at 212 billion tonnes and currently only  have been proven, namely;
Morupule, Mmamabula coal basins with  combined capacity of  billion tonnes There
are currently only two coal mines in operation, Morupule Coal Mine (MCM) and
Minergy Coal (Pty) Ltd Most of the coal produced at MCM goes to power generation
at Morupule power plants and the rest is shared between local industrial use and
export, with Minergy’ coal shared between the local industry and export market
In 2011 the National Coal Roadmap was developed and it made some recommendations
for monetization of Botswana coal The gas industry is still at early development
stages in Botswana but the industry presents an opportunity for supply of clean
thermal energy solutions Estimates of 196 trillion cubic feet of coal bed
methane (CBM) have been recorded and exploration is ongoing Commercially viable
gas exploration is required to firm up resource quantification and associated
development programs which can transform Botswana’ social and economic landscape
Solar and wind energy potential Taking into account the importance of limiting
activities that could harm the environment as stated in Botswana’ Vision 2036,
the NEP recognizes the need to harness the available renewable energy resources
potential as they have little negative impact on the environment Botswana
receives over ,200 hours of sunshine per year, with an average insolation on
flat surface of 21MJ/m2  Again, satellite images have revealed that Botswana has
abundant countrywide irradiation presenting the highest values of direct normal
irradiance (DNI) and global horizontal irradiance (GHI) the western and south-
western regions, with  slight decrease towards the east The lowest values of
irradiation are in  range of about ,000 kWh/m²/annum (~, kWh/m²/day) DNI and GHI
on average This amount of insolation is among the highest in the world, making
solar energy  promising renewable energy resource for Botswana By far, small
scale solar PV systems for lighting and refrigeration have been installed in
some households and in some government institutions located in areas that are
not connected to the national grid The tourism industry is also making use of
solar to power guest lodges and camps in some major tourist sites, like the
Okavango Delta The largest grid-connected solar plant is  3MW solar PV pilot
plant which was commissioned in 2012, funded by the Government of Japan There
also exists about 600 decentralised PV systems across the country producing an
estimated amount slightly more than 26MW Reasonable wind speeds exist within the
country with the highest wind resources potential located in the South-West and
Eastern parts of the country, with averaging wind speeds above 7m/, wind power
density above 200W/m2 and annual energy production above  GWh/year The wind
potential has not been fully explored and has primarily been used on windmills
for water pumping by farmers  Biomass and waste energy potential Botswana has
theoretical biomass energy potential of 32 million GJ per year The estimates are
derived from  considerable biomass potential of 20 million tonnes per year, for
crop residues, agro-industrial residues, livestock residues (manure), municipal
solid waste (MSW), forest harvesting residues, wood processing residues and
energy crops for biofuels While forest harvesting residues represents almost 50%
of the total energy potential, most of these residues are already used as
fuelwood at household level The use of livestock residues (cow-dung) seems to
offer the highest practical opportunity for energy production in Botswana, while
MSW can also contribute to the improvement of energy generation, especially at
the city level Other residues such as crop and agro- industrial residues, only
offer  limited energy potential that could be tapped by rural communities
feasibility study for production and use of biofuels in Botswana was carried out
in 2007 and the study indicated the potential for liquid bio-fuels production;
mainly biodiesel from Jatropha curcas and ethanol from sweet reed Following
this, the Government collaborated with JICA on  scientific research to develop
Jatropha species that can adapt to Botswana’ climatic conditions for biodiesel
production On realization that Jatropha was not necessarily  viable feedstock,
the program was  reviewed to include other potential biodiesel feedstocks The
government has, through the Botswana Bureau of Standards (BOBS) developed
biofuels standards for Botswana  Energy Conservation and Demand Side Management
By default, energy systems are inefficient and waste  lot of energy at different
stages of the energy flow  large proportion of this wasted energy is not being
used due to  number of constraints Previously, some energy efficiency measures
have been employed in Botswana to reduce the amount of end-use electricity
consumption  step-tariff Model was introduced by Botswana Power Corporation in
2010 to encourage efficient use of electricity Again, efforts to reduce
electricity demand were initiated at household level These included replacement
of incandescent bulbs with compact fluorescent bulbs (CFLs) in selected
households and installation of devices to switch off geysers remotely during
peak hours Figure  shows the cumulative effects of efficiency improvements that
were obtained from such initiatives and other measures over  19-year period
Figure : Cumulative effect of efficiency improvements in Botswana Source: Danish
Energy Management (2018) According to Figure , the adoption of energy efficient
measures significantly reduced the total final energy consumption, although
improvements in efficiency were reversed due to fall-backs during 1998 and It is
reassuring to note that these efficiency improvements occurred in the absence of
any significant policy or regulatory measures imposed by the government In 2018,
the National Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) for Botswana was developed with
view to address barriers, resource limits, lack of  policy integration and
accountability with regards to adoption of efficiency measures in the energy
sector  The Global Context Botswana is  landlocked country with existing number
of strategic partnerships and commitments in the energy sector at regional and
international levels She is  member of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and the Interstate Oil Committee (IOC) under the Southern
African Customs Union (SACU) Through the SADC Energy Protocol, member states are
required to work towards regional integration and cooperation in energy
development and as part of this regional integration, Botswana is eligible for
electricity trading mainly via the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP)  Energy
and environment The current international environmental discussions and concerns
are centred on the need to address climate change and the issue of global
warming As  party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) and having adopted the Paris Agreement, Botswana is striving to reduce
atmospheric emissions to the atmosphere The government has submitted  voluntary
commitment through the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) to reduce total
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 15% by the year 2030, with reference to 2010
emissions Furthermore, the country is working towards providing affordable and
clean energy in line with Sustainable Development Goal number seven (SDG7)
Botswana is also  signatory of the Basel Convention which deals with the control
of transboundary movement of hazardous waste and its disposal Therefore, this
policy recognises the need for proper waste disposal from the energy sector as
well as handling of hazardous waste within the sector Through these Treaties,
Botswana binds herself to formulate and implement policies that protect the
environment  Energy and gender Generally, energy issues are of concern to all
However, women are one of the most important actors in the energy sector, in
terms of their contact, use and management of energy In Botswana it is estimated
that 55% of households are headed by women and the gender statistics show that
females in Botswana are less represented in the formal sector and over-
represented in the informal sector at 36% and 75%, respectively Batswana women
mostly play  predominant role in subsistence agriculture, perpetuated by wrong
cultural and traditional beliefs that the women’ role is child bearing and
looking after the family 10 The informal sector is unstable and limits their
chances of economic empowerment hence most female-headed households are poor
because they do not have access to or control over productive resources The
government is thus focusing on mainstreaming gender into its operations in order
to realize gender equality and empowerment of women In 1995, the government of
Botswana developed  policy on women and development in order to align its
national policies and legislation with regional and international obligations on
gender equity and equality However, despite some advancement, women in Botswana
still have less access to, and control over, productive resources than men This
includes less access to modern energy This Policy supports Gender mainstreaming
in the energy sector  THE FRAMEWORK OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Any future
developments in Botswana’ energy sector will be shaped by the realities of the
past development performance of the sector, resource availability and the global
context within which the government operates These inform the broad strategies
that will be adopted by the NEP to drive the development of the sector for the
next 20 years They also inform the baseline, targets and indicators that will be
used to measure progress towards the policy aspirations The global environment
is highly dynamic and is characterised by uncertainty in  wide range of
development parameters As such, new models of development are needed to operate
in such  dynamic world Sustainable development and low carbon development have
emerged globally as new paradigms that shape the global governments’ development
approaches The overall aim being mainly to balance the objectives of the social,
economic and environmental pillars of development and, where such balance is not
possible, to negotiate trade-offs among them at local, national and global
levels This new paradigm is pinned by two main global frameworks; () Agenda 2030
on Sustainable Development and its associated sustainable development goals
(SDGs), and (ii) the Paris Agreement on climate change and associated nationally
determined contributions (NDCs) Effective implementation of these frameworks
will transform the world’ markets, technologies and social systems to enable
them to serve the needs of the people, the environment and economies In the
regional context, there also exists some instruments that will shape the future
of the African continent, as well as development at the regional level These
will also influence Botswana’ future energy developments The Africa Agenda 2063,
whose vision is for an integrated, prosperous and peaceful Africa, driven by its
citizens and representing  dynamic force on the global arena is one such
instrument This 11 agenda is aligned to the global Agenda 2030 on sustainable
development The Southern African Development Community (SADC) region also has
regional development strategies which influence development in the region
Botswana’ energy sector is highly reliant on conventional fuels; coal for
electricity generation and petroleum based liquid fuels This NEP presents clear
high level plans and deliberate efforts to execute these plans towards
transformation of Botswana’ energy system towards achieving security of supply
and energy self-sufficiency by assuming an optimal energy mix that will drive
sustainable economic development This is characterised by  gradual increase of
clean energy, especially renewable energies, and improved efficiency into the
energy system to ensure sustainability  Policy Guiding Principles Taking into
account the global and regional transition with respect to energy development,
the challenges faced by the country’ energy sector, and in alignment with the
country’ Vision 2036 and national development plans, this National Energy Policy
is anchored on three main principles; economic development, equity and
environmental responsibility  Economic development Under this principle, the NEP
ensures that adequate modern energy services and products are accessible for
commercial activities Energy will be used to generate income for the economy as
key driver of economic diversification by powering the country’ economic
development activities  Equity This policy ensures that energy is accessible to
all, especially the low income and disadvantaged members of the community and
that energy services are provided in an equitable and universal manner
Environmental Responsibility Modern energy technologies that are less harmful to
the environment will be adopted An increase in renewable energy use and improved
efficiency of the energy system will be used as measures to offset the country’
carbon footprint 12  The Policy Direction  The vision and overall policy goal
The vision of this National Energy Policy is to create an energy system that
would ensure secure and reliable supply of modern energy services for all the
sectors of the economy and to significantly reduce energy-related atmospheric
emissions by the year The overall goal of the NEP is to ensure energy security
and to improve access to reliable and adequate supply of energy in order to
facilitate  low carbon and sustainable economic development for Botswana Guided
by the principles outlined in Section , this goal seeks to ensure that; () The
NEP supports and drives Botswana’ economic growth, (ii) The NEP improves the
lives and livelihoods of Batswana, and that (iii) The NEP protects the
environment and minimizes energy- related impacts on the environment  Policy
objectives This goal will be realised through the following high level
objectives;  To diversify the national energy mix by promoting renewable energy
sources, especially solar and clean coal technologies;  To support the
modernisation and expansion of energy infrastructure to meet the growing energy
demand;  To ensure equitable access to modern energy forms by the industry,
rural communities and the disadvantaged groups;  To provide effective governance
and improved overall management of the energy sector;  To ensure cost recovery
for energy supply and delivery through adoption of cost-reflective tariffs and
efficient modes of supply and delivery;  To establish an effective and
sustainable energy research and development platform that encourages innovation
and promotes development of local skills;  To facilitate effective stakeholder
engagement in the development of the sector;  To improve service delivery and
facilitate private sector investment in the energy sector;  To minimize the
impacts of energy supply and consumption on the environment through increase of
renewable energy in the supply mix and improved efficiency in energy use;  To
mainstream gender, age and socio-economic status issues in energy development
programs;  To provide reliable energy statistics to inform policy making and
planning; and To proliferate regional and international cooperation in energy
trade and overall  development of the sector 13 Subsequent to the above Policy
objectives, this NEP outlines  number of high level strategies that will guide
implementation towards achievement of these objectives and ultimate realization
of the Policy goal These strategies are presented in Section  of this document
Policy Issues and Related Policy Statements  Electricity subsector The current
electricity demand stands at 600 MW and is expected to reach 936 MW by
Currently, the installed generation capacity for Botswana stands at 732 MW from
coal and 160MW from diesel peaking plants, even though the country is still
faced with shortages of electric power This is mainly due to the poor
performance of Morupule  power plant and inadequacy of the distribution
infrastructure Even if operating at full-capacity, the current installed
generation capacity would not meet the demand in the coming years Considering
these challenges and to ensure security of supply, this Policy calls for
additional generation capacity to be developed through independent power
producers (IPPs) POLICY STATEMENT - P1 Electricity will be generated optimally
from locally available energy resources to meet local demand and ensure self-
sufficiency The Rural Electrification Programme is effectively connecting
Botswana’ villages to the national grid This policy recognises the need to
extend the electricity grid to all parts of the country in order to facilitate
economic activities To cater for villages and settlements that are located far
from the national grid, the Policy calls for them to be powered using renewable
energy decentralized off-grid systems since extending the network to these areas
is not cost-effective for the government POLICY STATEMENT – P2 Transmission and
distribution infrastructure will be enhanced to facilitate economic growth and
universal access to electricity For  long time the government of Botswana has
strived to provide affordable energy services to its people To date, Botswana
offers one of the cheapest electricity prices in the SADC region at an average
of BWP 9187 per kWh (approx USD 085) for domestic use This tariff is however,
not cost-reflective as it is subsidized by the government With regard to supply-
related costs, BPC is in agony of high costs that come from; () constant use of
‘emergency’ diesel power plants to augment power shortages, and (ii) high
volumes of electricity imports from RSA to augment shortages Cognisant of BPC’
great financial losses in its operations and the government’ 14 continuous
supply of revenue towards subsidy and to the utility for its sustenance, the NEP
promotes migration to cost-reflective electricity tariffs POLICY STATEMENT – P3
Electricity tariffs will cost-reflective in order to balance the interests of
the investors, consumers and the environment Transmission and distribution
components of Botswana’ electricity value chain are naturally monopolistic and
this comes with associated challenges The NEP seeks to provide institutional and
legal reforms to encourage private sector investments in this regard  Petroleum
subsector Botswana is completely reliant on imports of refined petroleum
products from her neighbouring countries, mostly from RSA This over-reliance on
single source and route poses  high risk to security of supply Further, Botswana
has limited storage capacity which also poses  risk in cases where there can be
prolonged fuel shortages Sufficient storage in the supply chain can buffer the
consumer against short term supply chain disruptions and price fluctuations On
this note, the NEP seeks to ensure security of supply POLICY STATEMENT – P4
Petroleum products will be sourced and stored in  reliable and sustainable
manner to ensure security of supply Currently petrol, diesel and illuminating
paraffin prices are regulated by BERA and the Government whilst the price of
other products such as LPG are not regulated The high and volatile petroleum
product prices and the lack of implementation of market based pricing negates
effective and efficient regulation POLICY STATEMENT – P5 Petroleum products’
prices will be set in  manner that will balance the interests of suppliers and
consumers To date, procurement, supply and distribution of the products is done
by BOL and the private sector, which is largely comprised of the multinational
oil companies (MOCs) This has led to inequitable supply and distribution of
petroleum products, especially in rural areas, which are considered financially
unattractive for investment by the private companies The dominance of MOCs has
also limited citizen companies’ participation in the petroleum value chain
POLICY STATEMENT – P6 Participation of citizens in the petroleum subsector will
be facilitated to ensure economic supply of fuels to all parts of the country 15
At present rail and road are the primary modes of transporting petroleum
products in the country Since the liquid fuels industry is about economies of
scale, dividing the already small demand into many small import ‘parcels’
results in very high import prices for the country In this regard, this NEP will
facilitate use of the most cost effective, efficient and safe mode of fuel
transportation for Botswana POLICY STATEMENT – P7 Adequate primary transport and
secondary distribution infrastructure will be provided to ensure economic
countrywide fuel supply  Coal and coal bed methane Botswana has abundant coal
resources that are not yet significantly monetized despite coal presenting
significant development opportunities for the country Exporting coal to
international markets is  viable option which is hampered by inadequate
transportation infrastructure to the ports The National Coal Roadmap of 2011, in
addition to coal exports, identified opportunities for power generation, both
for domestic and export, and conversion of coal to liquids, coal to gas amongst
others Botswana, though endowed with such large quantities of coal, faces the
challenge of utilising this resource due to its negative effects to the
environment This policy facilitates activities of coal beneficiation for optimal
utilization of the resource as well as adoption of clean coal technologies to
minimize its impacts on the environment POLICY STATEMENT – P8 Measures will be
put in place to exploit the vast coal resources using clean coal technologies to
derive maximum benefit for economic diversification in an environmentally
sustainable manner Development of the gas industry, specifically CBM, in
Botswana presents an opportunity for the supply of clean thermal energy
solutions The current exploration efforts for CBM are beginning to bear fruits
with some CBM exploration companies having been issued with Mining Licenses
However, the industry faces  challenge of lack of  legal and regulatory
framework This policy lays  foundation for  robust legal and regulatory
framework to facilitate development of  lucrative local gas sector The Orapa
45 MW Dual Fuel General Electric Lm 6000 Open Cycle Gas Turbines Power Plant is
designed to operate on both gas and diesel and once the gas is commercially
available, this plant will be fully operated on gas The operation of the plant
using gas will reduce the country’ emissions from power generation as the gas is
cleaner compared to diesel POLICY STATEMENT – P9 An enabling environment will be
created to facilitate investments and to 16 fast track developments in the gas
sector  Renewable energy (solar and wind) Despite the abundance of solar energy
potential in Botswana, solar contributes insignificantly to the energy mix It is
mainly used for lighting, water heating and water pumping The learnings from
past experiences show that there are  number of barriers to solar energy
development These barriers cut across policy, institutional and regulatory
framework, technology, market and capacity The initial capital cost for
implementation of solar energy technologies is high in Botswana, despite the
global trend of reducing costs This comes from the fact that Botswana imports
the technology in its entirety as there are no local manufacturers in this field
Again, the current subsidy on conventional fuels deems solar energy less
competitive hence  less conducive environment to attract investment into solar
development, to both local and foreign investors The absence of an appropriate
legal and regulatory framework also poses  challenge to investors as this brings
little confidence on the system Botswana holds  history of failed projects and
programs tied to poor quality of equipment, substandard workmanship and lack of
maintenance of the installed systems Some programs failed due to poor planning
and execution This policy endorses up scaling of solar energy use, both at small
scale and large scale levels across the entire country POLICY STATEMENT – P10
The Government will support and facilitate initiatives that increase the
development of on-grid and off-grid solar in order to increase the contribution
of solar energy to the total energy supply mix Wind has not been explored as
much as solar due to the absence of data on the potential Lately it has been
realised that due to concerted global research and technological developments,
the potential for wind power generation has increased and requires further
exploration Allocation of resources to ensure development of wind energy
projects aligned with the national renewable energy strategy should continue to
be pursued POLICY STATEMENT – P11 The government will explore the potential for
wind and facilitate wind power development  Biomass and waste energy Wood fuel
continues to be  major source of energy for rural and low income urban
communities; mainly for cooking, space heating and lighting in rural households
especially for social ceremonies This has given rise to increased trade of the
resource 17 which exacerbates localised deforestation in some parts of the
country This policy puts some measures to ensure sustainable exploitation of the
wood resource for energy POLICY STATEMENT – P12 The Government will ensure
sustainable and efficient use of wood fuel to reduce over-exploitation of the
resource and to protect the environment The use of cow dung to generate biogas
offers  practical opportunity for Botswana but currently, there are no existing
guidelines to support the production and utilisation of the biogas technologies
Research on indigenous biodiesel feedstocks coupled with biodiesel trials to
power vehicles are giving courage to Botswana’ biodiesel undertakings However,
even though biodiesel standards are in place, there is no commercial production
and usage of biodiesel This policy seeks to promote the use of cow-dung for
biogas, especially at household level and to facilitate off-take of the
biodiesel industry as  clean alternative source to liquid petroleum fuels POLICY
STATEMENT – P13 Initiatives related to production and use of energy derived from
biodegradable materials will be promoted and facilitated in order to offset the
country’ carbon footprint  Energy efficiency and demand side management
Previously, initiatives on demand side management have only been concentrated in
the electricity subsector although opportunities exist in other energy
subsectors such as the petroleum Although Figure  shows significant savings
attained from various energy saving initiatives, there is evidence that some
strategies were not sustained For instance, users reverted to the use of cheaper
incandescent bulbs for replacements of efficient LCDs afterwards POLICY
STATEMENT – P14 Energy efficiency and conservation initiatives will be
supported, particularly from the demand side, with  view to minimize energy
wastage and to offset carbon emissions from conventional power generation There
is currently no reporting framework for energy efficiency and conservation
measures and initiatives hence no data available to prove the effect of
implementing efficient measures This policy supports  long-term, sustainable
energy efficiency program, which yields energy savings that will improve
Botswana’ energy security, 18 economic competitiveness and reduction of energy-
related emissions through offset measures  Energy and environment Botswana is
party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Having adopted the Paris Agreement, in 2015 the government has made  voluntary
commitment through its first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to reduce
the country’ total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 15% by the year 2030, with
reference to 2010 emissions Furthermore, the country is working towards
providing affordable and clean energy to its general population in order to
align with UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals, especially SDG7
POLICY STATEMENT – P15 Energy extraction, production, transport and use will be
done with minimal negative impacts on human health and on the environment
Energy and gender Generally, energy issues are of concern to all However, women
are one of the most important actors in the energy sector, in terms of their
contact, use and management of energy In Botswana it is estimated that 55% of
households are headed by women and the gender statistics show that females in
Botswana are less represented in the formal sector and over-represented in the
informal sector at 36% and 75%, respectively Batswana women mostly play
predominant role in subsistence agriculture, perpetuated by wrong cultural and
traditional beliefs that the women’ role is child bearing and looking after the
family The informal sector is unstable and limits their chances of economic
empowerment hence most female-headed households are poor because they do not
have access to or control over productive resources The government is thus
focusing on mainstreaming gender into its operations in order to realize gender
equality and empowerment of women In 1995, the government of Botswana developed
policy on women and development in order to align its national policies and
legislation with regional and international obligations on gender equity and
equality However, despite some advancement, women in Botswana still have less
access to, and control over, productive resources than men This includes less
access to modern energy This Policy supports Gender mainstreaming in the energy
sector POLICY STATEMENT – P16 The government will promote gender mainstreaming
in the energy sector and ensure alignment of gender concerns with appropriate
health, safety and environmental standards 19  Energy research and development
The provision of energy services is capital intensive and heavily reliant on
technology It is thus important to come up with innovative ways of delivering
these services Currently, there is no research institution dedicated to carrying
out energy research and development (&) to inform policy However, there exists
various institutions or think tanks that carry out energy research from various
perspectives These include Botswana Institute for Technology Research and
Innovation (BITRI), the University of Botswana (UB), Botswana International
University of Science and Technology (BIUST), Botswana University of Agriculture
and Natural Resources (BUAN), and Botswana Innovation Hub (BIH) Regrettably,
there is neither  clearly defined collaboration among and/or between these
researchers nor is there any between the researchers, the industry and the
policy makers Recognising that coordination of efforts in & is key to promoting
innovation, technology application and development for deployment of appropriate
modern energy services; the NEP seeks to aid coordination of research activities
in the energy sector as well as facilitate development and establishment of
academic/industry strategic research alliances POLICY STATEMENT – P17 Research
and development will be intensified to guide effective harnessing of the
country’ indigenous energy resources 10 Information management and planning
Energy planning provides  roadmap that can guide future energy infrastructure
and policy development The government of Botswana adopted an implementation of
the Integrated Energy Planning (IEP) concept during the eighth National
Development Plan (NDP ) period This was done to ensure that; () supporting legal
and regulatory frameworks are developed for the energy sector, (ii) energy
infrastructure is developed and resource capacity is strengthened, (iii) there
is continuous energy forecasting, and (iv) an up-to-date energy data base is
developed and availed This country, like most developing countries is faced with
challenges of data collection and management, which is crippling the energy
planning and informed development processes This policy acknowledges that data
management is  challenge in Botswana and there is insufficient energy data to
inform accurate planning in the sector Therefore, the NEP seeks to ensure that
energy data is accurate, available and accessible for planning purposes POLICY
STATEMENT – P18 An effective integrated energy planning will be ensured in order
to achieve optimal use of locally available energy resources towards sustainable
economic growth, economic diversification and low carbon development 20 11
International cooperation Botswana has existing strategic partnerships and
commitments in the energy sector at regional and international levels She is
member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Interstate
Oil Committee (IOC) under the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) Through the
SADC Energy Protocol, member states are required to work towards regional
integration and cooperation in energy development As part of this regional
integration, Botswana is eligible for electricity trading mainly via the
Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) POLICY STATEMENT – P19 The NEP will promote
regional energy trade and international cooperation in the energy sector 12
Monitoring and evaluation Regular collection of information about all activities
geared towards implementation of the policy will demonstrate whether the
objectives are being met and will help policy makers to identify and address any
prevailing challenges quickly Proper evaluation will show whether the policy is
giving the presumed outputs and whether it is making  difference Evaluations
thus keep track of key outcomes and impacts related to the various
implementation initiatives and assess whether the objectives, aims and goals of
this NEP are being achieved POLICY STATEMENT – P20 There will be continual
monitoring, regular review and evaluation of the impact of various policy
positions and provisions to ensure that they remain relevant 21  POLICY
STATEMENTS AND RELATED HIGH LEVEL IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES Table : The NEP
policy statements, objectives and high level strategies for 2020 - 2040 POLICY
STATEMENT POLICY OBJECTIVES HIGH LEVEL STRATEGY Electricity Subsector P1
Electricity will be generated optimally from locally available energy resources
to meet local demand and to ensure self- sufficiency P1 To increase installed
generation capacity from about 732MW to 1430 MW by the year 2040 from available
local resources (coal, solar, wind and CBM) P1 Lure the private sector to
investment in the construction and ownership of additional power plants P1
Promote the development of IPPs through competitive bidding processes for
specified generation capacity allocations P1 To promote sustainable use of
indigenous energy resources, especially solar for electricity generation P1
Create opportunities for mini- and micro-generators to feed into the national
grid and off-grid mini-grid networks P1 To power all the areas located far from
the national grid using decentralized off-grid systems to ensure universal
access by 2040 P1 Guide the integrated energy resource planning through
deliberate decisions that prioritize power generation from renewables and
decentralised systems in way that will optimise the long-term cost of
electricity supply P2 Transmission and distribution infrastructure will be
enhanced to facilitate economic growth and universal access to electricity P2 To
ensure open access to modern energy services P2 The country’ transmission
infrastructure and grid capacity will be improved to accommodate decentralised
and intermittent generation P2 Quantify and manage transmission losses based on
the best practice P2 Support interconnections with neighbouring countries to
increase Botswana’ trading opportunities and/or improve security of supply P3
Electricity tariffs will be set in way that will balance the interests of the
investors, consumers and the environment P3 To ensure that electricity tariff
policies provide  basis for sustainable power supplies over the long term P3 The
costs of electricity distribution to be optimised such that end-user electricity
prices correctly reflect fixed and variable costs and convey relevant price
signals to encourage efficiency 22 P3 To make Botswana  preferred regional
electricity supplier P3 Conduct regular and cost reflective tariff adjustments
to improve the viability of the industry and to facilitate private sector
participation P3 Set industrial electricity charges in  manner that ensures
equity, social justice and cost recovery P3 Adopt cost reflective electricity
tariffs that promote efficient use of energy P3 Incorporate Pricing of
electricity will take into account the environmental cost associated with its
generation P3 Implement relevant grid technologies that improve the management
of the distribution grid, reduce losses, enhance quality of supply, and increase
the grid’ capacity to accommodate small-scale grid connected decentralised
generation, storage and demand side measures Petroleum Subsector P4 Petroleum
products will be sourced P4 To ensure security of supply of petroleum products
P4 Construct government-owned storage facilities in the country and facilitate
access to storage facilities within the region and stored in  reliable and
sustainable manner to ensure security of supply P4 To ensure equitable access to
petroleum products P4 Oil industry participants will be legislated to maintain
set levels of commercial buffer stocks P4 Promote utilisation of alternative
supply routes and sources for petroleum products P4 Facilitate development of
domestic sources of fuel such as renewable fuels and liquid fuels derived from
coal P4 Reform the institutional arrangement to promote increased access to
petroleum products 23 P5 Prices for petroleum products will be set in  manner
that will balance the interests of suppliers, retailers and consumers P5 To
ensure continued citizen and private sector participation in the retailing and
wholesaling of petroleum products P5 Manage the impact of the volatility of the
petroleum products prices on the economy P5 Apply where necessary, cross
subsidies between petroleum products to achieve specific national development
objectives P5 To continue regulating petroleum pump prices to ensure
affordability P5 Regulate selected petroleum products prices in  manner that
promote countrywide availability P5 Ensure appropriate measures in place to
guarantee affordable petroleum product prices P6 Citizen participation in the
petroleum subsector will be facilitated to ensure economic countrywide supply of
fuels P6 To promote meaningful citizen participation in the petroleum industry
P6 Facilitate and promote participation of cooperatives in the distribution of
petroleum products to remote areas through the national oil company P6 Promotion
of investment in the upstream, midstream and downstream activities in the
petroleum value chain P7 Adequate primary transport and P7 To ensure adequate
petroleum products storage capacity, and extend petroleum products distribution
infrastructure to all parts of the country P7 Development of  legal framework
for the petroleum sector in order to facilitate investment in petroleum products
infrastructure secondary distribution infrastructure will be provided to
increase access to petroleum fuels P7 Promote use of global best practices in
the storage, handling and transportation of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) P7 To
promote safe transportation, storage and handling of petroleum products Coal and
coal bed methane P8 Measures will be put in place to P8 To promote emerging
clean technologies and derivatives that include beneficiation, gasification,
coal bed methane P8 Utilise appropriate and environmentally friendly
technologies to convert coal to liquids and coal to gas exploit the vast coal
resources using clean coal technologies in order to derive maximum benefit for
sustainable economic diversification P8 Secure long-term coal supplies for the
thermal power plants P8 Ensure adequate and competitively priced coal supply to
mining, industry, and manufacturing sub-sectors P8 Promulgation of enabling
legislation to facilitate private sector participation in the subsector 24 P8
Ensure deployment of clean coal technologies in the development of the coal
subsector P8 To promote private sector participation in the coal supply chain P8
prepare the legal, regulatory and institutional framework conditions needed to
enable the potential future use of CBM P8 To facilitate optimal exploitation of
the country’ indigenous and vast coal resources to drive economic growth P8
Develop appropriate infrastructure to facilitate coal exports P8 To promote
local consumption of coal for energy and facilitate export of coal and coal
products P9 An enabling environment will be created in order to facilitate
investments and to fast-track developments in the gas sector P9 To facilitate
private sector participation and development of the downstream gas industry P9
Collaborate with key stakeholders to exploit available gas resources P9 Ensure
effective economic regulation of the gas industry P9 To have  national gas
infrastructure accessible to all suppliers and distributors P9 Develop gas
storage and transport infrastructure including collaboration with neighbouring
countries Renewable energy – solar and wind P10 The government will support and
facilitate the development of on-grid and off-grid solar in order to increase
the contribution of solar energy in the energy supply mix P10 Facilitate
development and use of concentrated thermal power and photovoltaic electricity
generation P10 Develop mandatory standards for solar energy equipment and
installations solar P10 Develop mandatory standards for solar energy equipment
and installations Facilitate P10 financing mechanisms for utilization of
renewable energy technologies appropriate P10 Mainstream solar energy programmes
into all levels of education systems P10 Promote development and growth of solar
energy based industries P10 Promote the use of solar energy especially in
households, hospitality and small businesses 25 P11 The government will promote
further exploration of the wind potential and facilitate wind power development
P11 Promote the development and use of wind for power generation P11 Facilitate
further exploration for wind energy potential P11 Promote power generation from
wind in areas that have wind potential Biomass energy and waste P12 The
Government will ensure sustainable and efficient use of wood fuel to reduce
resource and to protect the environment P12 Facilitate sustainable harvesting
and usage of the wood fuel resource P12 Promote the production and use of
efficient wood fuel based technologies for clean cooking and space heating P12
Promote the use of alternative fuels as substitutes for firewood for cooking,
especially in government institutions P13 Initiatives related to production and
use of energy derived from biodegradable materials to offset the country’ carbon
footprint P13 To increase the contribution of bio- energy in order to diversify
the energy mix P13 Facilitate construction of biogas plants for conversion of
organic waste to produce gas as  thermal energy for households, commercial and
industrial use P13 Promote investment in infrastructure to produce energy from
agro processing P13 Mainstream bio-energy into the school curriculum at primary,
secondary and tertiary levels P13 Development and implementation of waste to
energy technologies as  waste management solution Energy conservation and demand
side management P14 Energy efficiency and conservation initiatives will be
supported with  view to minimize energy wastage and to offset emissions from
conventional power generation P14 To promote efficient use and management of
available energy resources for present and future generations P14 Establish
appropriate pricing regime for energy services that will provide incentives to
domestic, commercial and industrial customers to voluntarily manage their energy
consumption P14 Develop legislation that encourages the use of efficient energy
equipment and appliances P14 Establish incentives to improve energy conservation
and efficient use of energy across sub sectors 26 P14 Mainstream energy
efficiency, conservation and management programmes in all level of the education
system Energy and the Environment P15 Energy extraction, production, transport
and use will be done with minimal negative impacts on human health and on the
environment P15 To minimize environmental impacts from energy production and
use; P15 Ensure adherence of energy products and technologies to environmental
quality standards P15 To promote safe use of energy products P15 Ensure
adherence to safety procedures and standards for handling of petroleum products
P15 To promote generation of energy from available waste P15 Ensure that optimal
energy mix is achieved to realise attainment of the country’ set emission
targets P15 To promote the production and use of low-carbon fuels P15 Ensure
that the production, transportation, processing and use of energy do not result
in health or safety problems Energy and gender P16 Gender mainstreaming in the
energy sector will be promoted to ensure alignment of gender concerns with
appropriate health, safety and environmental standards P16 To promote the use of
modern forms of energy by women in households P16 Facilitate development of
programs for dissemination of modern energy technologies to replace the
traditional energy uses in rural areas P16 To support the capacity development
of women in the energy sector P16 Support training and capacity building
programs targeting women in rural communities P16 Facilitate inclusive
development of solar and other renewable forms of energy for off-grid
communities P16 To ensure participation of women in the formulation and
implementation of energy interventions Energy research and development 27 P17
Intensified research and development towards effective harnessing of the
country’ indigenous energy resources and efficient production and use of energy
P17 To promote effective and well-focused energy research and development to
contribute to the development of the sector P17 Enhance collaboration between
research institutions, government and policy makers in finding solutions to
problems inhibiting the effective and efficient utilisation of energy P17 Give
priority to adaptive research and development in energy technologies while
promoting basic energy research P17 To promote innovation in the energy sector
towards optimal utilization of the country’ energy resources P17 Facilitate
resource mobilization for energy Research and Development P17 Provide incentives
to encourage tertiary institutions to develop research programmes for the
application and implementation of renewable energy technologies especially
solar, biogas, biodiesel and wind Information management and planning P18 An
effective integrated energy planning will; be ensured in order to achieve
optimal use of locally available resources to drive sustainable economic growth
and low carbon development To develop  P18 comprehensive information database in
support of energy resources management and development; and maintain P18 Build
adequate institutional capacity including human resource as well as information
and communication technology P18 Promote strategic partnerships between the
public and private sectors to finance and develop energy diversification
programmes and projects P18 To evaluate optimal approaches to monetising of
country’ energy resources P18 Legislate and develop Integrated Resource Plan P18
To evaluate the impact of energy policy decisions P18 Timely development and
communication of an integrated energy resource plan P18 To ensure reliable and
timely access to energy related data and information; P18 Provide for  mandatory
provision of energy related data and information International cooperation 28
P19 Promotion of regional energy trade and international cooperation P19 To
ensure regional developmental synergies P19 Engage and participate in regional
and international initiatives P19 Develop regional knowledge networks P19 To
harmonise energy policies in  manner that promotes competitiveness, access to
regional and global markets and socio- economic development P19 To honour
regional and international agreements the country has entered into P19 Ensure
introduction and use of higher quality products conforming to global development
trends P19 Promote, pursue and implement projects with high regional impact and
relevance Monitoring and evaluation P20 There will be continual monitoring,
regular review and evaluation of the impact of various policy positions and
provisions to ensure that these remain relevant P20 To provide  review mechanism
that will ensure the policy framework for sustainable development and management
of energy resources are maintained in the national interest P20 Develop an
integrated monitoring framework that is compatible with national, regional and
international standards P20 Facilitate the exchange of data and information
among stakeholders with specific multi sectoral forums established to track the
implementation of the Policy P20 To assess the performance of the energy sector
and all stakeholders in realising the national development objectives related to
the provision, management and development of energy resources P20 Ensure
measureable indicators are agreed on and used for monitoring and evaluation of
policy implementation P20 Link the policy evaluation process to the national
energy accounts in order to assess performance in the sectorial application of
energy P20 To build necessary capacity for carrying out the monitoring,
evaluation and review of the Policy P20 Promote awareness raising on the use of
coal and other related implications P20 Promote awareness creation campaigns on
the methods and benefits of energy conservation and management 29
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEP This section outlines the high-level pragmatic
approach towards implementation of this Policy Taking into account the
limitations that come with execution, an Implementation Plan will be developed
and issued as  separate document to complement this Policy The Plan will outline
the key actors required for implementation, modes of investment mobilization for
energy sector development, human resource capacity building, strengthening of &,
and  monitoring framework for the policy  Actors involved in policy
implementation Team work and total commitment of all actors in Botswana’ energy
sector should be the primary driving principle to ensure smooth implementation
of the NEP Figure  outlines the various actors involved in Botswana’ energy
sector, who are the centre of energy transition Figure : The Botswana energy
sector actor arrangement These actors are structured according to the various
roles that they supposedly play in the energy sector development There is need
for  central point of coordination to ensure that each actor group contributes
accordingly to the development of the sector The Implementation Plan will
clearly define the mandates and roles of the various actors and how they will be
coordinated during the Policy implementation process 30  Capacity development
for transition In order to facilitate an effective development of the energy
sector, the government of Botswana is obligated to build the necessary levels of
human resource capacity across the board Various actor groups have varying
capacity needs hence capacity building programs should be tailored according to
these various needs This Policy seeks to attain maximum ownership and management
control of the major aspects of the energy sector by Batswana Therefore, the IP
outlines the support in terms of training, which will be given to Batswana in
all fields of energy development and management during the NEP period Again, it
is critical to cultivate comprehensive local content in all aspects of energy
sector operations On this note, the Implementation Plan will outline the support
for capacity building in indigenous manufacturing of energy technologies
Investment in the energy sector development By nature, the energy sector
requires huge capital investment especially to develop infrastructure in the in
the mid-term to long term Infrastructure for petroleum, power and renewable
energy subsectors is costly The government alone cannot drive the sector and
needs private sector investment at the forefront for  successful development
This Policy is calling for an increase in private sector development and the IEP
will suggest various available options for financing of infrastructure projects
and programs in the energy sector of Botswana The Policy seeks to provide
conducive legal, fiscal and regulatory environment to attract investment into
the energy sector This will give the private sector assurance to invest in the
sector comfortably Again, this will also ensure efficient and transparent
pricing regime for energy services as it is one of the challenges faced by the
country The IP will give details on this  Convergence with other government
policies Energy is one of the main drivers of economic growth as it facilitates
productivity in other sectors of the economy Therefore, it is critical for the
Policies driving these various sectors to be in alignment with the NEP The IP
will indicate how the Policy, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Divisions of
relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies will collaborate with the MMGE and
how they can be strengthened, if necessary, for effective implementation of the
NEP  Communication and awareness raising The IP will define how the MMGE, as the
custodian of the NEP will interact with other relevant Ministries, Departments,
the private sector, communities, Members of Parliament, District Councils and
many other stakeholders and actors to discuss 31 issues relating to the
implementation of the Policy  comprehensive programme will be outlined to create
awareness and ensure acceptance of energy transformation proposed by the NEP
among policy makers and the general public … 32