Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/BWA/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Botswana has made impressive
gains in its economic growth, in line with its ambition to become  high-income
country with an export-led and knowledge-based economy, as espoused by its
Vision 2036 and National Development Plan 11 (NDP11) Public expenditure,
however, accounts for per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and attempts to
diversify the economy have shown moderate results The private sector has yet to
take its rightful place as the engine of growth The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic has presented  serious blow to the economy and induced  contraction in
domestic output of  per cent in The informal sector, primarily women-owned
businesses, was particularly hard-hit, yet remains the ‘missing middle’ in the
policy space  Botswana continues to struggle with high levels of poverty and
inequality The top  per cent of earners account for per cent of gross national
income (GNI), making Botswana the seventh most unequal country in the world
according to the Human Development Report Significant geographic variations are
evident, with rural districts (Kweneng West, Ghanzi and Ngamiland West) left
behind, Comprising 70 per cent of the population, youth offer  real opportunity
However, their lack of skills, experience and limited job opportunities
contribute to high unemployment (per cent) and further loss of potential10
While Botswana has earned  reputation as  beacon of good governance, the global
rankings mask underlying issues, with  year-on-year deterioration since 11 The
most significant warning signals relate to indicators of safety and rule of law,
participation and human rights Botswana lags on gender equality and ranks 163
out of 188 countries in Inter-Parliamentary Union ratings, with only per cent
female parliamentarians12,13  The downward trend in safety and rule of law
became apparent during the COVID-19 crisis as gender-based violence emerged as
second pandemic ravaging the nation with 272 women seeking refuge in emergency
shelters during the three-month lockdown in 14 Representing  per cent of the
population, people with disabilities are 50 per cent more likely to experience
violence (including gender-based violence)15 Inequalities in physical and legal
security are driven mainly by differences in exposure to violence, inadequate
protection, inequalities in access to justice, and lack of recognition and
awareness of human rights  While individuals are free to form civil society
organizations, Botswana does not have  vibrant civic space Access to data and
information remains  significant challenge, with limited uptake of open data
platforms or digital tools Only 88 out of the country’ 209 national Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG) indicators have baselines, making it impossible to
monitor progress or uphold accountability  Available at Statista (
International Trade Centre, Ministry of Finance and Economic Development,
Available at UNDP (bwundporg)  Available at United Nations University UNU-WIDER
(  Human Development Report 2019 (  Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative, Ibid  Statistics Botswana, 10 Nthomang, , and Diraditsile, , 11
Available at the Mo Ibrahim Foundation ( 12 Botswana Institute for Development
Policy Analysis (available at  13 Inter-Parliamentary Union (available at
dataipuorg) 14 Ministry of Defence, Justice and Security, 15 ALIGHT, /16
DP/DCP/BWA/  Climate change, drought, land degradation and habitat loss all pose
significant risk to the country’ resilience and have  compounding effect on
inequality as rural populations and women are harder hit Heavily reliant on fuel
and coal-based energy, the country is exploring options for competitive and
sustainable energy By deploying solar technology, Botswana could meet its
current electricity demand using less than  per cent of its land area16  Vision
2036 “Achieving Prosperity for All”, its NDP11 and now, COVID-19 economic
recovery and transformation plan and digital transformation strategy, supported
by UNDP, uniquely position the country office as  key partner to support the
transformation agenda  UNDP strategic engagement is an integral part of the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), ,
developed in full alignment with the national development and transformation
priorities UNDP supported UNSDCF development through the common country analysis
and its lead role and strategic foresight in co-creating outcomes in
collaboration with  broad range of stakeholders UNDP plays  leading role, in
participation with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Children’
Fund (UNICEF) and the World Bank in transforming the national social protection
system Tackling gender-based violence and engaging youth and women in decision-
making are cross-cutting priorities UNDP will continue its leadership in this
space and strengthen its collaboration with UNICEF and UNFPA, in particular
Similarly, UNDP leads engagement in the recovery and transformation of the
informal and private sectors With strengthened focus on climate change
adaptation and mitigation, sustainable livelihoods and land management, FAO will
continue to be  crucial partner Therefore, given its strategic position and
capacities in Botswana, UNDP will continue to deliver on its role as an
integrator and convenor to facilitate joint programming and collaboration across
the United Nations system and development partners  The guiding principle and
intent of the country programme document (CPD) theory of change is to achieve
transformational change for  green, just, prosperous Botswana The impact of
COVID-19 has shown increasingly complex, interconnected and unpredictable People
are engaging with information, institutions and society in new and increasingly
digital ways, and institutions are having to adapt with increasing speed The CPD
has identified key domains of change around climate change and sustainable
resource management; inequality, corruption and accountability; and
unemployment, economic diversification and digital innovation These domains are
addressed through levers of change, such as women and youth as rights-holders;
communities, the private sector and the informal sector as transformational
agents; and institutions as duty-bearers, each leveraging UNDP capacity to
deliver through innovative and agile partnerships for  green, just, prosperous
Botswana The causes and effects within the theory of change are understood from
complex systems perspective and the outcomes of internal sensemaking, root cause
analysis, and  series of external strategic foresight consultations that twenty-
first century challenges are The theory of change is based on the principle of
‘punctuated equilibrium’,17 within which  number of capabilities are required:
developing new anticipatory systems approaches, becoming designers and
facilitators of system transformation, which involves expanding spheres of
collaboration and partnership, and moving past siloed, linear problem-solving
approaches UNDP has strong comparative and collaborative advantages to
complement United Nations development system efforts First, its value
proposition is anchored in its mandate as  lead development organization
globally through its signature and innovative development solutions and through
its repositioned offer for Africa Second, UNDP builds on its achievements from
the past CPD, notably strong leadership in economic diversification and
inclusive growth, environment and climate change, and the protection of human
rights, rule of law and empowerment of women and youth Through the COVID-19
response, opportunities to expand 16 Botswana’ Third National Communication to
the United Nations Framework on Climate Change, October 17 Punctuated
equilibrium in social theory  /16 DP/DCP/BWA/ the support to the private sector
and entrepreneurship, institutional transformation and digital solutions have
come to the fore Third, UNDP leverages its corporate global policy network to
provide technical and innovation expertise Fourth, UNDP will continue to be the
support platform, convenor and integrator of partners across United Nations
system, government, the private sector, academia and civil society in pursuit of
the national transformation agenda UNDP will continue building on its support to
the national digital strategy, the Ministry of Local Government and Rural
Development transformation strategy and decentralization policy, the South-South
and triangular cooperation strategy, the Supplier Development Programme, the
revised economic diversification drive strategy, the climate change policy, the
national human rights strategy, the national youth policy revision, the ongoing
support to the COVID-19 private sector and informal sector recovery plans, the
reform of the social protection system, and the empowerment of youth and
citizens Building on the recommendations of the midterm review and independent
country programme review, the programme will emphasize more downstream
engagement to strengthen development outcomes, bolster its gender and human
rights responsiveness, and broaden its partnerships and innovation to achieve
impact at scale The country office will establish regular forums for
stakeholders and influencers to solicit feedback on CPD implementation, approach
and priorities to facilitate anticipatory and agile decision-making, ensuring
its investments are directed at core development challenges with
transformational outcomes as envisaged II Programme priorities and partnerships
Building on the UNDP Strategic Plan, , and partnership strategy of the Regional
Bureau for Africa, UNDP will establish  vibrant network of influencers to shape
programming and apply human rights-based approaches, digitalization, innovation,
anticipatory decision- making, and flexible risk management UNDP will leverage
three key enablers: () the UNDP Global Policy Network and the Strategy and
Innovation (SIU) to build capacities for innovative solutions; () the UNDP
Digital Team to support digitalization and the digital strategy; and ()
establishment of collaborative platforms across government, the private sector
and civil society to deploy portfolio approaches, including leveraging the Joint
SDG Fund and programme to support the national monitoring and evaluation system
In this way it becomes possible to deliver and leverage innovative and agile
partnerships, and to implement the overall vision for Botswana to be  green,
just and prosperous country  green Botswana The success of Vision 2036 and the
2030 Agenda is largely dependent on natural resources, and thereby robust
environmental governance and management and enabling equal participation by
women and men, young and old Botswana is endowed with expansive wetlands,
unspoilt wildernesses and an abundance of wildlife, all at risk if intentional
efforts are not made to protect and sustainably utilize them To deliver on
UNSDCF outcome , therefore, UNDP will strengthen collaborative partnerships with
other United Nations organizations such as the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and FAO as well as civil society to invest in sustainable
management and effective utilization of ecosystems and biodiversity with
integrated management plans for protected areas and cross-border river basins
that can leverage innovative financing and reduce human-wildlife conflicts
Improvements in the management of natural capital and communal lands will in
turn increase their value and have  positive impact on the quality of life and
resilience of affected communities UNDP will support integrate permaculture and
agroecology principles and practices as well as other research-based innovations
to increase resilience and reverse trends in poor natural resource use,
restoring ecosystem goods and services UNDP will also partner with local
communities, research institutions, government and civil local communities’
capabilities to /16  DP/DCP/BWA/ society to develop early warning systems,
leveraging digital solutions and enabling real-time open access to information
for improved risk management planning and adaptation UNDP will build on its
current initiatives through several innovative strategies to restore and
sustainably manage agricultural landscapes and rangelands to expand and scale up
the diversity and volume of food production Across its portfolios, UNDP will
identify opportunities for climate finance and invest in  green economy,
leveraging businesses and value chains with the potential to create jobs for
women and youth and capitalizing on new technologies and opportunities for
renewable energy, reduction in waste, greenhouse gas emissions and
wastewater/effluent discharges Working across the country office’ portfolios
will not only support  greener economy and job creation but also substantially
improve quality of life and overall prosperity of the country and its people
just Botswana Recognizing the complexity of the interconnected society that has
emerged, the country’ formal, procedural and linear mechanisms and governance
institutions do not function well enough to support accountability, inclusion
and responsiveness To deliver on UNSDCF outcomes  and , UNDP will engage across
the complexity of governance systems and support the actors and levers within
those systems that can ultimately deliver on the future vision of Botswana in
which tolerance, inclusion, equality, and accountability are at the core Access
to information and  strong, independent civil society and media enable an
educated and informed public as rights holders An educated and informed public
can participate civically and politically and hold those they voted for
accountable Therefore, UNDP will expand its current initiatives and focus on
advocacy and building capacity to increase the participation of women, young
people, people with disabilities and members of rural communities in decision
making at all levels and ensure transparent and accountable leadership UNDP will
prioritize investing in digital platforms for women and youth to ideate, design
and scale local solutions and enable access to finance for development,
political and civic engagement18 particular focus will be on strengthening
institutions to be more efficient and effective as duty bearers Checks and
balances of power are needed to reduce corruption and increase trust and
confidence in public institutions UNDP will support the state to build capacity,
accountability and responsive leadership across integrity institutions,
including the National Human Rights Institution, and will support the
decentralization and public reform processes UNDP will also work to strengthen
equal access to justice for all, building on gains made during the COVID-19
response This work will include building the institutional capacity of courts
and the justice sector and the human resource capacity of judicial officers
Leveraging digital solutions to enhance case management and enable virtual court
hearings will be key Legal rights and protections, especially of the most
vulnerable members of society and victims of gender-based violence will be
strengthened through legal reforms, outreach and access to information and
strengthened enforcement Diverse partnerships, beyond government institutions,
with civil society, media, research and development institutions, the Office for
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNFPA, UNICEF,
the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) will be
critical to the success of  rights-based portfolio approach to strengthening
state-society relations in delivering on UNSDCF outcomes  and  and the Vision
2036 goal to achieve prosperity for all based on  tolerant, inclusive society
led by progressive governance 18 Particularly the scaling up of #YouthConnekt
/16 DP/DCP/BWA/  prosperous Botswana Across its portfolios, UNDP will accompany
the national vision of economic recovery and transformation with  focus on
promoting  strengthened, dynamic private sector composed of micro, small and
medium enterprises (MSMEs) To achieve UNSDCF outcome , active leadership and
participation of youth, women, people with disabilities and other marginalized
groups will be key in creating socially inclusive, digitally enabled and
environmentally sustainable MSMEs Becoming drivers of the economy, the private
sector, mainly in labour- intensive and green sectors, will increase
domestically produced goods and services and diversify export products and
services through expanded markets Leveraging international trade agreements and
opportunities for South-South and triangular cooperation, UNDP will continue
supporting institutions to enhance the business, investment and trade-enabling
environment Youth and gender-responsive actions focused on skills through
technical and vocational training, digital solutions and knowledge creation will
further support the private sector, transforming Botswana into  diversified,
export-led knowledge economy Building on its COVID-19 response, UNDP will expand
its partnerships with private and informal sector actors, national and
international banks and relevant state and regional institutions to deliver on
the collective vision Furthermore, UNDP will deepen partnerships with ILO, the
International Trade Centre (ITC), the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD), the World Economic Forum (WEF) and the World Trade
Organization (WTO) to articulate robust frameworks for the entire ecosystem
Furthermore, principles of green growth, employment and decent work, gender
equality and empowerment, digital economy and access to finance will inform the
design of UNDP strategic interventions to address current risks of rising
inequality, economic marginalization and environmental degradation that reduce
the country’ resilience to future shocks III Programme and risk management This
CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and is the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for alignment of results and resources The
accountabilities of managers at the country office are prescribed in the UNDP
programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control
framework The programme will be nationally executed and implemented through
mutually agreed modalities based on the most efficient and cost-effective manner
High-level national ownership and participation in governance and coordination
mechanisms will be ensured from the programme’ inception In cases where national
execution is not possible, the modality may be replaced by direct execution to
enable effective delivery of results and in response to force majeure The
harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged
to the concerned projects The country programme will be coordinated and guided
by the UNSDCF steering committee Furthermore, programme steering committees will
be established within UNDP with the participation of key government, civil
society, private sector and other relevant partners The ‘punctuated equilibrium’
theory of change posits that slow or continuous change (such as climate change
impacts) alternates in cycles with rapid, discontinuous or disruptive change
(such as  pandemic and its outfall) To identify such risks and shocks and be
better placed to address them, UNDP will invest in building capabilities for
systems thinking and portfolio approaches, abstraction and ambiguity management,
real-time qualitative and quantitative data analysis, horizon-scanning and
pattern detection to anticipate shocks and address trends The following risks
and mitigation measures are identified /16  DP/DCP/BWA/ Corruption UNDP will
support digitalizing systems and processes to improve efficiency, transparency
and accountability Furthermore, UNDP will support public access to data and
public education on the belief that empowered citizens can make informed
decisions Inequalities UNDP must apply an inequality lens to its analysis,
design and interventions to reduce the risk of investments in transformational
change inadvertently widening these inequalities UNDP will draw on regional
experts and its Global Policy Network for strategic and technical guidance
Consistent application of the UNDP gender marker and the social and
environmental standards and accountability mechanism will be important Mindset
shift and cultural change sensitivities The transformative change outlined in
this CPD is bold UNDP must be sensitive and cognizant of this in its design and
roll-out of its portfolio, ensuring the participation of all through co-
creation, providing  platform for dialogue and local leadership and identifying
and enabling the signals and levers of change Complexity of system
transformation To stay relevant, UNDP needs to build capabilities for system
transformations, disruptions and institutional renewals, investing in
partnerships and platforms that can yield data and insights which enable actors
to explore the nature of future challenges and deliver collective solutions
COVID-19 pandemic UNDP has adopted  flexible and agile approach, leveraging
digital solutions, ways of working and systems to deliver results Anticipatory
decision-making, regular reviews and broadened partnerships accompanied by
capacity development will strengthen resilience within the programme and
minimize negative shocks IV Monitoring and evaluation Results and value for
money are key aspects of UNDP support to the Government and other national
partners UNDP will pay particular attention to the monitoring and evaluation of
this programme, in line with the UNSDCF, Vision 2036, NDP11 and the SDGs High-
level consultations and dialogues will be organized biannually as part of the
UNSDCF process to review programme effectiveness and efficiency The UNSDCF and
UNDP results frameworks will serve as key measuring instruments to facilitate
continuous tracking, assessment and reporting of results The country office will
pursue  research agenda to ensure that information collected in the field is
packaged into accessible, disaggregated and actionable data and knowledge
resources This includes conducting baseline studies to close data gaps and
supporting open data portals and real-time data collection tools to strengthen
accountability and transparency in the public domain Jointly with other United
Nations organizations, UNDP will support Statistics Botswana to establish
national, digital monitoring and evaluation system and at least three ministries
with ministerial monitoring and evaluation systems to address identified
weaknesses in the implementation of national policies and plans Performance
indicators have been derived from the national performance measurement
frameworks and SDG domesticated indicator framework to promote national
ownership, coherence and synergies in reporting results UNDP will use its gender
marker to track programme contributions to specific gender and women’
empowerment achievements At least  per cent of the programme budget will be
allocated to the evaluation plan At outcome level, monitoring and evaluation and
joint reviews will be undertaken with other United Nations organizations and the
Government through agreed accountability and coordination platforms More
frequent reviews will be done at programme level As part of the evaluation plan,
UNDP will conduct  midterm evaluation and  final review following the latest
evaluation guidelines  /16 DP/DCP/BWA/ DP/DCP/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Botswana () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar – Human
and social development and Governance, peace and security COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
(OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, gender inequality is reduced,
and women and girls are empowered to access their human rights and participate
and benefit from inclusive development RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME
(United States dollars) DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines targets) MAJOR PARTNERS/PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS PEOPLE Indicator
Whether or not legal frameworks are in place to promote, enforce and monitor
equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sex Baseline: No Target: Yes
Data source: Ombudsman Office, Land Tribunal, Gender Affairs reports Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: Courts of law, UNDP Output  More responsive, inclusive,
participatory, and representative decision-making enabled at all levels (Goal )
Government: Ministry of Presidential Affairs, Governance and Public
Administration (MOPAGPA), Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
(MLGRD), Ministry of Youth (MYSC), Ministry of National Immigration and Gender
Affairs (MNIGA), Independent Election Commission (IEC), #SmartBots Regular:
$73,000 Indicator  (IRRF ): Proportion of seats held by women and youth in ()
national parliament; () local government Other: $,927,000 () Baseline (2021):
11% (women), % (youth) Target (2026): () 30% (women), 10% (youth) Data source:
Parliament, IEC Frequency: Every  years Data source: Labour Force Survey reports
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Directorate of Public Service Management
Reports, Stats Botswana Civil society organizations (CSOs): BOCONGO, BOCOBONET
Indicator  Proportion of women in managerial positions (public sector) Baseline
(2016): 34% Target: 50% Private sector: Business Botswana United Nations and
others: Resident Coordinator Office, OHCHR, UNICEF, UN-Women () Baseline (2021):
19% (women), % (youth) Target (2026): () 30% (women), 20% (youth) Data source:
MLGRD, IEC Frequency: Every  years Indicator : Number of incumbent and aspirant
women, youth and persons-with-disabilities public office holders with the
requisite knowledge and skills to effectively participate in political decision-
making at national parliament and local government levels Baseline (2021):
Target (2026): 12,500 (women), 12,500 (youth) 750 (persons with disabilities)
Data source: UNDP, MNIGA, MYSC, IEC Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of
public sector/ministries with gender- responsive budgeting systems in place
Baseline (2021):  /16  DP/DCP/BWA/ Target (2026): 10 Data source: Line
ministries Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar  –
Sustainable environment COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP : By 2026, Botswana sustainably uses and actively manages its diverse
natural resources, improves food security and effectively addresses climate
change vulnerability/ RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development PLANET Government:
Ministry of Mineral Resources, Green Technology and Energy Security (MMGE),
Ministry of Environment Natural Resources Conservation and Tourism (MENT),
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MOAFS), #SmartBots Regular: $581,000
Indicator  Percentage of contribution of renewable energy to total energy
consumption Baseline (2016): % Target: 12% Data source: Department of Energy
progress reports, Statistics Botswana reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
Department of Energy Output  National capacities to implement appropriate
climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies strengthened Other:
$15,419,000 Indicator  National disaster risk reduction and mitigation
strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,
adopted Baseline: Yes (not fully) Target: Yes (fully) Data source: National and
district disaster coordination and preparedness reports Frequency: Annual CSOs:
National CSOs Data source: MENT reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
Department of Meteorology Indicator  Level of emissions from greenhouse gases
Baseline (2010): 81307 Gg of CO2 eq Target: 7346 Gg of CO2 eq United Nations and
others: FAO, World Bank, European Union, United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) Indicator  (IRRF ): Percentage of population with primary
reliance on clean fuels and technology Baseline (2021): <10% Target (2026): off
grid >50%, on grid >30% Data source: MMGE Frequency: Annual Indicator : The
extent to which ecosystem-based adaptation (EBA) criterion are included in
planning legislation and land use master planning guidelines Baseline (2021):
119 Target (2026):  Data source: MENT Frequency: Annual Indicator  (IRRF ):
Existence of data that incorporate the contribution of climate change adaptation
and mitigation solutions and contribute to national reporting requirements
Baseline (2021): No Target (2026): Yes Data source: National Communication
Reports, NDC Report 19 =Low, =high /16  DP/DCP/BWA/ DP/DCP/ Frequency: Annual
Government: MENT, MOAFS, BITRI Output  Capacities of departments and communities
strengthened to develop and implement innovative and sustainable rangeland and
agricultural management strategies CSOs: National CSOs Indicator  Percentage of
livestock management associations implementing the range management strategies
at district level Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source: UNDP, MOAFS
Frequency: Annual United Nations and others: FAO Indicator  Percentage increase
of farmers implementing climate smart agricultural principles and techniques in
non-irrigated crop production (disaggregated by sex) Baseline (2021): <20%
(male: 10%, female: %) Target (2026): 50% (male: 20%, female: 30%) Data source:
MOAFS, BITRI Frequency: Annual Indicator  Existence of  functional and
integrated national climate information and disaster early warning system
(contributing to IRRF ) Baseline (2021): No Target (2026): Yes Data source: MENT
Frequency: Annual Output  National institutions and local communities have
strengthened technical capacities to conserve and manage biodiversity and
wildlife in line with international conventions Government: MENT CSOs: Local
CSOs and community-based organizations (CBOs) Indicator : Protected Area
management effectiveness scores show  persistent increase year-on-year Baseline
(2021):  Target (2026): 67%20 Data source: MENT Frequency: Annual United Nations
and others: Indicator : Capacity of wildlife management institutions and law
enforcement agencies to tackle Illegal Wildlife Trade strengthened Baseline: 28%
Target (2026): 50% Data source: MENT 20 13% increase per year 10  DP/DCP/BWA/
Frequency: Annual Government: MENT Output  National capacities strengthened to
develop and implement gender-responsive, environmental and disaster management
policies and strategies CSOs: National CSOs Indicator : Number of gender-
responsive legislative frameworks with costed action plans to address
environmental management challenges Baseline (2021): 021 Target (2026):  Data
source: MENT Frequency: Annual United Nations and others: FAO Indicator :
Percentage reduction in the volume of waste going to landfills Baseline (2021):
Target (2026): 10% Data source: MENT Frequency: Quarterly Indicator : Number of
district Social and Environmental Assessments which are integrated into relevant
local government planning tools Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source:
MENT Frequency: Biannual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036 Pillar -
Sustainable economic development COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, Botswana has strengthened resilience to shocks and
emergencies and is on  sustainable, equitable economic trajectory, reducing
levels of inequality, poverty and unemployment RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Outcome  Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions PROSPERITY
Indicator  Annual growth rate of real GDP per capita Baseline: -% (due to
COVID-19) Target: % Data source: Quarterly economic bulletins, National Accounts
reports Frequency: Quarterly Responsibility: Statistics Botswana Output
Strengthened, participatory and resilient private sector and MSMEs to create
green jobs through inclusive strategies Government: MOFED, Ministry of
Investment Trade and Industry (MITI), MNIGA, Botswana Investment and Trade
Centre (BITC), Local Enterprise Authority (LEA), Citizen Entrepreneurial
Development Agency (CEDA), Botswana Innovation Hub (BIH), #SmartBots Regular:
$363,000 Indicator  Number of MSMEs with innovative technology solutions to
enhance product value addition (disaggregated by urban and rural locations)
Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 50 Other: $,637,000 Indicator  Data source:
Labour force CSOs: TBC 21 =low, =high 11  DP/DCP/BWA/ DP/DCP/ Unemployment rate
by sex, age and persons with disabilities Baseline: % Target:15% survey,
quarterly reports Frequency: Quarterly Responsibility: Statistics Botswana Data
source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP Frequency: Annual Private sector: Business
Botswana, business and labour associations Indicator : Number of MSMEs with
innovative financing solutions to improve access to finance (disaggregated by
sex, age and persons with disabilities ownership) Baseline (2021):  Target
(2026): 50 Data source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP United Nations and others:
FAO, WEF, European Union Indicator  Labour share of GDP comprising wages and
social protection transfers Baseline (2016): % Target: TBD Data source: Labour
Force Survey - Quarterly report Frequency: Quarterly Responsibility: Statistics
Botswana Indicator : Number of additional youth, women and persons with
disabilities-led/owned MSMEs benefiting from business development support
initiatives Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 75 (youth: 35, women: 30, persons
with disabilities: 10) Data source: MITI, CEDA, LEA, BITC, UNDP Frequency:
Annual Data source: Quarterly economic bulletins, GDP quarterly reports
Frequency: Quarterly Responsibility: Statistics Botswana, Ministry of Finance
and Economic Development (MOFED) Indicator  Contribution of non-mining sector to
GDP Baseline: Fourth quarter 2020 (88% non-mining, 12% mining) Target: 90% non-
mining, 10% mining) Output  Robust research and development, innovation and
digital approaches enabled at national and subnational levels for improved
competitiveness and sustainable job creation Government: MITI, Ministry of
Tertiary Education (MOTE), BIH, BITC, LEA, CEDA, #SmartBots CSOs: TBC Indicator
: Number of new market-ready products and services developed through innovative
solutions Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 10 Data source: LEA, BITC, BIH,
BIUST, CEDA Frequency: Annual Private sector: Botswana Business, business and
labour associations United Nations and others: SADC, European Union, University
of Botswana, Botswana International University of Science and Technology (BIUST)
Indicator : Number of locally developed research and development-led, innovative
and digital approaches tested towards improving products, competitiveness and
service provision Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source: BIH, University
of Botswana, BIUST Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of new partnerships with
private sector associations in areas of research and development, innovation and
digital solutions Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source: LEA, BITC, BIH,
University of Botswana, BIUST, technical and vocational education and training
(TVET) institutions Frequency: Annual Output  Economic diversification strategy
implemented strengthening exports and green growth Government: MOFED, MITI,
MIAC, BITC, SB, SEZA, BURS 12  DP/DCP/BWA/ CSOs: TBC Indicator : Number of green
jobs created (disaggregated by sex) Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 100 (male:
40, female: 60) Data source: Business Botswana, MITI, UNDP Frequency: Annual
Private sector: Business Botswana, BEMA, Freight Forwarders’ Association United
Nations and others: UNCTAD, SADC Indicator : Number of new non-traditional
export products developed to enhance export diversification Baseline (2021):
Target (2026): 20 Data source: Statistics Botswana, BITC, MITI, BOB, MOFED,
SEZA, BURS Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of new bilateral, regional and
multilateral trade arrangements between Botswana and partners Baseline (2021):
Target (2026):  Data source: MITI, BITC, BURS, MIAC Frequency: Annual Output
Capacities developed for expansion of inclusive social protection systems and
efficient local public service delivery Government: MOPAGPA, MLGRD, MTC, BIH,
#SmartBots, other government ministries Indicator : Number of locally developed
innovations/solutions identified and tested for enhanced public services
delivery Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source: MLGRD, GICO, MOPAGPA
Frequency: Annual CSOs: TBC United Nations and others: UNICEF, ILO, UNFPA
Indicator : Number of decentralized services reaching men and women/citizens in
peri-urban and rural areas Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data source: MLGRD,
GICO, MOPAGPA and other ministries Frequency: Annual Indicator : Extent to which
gender-sensitive social protection systems and programmes have been consolidated
and are being implemented around the life-cycle approach (contributing to IRRF )
13  DP/DCP/BWA/ DP/DCP/ Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 322 Data source: MLGRD
and other ministries Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Vision 2036
Pillar – Human and social development, and - Governance, peace and security
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, Botswana
is  just society, where leaders are accountable, transparent and responsive,
corruption reduced, and where people are empowered to access information,
services and opportunities, and participate in decisions that affect their lives
and livelihoods RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development PEACE AND PARTNERSHIPS Indicator
Transparency index – corruption perception rankings Baseline:  Target: 20 Data
source: Annual reports, internal bulletins Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
OHCHR, Human Rights Office, Ombudsman Office Output  Enhanced public access to
information and increased protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms in
line with national legislation, plans and strategies, and international
agreements and SDGs Government: MOPAGPA, MLGRD, MDJS, Administration of Justice
(AOJ), Attorney General’ Chambers (AGC), MNIGA, BIH, DCEC, MIAC, #SmartBots
Regular: $182,000 Other: $,818,000 Indicator : Percentage of Government
Gazettes, policies, legislation, judgements of the High Court and Court of
Appeal and regulations freely available to the public from 1990 to Baseline
(2021): % Target (2026): 100% Data source: Botswana LII Frequency: Annual CSOs:
WAR, BGBVC Indicator  Level of confidence in delivery of basic public service
Baseline: 123 Target:  Data source: Corruption perception index website/reports,
Mo Ibrahim Index Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Directorate on Corruption and
Economic Crime (DCEC) Private Sector: Business Botswana United Nations and
others: OHCHR, UN-Women, UNFPA, UNICEF Indicator : Number of policies, laws and
tools that guarantee public access to information and statistics Baseline
(2021): 224 Target (2026):  Data source: BGIS, Statistics Botswana Frequency:
Annually Data source: SDG progress report, treaty body reports Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: MIAC, MOFED Indicator : Number of magistrates and judges that
effectively use virtual court for adjudication (contributing to IRRF ) Baseline
(2021):  Target (2026): 32 (28 Magistrates Court,  High Courts) Data source:
AOJ, MNIGA, MTC, BGBVC, WAR Frequency: Annual Output  Increased effectiveness,
accountability, and transparency amongst institutions at all levels Government:
All Indicator : Number of additional anti-corruption measures for CSOs: All 22
-low, =high 231 – low, =high 24 National Statistical Act and Public Information
Bill 14  DP/DCP/BWA/ improved transparency and accountability implemented
Baseline (2021): 225 Target (2026): 426 Data source: DCEC, parliamentary
oversight committees Frequency: Annual United Nations and others: OHCHR, UNODC,
UNICEF Indicator : Number of new platforms/mechanisms at national and
subnational levels created to enable the population to express their voice
freely and confidently and to hold government and duty- bearers accountable
Baseline (2021): 027 Target (2026): 328 Data source: BGIS Frequency: Annual
Indicator : Extent to which the Botswana Human Rights Institution is able to
implement its human rights mandate Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Data
source: Ombudsman, MOPAGPA Frequency: Annual Output  Capacity of justice and
rule of law institutions enabled at national and subnational levels for improved
access and redress, including for gender-based violence cases Government: MNIGA,
MDJS, AOJ, MLGRD, Ministry of Transport and Communications (MTC), #SmartBots,
Legal Aid Botswana Indicator : Extent to which the use of digital courts
improves case turnaround time (contributing to IRRF ) Baseline (2021): 029
Target (2026):  Data source: AOJ Frequency: Annual CSOs: All United Nations and
others: OHCHR, UN-Women, UNFPA, UNICEF Indicator : Percentage increase of
indigent people benefiting from legal aid services (disaggregated by sex)
(contributing to IRRF ) Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 50% Data source: Legal
Aid Botswana Frequency: Annually 25 Corruption and Economic Crime Act (1994),
Whistleblowing Act (2016) 26 Revised CECA, Revised Whistleblowing Act 27
Consultative meetings, ministry websites and toll-free numbers already existing
28 = low,  = high 29  = not started Digital courts not yet rolled out 15
DP/DCP/BWA/ DP/DCP/ Indicator : Number of customary courts capacitated to
deliver fair and uniform sentences for gender-based violence, including conflict
resolution Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): 520 Data source: AOJ, MLGRD
Frequency: Annually 16