RENEWABLE READINESS ASSESSMENT EL SALVADOR December 2020 © IRENA 2020 Unless
otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely used, shared,
copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that appropriate
acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder Material in
this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject to separate
terms of use and restrictions, and appropriate permissions from these third
parties may need to be secured before any use of such material Citation: IRENA
(2020), IRENA Renewable Readiness Assessment: El Salvador, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi ISBN: -- About IRENA The International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that
supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy future, and serves
as the principal platform for international co-operation,  centre of excellence,
and  repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on
renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of
all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower,
ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy
access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity
Acknowledgements This report was prepared by IRENA in close collaboration with
the Government of the Republic of El Salvador, as represented by the Executive
Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River (CEL) and the National Energy
Council (CNE) Special thanks are also due to numerous officials, especially
those from Cucumacayán Electricity Company (CECSA), Transmission Company of El
Salvador (ETESAL), Salvadorean Geothermal (LaGeo), Ministry of Economy and
General Electricity and Telecommunications Superintendence (SIGET) This report
benefited from the inputs of various experts, most notably Victor Hugo Ventura
(ECLAC), Isabel Griesheim, Tatiana Orellana and Rigoberto Salazar (GIZ), Lorena
Di Chiara (IDB), Medardo Cadena (OLADE) IRENA colleagues including Arjun Guha,
Carlos Fernandez, Imen Gherboudj, Jack Kiruja, Paul Komor, Rafael Ferreira
(Formerly IRENA), Ricardo Gorini, Rodrigo Leme, Vanessa Interiano (Formerly
IRENA) and Salvador Rivas (Consultant) also provided valuable guidance and input
Contributing authors: José Torón (IRENA), Fabian Barrera (IRENA), Gürbü Gönü
(IRENA), Binu Parthan (IRENA), Chris Marshall (formerly IRENA), and Juan Estrada
(IRENA) Report available for download:  For further information or to provide
feedback: publications@irenaorg Disclaimer This publication and the material
herein are provided “as is” All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA
to verify the reliability of the material in this publication However, neither
IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content
providers provides  warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, and they
accept no responsibility or liability for any consequence of use of the
publication or material herein The information contained herein does not
necessarily represent the views of all Members of IRENA The mention of specific
companies or certain projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed
or recommended by IRENA in preference to others of  similar nature that are not
mentioned The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do
not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the
legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries  Renewab
les  eadi ness  ssessm ent EL SALVADOR Foreword from the President of the
Executive Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River For 75 years, the
Executive Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River (CEL) has positioned
itself as  benchmark in power generation in El Salvador, creating important
hydropower and geothermal energy projects that for several years have
contributed to the economy of the country as well as to improve the quality of
life of millions of Salvadorans Since its creation, CEL has directed its efforts
in the country’ development through the energy output of four hydropower plants,
with coverage across  broad area of national territory Historically, these power
plants enabled the electrification of the country, giving rise to national
industrialisation and, in turn, the steady growth we see today Over time, CEL
has created programmes that contribute to environmental conservation, improving
landscapes, caring for ecosystems, and developing social initiatives to enhance
the capacities of the most vulnerable, reflecting principles that must always be
considered when exploring and developing new sustainable energy projects CEL has
diversified its business to include renewables, including geothermal projects
undertaken through its subsidiary company LaGeo, which has set international
standards, training professionals from Latin American countries who seek to
explore and promote this so-called “white gold” Under the government of
President Nayib Bukele, CEL and its companies have taken on another key role,
initiating projects to reduce the price of electricity for the Salvadoran people
and boost the economy, even in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic This is why
CEL is working to explore, create and promote renewable power generation through
geothermal, solar photovoltaic, wind and hydropower projects One ongoing
flagship project focuses on constructing the new ‘ de febrero’ hydropower plant
This efficient, transparently managed dam project, when completed, will further
boost the Salvadoran energy mix while also bringing other benefits, such as job
creation and enhanced tourism development The efforts of CEL and others in
initiating the energy transition have also benefited from the support of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), with which we have been working
for some years in  co-ordinated and synergistic way This co-operation will allow
us to continue strengthening our endeavours to scale up renewable energy The
Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) for El Salvador provides  key milestone
that aims to promote new initiatives and instruments, particularly to improve
the efficiency of public policies and regulations on energy Even in the midst of
pandemic, this assessment can help to create suitable conditions for the
widespread, sustainable deployment of renewables in El Salvador Consequently,
the recommendations are in line with the government’ energy policy, which
proposes increasing public investment in projects to develop and use new
renewable energy sources, as well as reviewing and reconfiguring the country’
energy mix On behalf of our President and the Government of El Salvador,  wish
to express the greatest appreciation for IRENA’ valuable and constant support,
as well as for the honour conferred on the Republic of El Salvador in holding
the Vice Presidency of the IRENA Assembly in Daniel Alejandro Álvarez Campos
President, CEL Republic of El Salvador  FOREWORD Foreword from the Executive
Secretary of the National Energy Council The main renewable resources used in El
Salvador for electricity generation are geothermal and hydropower While variable
renewable power is growing considerably, there is much more potential for these
resources, either for electricity or direct uses This report, prepared with the
support of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) identifies the
conditions to expand the use of renewables nationally Input from multiple
stakeholders in the Salvadorian energy sector has been key in identifying
priorities for action in key sectors like agriculture, industry, tourism and
health, aimed at utilising solar, geothermal and biomass resources, driving
decentralised economic development, and ensuring environmental and social
benefits in the short, medium and long term El Salvador adheres to environmental
commitments under international agreements Its national policy aims to further
deepen the energy transition, with  view to ensuring  sustainable energy supply,
strengthen our economy, bring widespread benefits to the Salvadoran population
while increasing our resilience to climate change The National Energy Council
continues to work on updating institutional and regulatory frameworks to promote
optimal resource use and the efficient implementation of appropriate
technologies We reiterate our gratitude to IRENA, as well as to all the
stakeholders involved in the development of this assessment We reaffirm our
commitment to develop enabling initiatives for renewables in all sectors and
position El Salvador as  reference case in the use of renewable energy José
Salvador Handal Candray Executive Secretary, National Energy Council Republic of
El Salvador  Foreword from the IRENA Director-General The Republic of El
Salvador, like other countries in Central America, the Latin American region and
around the world, faces unprecedented health and socio-economic challenges amid
the COVID-19 pandemic Beyond short-term recovery measures, the national response
has started to focus on longer-term measures, such as ensuring energy security,
aligning new investments with climate commitments and building  resilient
economy The decarbonisation of El Salvador’ energy sector can pave the way for
broad-based, sustainable socio-economic development in years to come For now,
the growing demand for energy continues to be met mainly through oil imports
However, indigenously sourced renewables are assuming  larger role The new
National Energy Policy  aims to diversify El Salvador’ energy mix and take
advantage of the country’ significant renewable energy resource potential At the
same time, the policy highlights the need to reduce dependence on fossil fuels
and mitigate the impact of climate change This means adopting energy storage,
efficiency measures, digitalisation and other innovative technologies, as well
as promoting renewables beyond the power sector This Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA), prepared through  broad-based consultative process in close
co- operation with the Executive Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River
(CEL) and the National Energy Council (CNE), examines El Salvador’ energy sector
holistically The report identifies key actions to expand renewable energy
development in the short and medium term Discussions with stakeholder have also
heightened knowledge exchange and fostered international co-operation to promote
clean, indigenous renewable energy technologies The report examines planning and
operations, the existing regulatory framework and the financing mechanisms that
could come into play to achieve the country’ long-term renewable energy
ambitions The assessment underlines the role of the Central American power
market and ongoing regional energy integration, in line with IRENA’ Clean Energy
Corridor of Central America (CECCA) initiative Since 2011, nearly 40 countries,
spanning the Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and
the Pacific have undertaken RRAs, exchanging knowledge and fostering
international co-operation to accelerate the deployment of renewables Each
process has been country-led, with IRENA providing technical expertise and
highlighting regional and global insights, along with facilitating national
stakeholder consultations IRENA wishes to thank CEL, CNE and all Salvadorian
energy institutions for their vital input and engagement We also appreciate the
valuable contributions of numerous other government agencies and national
stakeholders We look forward to working with all of them, as well as with
regional institutions and development partners, to turn these recommendations
into practical on-the-ground initiatives that promote renewables as  key element
in sustainable, equitable socio-economic development  sincerely hope this report
and its recommendations will strengthen El Salvador’ pursuit of renewables and
enhanced climate action IRENA stands ready to assist in the country’ transition
to  sustainable energy future Francesco La Camera Director-General, IRENA
Contents Figures  Tables  Boxes  Abbreviations and acronyms 10 Executive summary
12  Introducton 15 Country background 15 Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA)
in El Salvador 18  Energy context 19 Energy sector overview 19 Power sector 21
Energy sector institutions and governance 26 Energy policies and regulatory
framework 28 International power trade 29  Renewable energy developments 33
Drivers of renewable energy deployment 33 Renewable energy resources 35
Renewable energy master plan 38 Renewable energy support mechanisms in the power
sector 40 Renewable energy project procedures and permits 44 Renewable energy
project pipeline 46 Renewable energy financing 48  Recommendations for
addressing the main barriers hindering the deployment of renewable energy  50
Enhance long-term planning and policy for the renewable energy sector 50 Create
enabling conditions for geothermal energy development 52 Establish clear
institutional frameworks and co-ordination 54 Assess the implementation of
distributed power generation 55 Foster project development and financing for
renewables 56  References 58  Appendices 62 Appendix  Overview of entities in
the energy sector 62 Appendix  Installed and available capacity of power plants,
2018 64 Appendix  Location of on-grid power generators, 2018 65 Appendix
Certified electricity generation projects using renewable resources, 2017 66
Appendix  Small projects that obtained  concession to generate hydroelectricity,
2017 66  Figures Tables Figure  Annual population growth (%) (FY 2000 and 2019)
Economic indicators Table  16 15 Additional installed capacity per source by
2026 Table  Figure  GDP per capita, PPP (current international USD) (FY 2000 and
FY 2019) 39 Support instruments to promote renewable energy Table  16 41 Figure
Proportion of population with access to electricity Summary of results among
conducted wholesale market renewable energy auctions in El Salvador Table  17
Figure  Total energy supply by source 19 43 Figure  Total energy supply, 2019
[%] 20 Summary of results among conducted renewable distributed generation
auctions in El Salvador Table  Figure  Final energy consumption by sector, 2019
20 43 Figure  Electricity consumption by economic sector, 2019 (%) Table
Candidate power plant projects 46 20 Figure  Electricity consumption per capita
21 Figure  Total installed power capacity by source, 2019 Figure 10 Development
of electricity demand (minimum and maximum demand by year) Boxes 21 22 The Clean
Energy Corridor of Central America Box  Figure 11 Gross electricity generation
by type of resource 32 23 Electricity tariffs Box  34 Figure 12 Net electricity
supply by resource, The Geothermal Centre of Excellence in El Salvador Box  2018
(%) 23 36 Figure 13 Generation and transmission IRENA Global Atlas Geospatial
and Site assessment services Box  system, 2018 24 38 Figure 14 Wholesale
electricity market IRENA Regional REmap & FlexTool Box  structure 39 25 Figure
15 Institutional structure of energy Climate Investment Platform (CIP) Box  49
sector 27 Figure 16 Regional electricity system (SIEPAC line) Figure 17 Imports
and exports in the 30 regional market, per country 31 Figure 18 Residential
electricity rates of some of the main distribution companies in SICA, for
consumption of 50, 100, 200, and 400 kWh - December 2018 34 Figure 19 El
Salvador: Global horizontal irradiation, kWh/m2, 1km 1994-2015 Figure 20 El
Salvador: Average wind speed at 100  hub height 37 37 Figure 21 Permitting
stages 44  Abbreviations AEP ETESAL Annual Energy Production (AEP) Transmission
Company of El Salvador (Empresa Transmisora de El Salvador) ANDA National
Administration of Aqueducts and Sewers (Administración Nacional de Acueductos
Alcantarillados) EU European Union FISDL Social Investment Fund for Local
Development (Fondo de Inversión Social para el Desarrollo Local) BANDESAL El
Salvador Development Bank (Banco de Desarrollo de El Salvador) CABEI FINET
Central American Bank for Economic Integration National Investment Fund for
Electricity and Telephony (Fondo de Inversión en Electricidad  Telefonía) CD-MER
Council of the Regional Electricity Market (Consejo Director del MER) FMO
Development Finance Company (Netherlands) CDM Clean Development Mechanism GCF
Green Climate Fund CECCA Clean Energy Corridor of Central America GDF Geothermal
Development Facility for Latin America CECSA Cucumacayán Electricity Company
(Compañía Eléctrica Cucumacayán) GDP Gross Domestic Product CEL Executive
Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River (Comisión Ejecutiva Hidroeléctrica
del Río Lempa) GJ Gigajoule GW Gigawatt GWh Gigawatt hour CER Certified Emission
Reductions IDB Inter-American Development Bank CIP Climate Investment Platform
INE Energy Investments (Inversiones Energéticas) CLP Long-Term Contract
(Contratos de Largo Plazo) IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency CNE
National Energy Council (Consejo Nacional de Energía) JICA Japan International
Cooperation Agency CPI Consumer Price Index KfW German Development Bank CRIE
Regional Commission for Electrical Interconnection (Comisión Regional de
Interconexión Eléctrica) KWh/kWp/ yr Kilowatt hours per kilowatt peak per year
DC Consumer Advocacy (Defensoría del Consumidor) KWh Kilowatt hour kV Kilovolt
DRHM Regulatory Directorate of Hydrocarbons and Mines (Dirección Reguladora de
Hidrocarburos  Minas) LAIF Latin America Investment Facility LCOE Levelised cost
of electricity LNG Liquefied natural gas EDP Pacific Energy (Energía del
Pacifico) LPG Liquefied petroleum gas EOR Regional Operating Entity (Ente
Operador Regional) LaGeo Salvadorean Geothermal (Geotérmica Salvadoreña) EPR
Enterprise Owner of the Central American Electrical Interconnection System
(Empresa Propietaria de la Red) MARN Ministry of the Environment and Natural
Resources (Ministerio de Medio Ambiente  Recursos Naturales) 10 RRA MER
Renewables Readiness Assessment Regional Electricity Market (Mercado Eléctrico
Regional) RTL Regional transmission line MH Ministry of Finance (Ministerio de
Hacienda) SC The Superintendence of Competition (Superintendencia de
Competencia) MICULTURA Ministry of Culture (Ministerio de SDGs Sustainable
Development Goals Cultura) SE4All Sustainable Energy for All MINEC Ministry of
Economy (Ministerio de Economía) SIEPAC Central American Electrical
Interconnection System (Sistema de Interconexión Eléctrica de los Países de
América Central) MINSAL Ministry of Health (Ministerio de Salud) MJ Megajoule
SIGET General Electricity and Telecommunications Superintendence
(Superintendencia General de Electricidad  Telecomunicaciones) MOP Ministry of
Public Works and Transport (Ministerio de Obras Públicas  de Transporte) MRS The
spot market (Mercado Regulador del Sistema) SME Small and médium sized
enterprises / metres per second tC/ha/yr Tonnes of carbon per hectare per year
MW Megawatt TJ Terajoules MWh Megawatt hour UNDP United Nations Development
Programme MWp Megawatt peak UT Transactions Unit (Unidad de Transacciones) NDC
Nationally determined contribution & Operation and maintenance VAT Value added
tax OLADE Latin American Energy Organisation (Organización Latinoamericana de
Energía) VMDU Department of Housing and Urban Development (Viceministerio de
Vivienda  Desarrollo Urbano) PPA Power purchase agreement VRE Variable renewable
energy PPP Purchasing Power Parity /m2 Watts per square metre PV Photovoltaic 11
Executive summary El Salvador depends heavily on fossil fuels to meet its energy
needs for industry, transport and, to  certain extent, power generation
Increasingly, the country also imports electricity from neighbouring countries
to meet domestic demand Renewable energy use – already seen in hydropower and
geothermal projects – could therefore be scaled up further and faster in the
Central American country The General Electricity Law of 1996, which liberalised
the power sector, also allowed for more private sector participation in
renewable energy development, alongside the government’ more active promotion of
renewable energy sources The National Energy Policy  then became  key tool for
the implementation of renewable energy, especially in the power sector Indeed,
no new fossil- fuel based power generators have been added since By 2019,
renewables, including hydropower, biomass, solar photovoltaic (PV) and
geothermal power, had reached % of the country’ total installed capacity of
gigawatts (GW) Since 2015, solar PV capacity alone has grown nearly tenfold,
reaching 273 megawatts (MW) in Encouragingly, the past decade has seen national
energy policy recognise the benefits of developing solar, wind and bioenergy, as
wide range of renewable energy technologies can help to diversify the energy
mix, expand electricity access and strengthen regional energy integration El
Salvador’ economy, based mainly on services, industry and agriculture, grew by
an estimated % in 2019, within  moderate average annual growth rate of its gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita of % over the last 20 years Regardless of
persistent challenges, El Salvador has made substantial social and economic
progress over the last two decades, with national policies increasingly
mirroring with the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
Additionally, El Salvador is connected to the Central American Electrical
Interconnection System (SIEPAC – Sistema de Interconexión Eléctrica de los
Países de América Central), making the country an active participant in the
Regional Electricity Market (MER – Mercado Eléctrico Regional) Electricity
imports, mainly from Guatemala, accounted for around 21% of the country’
electricity supply in With no domestic oil, gas or coal supply, the country
depends entirely on imported fossil fuels, which accounted for 69% of its total
energy supply in Yet the energy sector continues to be recognised as  strong
contributor to economic and social development The country has prioritised the
development of renewables to mitigate import improve energy security dependency
and thus Renewables are also expected to stimulate local commerce and industry,
help reduce electricity tariffs and improve people’ welfare The National Energy
Council (CNE – Consejo Nacional de Energía) is currently developing its long
term National Energy Policy 2020-This aims to reduce the electricity tariff
through added renewable power generation, facilitating the removal of
electricity subsidies towards the end of the policy period This new strategy
goes beyond the power sector, too, stipulating targets for clean energy
technologies in end-use sectors and energy efficiency, as well as promoting
pilot projects for direct use of renewables in the industrial and agri-food
sectors 12 The country’ Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process has
highlighted key actions for the short and medium-term that could create more
conducive conditions for renewable energy deployment The country-led assessment,
facilitated by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), aims to help
unlock El Salvador’ renewable energy potential The identified actions are
grouped in five areas, where the main challenges have been identified for direct
uses  more in-depth review of the regulatory framework could also help to
overcome challenges with the existing remuneration scheme, as well as the
licensing procedure currently in place for geothermal projects Likewise,
geothermal project developers struggle to access financing options, underlining
the need to further enhance the capabilities of local financial institutions and
project owners to help create  better understanding of funding geothermal
projects and its associated risks Challenges and key recommendations  Enhance
long-term planning and policy for the renewable energy sector  Establish clear
institutional frameworks and co-ordination Competitive tendering processes and
various fiscal incentives for renewable electricity have helped to create good
business conditions for renewables in El Salvador, resulting in significant
uptake of renewable energy technologies Currently, responsibilities among
institutions in the country’ energy sector remain decentralised, which is
affecting the performance of the sector and is clearly reflected in the absence
of longer term co-ordination of different participants’ action plans El Salvador
may consider several options to improve this condition, including the creation
of an entity that centralises sector development and directives rapid Yet
renewable energy development has highlighted insufficient co-ordination in terms
of long-term energy plans El Salvador could devise  more comprehensive national
energy plan, encompassing all energy technologies, suppliers and consumers
through an integrated analysis of current market conditions The plan should also
consider the integration of renewable energy technologies for end uses in
buildings, heat and transport, while establishing clear targets that contribute
to the ongoing scale-up of renewables Additionally, the national the development
of transmission system and of new generation facilities are undertaken
separately Potential new renewable- based power generation, therefore, is not
consistently included in transmission expansion plans Such plans, moreover, tend
to overlook the short construction times needed for solar and wind (variable
renewable energy) facilities El Salvador benefited greatly from regional energy
integration and plays an active role in the MER The country should therefore
incorporate the Regional Energy Strategy 2030 in its national long-term planning
efforts This is in line with the country’ overall development strategy and
assures the participation of both public and private sectors Measures are needed
to ensure closer collaboration between the entities responsible for developing
such plans For instance, the identification of renewable energy zones in the
most suitable areas for project development could serve to inform both
transmission and generation planners, facilitating  co-ordinated planning effort
Create enabling conditions for  Assess the implementation of distributed power
generation geothermal energy development Despite having  long tradition of
geothermal energy use, El Salvador’ geothermal development has stagnated in
recent years, with  limited number of new projects for geothermal power
generation, or heating applications The implementation of the net metering
scheme in 2017 has resulted in  successful promotion of rooftop solar PV
generation Yet, there is still no clear understanding of the effects that the
growing self- generation practice has on the reliability of the power system and
the overall energy market El Salvador’ geothermal potential could be also
utilised for direct-use applications, but the existing regulatory framework only
covers power applications Classifications need to be established for geothermal
resources by temperature, including varying potential To improve this, all
existing use of self-generation must first be registered This should consider
both self-use and the potential injection of energy into the grid from existing
projects This exercise could provide  better 13 assessment of the existing
regulatory framework, while considering the stability of the grid and the
existing distribution market, as well as empowering end users for relatively
flexible energy management El Salvador’ long-term uptake of renewable energy
technologies will also hinge on assessing the availability, along with the
potential for improvement and expansion, of existing financing instruments
Existing mechanisms and conditions for financing and risk mitigation by private
institutions, similarly, must be clear to ensure that project developers can
make use of these instruments Additionally, local private institutions will need
to be familiarised with the renewable energy market to attract more interest
from them in project finance  Foster project development and financing for
renewables There have been significant achievements and progress in regulation
for the development of renewable energy in El Salvador Renewable project
developers still face challenges, however, with administrative procedures and
permits These are not centralised and cause delays in project development
Regulation in this area must ensure transparent processes and well-defined
timetables for obtaining permits  unified national office (or “single-window
agency”) should be established to handle all applicable licenses and permits for
renewable energy projects, reducing project delays and development costs
implementation of in close The these steps, collaboration with all national and
regional stakeholders from the private and public sector, should help El
Salvador attract investments that contribute towards  climate resilient, low-
emission development pathway Sonsonate Solar Plant, Acajutla, El Salvador Image
credit: Shutterstock 14  Introduction Country background 2010, however, the
growth rate has been slowly rising (see Figure ) With  land area covering only
21 040 square kilometres (km2), El Salvador is Central America’ smallest country
Bordering Guatemala to the west, Honduras to the east, and the Pacific Ocean to
the south, in 2018, El Salvador had an estimated population of just over
million This gave it  high population density, at inhabitants per km2 (UN, 2018)
In fiscal year (FY) 2019, El Salvador’ gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
at purchasing power parity (PPP) was around USD  As shown in Figure , this
number has been rising in recent years, with an average annual growth rate of %
from FY 2001 to FY This was, however, one of the lowest rates of growth in
Central America (World Bank, 2020b) Higher private consumption and  peak in
gross investment boosted annual average growth to % in FY 2006, while GDP shrank
% in FY 2009, following the global financial crisis Overall, annual population
growth in the country was low between 2000 and 2019, when compared to the
regional average in Latin America and the Caribbean, with the rate falling
between 2000 and Since Figure  Annual population growth (%) (FY 2000 and 2019)
) %        (                       20   20 05 20 04 20 03 20 01 20 08 20 06 20
07 20 02 2011 20 09 2013 2010 2014 2012 2015 2016 2019 2017 2018 Year El
Salvador LAC Based on: World Bank (2020a) 15 Figure  GDP per capita, PPP
(current international USD) (FY 2000 and FY 2019)  500  000  500  000  500  000
500  000  500  000  500  000 20   20 05 20 04 20 03 20 01 20 08 20 06 20 07 20
02 2011 20 09 2013 2010 2014 2012 2015 2016 2019 2017 2018 Year Based on: World
Bank (2020c) Table  Economic indicators 2015 2014 2016 2017 2018 2019 GDP growth
(annual %) 40 71 51 31 54 40 Agriculture, forestry, and fishing, value added (%
of GDP) 53 87 63 04 88 10 Industry (including construction), value added (% of
GDP) 01 29 80 16 35 60 Manufacturing, value added (% of GDP) 08 39 23 27 18 80
Services, value added (% of GDP) 42 01 46 67 34 50 Source: World Bank (2020d) In
FY 2018 and FY 2019, the Salvadoran economy saw annual GDP growth of % and %
respectively The largest contribution to the country’ GDP traditionally comes
from the services sector, followed by industry, manufacture and agriculture An
overview of the key economic indicators from 2014 to 2019 can be found in Table
loans (UN ECLAC, 2017) This was reflected in the national poverty rate, which
declined from % in 2000 to % in 2017 (DIGESTYC, 2018) The still relatively high
poverty rate is the result of both the country’ low overall economic growth and
trends in migration to urban areas The national deficit stood at approximately %
of GDP in 2017, down from % in 2015 (UN ECLAC, 2017) This decrease follows
reduced national oil bill, given that El Salvador imports all its oil products
and is thus highly dependent on international oil prices The economy has also
benefited from an improvement in real wages, stronger flows of worker
remittances and an increase in private consumption, including personal 16 The
Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador does not have complete monetary autonomy
This is due to the adoption of the United States dollar as the formal unit of
currency,  policy in force since 2001, as well as the free mobility of capital
As  result, the supply and demand for US dollars between locally-based financial
intermediaries is the main determinant of interest rates, in the short term
These intermediaries reported stable liquidity conditions in (UN ECLAC, 2017) El
Salvador is pursuing the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by including
it as part of its national development strategy The co-ordination of actions
related to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is led by the Presidency,
with the support of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (SDGs Knowledge Platform –
UN, ) Regarding SDG7 – ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all – El Salvador has made impressive progress Figure
presents the country’ access to electricity rates, with these reaching around
97% in 2018, compared to % in Over the last two decades, El Salvador has made
substantial progress its social and political development The country has
expanded access to its public services, which has directly contributed to
improved living conditions, including enhanced energy services Despite this
progress, however, the country’ long-term sustainable development continues to
face challenges, including threats from adverse natural events, environmental
degradation and climate change (World Bank, 2020b) in Other SDG7 indicators
reflect the country’ effort to achieve sustainable development across the energy
sector By 2016, 88% of the population had access to clean cooking, while the
same year, energy efficiency had improved to  megajoules (MJ) per USD of GDP
(UNStats, ) Figure  Proportion of population with access to electricity 100 95
90 85    80 75 70 65 20 05 2015 20 07 20   20 04 2014 20 06 1995 2016 20 08 2013
2010 20 09 2017 2011 2012 2018 20 03 Year Based on: UN ECLAC (2020) 17
Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) in El Salvador operators, financial
institutions, development partners, regional organisations, civil society and
academia, among others The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has
developed its Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) as  tool for carrying out
comprehensive evaluation of the conditions for renewable energy deployment in
given country The consultative process was launched during  meeting of experts
held in the country’ capital, San Salvador, in December This was based on
background paper, which described the challenges and opportunities for
renewables development The outcomes of these discussions facilitated the
identification of various challenges hindering the deployment of renewable
energy in the country, as well as possible solutions to these impediments The
RRA is  country-led, consultative process, providing  venue for multi-
stakeholder dialogue in renewable energy deployment The assessment then tries to
come up with solutions to existing barriers identifying challenges in The
challenges identified were grouped and assessed in  series of short and medium-
term draft recommendations These were then presented at  follow-up validation
workshop held in October 2019 and jointly organised by CEL and IRENA, with CNE’
support The main outcome of the discussion at this meeting was the validation of
the challenges identified, along with the proposed recommendations, with these
to be compiled in the final RRA report This process also benefitted from
bilateral interviews with key stakeholders short and medium-term The RRA
presents recommendations to governments to help guide the formation of new
policies and regulations, or to reform existing ones The aim is to create  more
enabling environment for the deployment of renewable energy The RRA also
consolidates existing efforts and mobilises resources for priority action For
the Republic of El Salvador, the RRA process has been led by the Executive
Hydroelectric Commission of the Lempa River (CEL – Comisión Ejecutiva
Hidroeléctrica del Río Lempa), in co-ordination with the National Energy Council
(CNE – Consejo Nacional de Energía) and with technical support from IRENA The
process involved extensive consultations with  large group of public and private
energy stakeholders, including the ministries, the regulator, generation
companies, transmission and distribution utilities, project developers, energy
market The co-ordinated approach employed in producing this RRA, which saw
consultation with governmental institutions, bilateral and multilateral co-
operation agencies, financial institutions, the private sector, regional
organisations, civil society and academia, helps set priorities for implementing
the actions recommended Renewables and COVID-19 recovery The COVID-19 outbreak
has led the countries around the world to an unprecedented economic, health and
social crisis The International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates  resultant
contraction of the economies in Central America of around  percent average
during These new regional conditions are undermining the economic growth of El
Salvador, however the new National Energy Policy  and the ongoing efforts
towards the revision of the NDCs by the country, are creating an opportunity to
centrally position the Salvadorian energy sector at the core of the post-COVID
recovery, focusing its efforts to achieve  green recovery Renewable energy
serves as an opportunity to increase energy security, attract investment to the
country and developing into  long-term source of jobs for its inhabitants
Additionally, investing in domestic renewable energy infrastructure offers the
potential to boost health capacity and build climate resilience It can also
greatly strengthen El Salvador’ post-COVID recovery efforts 18  Energy context
Energy sector overview Diesel has  high level of consumption, mainly in the
transport and industrial sectors Gasoline is used exclusively for the transport
sector, while fuel oil or bunker fuel is used for the generation of electricity
Natural gas does not have  relevant role in the country’ energy mix, yet In
2021, however,  liquefied natural gas (LNG) power plant is expected to be
commissioned, giving this resource  more prominent role in the energy sector
(see Section ) The bulk of El Salvador’ primary energy comes from fossil fuels
As shown in Figure , the total energy supply sources since 2010 have mainly been
oil derivatives, such as gasoline, diesel, liquid petroleum gas (LPG), kerosene
and bunker fuel (CNE, 2020) The total fossil supply accounted for  total 108 721
terajoules (TJ) in 2019, or 69% of the total energy supply Figure  Total energy
supply by source 180 000 160 000 140 000 )   (             120 000 100 000 80
000 60 000 40 000 20 000  2019 2018 2011 2012 2010 2013 2014 2015 2017 2016 Year
Oil derivatives Hydropower Geothermal Bioenergy Solar Based on: CNE (2020) 19
Figure  Total energy supply, 2019 [%] In 2019, total energy supply in El
Salvador reached around 156 600 TJ (see Figure ) That year, the renewable energy
source with the largest share as part of the primary energy supply was bioenergy
(%), followed by hydropower (%), geothermal energy (%), and solar energy (%)
(CNE, 2020) % % % % On the energy consumption side, the transport sector
accounts for the largest share, followed by the industrial and residential
sectors (Figure ) Final energy consumption in the transport sector increased
from 43 126 TJ in 2010 to 60 710 TJ in 2019, with the sector’ overall share
growing from 42% to 45% over the same period Between 2010 and 2019, the
residential and commercial sectors’ shares fell, reaching 21% and %
respectively, in 2019 (CNE, 2020) % % TPES (TJ) 156 663 Oil derivatives
Bioenergy Hydropower Solar Geothermal Imported electricity Based on: CNE (2020)
In terms of electricity consumption, in 2019, the total was 22 833 TJ As shown
in Figure , the industrial sector is the largest consumer (35%), followed by the
commercial, service and public sectors (34%) and the residential sector (31%)
Figure  Final energy consumption by sector, 2019 % % 21% 45% 27% TFEC (TJ)
133960 Transport Commercial and services Industry Residential Construction Based
on: CNE (2020) Figure  Electricity consumption by economic sector, 2019 (%) 34%
35% 31% Total (TJ) 22 833 Industry Residential Commercial and services City Hall
of Santa Ana Santa Ana, El Salvador Image credit: Shutterstock Based on: CNE
(2020) 20 Power sector In 2019, conventional thermal capacity stood at %,
followed by hydropower (%), biomass (%), solar photovoltaic (PV) (%) and
geothermal (%) Since 2015, solar PV capacity has grown nearly tenfold, reaching
273 MW in 2019 (including off-grid generation) Moreover, solar PV and wind
energy capacity is expected to grow in the coming years, as multiple projects
are in the pipeline Electricity supply and demand With 2018 seeing the
achievement of an electricity access rate of 97%, El Salvador is close to
universal access across the country (UN ECLAC, 2020) The remaining population
without access to electricity is located in rural areas that are widely
scattered Figure  Electricity consumption per capita From 2000 to 2014,
electricity consumption per capita grew from about 615 to 937 kilowatt hours
(kWh), following the same trend as the per capita GDP (Figure )  000 )
(                         900 800 As shown in Figure , in 2019, total installed
capacity in El Salvador reached  gigawatts (GW) (including off-grid generation)
In the last five years, the average annual growth rate of total installed
capacity has been around % Since 2013, however, there have been no new additions
of conventional thermal capacity (which in El Salvador has traditionally
corresponded to fuel oil and bunker fuel) Yet, this type of power generation
still has the largest share among all energy sources 700 600 500 400 20   20 01
20 02 20 03 20   20 05 20   20 07 20   20   2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Year Based
on: World Bank (2020e) Figure  Total installed power capacity by source, 2019
500  000 )   (                   500  000 500  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
2016 2017 2018 2019 Year Hydropower Solar Bioenergy Geothermal Non-renewable
Based on: IRENA (2020a) 21 Figure Development of electricity demand (minimum and
maximum demand by year) 1200 1000 800   600 400 200  1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2018 Min demand 191 228 207 227 219 260 273 250 265 327 341 320 329 351 345 344
362 368 371 400 372 397 Max demand 666 694 718 758 734 752 785 809 829 881 906
924 906 948 962 975 1004 1035 1089 1081 1081 1072 Source: SIGET (2019) in Figure
and peak demand in Figure 10, is given by the nominal installed capacity and the
reliability of generation Thermal power plants are at present used as  back-up
for variable renewable energy (VRE) generation Thermal electricity production in
El Salvador is, however, sometimes costlier than importing electricity within
the regional market, as will be presented in the section below As of 2018, El
Salvador’ power system consisted of 25 power plants located around the country
(Appendix ) These are interconnected with the electricity transmission system
and operate in the wholesale market This generating fleet is composed of four
hydropower plants operated by CEL (MW); two geothermal plants operated by LaGeo
(MW), ten thermal power plants (MW), where one is state owned and operated by
Energy Investments (INE – Inversiones Energéticas); five biomass power plants
(MW) and one solar PV plant (60 MW) In total, % of the total power generation
capacity in El Salvador is state owned  more detailed description can be found
in Appendix  The evolution of electricity generation in El Salvador between 2000
and 2018 is shown in Figure Since the 1990s, the Salvadoran electricity sector
has relied most heavily on thermal power generation, followed by hydropower and
geothermal energy Geothermal generation reached over  500 gigawatt hours (GWh)
in 2008 and has since stagnated Solar PV generation reached 309 GWh in 2018,
while bioenergy generation exceeded 700 GWh That same year, the share of non-
renewable energy generation reached one of its lowest values in the last decade,
at  200 GWh (IRENA, 2020a) Figure 10 shows the evolution of final electricity
demand from 1997 to In order to cover the average annual growth rate in demand,
which is between % and %, installed power capacity has increased The difference
between the installed capacity shown  The five biomass power plants are not
available all year long (SIGET, 2019) They are mostly available during the May
to October harvesting period 22 Figure Gross electricity generation by type of
resource  000  000  000 )    (                       000  000  000  000  20 05
20 04 20 06 20 02 20 01 20 03 20   20 07 2013 20 08 2015 2010 20 09 2014 2016
2012 2011 2017 2018 Year Hydropower Solar Bioenergy Geothermal Non-renewable
Source: IRENA (2020a) Figure Net electricity supply by resource, In recent
years, there has been  decrease in domestic electricity generation, mainly due
to growing electricity imports, most of which come from Guatemala Figure 11
reflects  clear reduction in domestic generation since 2014, with total net
electricity generation standing at  426 GWh in 2018 (%) % % % Figure 12 shows
net electricity supply (including imports) by generation resource in 2019, with
this accounting for  total of  GWh Fossil fuels held the greatest share, at %,
followed by net imports, at %, hydropower, at %, geothermal at %, and other
renewable energy sources (biomass, solar PV, etc) at % % % There is  high degree
of interaction between the Regional Electricity Market (MER – Mercado Eléctrico
Regional) and the national electricity market, as shown by the considerable
share taken by net imports In addition, at %, geothermal energy’ share in net
electricity supply is one of the highest in the world Total net electricity
supply (GWh)  Geothermal Thermal Biomass, Solar PV Hydro Net imports Source: UT
(2019) 23 Figure Generation and transmission system, 2018 Guajoyo Interconexión
con Guatemala Cerrón Grande Santa Ana  de Noviembre Linea SIEPAC Opico Nejapa
Ahuachapán San Rafael Cedros Sonsonate San Antonio Abad Ateos Soyapango San
Martin 15 de Septiembre San Bartolo Nuevo Talnique Acajutla Cuscatlán Tomás
Santo San Miguel Berlín Tecoluca Pedregal Ozatlán Transmission line 115 KV La
Unión SIEPAC transmission line 230 KV Pre-existing transmission line 230 KV
Fossil-based thermal power Geothermal power Hydroelectric power Source: SIGET
(2019) (SIGET – Superintendencia General de Electricidad  Telecomunicaciones) is
responsible for regulating the power sector Transmission system The Salvadoran
electricity transmission system relies on 230 kilovolt (kV) central lines that
also serve the interconnection with Guatemala and Honduras, as part of the
Central American Electrical Interconnection System (SIEPAC – Sistema de
Interconexión Eléctrica de los Países de América Central) This system’ regional
transmission line (RTL) has  transfer capacity at all borders in the region of
300 MW in one circuit The Salvadorian power market also includes generation and
distribution companies;  transmission system owner – the Transmission Company of
El Salvador (ETESAL – Empresa Transmisora de El Salvador);  market and system
operator in charge of power exchanges (the UT); electricity suppliers and
traders All these actors are subject to electricity regulation at the national
and MER levels The central lines are complemented by  372 km long transmission
lines, consisting of 40 lines at 115 kV ( 072 km) and four interconnection lines
at 230 kV (299 km) The UT manages the country’ electricity market and is
responsible for the operation of the transmission system (SIGET, 2019) in the
MER are: the Regional The key actors Commission for Electrical Interconnection
(CRIE – Comisión Regional de Interconexión Eléctrica), which is the regional
regulator; the Regional Operating Entity (EOR – Ente Operador Regional), which
is the system operator and market administrator; the Enterprise Owner of the
Regional Electric Grid (EPR – Empresa Propietaria de la Red); the Council of the
Regional Electricity Market (CD-MER – Consejo Director del MER), which is the
body in charge of regional policies; the regional generating companies; and
other market participants Wholesale power market The electricity market in El
Salvador comprises actors both (Figure 14) In addition to the CNE, which is in
charge of developing the national energy policy, the General Electricity and
Telecommunications Superintendence public private sector and 24 Figure Wholesale
electricity market (MRS – Mercado Regulador del Sistema) The CLP was established
in 2011 and is where long-term contracts are subscribed to by the distribution
companies, via  competitive bidding process This takes place under the
supervision of the regulatory entity, SIGET The MRS, meanwhile, operates on
production-cost basis and allows commercialisation of energy at variable prices,
with these depending on the sector specifics Factors here may include national
demand, unavailability rates, and maximum powers for each plant, among others
(CNE-PROESA, 2016) structure National electricity market CNE SIGET UT
Transmitter Electricity suppliers and marketers Generators Electricity
generation costs and tariffs Every three months, SIGET reviews the energy charge
within the electricity tariff and may revise rates for each distribution company
(SIGET, 2017a) Electricity prices in power purchase agreements (PPA) that have
already been established through the competitive procurement process form the
basis for any revision, as they reflect the current wholesale market power
generation costs CRIE CDMER EOR Regional electricity market Regional generators
EPR The end-user tariff considers the trading, transmission, distribution and
energy charge, which are reviewed every five years, with the last revision in
Within reviews, these tariffs can be adjusted annually according to changes in
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for the month of September Source: CNE-PROESA
(2016) Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any
endorsement or acceptance by IRENA The Transmission System and Wholesale
Electricity Market Operation based on Production Cost Regulation (ROBCP –
Reglamento de Operación del Sistema de Transmisión  del Mercado Mayorista basado
en Costos de Producción) is the regulatory regime for the El Salvador market
Establishing clear rules, ROBCP aims to provide investors with guaranteed
profits and end-users with affordable rates, while also rewarding efficiency
Variable production costs are the basis for each generator’ generation dispatch,
meaning that the market operator also has responsibility for conducting
mandatory cost audit for each generator, in order to verify their costs (CNE-
PROESA, 2016) The three electricity tariff categories are segmented according to
maximum demand First, there are small- scale users – those with demand under 10
kW – while second, there are medium-scale users, which have demand ranging from
10 kW to 50 kW Finally, large- scale users are considered to be those with
demand exceeding 50 kW For small-scale residential users that have consumed
between  kWh and 105 kWh in the six months prior to the calculation period,
continuous subsidy is provided by the government and paid through the National
Investment Fund for Electricity and Telephony (FINET – Fondo de Inversión en
Electricidad  Telefonía) (Legislative Assembly Executive Decree No 38, 2018 –
Asamblea Legislativa de la República de El Salvador, Decree Executivo No 38,
2018) The electricity market comprises of two main business areas: the Long-Term
Contract market (CLP – Contratos de Largo Plazo), and the spot market 25 Energy
sector institutions and governance developing and implementing subsidies for the
energy system and monitoring the good use of the energy resources, as well as
energy access across the Salvadorian population (IDB, 2013) El Salvador’
institutional landscape in the energy sector is evolving, after going through
series of restructuring processes, focusing mainly on the power sector
Additionally, the CNE has  consultative council, which includes: representatives
of private sector trade associations (industrial and commercial);
representatives of professional associations linked to energy; representatives
of academic and research institutions; representatives of organisations linked
to consumer protection; representatives of organisations linked to protection of
the environment; and representatives of electrical industry unions Key
institutions The CNE was created by  2007 legislative decree and established as
the energy sector’ governing authority It is responsible for developing national
energy strategy and policy in order to further promote the development of
renewable energy, the rational use of energy, the integration of regional energy
markets, and the creation of enabling regulatory frameworks As previously
mentioned, the regulatory authority in the hydrocarbon sector is MINEC,
operating through the Regulatory Directorate of Hydrocarbons and Mines
Infrastructure and handling of transportation of hydrocarbons are also overseen
by MINEC The participation of private companies in the marketing and importing
of oil by-products is allowed The regulator fixes liquified petroleum gas (LPG)
prices and establishes  reference price for all petroleum derivative products
The Superintendence of Competition (SC) oversees monitoring of the markets in
order to promote and protect competition, increase economic efficiency and
consumer welfare Before the creation of the CNE, the Ministry of Economy (MINEC
– Ministerio de Economía) was in charge of the sector and operated through two
directorates for its management and co-ordination These were: the directorate
for electricity and the regulatory directorate for hydrocarbons and mines The
latter still exists as part of MINEC, but as the regulatory entity for the oil
and gas sector only (MINEC, ) The main functions of the CNE highlighted in the
legislative decree are (IDB, 2013): • planning and design of the national energy
policy • promotion of regulatory frameworks for the creation of investment and
competitive conditions in the energy sector Recently, the government of El
Salvador created several executive bodies, or cabinets, for institutional co-
ordination and strategic planning in key policy areas (Legislative Assembly
Executive Decree No 14, 2019 – Asamblea Legislativa de la República de El
Salvador, Decreto Ejecutivo No 14, 2019) • promotion of an adequate use of
energy • promotion of the development and deployment of renewable energy
resources • promotion of the integration of regional energy Amongst these, the
Energy Cabinet was created to undertake the strategic planning of investments in
the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity, as well as to
conduct  review of the country’ energy mix This is to be done in order to
achieve affordable, cheaper energy from renewable resources for the population
The Energy Cabinet is composed by the Presidential Commissioner for Operations
and Government Cabinet, MINEC, CNE, CEL, SIGET and the DC markets The CNE has
board of directors made up of representatives from its five member institutions:
MINEC, which acts as president of the board; the Minister of Finance (MH –
Ministerio de Hacienda); the Minister of the Environment and Natural Resources
(MARN – Ministerio de Medio Ambiente  Recursos Naturales); the Minister of
Public Works and Transport (MOP – Ministerio de Obras Públicas  de Transporte);
the Deputy Minister of Transportation; and the President of Consumer Advocacy
(DC – Defensoría del Consumidor) Structure of the power sector Until the 1990s,
El Salvador maintained  vertically integrated structure in its power sector,
with CEL as the country’ only state-owned generator With Legislative Decree No
137, dated October 18, 1948, CEL was established as an independent, public
electric utility in charge of developing, conserving, managing and using the
energy resources of the country (SIGET, 2017a) The board of directors has
responsibility for: monitoring the implementation of policy and strategies
contained in national energy plans; promoting the approval of laws and
regulations of the energy sector at  national level; preparing the national
energy balance; 26 Before the approval of the General Electricity Law and in
preparation for reform, Legislative Decree No 808, dated September 1996,
established SIGET as the regulatory institution for the electricity and
telecommunications sector As the regulator, SIGET has the task of applying and
enforcing the country’ legal framework concerning both the electricity and
telecommunications sectors SIGET also guarantees both user and operator rights,
while acting to develop  competitive market and more investment by establishing
robust legal framework Final consumer tariffs are regulated by SIGET, while
FINET is in charge of administration and the allocation of subsidies to low-
income users, as well as the expansion of electricity coverage and rural
electrification sector participation, and by 2018, there were 25 private sector
electricity generation plants operating in the wholesale market (UN ECLAC, 2020)
The law also maintained CEL’ presence in the generation sector and, over time,
CEL subsidiary generation companies were created These include LaGeo in the
geothermal sector, the Cucumacayán Electricity Company (CECSA – Compañía
Eléctrica Cucumacayán) in the hydropower sector and Energy Investments (INE –
Inversiones Energéticas) in the thermal sector Ownership and maintenance of the
transmission system was turned over to the company ETESAL, while UT,  private
corporation, was assigned to operate the transmission system and national
electricity market Following the enactment of the General Electricity Law and
Legislative Decree 843, dated 10 October,1996, El Salvador began liberalising
its electricity market and unbundling the vertically integrated CEL The law
opened up both generation and distribution to private  simplified scheme of the
institution framework of the energy sector in El Salvador can be found in Figure
15, while  more detailed overview of the energy sector’ institutions can be
found in Appendix  Figure Institutional structure of energy sector Board of
directors CNE MARN MOP DC MINEC MH Society academy, etc CNE CC Policies,
strategies and coordination FINET SIGET SC DRHM Supervision Supervision
Regulation Supervision and control Implementation Electricity market Fuels
market Demand Demand Based on: CNE (2012) 27 Energy policies and regulatory
framework For geothermal and hydropower projects under  MW, there is  more
streamlined concession process involving directly awarded tenders that are
regulated by SIGET El Salvador’ National Energy Policy  was still being
developed by CNE at the time of this report’ release, with  publishing date of
later in At time of writing, the existing national energy policy was thus still
the one published by the Council in 2010 (CNE, 2010) This had the purpose of
serving as  strategic guide for the development of the national energy sector
during the  period SIGET issues an agreement for an approved project, which can
be granted in concessions of geothermal and hydro resources for power generation
purposes The project developers must also present the agreement for processing
by the Legislative Assembly, which has to grant concessions for the use of the
corresponding natural resources The  policy includes: • renewable energy
resource promotion and energy mix diversification Rules for electricity trading
activities • protection of final users with  strengthening of The retail
electricity market is governed by  regulatory framework that promotes the
commercialisation of electricity The regulations allow for  wide diversity of
electricity suppliers This allows for more competitive options at the retail
level, so that end-users are able to choose their electric power supplier This
regulation stipulates that an electricity market participant, or marketer, can:
the sector’ institutional frameworks the deployment of technologies that save
energy and development of  culture of energy efficiency increasing access to
power across the nation and the use of preferential rates the development of
innovation and technology further energy regional level • • • • integration of
El Salvador at • sign contracts for the supply of electric power, The primary
entity for implementing this energy policy is the CEL and its subsidiary
companies These assume  strategic role in energy research, project execution and
renewable energy generation, as well as maintaining  high degree of co-
ordination with the CNE in the development of El Salvador’ energy sector
transmission, and distribution • purchase and sell electric power in low voltage
networks • purchase and sell electric power in the wholesale market Regarding
the first of these points, the prices and conditions of the supply contracts may
be the same, or they may differ from those contained in the tariffs approved by
SIGET for distributors that operate as marketers in the areas where their
networks are located (SIGET, 2017b) The government has also developed various
actions for the development of renewable energy in the country and for the
fostering of private sector participation These include the development of
fiscal incentives for renewable energy project development proposed by MINEC and
approved by the Salvadoran Legislative Assembly (Legislative Assembly Executive
Decree No 462, 2007 – Asamblea Legislativa de la República de El Salvador,
Decreto Ejecutivo No 462, 2007) The CNE has been developing standards for
renewable energy PPAs (CNE-PROESA, 2016), net-metering, and priority dispatch in
the wholesale market for non- conventional renewable energy generators (wind,
solar and biomass plants), among others This regulation also allows for the
connection of small power plants directly to the distribution system, enabling
transactions between generators and distributors, distributors and marketers,
and distributors and end users Legal Stability Law for Investment In order to
attract and promote investment, El Salvador enacted the Legal Stability Law for
Investments in This provides  framework for guaranteeing legal assurance to the
investor, through the implementation of legal stability contracts (Legislative
Assembly Executive Decree No 905, 2015 – Asamblea Legislativa de la República de
El Salvador, Decreto Ejecutivo No 905, 2015) This law can be applied to national
or foreign investors that are developing new projects, or expanding existing
projects, within strategic sectors of El Salvador, including the energy sector
The General Electricity Law In addition to serving as the basis for the
liberalisation of El Salvador’ energy sector, the General Electricity Law
establishes that auctions are the preferred mechanism for procuring new power
capacity and allocating concessions for projects using geothermal and hydropower
28 Investors covered under this law are ensured stability of taxation and
capital repatriation conditions, among other benefits Under the law, developers
must commit to undertake development work in the territory of the municipality
where their project is located This work must be worth at least % of the total
contracted investment There is also  time limit of two years from the start of
the project’ operation for disbursing the development work funds Distributed
generation regulation In 2013, with Agreement No 120--2013, SIGET approved  new
norm, known as Open Procurement Processes for Long-term Contracts Supported by
Renewable Distributed Generation This enables the development of renewable
distributed generation auctions of up to 20 MW Under this, the procurement
process is led by  distribution company, willing to purchase power from  self-
generator for the distribution grid Despite the benefits of the law, however,
several developers have experienced delays in project implementation due to its
execution Nonetheless, in 2019, MINEC signed the first legal stability contract
for the government of El Salvador and the company Ventus  de , which is
developing the Ventus Wind Farm in Metapán, in the province of Santa Ana In
2017, through Agreement No 367--2017, SIGET approved the Norm for End User
Producers of Electrical Energy with Renewable Energy Sources This established
the procedures, requirements and responsibilities applicable to the connection,
operation, control and commercialisation of surplus energy from distributed
renewable generation units In addition, this regulation also governs relations
between the generator of electricity for self-consumption and the distribution
company that is to receive the injections of surplus power investments, between
Fiscal Incentives Act to promote renewable energy This Act for the promotion of
renewable energy describes the benefits intended for investment in the
construction or expansion of renewable energy power plants The technologies
covered by the Act include biomass, geothermal energy, hydropower, solar PV and
wind This procedure for selling electricity to the grid is usually referred to
as “net metering” With this scheme, end users (generally residential and
commercial customers) which generate their own electricity can feed excess
generation back into the grid This end user producer is then compensated in
terms of energy (, credit in kWh), and the credit can be applied to offset
consumption of electricity within the current billing period (, one month)
According to the law, investments in new projects shall enjoy the following
benefits and tax incentives (Legislative Assembly Executive Decree No 462, 2007
– Asamblea Legislativa de la República de El Salvador, Decreto Ejecutivo No 462,
2007): International power trade • For the first ten years of the project’
lifetime, imported power generation equipment is duty free Today’ regional
transmission line – known as SIEPAC (Figure 16) – links six different countries
and evolved from  series of bilateral arrangements between regional countries In
those early stages, energy transfers were limited to amounts varying between  MW
and 50 MW and took place according to specific arrangements • For the first five
years of the project’ life time, if the project is larger than 10 MW, and for
ten years, if it is less than 10 MW, the project is exempt from income tax • Any
sales made under Certified Emission the Clean (CERs, made under Reductions
Development Mechanism), or via similar carbon offsetting markets, gain  complete
exemption from tax Such transfers enjoyed considerable political support amongst
Central American countries, which led to the 1996 Marco Treaty of the
Electricity Market of Central America, which came into force in This was the
foundation stone for MER, which uses the infrastructure established by SIEPAC At
time of writing, in addition to El Salvador, MER’ members are Costa Rica,
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama • Value Added Tax (VAT) is waived if
it is otherwise liable as part of efforts made for investment or pre-investment
in power plant construction 29 Figure Regional electricity system (SIEPAC line)
LEC AGC SLU THP PRD NNC LBR GNO PAN LN1 SND MOY TC1 LV2 AMY CAS CHA AHU NEJ CAH
PAL DOM 155 LIB PAR 230 kW - SIEPAC 230 kW RCL PRO 400 kW Source: EOR (2017)
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any endorsement
or acceptance by IRENA transactions record, setting out all the transactions
undertaken in summary form For agencies which have debts, the monthly record
also gives  timeline for them to make credit transfers to the regional
liquidating bank As  condition to participate in the MER, agents must supply
payment guarantee to this financial institution In order to make sure that there
is always enough daily collateral to support the transactions made,  deduction
equal to the amount of credit is made by the EOR from the value of this payment
guarantee The Marco Treaty The SIEPAC interconnection established by the Marco
Treaty of the Electricity Market of Central America is owned by the EPR, which
the Treaty also established, along with the regional regulator, the CRIE, and
regional market operator, the EOR (Reinstein et al, 2011) CRIE is based in
Guatemala and began work in 2000, led by its board of commissioners and
executive secretary The board contains  representative from each member-state,
with this representative usually also  member of their country’ national
regulatory board Given the increasing volume of electricity imports from the
region, El Salvador’ national electricity market has become highly dynamic As of
2017, the country had 47 authorised agents for transactions in MER: eight
generators, seven distributors, 31 marketers and one large user (CRIE, 2018) The
majority of from El Salvador’ Guatemala, which accounted for over 67% of
electricity injections into the SIEPAC in Regional electricity transactions MER
member-state agencies conduct transactions with each other in three ways: spot
transactions, firm, or non-firm contracts (Reinstein et al, 2011) The EOR then
produces  monthly regional economic transactions come import  Transmission
rights (DTs – Derechos de transmission), is  system of trading the rights to
using transmission lines  The transmission entity (EOR in this case) will issue
rights to use the regional line (SIEPAC) and make it available to buyers and
sellers of electricity in the region The regional energy buyer/seller will then
buy these transmission rights in order to use the line to transmit/transport the
energy across the region for their needs  The regional transmission line is
often constrained, and transmission entities are required to plan ahead of time
to manage the system The transmission rights system allows them to plan and
offer  transparent pricing system for the users 30 Figure Imports and exports in
the regional market, per country  000  500             000 500 ) + ( 00 )    (
-500 - 000        ) - ( - 500 - 000 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Guatemala El
Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Costa Rica Panama Source: CRIE (2019) El Salvador
complies with regional interconnection requirements transmission expansion
planning at the national level This is thanks to the growing number of
transactions within both the regional market and the integrated national
electricity system within SIEPAC electricity that is expected to be generated by
new power plants (including renewable energy generating facilities), which would
be strategically located for interconnection with the transmission grid and
provisions in In November 2018, CRIE published RESOLUTION- CRIE-, which
establishes the minimum technical requirements for connecting and operating
solar PV and wind plants in the regional power system Since El Salvador has the
opportunity to use the SIEPAC infrastructure to meet national electricity
demand, opportunities exist that can create  more robust national transmission
system One such opportunity is the construction of additional 230 kV lines
between the Port of Acajutla, El Pedregal and the 15 de Septiembre substations,
which, when complemented by the 230 kV line to be built by Pacific Energy (EDP –
Energía del Pacifico) between Acajutla and Ahuachapán (see Figure 13), would
form  ring loop and therefore create  more robust network (CRIE, 2018) This
resolution will be applicable to new requests for integrating these renewable
technologies into the regional grid (CRIE, 2018) The resolution and the minimum
technical requirements have been transferred by the Executive Secretary of the
CRIE to national regulatory bodies in the region, to evaluate the possibility of
including them in their national regulations, in the short term Consultation and
training activities are therefore also envisaged by the national regulators of
the participating member states, as well as solar PV and wind project developers
On the other hand, the construction of  transmission line between Acajutla and
Ahuachapán is also tied to the construction of  natural gas power plant in the
Sonsonate region The resolution further stipulates that system operators and
market operators adopt the necessary measures to co ordinate the operation of
the distributed generation of wind and solar PV power plants connected at low or
medium voltage levels, or storage of energy at the distribution level (CRIE,
2018) Such considerations are in ETESAL’ transmission network expansion plan
This type of network would also facilitate the dispatch of included 31 Box  The
Clean Energy Corridor of Central America IRENA launched the Clean Energy
Corridor of Central America (CECCA) initiative in This was in order to support
the accelerated deployment of renewables at the regional level It was also
undertaken within the context of the SIEPAC line that interconnects Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, and to promote cross-
border trade of renewable energy power in the region CECCA is built around the
key pillars of implementation: power system operations and regulatory frameworks
for increasing VRE shares; country and regional power system planning with
renewables; zoning and renewable resource assessment; and capacity building and
information dissemination The implementation of CECCA started within its pilot
country, Panama, in There, an assessment was made of PPAs for solar and wind
energy, as part of the regulatory component of the initiative Likewise, IRENA
has conducted  series of capacity building activities for Central American
national and regional grid operators, targeting the integration of VRE into
their electricity systems, in line with CECCA’ technical component Additionally,
IRENA has recently started the regional Renewable Roadmap (REmap) and
flexibility assessment of the power systems of all the CECCA countries – an
effort that forms part of the country and regional power system planning pillar
of the initiative It is envisaged that this pillar will be expanded by
implementing  series of workshops These will be on long-term energy planning,
the promotion and identification of best planning practices, and experience
sharing among the countries of Central America when planning with renewable
energy sources Regional partners have supported CECCA in its development, with
the initiative becoming  milestone and reference point for the Central American
region It has also now been included as part of other regional efforts, as it
forms the basis for the Central American Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (ECLAC)-Central American Integration System (SICA) energy
strategy 32  Renewable energy developments Drivers of renewable energy
deployment Addressing these challenges has become the main driver for the
promotion of renewable energy in El Salvador With the introduction of the
National Energy Policy , the country prioritised the diversification of the
energy mix, as  starting point for improving the energy supply This was also
seen as  tool for increasing access to electricity across the population The
Republic of El Salvador is making  concerted effort to boost economic growth and
the welfare of its inhabitants In this regard, the government considers the
energy sector  strong contributor to economic and social development (CNE, 2010)
Recent IRENA work, for example, estimates that more than  million jobs have been
created by the renewable energy sector in Latin America and the Caribbean by
Potentially, this could reach more than  million jobs by 2030, given  scenario
in which the rise in global temperatures is kept to well below ° and closer to
°, during this century (IRENA, 2020b) With the adoption of the Paris agreement,
El Salvador has also prioritised the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions from
the energy sector This is to be achieved by increasing the penetration of clean
energy sources, together with improving energy efficiency along the whole energy
chain On  global level, renewable energy has experienced  rapid decline in cost
in recent years Between 2010 and 2019, the global weighted average levelised
cost of electricity (LCOE) from solar PV fell 82%, to USD 40 per megawatt hour
(MWh), while the cost of electricity from onshore wind declined 45%, to USD /MWh
(IRENA, 2020b) El Salvador’ power generation costs, however, have been strongly
influenced by the price volatility of oil and gas, due to fossil fuel dependency
in the country’ energy sector The cost of this energy has put pressure on the
state budget and has  negative impact on its final users (see Box ) With good
progress made on energy access rates and renewable energy penetration in the
power sector, the new, National Energy Policy  is now under development This
draws up  long-term energy strategy for the country, highlighting the importance
of mitigating the dependency on fossil-fuels and climate change effects, with
the promotion and use of renewable energy beyond the power sector The new energy
policy supports the development of direct use applications from renewable energy
sources, such as geothermal and solar thermal, facilitating the penetration of
clean technologies in the industrial and agricultural sector This is the result
of the successful implementation in recent years of renewable energy pilot
projects, involving local and vulnerable communities These have provided clear
benefits by boosting local economies, promoting the development of the agri-food
sector, and by the inclusion of women in commercial activities In addition, El
Salvador is vulnerable to climate change, with temperatures forecast to rise
between ° and ° by During this period, sea levels may rise by some 18
centimetres (cm), while ‘extreme weather events’, such as tropical storms,
floods and droughts, are also expected to increase in frequency and intensity
(USAID, 2017) All these conditions will affect different aspects of the country,
including energy infrastructure and power generation Hydropower generation along
the Lempa River Basin, for example, could decline by between 33% and 53% by the
end of the century (USAID, 2017) Additionally, El Salvador envisages the use of
innovative technologies such as electric vehicles, blockchain and digitalisation
This is with the aim of creating  modern energy sector, as  priority on the path
to achieving the country’ sustainable development objectives and attracting
foreign investment to boost the economy 33 Box  Electricity tariffs During the
1990s, the country’ power generation portfolio witnessed an influx of
conventional thermal units, which led to  higher fossil-fuel dependency This was
despite the traditionally significant role of hydro and geothermal power
generation in the energy system During the following decades, global oil market
price volatility provoked an increase in electricity tariffs, giving El Salvador
one of the highest residential rates in Central America (see Figure 18) Between
1998 and 2015, the average electricity tariff in El Salvador increased by %, due
to the rise in international oil prices Generation costs (including fuel and
transmission costs) corresponds to an estimated 80% of the final electricity
price, while the remaining 20% is mostly distribution and commercialisation
charges The latter decreased dramatically in 2015, however, due to the entrance
of new actors in the country’ distribution market (Superintendence of
Competition of El Salvador, 2017) The government of El Salvador believes that
renewable energy sources are the key to mitigating dependency on fossil-fuels in
power generation, with their use also contributing to  reduction in electricity
tariffs (CNE, 2010) Additionally, the current high costs of electricity require
the use of subsidies to provide services to all the inhabitants, resulting in
high expenditure for the country Therefore, among the main objectives of the new
National Energy Policy  is  reduction of the electricity tariff through the
promotion of renewable energy generation, facilitating the removal of
electricity subsidies towards the end of the policy period Figure Residential
electricity rates of some of the main distribution companies in SICA, for
consumption of 50, 100, 200, and 400 kWh - December 2018 30 25 20    / $   15 10
Belize (BEL) Costa Rica (ICE) Dominican Republic (EDE) El Salvador (CAESS) El
Salvador (CLESA) El Salvador (DEL SUR) Guatemala (DEOCSA) Guatemala (DEORSA)
Guatemala (EEGSA) Honduras (ENEE) Nicaragua (INE) Panama (ENSA) 50 kWh 100 kWh
200 kWh 400 kWh Based on: (UN ECLAC, 2019) 34 Renewable energy resources
Geothermal energy The exploitation of geothermal resources in El Salvador
started back in the 1960s with the identification of 18 potential geothermal
sites in the country The first geothermal power plant was commissioned in 1975
in Ahuachapán The range of renewable energy resources available in the Latin
American and Caribbean regions is  wide one – although much of this potential
has yet to be realised While more than  quarter of the total primary energy
supply in the region came from renewables in 2017 – twice the global average –
the regions’ total renewable generation represents just % of its overall
renewable power potential This relatively long history in the sector has given
El Salvador  leading role within the regional geothermal sector There are now
significant numbers of experienced scientists and technicians available in the
country, with these often sharing their expertise via the Geothermal Centre of
Excellence in El Salvador (Box ) This provides young professionals from the
country and around Latin America and the Caribbean with training courses and
workshops in many aspects of geothermal energy  renewable energy installed
capacity of 50 GW of bioenergy, 186 GW of hydro, 108 GW of solar PV and 93 GW of
wind is achievable by 2030, and in line with the Paris Agreement (IRENA, 2020b)
These estimations do not consider the geothermal or ocean energy resource
potential, which will also play an important future role in the region’ energy
supply Nowadays, utility company LaGeo operates roughly 200 MW of geothermal
power capacity across two geothermal fields Following  public tender in 2001,
Enel Green Power purchased  % share of LaGeo, gradually increasing this to 36%,
with the government of El Salvador holding the remaining shares In 2008, the
government obtained full ownership of LaGeo, after Enel Green Power sold its
ownership share (Sanyal et al, 2016) El Salvador is not an exception to these
regional characteristics Given its geographical position, the country’ renewable
energy potential is abundant and diverse, and includes bioenergy, geothermal,
hydropower, ocean, solar and wind While the country has recently made
significant advances in diversifying its energy supply, much of its renewable
resource potential remains untapped Bioenergy Regarding direct use of geothermal
energy, an installed capacity of 36 MWt is estimated for 2015, including
variety of applications for swimming and bathing, as well as pilot projects in
the agri-food sector, such as greenhouse heating, fish farming and food drying
(Lund and Boyd, 2015) In terms of installed power capacity, by 2019, El
Salvador’ solid biomass had reached 298 MW while biogas totalled nearly  MW
(IRENA, 2020a) The estimated net primary production of bioenergy in El Salvador
is around tonnes of carbon per hectare per year (tC/ha/yr), which is well above
the global average of between  tC/ha/yr and  tC/ha/yr (IRENA, 2019) In 2018,
bioenergy (sugarcane bagasse and firewood) stood at over 18% of primary energy
supply  range of factors govern the quantity of residues available to the
bioeneregy sector, including the overall level of activity in the economy This
is also largely the case for solid waste from urban areas and sawmill residues,
which are beyond the scope of this report 35 Box  The Geothermal Centre of
Excellence in El Salvador Blessed with extensive geothermal resources, El
Salvador is fortunate in having  history of geothermal energy development that
now dates back to the 1950s This has given it an unprecedented level of
expertise in the field within the region –  factor now capitalised upon by the
Geothermal Centre of Excellence in El Salvador  joint project between LaGeo and
the GRÓ GTP Geothermal Training Programme from Iceland (previously known as the
United Nations University-Geothermal Training Programme), the Centre has
established the country as  leading location for training in the geothermal
industry Young professionals from El Salvador, other Latin American countries
and the Caribbean have been able to share the extensive technical, scientific
and managerial experience and knowledge accumulated by the Centre via  range of
workshops and courses The five-month Geothermal Diploma Course for Latin America
is  flagship amongst these, helping El Salvador set the standard for geothermal
training in the region The Diploma brings together experts from El Salvador and
Iceland – another key country in the global geothermal industry – thanks to  co-
operation agreement between LaGeo and GRÓ GTP The Centre has so far provided the
Diploma course – and other, shorter training programmes –to over 700
professionals In addition to those from El Salvador who have enrolled on these
courses, students have included professionals from Montserrat, Saint Kitts &
Nevis, St Vincent and the Grenadines in the Caribbean, and Argentina, Bolivia,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico,
Nicaragua, Panama, and Peru from elsewhere in Latin America Source: GGA ()
Hydropower Solar energy Figure 19 presents an overview of the solar irradiation
for El Salvador, according to the IRENA Global Atlas The solar irradiation in
the country is uniformly consistent across the territory, being in average
larger than  000 kWh/m2 Likewise, more than 80% of the Salvadorian territory
shows estimated annual generation per unit of installed PV capacity in the range
of  600 kilowatt hours per kilowatt peak per year (kWh/kWp/yr) and  800
kWh/kWp/yr (IRENA, 2019) Hydropower continues to have the largest share of
renewables in El Salvador’ electricity mix In recent years, CEL has carried out
an 80 MW expansion project at the  de Noviembre hydroelectric plant, with
January 2017 seeing the plant’ two new, 40 MW generating units begin commercial
operation This allows them to harness the surplus water that accompanies the
rainy season Meanwhile, the El Chaparral hydroelectric plant is under
construction and will have an installed generation capacity of MW on completion
It is expected to start operations in Several solar PV projects have become
operational in recent years, totalling over 166 megawatt peak (MWp) of installed
power capacity, by Solar irradiation in El Salvador is high, which provides
excellent yields and favourable cost-benefit conditions for the development of
solar PV plants Ocean energy Preliminary research on Mizata beach (La Libertad
Department) has been carried out to determine the energy potential of marine
waves (LaGeo, ) LaGeo’ renewable energy unit, the entity conducting the study,
collected the necessary data using  sensor that measured: () height, speed,
temperature, direction and flow of the energy contained in one metre of wave
front; and (ii) the height variation of the tides 36 Figure El Salvador: Global
horizontal irradiation, kWh/m2, 1km 1994-2015 Global horizontal irradiation
kWh/m2 < = 1800 1800 - 1900 1800 - 1900 1800 - 1900 1800 - 1900 1800 - 1900
Source: IRENA: Global Atlas, Map data: ESMAP, 2019, [2019] OpenStreetMap
contributors Figure El Salvador: Average wind speed at 100m hub height Wind
speed at 100m annual average / < =   -   -   -   -   -  >  Source: IRENA: Global
Atlas, Map data: DTU, 2019, [2019] OpenStreetMap contributors 37 Wind energy Box
IRENA Global Atlas Geospatial and Site assessment services Despite the country’
interest in promoting wind power plants, the prices achieved in El Salvador’
first auction in 2014 were over the ceiling prices, so no wind projects were
awarded During the country’ second auction, one project was awarded, but as of
2019, it has not come online Resource mapping is the first phase in planning
cost-effective renewable energy project for subsequent development IRENA’
geospatial assessment services aim to identify areas and zones (and attributes)
in  country that are appropriate for deploying utility-scale wind and solar PV
power projects The methodology combines resource maps and ancillary data, such
as transmission lines and road networks, protected areas, land cover,
topography, and population growth These factors are assessed in order to
identify areas and zones that have good resource availability, are within
reasonable proximity to the necessary infrastructure, and have low environmental
and social impact, based on local conditions Furthermore, the assessment
calculates the maximum installable capacity, identifies the energy generation
potential and suggests possible storage opportunities for each zone Such
information supports adequate generation and transmission expansion planning,
reduces the risk of investing in unsuitable areas, supports countries in making
strategic decisions on energy security, and increases the share of sustainable
sources of electricity generation looking at measurements from Several studies
stations have detected wind meteorological speeds of between  metres per second
(/) and  / (MARN and UCA, 2005) Figure 20 presents an overview of the average
wind speed at 100  hub height, showing that this averages between  / and  /
Likewise, around 70% of Salvadorian territory has  potential wind power density
(at 100  high) of below 260 watts per square metre (/m2) (IRENA, 2019) Few areas
have shown high and relatively constant wind speeds One site that has proved to
have high wind speeds is the 54 MW project developed by Ventus in Metapán, which
has an average speed of  / at 50 metres high Renewable energy master plan In
2012, in collaboration with the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA),
CNE developed the Master Plan for the Renewable Energy Development of El
Salvador This plan identifies the renewable energy sources that have potential
in the country, and highlights an indicative roadmap for the development of
those resources out to The estimated potential capacity additions by then, as
per each energy source, are provided in Table  IRENA’ site assessment service
aims to evaluate the technical and financial viability of sites for solar PV and
wind project development The methodology uses high resolution site-specific time
series resource data, site characteristics and technological parameters to
calculate the annual energy production (AEP) at different exceedance
probabilities for each site It further simulates the levelised costs and tariffs
at which the sites would become viable for further investment in in-situ
measurements and subsequent development This information is of critical value to
local authorities, which can screen these sites by comparing the pro-forma
tariffs or levelised costs to  benchmark, ensuring resources are invested only
in worthy locations This master plan aims to promote the diversification of the
energy mix, by adopting clean energy sources The development of this plan also
encouraged the implementation of other supporting mechanisms for renewable
energy, such as auctions, long term contracts, and others 38 Table  Additional
installed capacity per source by 2026 Small hydro (<20 MW) Solar thermal* Energy
source Wind Solar PV Geothermal Biomass Biogas Installed capacity (MW) in 2012
35 -  -  Additional installed capacity to 2026 (MW) 60 90 200  45 35 Source: CNE
and JICA (2012) * Power generation capacity estimation Box  IRENA Regional REmap
& FlexTool IRENA is currently developing  regional REmap (Renewable Energy
Roadmap) study for Central America This will include the countries of Belize,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama and be
complemented by  power system flexibility assessment using IRENA’ FlexTool This
is  publicly and freely available tool that analyses power system flexibility in
detail The regional REmap study explores technology options that enable an
energy transition at the regional level, through the accelerated development of
renewable energy in the energy mix The study covers electricity generation, the
end-use sectors (transport, industry and buildings) and energy efficiency
Additionally, using the FlexTool, the energy scenarios resulting from the REmap
analysis are analysed in terms of power system flexibility, in order to check
their technical feasibility and provide feedback to the REmap team The project
began in May 2019, with its first step  major effort to engage country
counterparts and institutions and scope the vision for the analysis This
involved several conference calls, including with member countries and regional
institutions, with the aim of securing their interest and participation in the
project As  culmination of this first step, IRENA organised the First Regional
Workshop:  renewable energy roadmap and flexibility assessment for Central
America, which was hosted by the National Energy Secretariat of Panama and took
place in Panama City between - September During the workshop, the countries
involved in the study, partner institutions and IRENA assessed policy objectives
and priorities at the national and regional levels, along with the status of the
energy system in each country The workshop also served to evaluate the current
status of renewable energy development, existing planning models and the vision
of regional integration Regional institutions that joined the workshop included
the Latin American Energy Organisation (OLADE – Organización Latinoamericana de
Energía), ECLAC, World Bank, the Inter American Development Bank (IDB), UNFCCC,
SICA, EPR and EOR As  follow-up to the first workshop, individual data requests
were sent to each country and conference calls were organised to discuss the
data input for the study Having collected most of the data needed for the
analysis, the project is currently at the phase of developing the energy system
reference and REmap scenarios that will then serve as an input for the
flexibility assessment  2nd workshop was scheduled for the last week of March
2020 to help in the development of the reference scenario The workshop was
confirmed with the participation of all countries and regional institutions, but
had to be cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic The workshop will be
replaced by bilateral calls with countries The calls should take place during
the second half of 2020, with the overall final results of the project expected
to be concluded and presented by the end of that year 39 Renewable energy
support mechanisms in the power sector • Priority dispatch: Article 67-, which
is included among the reforms made to the General Electricity Law, establishes
that renewable generation plants (from solar, wind and biomass) have dispatch
priority, and therefore their marginal cost is considered to be zero
(Legislative Assembly Executive Decree No 80, 2012 – Asamblea Legislativa de la
República de El Salvador, Decreto Ejecutivo No 80, 2012) El Salvador utilises
range of support mechanisms to incentivise renewable energy development in the
power sector The main instruments, as shown in Table , can be segmented into the
following categories: to electricity ) Fiscal transmission grid; instruments; )
financial instruments; and ) others (IRENA, 2016) incentives; ) access )
regulatory Regulatory instruments Fiscal incentives • Renewable energy auctions:
Technology-specific auctions are implemented to procure renewable energy
capacity resulting in long-term power purchase agreements (PPA) • Value added
tax (VAT, 13%): Provisions for VAT exemption related to pre-investment work and
investments in the construction of renewable energy projects (Legislative
Assembly Executive Decree No 462, 2007 – Asamblea Legislativa de la República de
El Salvador, Decreto Ejecutivo No 462, 2007) • Distributed generation: Net
metering regulations enable eligible self-producers of renewable energy to
inject surplus production into the local distribution grid (SIGET, 2017a)
Likewise, there are rules set for renewable distributed generation auctions in
the Agreement No 120--Income tax: For projects larger than 10 MW in size, there
is  five year income tax exemption For those smaller, the exemption is for ten
years • Financial instruments Import tax (%): Tax benefits for the import of
equipment, services or products intended for renewable energy projects • •
Dedicated fund:  public fund (FINET) finances projects related to energy
generation or the improvement of energy infrastructure in rural areas •
Certificates of Reduced Emissions (CERs): Under the framework of the Kyoto
Protocol’ Clean Development Mechanism – and other, similar carbon markets –
income derived from the sale of CERs is completely tax exempt • Eligibility
fund:  public fund of the El Salvador Development Bank (BANDESAL – Banco de
Desarrollo de El Salvador), provides financing for renewable projects Access to
electricity transmission grids Others • Grid access: Generators are guaranteed
grid access, including renewable energy generators • Social support
requirements: Renewable energy projects are required to allocate  percentage of
their revenue to either directly support local community projects, or to support
the overall financing of community development (REN21, 2017) 40 Table  Support
instruments to promote renewable energy Existing supporting instrument -
Supporting instrument Yes VAT exemption Yes Income tax exemption Yes Import
fiscal benefit Fiscal incentives Yes Tax exemption from the sell of CERs No
National exemption of local taxes No Accelerated Depreciation Yes Grid access
Grid Yes Preferential dispatch of energy Yes Auctions of PPAs No Feed-in tariff
Regulator Yes Net metering Yes Dedicated fund Yes Eligible fund Finance Yes Pre-
investment support Yes Social requirements Other Yes Renewable energy in rural
access programs Based on: BNEF (2012) • The auctions aim to be transparent and
are therefore publicly announced, with  publicly disclosed process available to
view on the website of the distribution company leading the auction process
Renewable energy auctions The reform of the General Electricity Law in 2007
established the procedures and regulations for the use of bidding processes to
procure power capacity Under these, the winning bidders enter into long-term
PPAs with the off-taker,  distribution company • Based on the result of the
power planning process, CNE and SIGET agree on scheduling the tender process
There is not, however, an established schedule for the implementation of
auctions in the long term There are two types of renewable energy auctions in El
Salvador, for generators connected to the grid and for distributed generation
projects Some of the most relevant aspects of the auction methodology in El
Salvador are the following (USAID, 2018): • The auctions are technology
specific, with defined quotas and  reallocation mechanism If the target for one
technology has not been met, additional amounts of other technologies can be
contracted to fill the gap • The contracted amounts per auction are allocated
proportionally among all of the distribution companies, based on their shares in
the wholesale market • There is  pay-as-bid pricing mechanism (prices as bid)
Auction winners are paid  price equal to the bids of the offeror 41 • Ceiling
prices are disclosed after the submitted bids are opened SIGET is responsible
for setting the ceiling prices for each technology and approving the bidding
documents El Salvador’ second renewable energy auction began in 2016, when
DELSUR opened  bidding process to procure  total capacity of up to 170 MW of
non- conventional renewables (70 MW of wind, 100 MW of solar PV) The PPA
contracts were set to 20-year lengths, with the auction rules stipulating that
solar PV projects had to be online and operational by April 2019, while wind
projects had to come online by April Additionally, solar PV and wind projects
had capacity requirements of between  MW and 50 MW • There is no specified for
project development, and bidders can propose project sites location • The
winners of the bidding process are obliged to deliver the total amount of
electricity generation awarded to them under  PPA that runs for  20 year period
The PPA guarantees that the distribution companies will buy all the energy
produced by the generator at an established rate, as  take or pay commitment For
distributed generation, the bidding process offers PPAs for  period of five to
20 years, but most of the PPAs awarded so far have been for 15 years DELSUR
again represented  group of the same seven distribution companies participating
in the first and second auction processes, with 62 companies registered to
participate in this tender DELSUR received 29 bids from 19 companies, resulting
in four solar PV projects and one wind project winning PPAs, for  total awarded
capacity of MW (see Table ) The price reduction over the course of the two
rounds of grid-connected generation reflects  learning curve in local project
development Several obstacles were identified during the first auction round and
later improved These improvements included:  greater ability for small projects
to negotiate more competitive equipment prices; increased experience in
Salvadoran commercial banks with renewable energy project finance; and stronger
interest from multilateral investment banks and development banks in funding
small projects in El Salvador • The PPA establishes  determined tariff for the
energy in US dollars, including yearly indexation The payment for the energy is
made on  monthly basis • The PPA includes commitments the generators related to
the construction period and commissioning of the power plant Commissioning
delays may lead to the execution of  completion bond for Wholesale market
auctions Distributed generation auctions The first energy auction process,
implemented in December 2012, saw 355 MW of LNG generation procured in August
2013 (for more information, see Section ) Following this, in September 2013,
electricity distributor DELSUR opened El Salvador’ first renewable energy
auction This tendering process aimed to purchase  total capacity of 100 MW from
non-conventional renewables projects, stipulating that these must be at least
MW in capacity In this auction, the PPA contracts were set with 20- year terms
Ceiling prices for bids, revealed post- bidding, were USD 41/MWh for wind
projects and USD 53/MWh for solar PV projects El Salvador’ distribution
companies, together with the CNE and SIGET, then opened the country’ first
distributed renewable energy auction, to contract  total capacity of up to 15 MW
Of this,  MW was to come from small hydropower,  MW from solar PV,  MW from
biogas, and  MW from residential customers with renewable energy self-generation
systems up to  kW In this first auction, SIGET received bids for 58 small- scale
renewable energy projects, mainly from national project developers, from which
SIGET selected  total of 35 projects for the off takers, comprised of seven
distribution companies In this first auction, the PPAs carried  15 year contract
term, fixed in US dollars, with prices indexed to the CPI for all urban
consumers in the USA The project developer had to present  guarantee for
maintenance of the offer and  guarantee for fulfilment of the contract In this
auction, many bidders were unable to reach financial closure on their projects
As  result, most of these developers sold their PPA to  private equity firm
based in the USA This first auction contracted 94 MW of solar PV capacity under
20-year PPAs, while no wind projects were allocated, as offers exceeded the
ceiling price The winning companies were also required to direct % of project
profits to social development programmes in the cities where the projects were
based 42 In 2018, CNE launched  new tender process for distributed renewable
energy sources This technology specific tender process focused on the following
technologies with the respective auctioned capacity: rooftop solar PV (10 MW),
biogas ( MW) and on- ground solar PV (10 MW) (CNE, ) The results of this auction
were published in March 2019 and can be found in Table  Table  Summary of
results among conducted wholesale market renewable energy auctions in El
Salvador Auction date Target capacity Capacity awarded Average prices • 100 MW
from non- conventional renewable energy • 94 MW solar PV ( projects) • USD
68/MWh 2014 • 100 MW solar PV • MW solar PV ( projects) • USD 44/MWh 2016 • 70
MW wind • 50 MW wind ( project) Based on: USAID (2018); CNE () Table  Summary of
results among conducted renewable distributed generation auctions in El Salvador
Auction date Target capacity Capacity awarded Average prices • 36 MW solar PV
(31 projects) • 15 MW • 500 kW small hydro • USD 47/MWh 2013 ( projects) • 450
kW biogas ( projects) • 10 MW rooftop solar PV •  MW biogas ( Projects) •  MW
biogas • USD 17/MWh 2019 • 48 MW on-ground solar PV • 10 MW on-ground solar PV
Based on: USAID (2018); CNE () Ventus wind project in Metapan, El Salvador Image
credit: CEL 43 Renewable energy project procedures and permits of the project
development lifecycle These procedures are carried out and permits obtained
sequentially, beginning with the project profile formulation and the pre-
feasibility study In the pre-investment stage, the feasibility, electrical and
the environmental impact studies are carried out until the final design of the
project is concluded The development of renewable energy projects in El Salvador
requires that  number of procedures be followed and various permits acquired
range of government offices deal with these, at different stages Figure
Permitting stages Pre-feasibility study Feasibility study Final design Project
proﬁle Electrical studies Innvestment stage (construction) Operation’ dosing
stage Institution Pre-investment stage Operation stage Disconnection procedure -
End of the contract Interconnection contract Access feasibility Distributor
Interconnection request Construction permit Project registration Construction
feasibility City council Vice Ministry of Housing and Urban Development (VMVDU)
Construction permit Project registration Construction feasibility Inst and Func
Autorisation Ministry of Health (MINSAL) Ministry of Culture (MICULTURA)
Technical inspection request National Administration of Aqueducts and Sewers
(ANDA) Feasibility AN and AP Likewise, delivering letter of no affection
Ministry of the Environment and Natural resources (MARN) Annual operating report
and environmental audit Release of the environmental compliance bond Abandonment
plan Environmental permit for the project’ construction Certiﬁcation for tax
incentive SIGET Withdraw generator registration Renew enrollment Enrollment in
the registry Ministry of Finance (MH) Tax incentive authorisation Credit
disbursement and supervision Credit monitoring Request ﬁnancing Finance system
Environmental impact assessments Construction Tax incentives Interconnection
with the electrical system Source: CNE (2013) 44 Once the project is
operational, the generator should make  payment to SIGET for the registration
update, which considers the amount of electricity generated (MWh) and injected
into the grid during the previous year Additionally, it is essential to submit
annual operation and environmental audit reports to the MARN At the end of
project’ operations, the disconnection procedures, the abandonment plan and the
withdrawal of the generator register in the SIGET are carried out The procedures
indicated in Figure 21 are carried out by different agencies within the power
sector, including: • distribution companies – responsible for network
interconnection application, access feasibility, interconnection agreement •
ETESAL – responsible for network access feasibility, interconnection
application, interconnection contract The General Electricity Law states that
geothermal and hydropower projects require different concession procedures Once
project developer has developed the feasibility studies for the exploitation of
the in  determined area, the concession resource should go through an open
tender process, where it is awarded to the lowest price bidder, unless the
following happens after the auction: • System Operator and Market – responsible
for application to sign interconnection contract • SIGET – responsible for the
application for studies, registration, concession request for hydro and
geothermal projects, tax incentive certification The procedures listed above are
performed by the following government institutions: • The hydropower developer
that carried the costs of the feasibility study offers  bid of at least 90% of
the winning bid • the major’ office, for building permits • The geothermal
developer that carried the costs of the feasibility study offers  bid of at
least 85% of the winning bid • the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(VMDU – Viceministerio de Vivienda  Desarrollo Urbano) for construction
feasibility, and building permits Additionally, the General Electricity Law
streamlines licensing procedures for hydro and geothermal power projects below
MW of installed capacity, which are specified under the Regulatory Law for the
Concession of Small-Scale Power Generation Projects • the Ministry of Health
(MINSAL – Ministerio de Salud) for authorisation of the project permit • the
Ministry of Culture (MICULTURA – Ministerio de Cultura) for technical inspection
requests According to private sector officials and several project developers,
the project procedures and permitting processes currently in place have created
unfavourable cost implications, delays and uncertainty for renewable energy
projects Despite  certain degree of learning and improvement in the
documentation of procedures, it has been suggested there remains insufficient
technical knowledge in several public offices to enable them to effectively
carry out the permitting procedures The necessary paperwork is also dispersed
across various institutions, with  lack of clarity on responsibilities • the
National Administration of Aqueducts and Sewers (ANDA – Administración Nacional
de Acueductos  Alcantarillados) for feasibility studies • the MARN for
environmental building permits • the MH for tax incentive approvals During the
investment stage for project construction, the procedures for property
inscription at the mayor’ office, work reception by the VMVDU and for release of
the environmental compliance bond are performed 45 Renewable energy project
pipeline LaGeo has advanced research in two geothermal reservoirs with
generation potential, at project sites known as Berlin and Chinameca The
development of the  MW binary cycle Project II at Berlin has been completed and
is expected to be operational by In addition to being the state company that has
historically been in charge of developing renewable energy and fossil energy
resources in El Salvador, CEL also formulated the National Plan for Integrated
Energy Development (1988 2000) After this, several feasibility studies and
investment plans were created to outline future development of generation from
renewable energy resources, including hydropower, geothermal, solar PV, wind,
and biogas, as well as the introduction of ocean energy (tidal energy) As part
of its duties, the CNE is tasked with preparing the Indicative Plan for
Generation Expansion 2018 2028, which identifies potential candidate projects
for development This plan assesses the status of the current Salvadoran
electricity system to evaluate capacity expansion options that can promote
renewable energy resources, support the reliability of the power system and help
ensure electricity supply at competitive prices As mentioned above, in recent
years, CEL has carried out an expansion of the MW hydropower plant  de
Noviembre, with the addition of two new generating units of 40 MW each These
came online in 2017 and will allow the plant to harness surplus water that
occurs during the rainy season CEL’ MW El Chaparral hydropower plant is also
under construction, and is expected to begin operations in Projects included in
the generation plan, shown in Table , have undergone studies and consultations
between the CNE and project owners The list of projects does not include those
that are already under construction, nor those that have long-term PPAs, as
these are considered firm projects that could be part of the generation system
Table  Candidate power plant projects Tentative Date of Operation Power (MW)
Investment (USD/kW) & % of Investment Name Resource Geothermal //2021   500 % -
% Berlín U5 Wind //2022 40  631 % - % Wind CEL Geothermal 12//2023   500 % - %
Ahuachapán U4 Geothermal //2023   500 % - % Chinameca Bunker //2023 100  631 % -
% Motor  Bunker //2023 100  631 % Motor  LNG //2023 150  338 % - % Motor LNG PV
//2023 50 700 % - % Solar  PV //2023 15 700 % - % Solar  PV //2023 60 700 % - %
Solar  PV //2023 20 700 % - % Solar  PV //2023 80 700 % - % Solar  PV //2023 25
700 % - % Solar  Geothermal //2024   500 % - % San Vicente Geothermal //2026 28
500 % - % Berlín U6 Geothermal //2026 34  500 % - % Expansion Chinameca
Geothermal //2026 14  500 % - % Expansion San Vicente Source: CNE (2019) 46 The
list of projects in the generation plan includes four geothermal generation
units, totalling 30 MW of installed capacity, which are already in the
development phase It also includes  total of 76 MW of installed capacity
expansion at three existing geothermal power stations In addition, the plan
includes six solar PV plants, totalling over 250 MW of installed capacity and
one 40 MW wind project Several potential fossil fuel generation facilities are
also included in the plan, including two bunker-oil generation plants, totalling
200 MW of installed capacity, and an LNG plant with 150 MW of installed capacity
first energy bidding process in El Salvador back in It will also cover  large
part of the distribution companies’ demand Following the plant coming online,
the allocation of new PPAs for renewables will likely depend on the growth of
electricity demand and future energy policy The price of the electricity
generated by EDP (according to the project’ financial contract) depends on the
international price of natural gas In the case of the gas supply contract, this
price is indexed in turn to Brent oil Therefore, the prices of electricity
generated by EDP will depend on the development of oil prices It is expected
that  gas power plant shows  lower variable generation cost than other thermal
plants Thus, following the order of merit, EDP electricity would be dispatched
first and those thermal plants based on Bunker  fuel oil, with higher prices,
would be dispatched later Furthermore, in 2017, SIGET evaluated and certified
set of nine renewable energy projects, representing  potential of over 150 MW of
installed solar PV and biomass capacity (see Appendix ) This certification was
necessary step for compliance with the renewable energy fiscal incentives law,
and thus exemption of the relevant taxes for project owners There is some
uncertainty, however, whether these projects will be completed The Indicative
Plan for the Expansion of Electricity Generation of El Salvador  also shows the
EDP plant displacing thermal plants based on Bunker  fuel oil in dispatch This
Indicative Plan shows that the marginal cost of operation (equivalent to the
wholesale price of electricity for  cost-based system) would be lower during the
EDP plant’ first years of operation In later years (between 2023 to 2035), the
marginal cost then tends to stabilise, between USD 64/MWh and USD 117/ MWh In
2017, too, SIGET issued agreements for three hydropower projects (see Appendix
), which will be presented before the Legislative Assembly in order to be
granted concessions for the use of water resources The CNE has also developed an
online portal5 listing renewable energy projects in El Salvador In addition to
those projects that have obtained PPAs in auctions, the portal presents  set of
renewable energy projects that includes distributed generation in the retail
market, small hydropower projects, and bioenergy power plants The other
component in the tariff price is the cost of the contract price This is composed
of the variable costs of generation associated with the cost of fuel and
machinery efficiency, operation and maintenance (&) costs, and the premium
component, which covers the investment costs, fixed costs and the expected
profit by the project’ investors (SIGET, 2012) El Salvador also has considerable
experience in the installation of solar PV systems in the off grid sector
register of solar PV systems carried out by CNE reports  182 solar PV systems of
75  each installed in 167 rural communities, serving an estimated  000 families
The electricity sale price in the contract should be similar to the costs of
thermal plants based on Bunker  For this reason, the EDP project is not expected
to contribute to  decrease in electricity prices Based on these assumptions,
market prices in the future can be expected to allow renewable energy power
plants to be economically viable, displacing thermal Bunker  and other fuel oil-
based thermal plants along the way An additional project, which will have
important implications for the future of the power sector, given its capacity
size, is the 380 MW EDP LNG project, expected to be commissioned in This project
already holds  PPA, which was awarded during the   47 Renewable energy financing
Together with the Netherlands Development Finance Company (FMO) and the French
development bank, Proparco (Société de Promotion et de Participation pour la
Coopération Economique ), IDB provided  financial package for the construction
of El Salvador’ Capella solar PV project Capella is the second largest solar
power generation project in the country, with 140 MW of installed capacity The
financial package for the project has  tenor of up to 18 years and is comprised
of three loans of USD 28 million each (IDB Invest, 2018) In the 1990s, El
Salvador’ energy reform process provided  starting point for future renewable
energy investment flows in the country Regulatory stability and enabling
policies are critical to renewable energy finance, as they help ensure the
transparency essential for market-based financing schemes (IRENA, 2016) In this
context, El Salvador’ liberalised approach to the energy sector provides the
basis for the enabling framework needed to scale-up future private financing
within the sector, with the initial support of public financing Thus far,
renewable energy investments in the country have largely been the result of
public financing In addition, IDB seeks new opportunities for promoting national
and regional energy integration It aims to minimise fluctuations in energy
prices, reduce waste and losses in transmission, and thus increase energy
security in the Americas and the Caribbean The Bank is aware that by
diversifying the energy mix of each country, it will help reduce the effects of
climate change and the costs of system operation (IDBa, 2018) The Central
American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) provides key for renewable energy
projects CABEI’ objective is to finance projects that have an impact on economic
and social development and help fulfil the bank’ broader mission of economic
integration in the region As part of its past financing efforts, the bank has
provided funding for the SIEPAC project, renewable energy generation initiatives
at local and regional level, energy diversification programmes, and transmission
and distribution system projects In 2017, CABEI approved loans for the energy
sector that amounted to USD million, representing % of its approved loans for
the year (CABEI, 2018) investment support In recent years, there have been
efforts made to support small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs), for energy
efficiency and renewable energy investments IDB has, for example, provided  USD
20 million loan to El Salvador for the creation of  financing line aiming to
promote SMEs investment in energy efficiency This programme is supplemented by
non-reimbursable technical co operation component, which will develop energy
savings measurements, and  financial risk transfer instrument, which favours
energy efficiency investments (IDBb, 2018) CABEI, together with the German
Development Bank (KfW), administer  funding programme in the region under the
Latin America Investment Facility (LAIF) from the European Union (EU) that
comprises renewable energy projects One such project to receive financing
support was the expansion of the  de Noviembre hydroelectric plant, mentioned
above Recently, CABEI also launched the Green SME initiative This creates credit
lines to finance investments of up to USD  million in projects that aim to
reduce SME energy consumption by 15%, and/or renewable energy projects with
maximum installed capacity of  MW This credit line is supported by KfW and the
EU (CABEI, 2020) BANDESAL, as the national development bank, provides financing
to support feasibility studies and other pre-investment activities for renewable
energy projects The bank can fund renewable projects either directly or through
first-tier commercial banking Beyond BANDESAL, at the national level, the Banco
Hipotecario state bank and several commercial banks in El Salvador also offer
financing lines with their own resources for the construction of renewable
energy projects Meanwhile, private investment in existing infrastructure in El
Salvador is still limited The country has, however, facilitated the financing of
renewable energy projects awarded in the framework of the tendering process, as
in the case of private equity funds supported by institutional investors
Additionally, export credit agencies have also provided financing in the form of
long-term credits El Salvador has functioning capital markets, with private
pension in corporate bonds securitised by future cash flows from public
infrastructure This has become an important source of financing for renewable
energy project developers in the country (USAID, 2018) Based on its objectives,
the IDB supports El Salvador in financing projects for the development of
renewable energy, for research projects and the development of pilot programmes
to verify the viability of renewable energy alternatives funds investing 48 Box
Climate Investment Platform (CIP) The CIP is  global initiative supported by
IRENA, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Sustainable Energy
for All (SE4All), in co-operation with the Green Climate Fund (GCF) The CIP’
objective is to step up climate action and translate ambitious national climate
targets into concrete investments on the ground (IRENA,  ) Whilst initially
focused on energy transition, the ultimate goal of the initiative is to
accelerate investments in renewable energy and enable the success of the
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) The platform offers an avenue to
strengthen existing collaboration and presents an opportunity to consider new
ways for more effectively bringing together stakeholders to catalyse action, all
within existing institutional structures and in line with the respective
mandates of the partner organisations In this context, investment forums,  key
element of IRENA’ strategy to facilitate investments in renewable energy, offer
an effective organising framework for the implementation of the CIP through
sub-regional approach The sub-regional forums have two main aims: to strengthen
the ability of decision-makers to build  strong enabling environment for
renewable energy investments; and to support developers in preparing bankable
projects and accessing finance Post-forum project support is also provided In
operationalising the CIP, IRENA intends to work closely with multilateral,
bilateral and local financial institutions, development partners and other
institutions that are prepared to provide financial and/or technical resources,
and/or support the realisation of projects, as well as private companies and
private investors In Latin America and the Caribbean, IRENA aims to implement
two sub-regional investment forums: one for Central America and the Caribbean
and  second one for South America Both events aim to scale up renewable energy
investments in the region, support project development and implementation, and
contribute to the creation of policy and regulatory frameworks conducive to
renewable energy investments Key forum activities will include matchmaking
between project developers, potential financiers and investors Renewable energy
projects, along with renewable-based electricity grid and energy efficiency
projects, may be considered for support (IRENA,  ) 49  Recommendations for
addressing the main barriers hindering the deployment of renewable energy
targets and long-term plans Positive implementation can lead to  strengthened
investment environment for renewables and improve the country’ policy stability
This section presents the main challenges to the deployment of renewable energy
in El Salvador identified during the RRA process This included  review of the
literature, insights from respondent interviews, outcomes from focus groups and
multi- stakeholder roundtable discussions held during consultative workshops,
along with subsequent exchanges with selected stakeholders Indeed,  long term
national energy plan should take  holistic approach to cover the diverse aspects
of the energy sector This approach should include: the use of clean technologies
for the heating sector; expansion of the generation fleet and transmission
infrastructure; and integration with the regional electricity market, which is
very relevant for El Salvador, due to its regional interconnection via SIEPAC
Each of these challenges is presented below, together with  set of corresponding
short- to medium term recommendations aimed at addressing them, including, where
relevant, actions being taken by the government Action : Establish  long-term
plan for the energy sector Enhance long-term planning and policy for the
renewable energy sector During the RRA process, stakeholder consultation
revealed the need for  more comprehensive national energy plan This plan should
encompass all energy technologies, suppliers and consumers through an integrated
analysis of the current market conditions, and include an evaluation of energy
demand, power and heat availability, grid expansion, off-grid strategies, and
other subjects By undertaking this long-term plan,  more co-ordinated approach
can be sought for the expansion of the generation and transmission system The
National Energy Policy  provided the momentum needed to promote the development
of renewables and diversify the country’ energy supply, after years of fossil
fuel based generation and  slow- paced development of renewable energy In recent
years, the introduction of competitive tendering processes and various fiscal
incentives for renewable electricity has contributed to  positive business
environment for renewables in El Salvador The CNE prepares the Indicative Plan
for Generation Expansion, which analyses the expected evolution of electricity
demand over  period of approximately 10 years and proposes different
technologies for its supply This study assesses scenarios for the growth of
energy demand in different sectors of the economy During the RRA consultation
process, however, numerous stakeholders highlighted the negative impact on
renewable energy development from  lack of institutional co-ordination on long-
term energy plans Therefore, an inclusive approach between all parties is vital
when developing renewable energy 50 (industrial, services, transport, etc),
analysing the national capacity for supply Likewise, ETESAL is responsible for
carrying out the long-term expansion plan of the national transmission network
Both reports are an important input in the development of  national energy plan,
but require better co- ordination between both institutions to achieve an
efficient development of power sector infrastructure Additionally, it is
recommendable to have  closer involvement of SIGET in the whole process, to
ensure the appropriate approval of the plan an through extensive Currently,
stakeholder consultative process, CNE is developing its long term National
Energy Policy for the period 2020-This includes targets for the share of clean
energy technologies in end-use sectors, such as industry and transport Moreover,
the new National Energy Policy aims to promote the development of pilot projects
in the direct use of renewable energy resources in the industrial and agri-food
sectors Action : Align with the regional, ECLAC-SICA Energy Strategy 2030
Furthermore, power system expansion plans need to address the issue of
operational flexibility in the power system The deployment of VRE generation has
to be accompanied by actions that give the system the operational flexibility it
needs to cope with short term variability and to allow the system to operate
reliably Planning efforts should explore all possible options, including
investments in transmission and storage, as well as other base-load technologies
such as geothermal and hydropower, which can enhance flexibility These efforts
should also look at the specification of the technological mix of renewable
generation capacity additions that results in the lowest overall costs for the
system, together with additions without short term variability, such as
geothermal or biomass Regional integration in Central America has played an
important role in the Salvadorian power system SIEPAC acts as  backbone for the
electricity network, with the country playing an active role in the MER as one
of the largest importers of power El Salvador can continue benefiting from
regional integration by aligning its efforts with regional strategies for
electricity development SICA and ECLAC are currently developing the 2030 energy
strategy for SICA countries, which provides  comprehensive approach regional
energy development, and identifies priorities for countries in pursuit of
sustainable energy development El Salvador should incorporate this strategy in
its national long-term planning efforts, in order to maximise renewable energy
resources from outside the country This strategy must also remain in line with
the country’ overall development strategy, assuring the participation of both
public and private sectors for Action : Promote renewables for end uses in
buildings, heat and transport El Salvador has focused its efforts on renewable
energy penetration of the power sector This has led to an increasing share of
renewables in the electricity mix and  reduction in the sector’ reliance for
fossil fuels When analysing the national energy mix, however, the consumption of
electricity in end use sectors represents about 20%, with approximately 79% of
final energy consumption supplied by fossil fuels Thus, the share taken by
renewable energy remains low in these sectors Some progress has already been
achieved in this, by including regional energy integration as one of the
strategic components of the new, El Salvador National Energy Policy 2020-This
should also be reflected as part of  more comprehensive national energy plan,
however Action : Incorporate distributed power generation into comprehensive
long-term electricity planning El Salvador does not currently have targets for
renewables in end-use sectors, either Establishing targets for renewable energy
in transport, heating and cooling, agriculture and industry could contribute to
further scale-up of renewables in the country, and help achieve emissions
reduction targets while creating new business opportunities Furthermore,
renewable energy in end-use sectors can help facilitate the integration of
ancillary services, such as storage applications As is the case in many
countries, net-metering can be an effective instrument to spur the development
of distributed renewable power generation Careful implementation is critical,
however, to avoid risking efficient cost-recovery in the system and to prevent
cross subsidisation between those customers who self consume and those who do
not (IRENA, IEA, REN21, 2018) 51 SIGET regulation self-generation The offers an
opportunity to exploit widely available and geographically scattered solar
energy Given the importance of grid stability and the financial viability of the
distribution companies,  comprehensive national distributed power generation
strategy should be pursued purchase contracts Likewise, geothermal project
developers struggle to access financing instruments at  local level This is
because financing institutions do not have the capacity for geothermal project
financing, or for overcoming high upfront investment costs to achieve bankable
projects Most of the current existing financing mechanisms are provided by
multilateral development banks and international organisations in Central
America, such as the Geothermal Development Facility for Latin America (GDF)
This strategy would need to be based on integration with El Salvador’ indicative
generation plan It should also include  rigorous analysis of distributed power
generation potential and its impact on the economics of the power market This is
important to encourage self consumption, which can drive producers to more
system friendly behaviour, while ensuring the fair distribution of anticipated
dividends, so that net- metering may be seen as mutually beneficial to both
buyer and seller In addition, the existing regulatory framework for geothermal
energy in El Salvador focuses mainly on power generation and does not address
direct use applications of the resource The absence of  regulatory framework for
direct use applications for geothermal energy hampers the scaling-up of existing
pilot projects and the provision of  proper investment environment for the
attraction of private finance to the sector This strategy should also
incorporate studies on current levels of distributed renewable energy generation
and future maximum penetration levels Obtaining statistics would help provide
distribution companies with the necessary analyses needed to accurately forecast
demand, as well as indicate the growth potential of the distributed generation
market to project development companies The strategy could also consider the
implementation of new technologies as distributed storage, which could promote
wider use of distributed renewables development, without the constraint of
having maximum penetration levels Action : Improve geothermal energy policy and
regulatory frameworks El Salvador only has  regulatory framework covering power
applications This streamlined concession procedures for small-scale hydro and
geothermal projects below  MW To improve this situation, it is recommended to
establish  classification of the geothermal resources by temperature, including
adequate procedures for the different potential uses of the geothermal resource
includes Moreover, this strategy should be fully integrated with long term
electricity planning efforts The evolution of distributed generation must be
understood in the wider context of the evolution of the power system as  whole
The strategy must also reflect the extent to which distributed generation offers
meaningful alternative, from both the technical and the economic point of view,
in meeting the country’ electricity needs The definition and classification of
resources as low, medium and high temperature could enable the formulation and
implementation of streamlined regulatory the direct use of geothermal heat,
while also boosting opportunities for the exploitation of geothermal resources
frameworks for Currently, the use of geothermal heat for other purposes, such as
air conditioning, agriculture industry, tourism and medicine, only requires
complying with environmental procedures and obtaining construction permits from
the respective municipality  process therefore needs to be initiated to devise
special regulatory framework for this type of application, providing an
opportunity for scaling-up such projects to an industrial level  clear
regulatory framework for direct use applications will serve to attract investors
and leverage private finance for geothermal direct use projects Create enabling
conditions for geothermal energy development Despite having  long tradition of
geothermal energy use, mainly for power generation, El Salvador’ geothermal
development has stagnated in recent years, with  limited number of new projects
for geothermal power generation, or heating applications Geothermal power
projects face challenges with the existing remuneration scheme, being sometimes
at  disadvantage compared to other renewable energy sources – especially in
accessing long-term energy An increased deployment of direct use applications
would also bring  range of benefits to El Salvador 52 Such uses of geothermal
heat can create  more sustainable energy future for the country, increase food
security and decrease dependency on fossil fuels This diversification into
direct use can also increase the benefits received by communities located close
to geothermal resources Indeed, some direct use pilot projects already
implemented in the country provide strong evidence of such benefits to the
community for local financial institutions and project owners could contribute
to an increased understanding of geothermal project financing and risks In
addition, the capacity of project developers in project financing aspects, such
as pricing mechanisms, inflation, and other key project parameters, needs to be
strengthened in order to improve the preparatory stage of geothermal projects
Likewise, the possibility could be considered of creating  governmental entity
that provides technical and administrative support to investors and developers,
both for the implementation of geothermal direct-use projects and for small-
scale projects from any renewable resource While El Salvador has established
tendering process for PPAs in renewable energy, this has only been granted to
solar, wind, bioenergy and small-scale hydropower projects These long-term
contracts provide  secure remuneration mechanism through  guaranteed, stable
price, helping to attract investment in projects and allow investment recovery
Utilising  similar contract structure tailored for geothermal projects could
improve the investment environment by guaranteeing financial stability for those
projects commissioned Furthermore, available risk mitigation instruments are
specifically designed for electricity generation projects The need therefore
remains to identify – or possibly create – similar financial instruments that
support the development of geothermal direct use projects for applications
beyond the power sector Some opportunities can be found within existing
platforms, such as the GDF, or funds for industrial development El Salvador has
also undertaken four rounds of renewable energy auctions for generation as part
of the wholesale market and distributed generation, in which geothermal did not
participate As the economics of geothermal projects generally require higher
upfront investment for the initial development phase, compared to solar and wind
projects, they can struggle to compete in renewable energy tenders based purely
on  cost bid basis (US dollars per kWh) It is recommendable to initiate an
assessment to determine the best mechanism to allow geothermal projects to
compete equally with other renewable technologies in future tender processes
This could be done by eventually adjusting the parameters of El Salvador’
renewable energy auction scheme, while also accounting for advantages associated
with dispatchable power generation, such as providing balancing support and
enhancing system flexibility Furthermore, the adoption of the United Nations
Framework Classification the standardised methodology estimates of geothermal
potential could contribute to unlocking financing for geothermal projects This
methodology provides transparency in assessing the favourability of the social
and economic conditions in the country necessary to support the establishment of
geothermal projects It also assesses the maturity of relevant project studies
and commitments in the implementation of the project, as well as looking at the
level of confidence in the potentially recoverable resource Therefore, through
the application of this methodology, investors are able to compare different
geothermal projects across different countries – and against other energy
resources – before making investment decisions as (UNFC-2009) for reporting
Additionally, the current regulation for the concession of geothermal and
hydropower projects should be assessed to generate an environment of trust for
project developers, attracting investments in the early stage of development of
geothermal projects, including feasibility studies and environmental permits
Action : Promote in geothermal technology through academic partnerships and
international co-operation innovation The partnership between industry and
academia has contributed to the promotion of research and development in El
Salvador Students have prepared geothermal projects their graduation year,
addressing current challenges for the industry Action : Build capacity in
geothermal project development in There is limited capacity and awareness at the
national level of geothermal project financing and how to overcome high upfront
investment costs to achieve bankable projects As such,  geothermal project
development capacity building programme Yet, while this co-operation has had
good results in the past, it has not been established as  regular activity The
research undertaken by universities has 53 Establish clear institutional
frameworks and co-ordination important potential in developing local technology,
especially in the area of geothermal direct use Chile and Mexico provide good
examples from elsewhere in the region There, universities have an important part
in innovation, developing new equipment for the geothermal industry that can
also, potentially, be scaled up for use in meeting  wide variety of challenges
Partnerships should be promoted between the geothermal industry and
universities, guaranteeing  continuous collaboration between both actors
Currently, responsibilities among institutions in the energy sector remain
decentralised Although the planning and co-ordination roles were assigned to the
CNE in 2009, the current performance of the energy sector suggests that the
government may consider different options to improve co-ordination and
distribution of responsibilities in the Salvadorian include energy sector Such
considerations may the creation of an entity that centralises sector development
and directives For that purpose,  review is needed of the legal and regulatory
framework in response to the needs of the energy sector To promote the direct
utilisation of geothermal resources, El Salvador could also learn from more
experienced countries This co-operation can be financial or technical, or
include technology transfer for many geothermal direct use applications Co-
operation can take place using existing platforms, thanks to the presence in the
region of multilateral organisations that promote exchanges between educational
in geothermal energy research These include El Salvador’ Geothermal Centre of
Excellence (see Box ), as well as co- operation projects created under South-
South/ triangular co-operation modalities The strategic development of that
sector is also hindered by the absence of longer term co-ordination of different
participant’ action plans Improving these institutional frameworks is critical
in creating  clear path towards  sustainable energy future, which goes beyond
the power sector by including renewables in transport, heating, cooling and
direct use institutions Action : Improve co-ordination of expansion planning for
transmission and generation Action : Increase public awareness of geothermal
energy potential the development of the national Currently, transmission system
and of new generation facilities are tasks undertaken separately In addition,
the transmission planning structure does not consider the short construction
periods of VRE sources, such as solar PV, that often require only around two
years to be commissioned As  result, generation and transmission planners in El
Salvador must frequently revise and update plans, while new potential renewable
generation is not included in transmission expansion plans The government of El
Salvador, along with the geothermal industry, should guarantee the continuity of
public awareness campaigns, in order to actively communicate the various socio-
economic advantages of geothermal energy to the public, especially at the local
level In doing so, the potential for scaling-up direct-uses of geothermal energy
could be promoted, while the need to involve local communities in the
development of these resources could be addressed –  particularly important
factor when issuing or renewing licences for geothermal development ETESAL and
CNE should therefore co-ordinate more closely on those expansion plans, to
ensure that renewable energy projects are not forgone arbitrarily due to
expansion timelines One such measure to overcome this challenge is to embark on
the identification of renewable energy zones for the most suitable areas for
project development These zones would then inform both transmission and
generation planners, facilitating  co-ordinated planning effort Currently,
campaigns are in place in El Salvador that aim to raise public awareness of
geothermal energy’ potential These campaigns are important, not only in showing
how geothermal energy can help address key macroeconomic challenges related to
energy security and climate change, but also in offering local economic
opportunities and benefits Furthermore, as  baseload generation resource,
geothermal energy can contribute to the efficient integration of an increasing
level of VRE in the power system, by acting as  balancing resource Inter-
institutional co-ordination will be crucial in carrying out effective planning
In addition, the involvement of SIGET throughout the planning process will
accelerate the approval process and enhance the dissemination of the planning
exercise 54 systems creates  problem of distortion in the global statistics on
demand growth In turn, this can distort macroeconomic data, while also
negatively impacting planned generation expansion and development programmes for
the transmission and distribution networks The significance of this becomes
apparent, too, when considering that self-generators receive credit in kWh which
can then be used to reduce their cost electricity consumption during their
particular billing period Action 10: Enhance power system flexibility Besides
ensuring that planning efforts address the topic of flexibility, in order to
accommodate increasing shares of VRE generation technologies, regulation and
market design must be adjusted to unlock all possible sources of flexibility in
the power system The country has created  strong policy and regulatory framework
to promote renewable energy penetration in the power sector Nevertheless,
additional measures can include: adapting dispatch and pricing procedures to
ensure that controllable generators deliver all the operational flexibility they
can; adjusting the grid code technical performance requirements of inverter-
connected variable generators to ensure that they do not unnecessarily increase
the systemic demand for flexibility; eliciting demand response; promoting
market for auxiliary services (through systems that provide flexibility); and
others The implementation of this net-metering scheme has seen mixed results
While rooftop solar PV generation has increased since the introduction of the
regulation, studies have yet to be undertaken to establish current levels of
distributed generation in the grid, or the maximum penetration levels of VRE in
the distribution grid As such, several distribution companies have expressed
concerns about the impact of growing distributed generation on the reliability
of the power system Moreover, although growing self-generation would increase
overall renewable generation capacity in El Salvador, excessive distributed
generation capacity installation is likely to alter the demand profile for
distribution companies, as well as challenge their financial liquidity The pace
at which such measures will be implemented depends on the rate of increase of
the share of VRE generation in the system In this sense, the planning effort
must serve to inform regulators and policy makers, allowing them to implement
such measures in  timely fashion, adapting the regulatory framework to new
requirements Considering the possibility of addressing flexibility needs via
improvements to the regulation and market design can complement strategies based
on new investments – and thus represent savings to electricity users
Simultaneously, several project developers expressed concerns that an uneven
playing field currently exists in developing distributed generation projects,
given that subsidiaries of distribution companies also compete in the market
These companies may already have  commercial relationship with the customers,
and thus have access to customer information not available to other project
developers Furthermore, project developers may face obstacles and delays in
realising rooftop solar PV projects, as distribution companies do not want to
lose electricity demand from  customer (and thus revenue) Some first steps have
been taken within regulatory adjustments to encourage the penetration of VRE in
the national electricity system These adjustments have included various
amendments in the regulations for the operation of the transmission system and
the wholesale market, based on production costs for dispatching They also
include conducting studies of the spinning reserve with  view to the further
integration of VRE Action 11: Assess the generation systems impact of
distributed Assess the implementation of distributed power generation With the
implementation of the Norm for End User Producers of Electrical Energy with
Renewable Energy Sources, the use of solar rooftop systems has been growing in
El Salvador, especially in the commercial sector Despite the effectiveness of
the net metering scheme implemented in 2017, periodic reports are also needed on
the energy generated by end-users, who are generally residential and commercial
customers They can generate their own renewable electricity and feed the excess
generation back into the grid lack of centralised measurement for these The
Measuring the impact of this on the energy market accurately requires some
important steps These include registering all the existing self-generation
Agreement No 367--2017 Norm for End User Producers of Electrical Energy with
Renewable Energy Sources 55 solar panels in use, with this registration
including details of the potential amount of electricity they can inject into
the grid and how much of the power generated is for self-use This first step can
provide important information to assess the impact that the implementation of
distributed generation can have on the different energy stakeholders, such as
grid operators, distribution companies, final users, and others This first
assessment of distributed generation should not just focus on rooftop solar
technologies It should also include other power generation systems existing in
the country, such as biogas and small hydro and tax incentive approvals are
under the remit of municipal offices, VMVDU, MINSAL, MICULTURA, ANDA, MARN, and
the MH While these procedures and permits are carried out in  sequential order,
there is often repetition among permitting offices,  limited technical capacity
in issuing agencies, and  lack of legal clarity concerning feedback issued to
project developers At the same time, municipal tax structures for projects are
unstable and often subject to change at the request of  mayor’ office, once
approved by the Legislative Assembly Furthermore, according to the private
sector, compliance with the Law of Legal Stability and the Money Laundering Law
has led to instances of excessive document requests and irrelevant project
information being required the the Better understanding of impact of
implementation of distributed generation in El Salvador among the different, key
energy sector actors can contribute to the assessment of the existing regulatory
framework for the use of self-generation Indeed, private sector representatives
have indicated that this lack of co-ordination in the current process of
obtaining permits and permissions has negative cost implications, creating delay
and uncertainty surrounding renewable energy project development The regulatory
aspects for distributed generation must consider the stability of the grid and
the existing distribution market They must also empower the end user with the
flexibility of energy management This can be reflected in the commercialisation
of the distributed generation market, the conditions given by long term
contracts and the application of innovative technologies, such as digitalisation
and blockchain, that facilitate transactions among the distribution actors El
Salvador could use the experience of other countries in the application of such
technologies, and evaluate  more adequate strategy for implementation, based on
market growth When it comes to financing such projects, it is public financial
institutions, including national and international development organisations,
that are the main players in the renewable energy debt market On the other hand,
via the implementation of guarantees and other risk mitigation tools, private
financial institutions play  key role in renewable energy project finance Yet,
the availability of such private financing is still limited  full assessment of
the sufficiency of the current sources of public and private instruments in
financing the transition towards  sustainable energy future needs to be carried
out in the country, with alternatives that would expand the participation of
private financing identified and deployed Foster project development and
financing for renewables There have been significant achievements and progress
in the adjustment of the regulation for the development of renewable energy in
El Salvador Reforms of the General Electricity Law must be deepened, however, to
guarantee that the benefits of introducing renewable energy reach all final
consumers Action 12: Streamline administrative procedures and facilitate their
enforcement Streamlining these administrative procedures is an important step in
removing  key barrier to renewable energy project development in El Salvador
Regulation in this area should ensure procedures are transparent and timetables
for various permitting processes have been defined clearly Moreover, co-
ordination should be enhanced among the various government offices involved in
issuing permits, in order to reduce project delays and reduce development costs
Additionally, in El Salvador, administrative procedures and permits for the
development of renewable energy projects are still an important barrier These
are not centralised, with registration applications, feasibility and
interconnection studies and agreements, as well as concession requests all
carried out by different power sector agencies These include distribution
companies, ETESAL, the UT, and the regulator Moreover, building permits,
construction feasibility studies, technical inspections, environmental permits
One such mechanism used in many countries to consolidate the responsibilities of
administrative procedures and project permitting is to develop  56 single office
( “single-window agency”) to handle and resolve most of the applicable licenses
and permits for renewable energy projects This entity can be created as an
independent legal body, or under an existing government office, and can be an
important mechanism renewable energy investments and expediting project
development timelines in partially re-directing public financing to de-risking
instruments that enable the participation of private lenders An assessment of
other types of financial instrument that might be used to finance renewable
energy projects in the country – such as Green Bonds – should also be undertaken
in encouraging In addition, several project developers expressed the need to
develop  single compliance certificate for the Money Laundering Law, valid for
all institutions Utilising this certification approach could help cut down
project delays and provide clarity for project owners At present, national or
international development agencies, such as the World Bank, IDB, KfW, CABEI and
BANDESAL, account for the bulk of the financial instruments deployed the capital
structures of El Salvador’ renewable energy projects Financial instruments
provided by private institutions have, however, also been important in providing
funding for the energy transition in the country, especially instruments related
to loans and risk mitigation mechanisms provided by guarantees in financing
Action 13: Assess sufficiency of prevalent financial instruments The sufficiency
of the prevailing alternatives for financing renewable energy in El Salvador
must be assessed in light of the plans to deploy renewable energy in the country
While the low costs of finance from public institutions can certainly have
positive impact on the capital mix of renewable projects, limitations on the
availability of such instruments must also take account of the volumes needed to
realise El Salvador’ long-term deployment ambitions for renewables  realistic
assessment for the long term is necessary, due to the time usually needed for
those measures that are eventually implemented to expand the range of financial
sources Action 14: Create capacity for financing of renewable energy projects
local private An additional uncertainty for financial agencies when it comes to
renewable energy projects in El Salvador is the relative lack of experience such
agencies have in financing projects of this type This limits the involvement of
even those private financial institutions that do undertake risk mitigation in
the renewable energy arena The capacities of local private financiers must
therefore also be built up, in order to remove the knowledge barrier to
renewable energy market entry On the other hand, existing mechanisms and
conditions for finance and risk mitigation provided by private institutions must
also be clear, to ensure that project developers can make use of these
instruments for renewable energy projects Existing financial instruments in El
Salvador must be evaluated in order to improve and maximise them This would
include an evaluation of improvements that could be made in the regulatory and
contractual conditions that impact the remuneration of renewable energy
projects, as well as Making local private institutions more familiar with this
market can generate more interest from them in financing sector projects At the
same time, familiarity can improve the capability of existing mechanisms in
facilitating access to project developers Additionally, the enhancement of local
finance capacity can also promote the creation of new and potentially innovative
mechanisms, making El Salvador’ renewable energy market more attractive to
investors 15 de Septiembre hydropower plant in San Vicente, El Salvador Image
credit: CEL 57 References BANDESAL (El Salvador’ Development Bank) (2019),
Programa renovable (Renewable programme),  (accessed March 2020) BNEF (Bloomberg
New Energy Finance) and MIF (Multilateral Investment Fund) (2012), Climatescope
2012: Assessing the climate for climate investing in Latin America and the
Caribbean CABEI (Central American Bank for Economic Integration) (2020), Green
SMEs initiative,  iniciativa-mipymes-verdes (accessed August 2020) CABEI (2018),
Memoria Anual de Labores 2017 (Annual report 2017),  (accessed June 2020) CNE
(National Energy Council) (2020), Balances energéticos (Energy Balances),
(accessed September 2020) CNE (2019), Plan Indicativo de la Expansión de la
Generación Eléctrica de El Salvador  (Indicative plan of the electric generation
expansion of El Salvador ),  expansi%C3%B3n-2019-pdf (accessed February 2020)
CNE (2013), Portal para proyectos con Energías Renovables: Proyecto Fotovoltaico
(Portal for Renewable Energy Projects: Solar PV Project),  (accessed July 2020)
CNE (2012), Training and Dialogue Program Energy Policy – Country Report of El
Salvador,  (accessed July 2020) CNE (2010), Política Energética Nacional
(National Energy Policy),  (accessed February 2020) CNE (), Autoridades de El
Salvador  Distribuidoras de Energía eléctrica dan  conocer (Authorities in El
Salvador and electricity distributors disclosed),  -distribuidoras-de-energia-
electrica-dan--conocer-proceso-de-licitacion-para-28-mw-de-energia-renovable
(accessed March 2020) CNE/JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency) (2012),
Proyecto del Plan Maestro para el Desarrollo de Energías Renovables – Informe
final (The project for master plan for the development of renewable energy in
the Republic of El Salvador final report),  (accessed February 2020) CNE-PROESA
(Export and Investment Promotion Agency of El Salvador) (2016), Sector Eléctrico
de El Salvador (Electricity sector of El Salvador),  (accessed December 2019)
CRIE (Electrical-Interconnection Regional Commission) (2019), Supervisión
Análisis del Mercado Eléctrico Regional Año 2018 (Supervision and analysis of
the regional electricity market, 2018),  (accessed June 2020) CRIE (2018),
Resolucion-CRIE- - Modificación al RMER del Procedimiento para el Trámite de
Solicitudes de Conexión  la Red de Transmisión Regional (RTR)  del SIEPAC
(Resolution-CRIE- - Modification to the RMER of the procedure for the processing
of applications for connection to the Regional Transmission Network (RTR) and
SIEPAC),  (accessed February 2020) 58 DIGESTYC (Department of Statistics and
Censuses) (2018),  noticias-dia-internacional-de-erradicacion-de-la-pobrezahtml
(accessed February 2019) EOR (Regional Operating Entity) (2017), Operational
Link Nodes,  (accessed July 2020) GGA (Global Geothermal Alliance) (), Regional
and International Training Centres,  (accessed June 2020) IDB (Inter-American
Development Bank) (2018a), Energy Sector Framework Document - Energy Division,
(accessed June 2020) IDB (2018b), El Salvador to offer greater investment in
energy efficiency with IDB support,  (accessed August 2020) IDB (2013), Dossier
Energético – 04 (Energy dossier 04) El Salvador,  (accessed May 2020) IDB Invest
(2018), IDB Invest finances 140MW Capella solar project in El Salvador,
(accessed March 2020) IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2020a),
Data & Statistics,  (accessed December 2019) IRENA (2020b), Global renewables
outlook: Energy transformation 2050, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  (accessed May 2020)
IRENA (2019), Statistics Country Profile: El Salvador,  Central%20America%20and%
20the%20Caribbean/El%20Salvador_Central%20America%20and%20the%20
Caribbean_RE_SPpdf (accessed July 2020) IRENA (2016), Renewable energy market
analysis: Latin America, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/IRENA_Market_Analysis_Latin_America_2016pdf
(accessed February 2020) IRENA (2015), Renewable energy in Latin America 2015:
An overview of policies, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  Latin_America_Policies_2015pdf
(accessed February 2020) IRENA ( ), IRENA for CIP,  (accessed May 2020) IRENA (
), Investment forums in Central America,  (accessed May 2020) IRENA, IEA and
REN21 (2018), Renewable energy policies in  time of transition, IRENA, OECD/ IEA
and REN21,  (accessed March 2020) LaGeo (Geotérmica Salvadoreña,  de ) (),
Investigación  Desarrollo (Investigation and development),  (accessed April
2020) Lund,  and Boyd,  (2015), “Direct utilization of geothermal energy 2015
worldwide review”, Proceedings World Geothermal Congress 2015, Melbourne,
Australia,  April 59 MARN (Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources –
Ministerio de Medio Ambiente  Recursos Naturales) and UCA (Jose Simeon Canas
Central American University – Universidad Centroamericana “José Simeón Cañas”)
(2005), Determinación del Potencial Solar  Eólico en El Salvador (Solar and Wind
Energy Resource Assessment of El Salvador),  Salvador (accessed February 2020)
MINEC (Ministry of Economy – Ministerio de Economía) (), Ministry website,
(accessed May 2020) Reinstein,  et al (2011), Regional power integration –
Structural and regulatory challenges, Central America regional programmatic
study for the energy sector, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program
(ESMAP), World Bank Group, Washington, DC,
pdf/589340ESW0P1100toryModule00English0pdf (accessed March 2020) REN21 (2017),
Renewable Energy Tenders and Community [Em]power[ment]: Latin America and the
Caribbean (Paris: REN21 Secretariat),  (accessed July 2020) Sanyal,  et al
(2016), Comparative analysis of approaches to geothermal resource risk
mitigation:  global survey, ESMAP knowledge series 024, World Bank Group,
Washington, DC,  curated/en/Comparative-analysis-of-approaches-to-geothermal-
resource-risk-mitigation-- global-surve (accessed February 2020) SDGs Knowledge
Platform - UN (), El Salvador Voluntary National Review 2017  (accessed March
2020) SIGET (General Electricity and Telecommunications Superintendence) (2019),
Boletín Estadístico de Electricidad No 20 – año 2018 (Statistical Newsletter of
Electricity No 20 – 2018),  (accessed February 2020) SIGET (2017a), Boletín
Estadístico de Electricidad No 19 - año 2017 (Statistical Newsletter of
Electricity No 19 – 2017),  (accessed February 2020) SIGET (2017b), Anexo  del
Acuerdo No 367--2017 – Norma para usuarios finales productores de energía
eléctrica con recursos renovables (Annex , Agreement No 367--2017 – Policy for
end users that produce electrical energy from renewable sources),  (accessed
February 2020) SIGET (2012), Licitación pública internacional No DELSUR-CLP-, 12
diciembre (International public tender No DELSUR-CLP-, 12 December),  pblica-
internacional-delsur-clp-001-pdf (accessed March 2020) SIGET (2006), Acuerdo No
257--2006, “Normas aplicables al procedimiento de licitacion para el
otorgamiento de concesiones de recursos geotermicos  hidraulicos con fines de
generacion electrica”, Diario Oficial de La República de El Salvador No 200, 26
de octubre (Agreement No 257--2006, “Rules applicable to the tender procedure
for the granting of geothermal and hydraulic resource concessions for
electricity generation purposes”, Official Gazette of the Republic of El
Salvador No 200, 26 October),  (accessed February 2020) sieLAC - OLADE
(Latinoamerican Energy Organisation) (2019) Sistema de Información Energética de
Latinoamérica  el Caribe (Latin American and Caribbean Energy Information
System),  (accessed December 2019) 60 Superintendence of Competition of El
Salvador (2017), Evolución del precio del servicio de energí  eléctrica en El
Salvador 1998 2015 (Evolution of the electricity Price in El Salvador 1998
2015),  uploads/Monitoreos_IE/Monitoreo - Evolución de precios energía eléctrica
en El Salvadorpdf (accessed June 2020) UN ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean) (2020), Statistics of the electrical subsector of the
countries of the Central American Integration System (SICA), 2018, LC / MEX /
TS2020 / , Mexico City, UN ECLAC (2019), Estadísticas de producción de
electricidad de los países del Sistema de la Integración Centroamericana (SICA)
Datos preliminares  2018 (Statistics of electricity production of the countries
of the Central American Integration System (SICA) Preliminary data to 2018)
(LC/MEX/TS2019/), Ciudad de México, UN ECLAC (2017), Estudio Económico de
América Latina  el Caribe 2017: El Salvador; Santiago, Chile (Economic Study of
Latin America and the Caribbean 2017: El Salvador; Santiago, Chile),
cepalorg/bitstream/handle/S1700700_espdf (accessed February 2020) UNStats (),
SDG Country Profile: El Salvador,  (accessed March 2020) USAID (United States
Agency for International Development) (2018), Analysis of renewable energy
auctions in El Salvador, Mexico, and Peru,  Mikell-%E2%80%99Mealy-Analysis-of-
Renewable-Energy-Auctions-in-El-Salvador-Mexico-and-Perupdf (accessed March
2020) USAID (2017), Climate change risk profile – El Salvador,
document/2017_USAID%20ATLAS_Climate%20Change%20Risk%20Profile_El%20Salvadorpdf
(accessed May 2020) UT (Unidad de Transacciones – Transactions Unit ) (2019),
Statistical information – Reports,  utcomsv/reportes?p_auth=3oYU8gON&p_p_id=Menu
ReportesEstadisticos_WAR_CompletePublicReports&p_p_
lifecycle=&p_p_state=normal&p_p_mode=view&p_p_col_id=column-&p_p_col_count=& Men
uReportesEstadisticos_WAR_CompletePublicReports_reportName=11utinyeccionesporrec
urso (accessed July 2020) World Bank (2020a), World Development Indicators:
Population growth (annual $) – El Salvador and Latin America and the Caribbean,
GROW?end=2018&locations=ZJ&start=2000 (accessed July 2020) World Bank (2020b),
The World Bank in El Salvador,  (accessed July 2020) World Bank (2020c), World
Development Indicators: GDP per capita, PPP (current international $) – El
Salvador,  (accessed June 2020) World Bank (2020d), World Development Indicators
– El Salvador,  development-indicators# (accessed April 2020) World Bank
(2020e), World Development Indicators: Electric power consumption (kWh per
capita) - El Salvador,  (accessed June 2020) 61 Appendices Appendix  Overview of
entities in the energy sector National institutions The governing authority for
the sector, the CNE has responsibility for policy and national energy strategy
development, with the goal of fuel and electricity sector expansion National
Energy Council (CNE – Consejo Nacional de Energía) Before CNE was created, MINEC
was in charge of the management and co- ordination of the energy sector through
its two directorates, the directorate for electricity and the regulatory
directorate for hydrocarbons and mines; this last one still exists as part of
MINEC Ministry of Economy (MINEC – Ministerio de Economía) Ministry of the
Environment and Natural Resources (MARN – Ministerio de Medio Ambiente  Recursos
Naturales) The governmental institution charged with the oversight of all
environment and natural resource issues in El Salvador The MARN also sends
representative to the board of CNE As the regulator for the electricity and
telecommunications sector, SIGET has responsibility for application and
enforcement of the legal frameworks in these areas Also within its portfolio is
the task of establishing  legal framework to encourage investment in these
sectors, along with the establishment of competition Other duties include
regulating final consumer tariffs and guaranteeing user and operator rights
General Electricity and Telecommunications Superintendence (SIGET –
Superintendencia General de Electricidad  Telecomunicaciones) The
Superintendence of Competition (SC – Superintendencia de Competencia) The SC is
in charge of monitoring the markets to promote and protect competition, and
increase economic efficiency and consumer welfare FINET is part of the Social
Investment Fund for Local Development (FISDL – Fondo de Inversión Social para el
Desarrollo Local), and is in charge of managing and allocating subsidies to low-
income users, as well as the expansion of rural electrification National
Investment Fund for Electricity and Telephony (FINET – Fondo de Inversión en
Electricidad  Telefonía) DRHM is the institution in charge of regulating the
hydrocarbons sector It oversees imports, transport, distribution and marketing,
inspection, and control, while also supervising compliance with the current
legislation for hydrocarbon trading This entity also establishes the weekly
reference price for gasoline and diesel, as well as the parity price of imported
LPG for domestic consumption Regulatory Directorate of Hydrocarbons and Mines
(DRHM – Dirección Reguladora de Hidrocarburos  Minas) Executive Hydroelectric
Commission of the Lempa River (CEL – Comisión Ejecutiva Hidroeléctrica del Río
Lempa) CEL is an independent, public electric utility in charge of developing,
conserving, managing, and using the energy resources of El Salvador Clean energy
is generated in four hydropower plants located at different points in the Lempa
River basin 62 ETESAL is El Salvador’ transmission system owner The institution
was created to ensure the safe, non stop supply of electricity It makes possible
transactions between market participants within the country, as well as with
other regional countries through the Electrical Interconnection System for
Central America Transmission Company of El Salvador (ETESAL – Empresa
Transmisora de El Salvador) LaGeo,  CEL subsidiary, is  company dedicated to the
production of electricity using geothermal resources in  rational and
sustainable way The institution currently has  total installed capacity of MW
and  net production equivalent to % of the electrical energy produced in El
Salvador Salvadorean Geothermal (LaGeo –Geotérmica Salvadoreña) Cucumacayán
Electricity Company (CECSA – Compañía Eléctrica Cucumacayán) CECSA,  CEL
subsidiary, is  company dedicated to the generation of electrical energy through
small hydropower plants INE,  CEL subsidiary, is  company in charge of
commercialising the energy generated by the El Talnique thermal power plant It
was the first thermal generation project developed by the government after
electric sector reforms Energy Investments (INE – Inversiones Energéticas) UT is
private institution in charge of El Salvador’ wholesale electricity market
operations Its functions are operating the electricity transmission system and
ensuring the safety and quality of this service Transactions Unit (UT – Unidad
de Transacciones) Regional institutions CRIE started operations in 2000 as the
regulatory authority of the regional market with its legitimacy recognised by
all parties to the Marco Treaty of the Electricity Market of Central America,
signed in It has an Executive Secretary and  Board of Commissioners, consisting
of one representative from each country, who is often  member of the national
regulatory board Regional Commission for Electrical Interconnection (CRIE –
Comisión Regional de Interconexión Eléctrica) EOR is the regional system
operator and market administrator This entity was also created as part of the
Marco Treaty of the Electricity Market of Central America, signed in Regional
Operating Entity (EOR – Ente Operador Regional) EPR is the entity that owns the
SIEPAC line The regional transmission line (RTL) of SIEPAC has  transfer
capacity at all borders in the region of 300 MW in one circuit This regional
entity was also created as part of the Marco Treaty of the Electricity Market of
Central America, signed in Enterprise owner of the Regional Electric Grid (EPR –
Empresa Propietaria de la Red) Council of the Regional Electricity Market (CDMER
– Consejo Director del MER) CDMER is the body in charge of revising regional
integration policies in Central America 63 Appendix  Installed and available
capacity of power plants, 2018 Installed capacity Available capacity No Name
Type Unit number (MW) (%) (MW) (%) 30% 74 32% Hydro Guajoyo Hydro (1x19) % %
Cerrón Grande Hydro (2x86) % 10%  (3x20)+(1x18)+(1x2140)+ (2x4007) (1x055)  de
Noviembre Hydro 09 10% %  15 de Septiembre Hydro (2x90) 180 10% 180 11%  11% 175
10% Geothermal Ahuachapán Geothermal (2x3000)+(1x3500) 95 % %  Berlín Geothermal
(2x 10)+(1x44)+(1x9) % %  175 11% 10% Fossil Orazul Acajutla - - 17% 18%
Acajutla ) Vapor (1x30)+(1x33) 63 % %   Acajutla ) Gas (1x82) 64 % %   Acajutla
) Motors (6x16)+(3x17) 150 % %   Acajutla ) FIAT - (1x27) 27 27 % %   Orazul Soy
ap ango Motors (3x5) % %  Nejapa Power Motors (27x5) % %  Holcim Motors
(3x640)+(1x670) % % 10 Inversiones Energéticas Motors (3x16) + (6x845) % % 11
Textufil / Motors (2x3)+(2x6)+(1x7)+(2x7) % % 12 GECSA Motors (3x38704) % % 13
Energía Borealis Motors (8x1) % % 14 HILCASA Energy Motors (4x1)   % % 15 Termop
uerto Limitada Motors (1x1)+(1x2)+(1x7)+(1x10) % % 16 16% 11% Biomass CASSA - -
% 61 % 17 Central Izalco Turbogenerators (1x25)+(1x20) 45 % 26 % Ingenio
Chaparrastique Turbogenerators (1x1)+(1x2)+(1x2)+(1x10)+(1X62) % 35 % Ingenio El
Angel / Turbogenerators (1x10)+(1x12)+(1x25)+(1x3) % % 18 Ingenio La Cabaña /
Turbogenerators (1x1)+(1x2)+(1x10)+(1x20) % 30 30 % 19 Ingenio Jiboa
Turbogenerators (1x1)+(1x2)+(1x7)+(1x10) % % 20 % 60 60 % Photovoltaic % 60 60 %
Providencia Solar Solar PV 239,358 Paneles FV 21 TOTAL 81 100% 100% - Source:
SIGET (2019) 64 Appendix  Location of on-grid power generators, 2018 HOLCIM MW
Nejapa MW  Guajoyo MW   de Noviembre MW Ahuachapan 95 MW  Hilcasa  MW BOREALIS
MW   Cerron Grande MW Izalco MW   15 de Septiembre MW   Jiboa  MW
Chaparrastique 4MW GECSA MW     Acajutla MW Termopuerto MW Berlin MW  El Angel
MW Soyapango MW La Cabaña MW Talnique MW Textuﬁl MW  ANTARES 60 MW Installed
capacity Share  = Hydro MW 59%  = Fossil fuel MW 54%  = Geothermal MW 94% -
Bioenergy MW 72% MW 21% -Solar TOTAL ,81 MW 00% Source: SIGET (2019) 65 Appendix
Certified electricity generation projects using renewable resources, 2017 SIGET
Agree- ment No Capacity (MW) Project developer Project name Resource
Photovoltaic Solar Installation on Roof up to  MWp INDUFOAM  INDUFOAM ENERGY
SUPPLY,  DE  604 PV 79--2017 Biomass – Sugar cane bagasse Sugar Cane Processing
Plant Cogeneration Phase IV INGENIO EL ÁNGEL,  de  80 84--2017 POTENZA,  de
Plant Photovoltaic La Independencia 00 PV 124--2017 Biomass – Sugar cane bagasse
Generation Plant Sugar Cane Processing Plant Jiboa  INJIBOA,  DE  90 221--2017
VASES INGENIEROS,  de  Photovoltaic Generating Plant Tangolona 475 PV 244--2017
ACAJUTLA ENERGÍA SOLAR , LTDA de  Solar plant Los Remedios 00 PV 260--2017 PFV
PASAQUINA 00 PV 384--2017 BOSFORO, LTDA DE  PFV EL CARMEN 00 PV 421--2017 PFV
CONCHAGUA 00 PV 422--2017 Source: SIGET (2017a) Appendix  Small projects that
obtained  concession to generate hydroelectricity, 2017 Agreement No Project
name Capacity (kW) Legislative decree PCH San Simón  230 kW 125--2017 693 PCH
San Simón II 400 kW 126--2017 694 PCH Velesa Energy 120 kW 127--2017 695 Source:
SIGET (2017a) 66