Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/SLV/  UNDP within the Cooperation
Framework  El Salvador has made significant progress in reducing monetary
poverty in the last three decades, which on average decreased from per cent in ,
to per cent in , and to per cent in 2011-similar trend is observed in the Gini
index, which dropped almost ten percentage points between  and , from per cent
to per cent However, multidimensional poverty affects almost three out of every
10 households: 543,000 households and 1million people live in this condition
Poverty incidence in rural areas is more than double that of urban areas
Crucial development challenges in the country are thus the persistence of
multidimensional poverty and the need to increase access to basic services,
education, employment, social security, health, and water In seven out of every
10 households there are five most frequent deprivations: low adult education;
lack of access to social security; underemployment and job instability; lack of
access to sanitation; and overcrowded homes  The risks of climate change are
growing and threatening to exacerbate social imbalances El Salvador is
exceptionally vulnerable to changes in climate, which makes building resilience,
climate adaptation and mitigation increasingly essential to avoid  greater
incidence of poverty Moreover, exclusion, poverty and climate change have been
identified as the main drivers of migration in the region  The national economy
is characterized by fragmentation, with  large informal sector and insufficient
decent jobs In 2019, per cent of people who worked were in the informal sector
and per cent in micro and small businesses; only 20 per cent had  decent job
Approximately one out of two women does not participate in the labour market,
while male inactivity is one in five In addition, 77 per cent of micro and small
businesses were disconnected from the internet in 2017; the lack of digitization
makes them more vulnerable to shocks such as COVID- Since the 1992 Peace
Accords, the country has strengthened its democratic institutions However, in
recent years, support for democracy as  form of government has begun to show
signs of wear, due to  perception that institutions are corrupt and inefficient
It reached its second lowest historical minimum support (per cent) in 2018,
according to Latinobarómetro El Salvador faces  challenge in access to justice
In 2017, it was among the countries with the highest levels of impunity, ranking
13th according to the Global Impunity Index  COVID-19 and the economic recession
caused by its mitigating measures also increased the vulnerability of the
economy At the end of 2020, the gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate
decreased by  per cent, leading to  fiscal deficit of per cent of GDP, and
indebtedness of 85 per cent of GDP The increases in spending derived from the
pandemic and the pressure on debt growth created an adverse fiscal context and
an uncertain economic recovery The pandemic has further exacerbated the
inequalities, particularly for those in monetary and multidimensional poverty,
including  large proportion of women-headed households  The Common Country
Assessment and the United Nations socio-economic response plan to COVID-19
determined that it was imperative to focus on the most vulnerable population
groups, including rural households and particularly women, older adults in
vulnerable condition, violence victims – especially gender-based – young people
at risk, displaced persons and returning migrants, small businesses, persons
deprived of liberty, people with disabilities, and people in extreme poverty
Under the  country programme, UNDP promoted  multidimensional approach to
citizen security to respond to the challenge of  rate of 81 homicides per  /14
DP/DCP/SLV/ 100,000 inhabitants (2016) and  large number of internally displaced
people due to violence The approach included prevention measures, institutional
reforms, structural changes in the relationship between the State and
communities, promotion of broad and sustained political commitments, care for
victims, social inclusion, and the adoption of modernized information and
intervention systems UNDP also supported political dialogue and the engagement
of civil society on Citizen Security, Education and the Environment through the
National Councils This integrated strategy was  priority for the Government of
El Salvador with commitment at the highest level UNDP was therefore able to
influence the public agenda strongly The independent country programme
evaluation, 2019, demonstrated the effectiveness of UNDP technical support,
methodological guidance, and inclusive strategy in setting up and convening
democratic spaces for dialogue  On effective governance and strengthening of
democratic institutions, UNDP continued to support the Supreme Electoral
Tribunal for fair and transparent elections UNDP promoted equal rights in the
electoral process for persons with disabilities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community, and other vulnerable groups, through
training and awareness campaigns UNDP also promoted transitional justice as one
of the main axes of strengthening democracy UNDP promoted  South-South
partnership with Chile to strengthen the memory and reconciliation agenda The
independent evaluation noted that public government institutions, especially in
the health sector, were well supported by UNDP in accessing international
markets to acquire high-quality products, ensuring best value for money UNDP
supported transparency, efficiency, and quality in the procurement of goods and
management of public funds The country also benefited from data production,
numerous studies and analyses, including the 2018 national human development
report on youth; systematic data collection on security and violence; and the
production of analyses and studies on climate change issues providing  wealth of
information for key policy and legal framework decisions On gender equality,
UNDP supported the setting up of the gender equality seal for public and private
enterprises and the national gender equality management standard for the
business sector UNDP, as part of the United Nations global initiative to
eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls, strengthened its work
on gender-based violence, especially femicides Through these initiatives, the
capacity of key institutions such as the Attorney General’ Office, the Public
Defender’ Office and the Supreme Court of Justice were strengthened, awareness
campaigns were launched, and spaces for dialogue were promoted During the
programme cycle, the Sustainable Development Goals were adopted and the United
Nations development system reform was implemented; and in June 2020 the United
Nations developed socio-economic response plans to COVID-This opened an
opportunity for UNDP to consolidate as the development programme of the United
Nations and the integrator of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development UNDP
also consolidated as  reference point to the United Nations system in
governance, electoral processes, dialogue, climate change and socio-economic
analysis The  country programme showed that tackling poverty, inequality and
exclusion requires mainstreaming economic development and gender equality
Comprehensive interventions to tackle violence, including gender-based violence,
are key to addressing the local drivers of migration and forced displacement
Underpinning sustainable development requires strengthening interventions that
target resilience; hence an increased focus on adaptation to climate change and
mitigation is needed  holistic  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ approach to the rule of law,
access to justice and social reintegration provides durable solutions to crime
and social insecurity COVID-19 exacerbated the challenges listed above and made
clear that it will only be possible to overcome the difficulties through
innovation UNDP is uniquely positioned with the establishment of the Accelerator
Lab in the country, which fosters an enhanced innovation ecosystem in key areas,
such as access to water, technology and innovative livelihood solutions for the
informal sector UNDP will focus on four of the seven outcomes identified in the
Cooperation Framework and integrate the other three outcomes by systematically
addressing gender inequalities, human mobility, and citizen security UNDP will
strengthen universal social protection systems and expand educational, health,
and water services to eradicate multidimensional poverty For the economic
transformation, UNDP will promote decent work, women’ economic participation,
innovation and digital transformation, green jobs, adaptation to climate change,
and risk management In the area of peace and justice, UNDP will strengthen
capacities to promote: the rule of law, access to public information, social
cohesion, the fight against corruption, electoral participation, prevention of
gender-based violence, transitional justice, citizen security, and improved
public management To meet these challenges, UNDP will draw on its reputation as
an impartial partner, its convening capacity, credibility, and legitimacy in
development work The relationship of trust built with the Government of El
Salvador and other State institutions, the ability to construct state-of-the-art
knowledge products, mobilize technical support around the globe and proven
efficiency in implementing cost-sharing programmes, will be key to supporting
national efforts to efficiently expand the offer of services in  fiscally
constrained situation UNDP expertise in creating opportunities for brokering
dialogue among diverse actors on priority and sensitive issues will also be
essential II Programme priorities and partnerships The UNDP programme will
contribute to the development of El Salvador in achieving improvements by 2026
in the following areas: () inclusion, through reduction in multidimensional
poverty and inequality gaps; () resilience, through adaptation to and mitigation
of climate change; and () productivity, through innovative, inclusive and
sustainable economic transformation – all of this based on effective governance,
strengthening of the rule of law, citizen security and accountability To achieve
this, UNDP will focus on four priorities in the 2022–2026 period People have
equitable access to education, health care, social services, and universal
social protection systems UNDP will promote social inclusion if the following
can be expanded: the multimodal educational offer, through better digitization
and infrastructure, particularly with computers, digital skills and management
systems; the offer of health services and medicines, through  national health
system integrated with the effective use of digital tools; and capacities to
design universal social protection programmes and achieve  higher-quality
coverage of water services Then, multidimensional poverty and inequality gaps
focusing on the most vulnerable populations, particularly at risk youth, women
and girls in conditions of socioeconomic vulnerability and migrants, will be
reduced This priority is aligned with UNDP’ Strategic Plan, 2022- 2025, through
the signature solution: lifting people out of poverty and strengthening gender
equality Building partnerships is one of the main strategies for achieving the
outcomes of this programme Consolidating portfolios with the Ministries of
Education and Health, the Institute for Teachers’ Welfare, and the Social
Security Institute and the government bodies  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ responsible for
promoting social protection and the comprehensive management of water resources,
will be key UNDP is strengthening its partnerships within the United Nations
system to deliver solid results: collaborating with the United Nations Children’
Fund (UNICEF) for its knowledge of early childhood builds on UNDP strengths in
educational innovation with digital services and infrastructure; working with
the Pan-American Health Organization to strengthen the role of the governing
body of the Ministry of Health, with UNDP contributing best practices in
planning, acquisition of supplies, and digital services; collaborating with
World Food Programme in social protection programmes, building on the UNDP
capacity to developing public policy frameworks; and the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) for ensuring that
gender inequality in access to social services is reduced People have greater
opportunities to access decent, productive work and sustainable livelihoods UNDP
will promote an economic transformation if capacities can be expanded to: design
public policies that promote the transition to decent work, the formal economy,
the economic participation of women and sustainable livelihoods; promote
innovation and inclusive digital transformation, particularly for the economic
recovery of micro and small businesses; generate green jobs, and promote the
circular economy Then, the economy will be transformed under an innovative,
inclusive and environmentally sustainable model In  formal and innovative
economy, increasing productivity is the basis for achieving sustained economic
growth This priority is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan through the
signature solutions: keeping people out of poverty, strengthening gender
equality, and promoting nature-based solutions The gender equality approach will
reduce inequalities by including women in the labour market and reducing the
wage gap To consolidate the economic recovery portfolio and face COVID-19
challenges, strengthening partnerships with the Ministries of Economy, Tourism
and Public Works, the Secretariat of Trade and Investments, and other government
bodies such as the National Commission for Micro and Small Business will be key
Partnerships will be built with the private and academic sectors and
international financial institutions to promote innovation and financial
inclusion It will also be key to complement UNDP strengths with other United
Nations system entities The International Labour Organization, with its
knowledge of decent work and the formal economy, builds on UNDP strengths to
create an inclusive economic growth policy framework; UNDP works with
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in order to foster agricultural
transformation, food safety and rural development into  broader UNDP vision of
sustainable development; and with UN-Women for promoting greater labour
participation for women and the care economy Institutions and populations are
more resilient to disasters and better adapt to and mitigate climate change UNDP
will promote  strategy for better risk management, adaptation and mitigation to
climate change If capacities have been built: to implement public policies that
promote climate change adaptation, mitigation of greenhouse gases and
comprehensive risk management; planning and land use management leading to
comprehensive risk management; and to develop sustainable and resilient
infrastructure projects, with climate protection; Then, the resilience of the
population, particularly at-risk youth, women in conditions of socioeconomic
vulnerability, rural households, and older adults, will be increased to confront
climate change and natural disasters Addressing gender gaps in access to natural
resources is also important This priority is aligned with the UNDP Strategic
Plan through the signature solution of improving resilience and closing the
energy gap  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ As part of the consolidation of the environmental
portfolio, updating the Nationally Determined Contributions, under the
leadership of the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and the Ministry
of Finance, will be key Consolidating partnerships with the National Energy
Council and the Secretary of Trade and Investment, and building partnerships
with mayors, the private sector and civil society, will be central Building on
its strengths in providing  comprehensive risk management and climate change
adaptation policy framework, UNDP will work with the United Nations Environment
Programme to mitigate greenhouse gases and with IFAD and FAO to develop
sustainable and inclusive production methods The institutions strengthen
democratic governance by guaranteeing the rule of law as well as inclusive and
fair political and civic participation UNDP will promote  strategy for effective
governance, strengthening the rule of law, citizen security, social cohesion and
accountability, if capacities are built to: promote the rule of law, access to
public information and the fight against corruption; there is increased citizen
participation, particularly of youth and women, in electoral processes and the
governance agenda; capacities are built to promote access to justice, social
reintegration of young people in conflict with the law, and reintegration of
migrants; prevention of violence and comprehensive protection of gender-based
violence victims; and application of transitional justice and reparations for
victims Then, contributions to sustainable, inclusive, and egalitarian peace for
the exercise of democracy, human rights and the enjoyment of  more just and
secure society will have been made This priority is aligned with the UNDP
Strategic Plan through the signature solutions: strengthening effective,
inclusive, and accountable governance and gender equality Women’ empowerment and
the construction of new masculinities will be key to preventing gender-based
violence Under this priority, the following partnerships will be prioritized:
the justice sector, the Ministries of Justice and Security, Education and
Health, Deputy Ministry of Transportation, the National Civil Police, the Court
of Audit and institutions responsible for the gender agenda, minors and human
rights The partnership with key mayors, the private sector, civil society
organizations, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal will be central Building on
UNDP strengths to foster the processes of reintegration and social cohesion,
working with UNICEF and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) for
their knowledge of the rights of children, youth and migrants; the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for the fight against corruption and access to
justice; and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for
promoting the human rights of people displaced by violence, will be key to
delivering robust results Some of the main assumptions for the achievement of
the above outcomes are: () the Government concludes agreements with the
international financial institutions to finance the growing social spending; ()
inter-institutional coordination is effective in addressing the complexity of
the challenges of reducing poverty and improving resilience to climate change;
() new regulations and incentives to promote sustainable management of the
natural resources are in place; and () the Government, the private sector and
civil society adopt an integrated vision for the 2030 Agenda UNDP will continue
to promote South-South cooperation for achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals through knowledge-sharing and innovation In this context, and
in partnership with the Korea International Cooperation Agency, the Accelerator
Lab will connect with its global network, and promote South-South cooperation on
digital and financial inclusion in micro and small tourism enterprises Another
area is the sharing of historical memory with other Latin American countries
UNDP is brokering  partnership with Costa Rica on social reintegration and
reconstruction of the social fabric  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ The inter-agency work of
the United Nations will continue to be  priority in this programme It will
strengthen the new approach to the humanitarian and development nexus and inter-
agency coordination in joint programmes – for example, those financed by the
Peacebuilding Fund and the European Union UNDP technical leadership, using an
innovative and catalytic approach, will be critical in implementing these
programmes III Programme and risk management This country programme document
presents the UNDP contribution to national outcomes It serves as the main
instrument of accountability to the Executive Board regarding the harmonization
of results and the resources allocated to the programme The responsibilities of
national, regional and headquarters administrators with respect to country
programmes are described in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures
and the internal control framework The programme will be nationally executed
under the coordination of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Agency for
International Cooperation If necessary, national execution may be replaced by
direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force
majeure The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in  coordinated
manner with other United Nations entities to manage financial risks Cost
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will
be charged to the concerned projects The programme document is based on the
Cooperation Framework and the analysis of the priorities and needs of the
country carried out by the United Nations system Additionally, it draws on
consultations with multiple stakeholders and development partners throughout the
programming process This participatory and consultative process reflects
national ownership of the programme The National Steering Committee will ensure
that the UNDP contribution is implemented following the Cooperation Framework
and national development priorities, supporting mutual accountability The main
risks identified are: ()  rise in the COVID-19 pandemic due to new variants of
the virus, leading to greater social vulnerability of households; () the slowing
of economic recovery, associated with fiscal and financial instability () socio-
natural disasters with high human impact due to the effects of climate change;
and ()  rise in crime and violence affecting the implementation of  prevention
policy, particularly in violence against women UNDP will strengthen partnerships
with other United Nations entities and international donors to address these
risks comprehensively and will contribute to enhancing the capacities of public
institutions for risk mitigation The capacity of the country office to adapt
promptly to new realities and government demands and to provide procurement
transparency mechanisms are key to implementing the programme and for
fundraising UNDP will screen and review its activities to identify social and
environmental opportunities and risks so as to ensure they are avoided,
minimized, mitigated and managed The screening further develops the overarching
principle of “leaving no one behind” by incorporating the guiding principles of
human rights, gender equality and women’ empowerment, accountability,
sustainability and resilience The combination of impact and likelihood of each
identified risk will determine its overall significance and the management
measures to be developed and implemented whenever avoidance is not possible UNDP
will ensure that grievance mechanisms are in place so that potentially affected
individuals or communities can raise concerns and receive  clear and
constructive response  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ The country office will continue to use
the available programming instruments to manage the activities and inputs to
obtain the outcomes proposed in the programme, depending on the nature of UNDP
participation The accumulated experience using innovative programming
instruments has shown their usefulness to address innovation, digital
transformation, and emergency situations UNDP will seek to increase its
participation in joint programmes with other United Nations entities IV
Monitoring and evaluation The monitoring and evaluation of the programme seeks
to: support accountability, guarantee effective execution to achieve the
proposed outcomes, adapt the theory of change in response to the level of its
effectiveness or environmental changes, and support accountability Monitoring
and evaluation will follow UNDP standards and policies  midterm evaluation of
the programme will be commissioned to assesses the level of effectiveness in
delivering the intended results and, if needed, adjust direction The National
Steering Committee is the decision-making mechanism regarding the design and
implementation of the programme, and will also supervise the Cooperation
Framework At the project level,  board of multi-stakeholders will be constituted
to review project performance and address implementation issues For programme
monitoring, UNDP will collect the necessary evidence disaggregated by sex and
other factors according to target groups, guaranteeing its quality, credibility,
timeliness and relevance To the extent possible, the evidence will use official
nationally owned sources To cover gaps identified about the measurement of
Sustainable Development Goals progress and other disaggregated development data,
UNDP will use international sources and retrieve data from projects Whenever
required, randomized controlled trials will be used to generate  valid estimate
of impact and to limit bias in results Projects will budget monitoring and
evaluation activities accordingly to their characteristics, and adequate
staffing will be ensured To facilitate monitoring and ensure that timely action
is taken, interactive digital means will be maximized based on key performance
indicators UNDP will continue to strengthen the data systems developed in the
previous programming cycle, to address any information gaps about Sustainable
Development Goals and disaggregated development data for informed decision-
making UNDP, as  member of the National Steering Committee, will work in
coordination with United Nations entities to harmonize its work to further
strengthen national monitoring and evaluation systems  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ Annex
Results and resources framework for El Salvador () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Reduce poverty, extreme income poverty and multidimensional poverty COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP # By 2026, individuals,
especially those who are in the most vulnerable and exclusion situations, have
equitable access to education, healthcare, basic services and integrated social
protection systems, thus contributing to the reduction of multidimensional
poverty and inequality gaps in all their manifestations RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome  Leave no one behind Estimated cost by outcome ($ thousands)
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines, targets)
Major partners / partnerships frameworks Cooperation Framework outcome
indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities Regular: 633 Ministry of Health Ministry of Education
Salvadoran Institute of Teachers’ Welfare Salvadoran Social Security Institute
Public Water Administration UNICEF Joint United Nations Programme on Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome Civil society,
private sector, international financial institutions Source : Ministry of the
Economy General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses Multi-purpose Household
Survey; annual Indicator  Multidimensional poverty rate – total (SP1) () Male-
headed households () Female-headed households () Rural () Urban Baseline (2019 –
published in 2020):  % Output : Targeted national institutions of the health
sector have better capacities to provide adequate access to health services
Other: 78,612 Indicator  Number of national institutions with strengthened
public administration and core government function for improved health service
delivery (SP) Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Source: Ministry of Health,
National Institute of Teacher Welfare (ISBM), Social Security Institute (ISSS)
National Bureau of Medicine (DNM), annual () 89% ()95% ()% ()%  Target (2026):
To be determined (TBD) () TBD () TBD ()TBD ()TBD Indicator  Number of national
institutions that transitioned towards digital health services Baseline (2020):
Target (2026):  Source: Official reports of Ministry of Health, ISBM, ISSS, DNM;
annual Indicator  Proportion of government spending on social services Source
Ministry of Finance: General State Budget; annual Baseline:41% (/) (2020) Target
(2026): TBD Output  Improved capacities for selected national institutions on
social protection and social inclusion for advancing to universality, with an
emphasis on vulnerable populations  The targets for the outcome indicators are
in the process of being determined under the Cooperation Framework in
collaboration with the Government  /14 DP/DCP/SLV/ Indicator  Number of social
protection and inclusion programmes in place with renewed and strengthened
approaches to coverage scope, targeting beneficiaries or their financing (SP )
Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Source: Presidency, annual Indicator  Number
of knowledge products on social protection that support advocacy on coverage
scope, improved targeting of beneficiaries or new approaches for their financing
Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Source: UNDP, annual Output  Members of the
educational community have physical and digital infrastructure to guarantee
access to education Indicator  Number of persons that integrate the national
educational system with technological tools Baseline (2020):  () Teachers ,941
() Students  Target (2026):  () 46,117  () 500,000 Source: Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology, annual Output  Public and private bodies and
selected communities have better capacities to access quality water and
contribute to an integrated management of water resources Indicator  Number of
innovative solutions in integrated water management implemented based on the
methodology of the Acceleration Lab Baseline (2021):  Target (2026); 10 Source:
UNDP; annual  10 DP/DCP/SLV/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: The thrust on innovation
and business competitiveness; promote agriculture that is sustainable, resilient
and adaptable to climate change COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, individuals, particularly those in vulnerable
situations, have greater opportunities to access decent, productive work and
sustainable livelihoods, in an environment of inclusive, innovative and
sustainable economic transformation RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome
Structural transformation Regular: 370 Ministry of Agriculture IFAD Executive
and Autonomous Port Commission Ministry of Public Works and Transportation
Ministry of Tourism Comisión Nacional de la Micro  Pequeña Empresa Indicator
Percentage of employed population that is registered with or covered by  social
security system, disaggregated by geographical area and sex  Male  Female  Rural
Urban Source  Ministry of the Economy General Directorate of Statistics and
Censuses Multi-purpose Household Survey; annual Output : Rural families in the
eastern part of the country reduce their economic vulnerability Other: 19,325
Indicator : Number of new jobs generated, disaggregated by sex Baseline (2021):
Target (2026): :300 () Male:165 () Female: 135 Source: Ministry of Agriculture;
annual Baseline (2019-published in 2020) : %  % : % : %  % Output
Entrepreneurial women enjoy digital and financial inclusion Indicator : Number
of women entrepreneurs with access to digital technologies for finances,
-commerce, digital marketing (SP) Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): ,500 Source:
UNDP; annual Target 2026: : TBD  TBD : TBD : TBD  TBD Indicator  Salary gap
between men and women (%) - Total;  agricultural workers Source  Ministry of the
Economy General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses Multi-purpose Household
Survey; annual Output  Targeted national institutions have access to quality
information to design evidence-based policies for sustainable economic
transformation and the inclusion of populations in vulnerable conditions
Baseline (2019-published in 2020)  02%  % Target 2026:  TBD  TBD Indicator
Number of knowledge products on produced and disseminated to inform public
policies Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 11 Source: UNDP; annual Source : World
Intellectual Property Organization Global Innovation Index; annual Indicator
Ranking in the Global Innovation Index Baseline: 92 (2020) Target 2026: TBD
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Integrated disaster risk management, environmental
management, adaptation to climate change and mitigation of greenhouse gases  11
DP/DCP/SLV/ COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP # By
2026, institutions and the population in El Salvador are more prepared and
resilient to disasters, manage risks effectively, adapt better, and mitigate the
effects of climate change RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Building
Resilience Regular:106 MARN Indicator  Existence of nationally determined
contribution (NDC) communication by El Salvador to the Convention on Climate
Change (Yes/No) Source  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
NDC Submission Portal Once in the programming cycle Output  Targeted national
institutions have better the capacities to prepare sectoral plans for the
expansion and implementation of the nationally determined contributions
Municipalities Metropolitan area of San Salvador Other: 10,111 Municipalities of
San Francisco Menéndez and Tacuba Baseline (2020): Yes – first NDC 2017 Target
2026: TBD Indicator  Number of sectoral plans prepared for the implementation of
the NDCs Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Source: Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources (MARN); Annual National Energy Council (CNE) Indicator
Percentage of renewable energy generated Source  National Energy Council
Accumulative Generation Matrix by year (GWh); annual Global Environment Facility
Adaptation Fund Baseline : 84% (2021) Target 2026: TBD Output  Selected
institutions have updated information for decision- making on climate change
Indicator  Proportion of women on boards in climate mechanisms and funds (SP6)
Source  () Gender climate Tracker Women’ participation in party delegations;
annual () UNDP; annual Indicator  Number of climate knowledge products Baseline
(2020):  Target (2026):  Source: MARN; annual () International () National
Baseline:  () 42% (COP25)  () % (2021) Target 2026:  () TBD  () TBD Output
Targeted municipalities have incorporated energy efficiency actions Indicator
Number of municipalities with energy efficiency measures under implementation
with UNDP accompaniment Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Source: CNE; annual
Output  Targeted rural communities incorporate climate change adaptation
practices Indicator  Number of climate- resilient products/practices developed
by rural communities Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):   12 DP/DCP/SLV/ Source:
Ministerio de Agricultura  Ganadería Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR
GOAL: Territorial Control Plan: Citizen security, Digital agenda : Digital
governance, Digital identity and modernization of the State, Fight against
corruption COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By
2026, Salvadoran institutions strengthen democratic governance, guarantee the
rule of law and inclusive political and civic participation, and prevent and
combat corruption, promoting transparency and accountability RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Leaving no one behind Indicator  Rule of Law Index
Baseline 2020: Score: 49 (2020) Target 2026: Score: TBD Source : World Justice
Project; annual Output  Prioritized institutions have better capacity for
effective and transparent public management Regular:750 Other: ,556 Supreme
Court of Justice Governmental Ethics Court Institute on Access to Public
Information Office of the Attorney General Court of Auditors Ministry of Foreign
Affairs National Civil Police Civil society organizations Ministry of Justice
and Public Security General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses Ministry of
Health Ministry of Education Ministry of Agriculture Municipal governments
National Commission of Micro and Small Enterprises Ministry of Tourism National
Youth Institute Supreme Electoral Tribunal National Registry of Natural Persons
Legislative Assembly Faith-based organizations Private sector Salvadoran
Institute for the Integral Development of Childhood and Adolescence Indicator
Degree of improvement in the capacities of the civil society organizations to
advocate transparency and anti-corruption Baseline: low Target 2026: large
Source: UNDP, annual Indicator  Corruption Perception Index Baseline (2020): 36
Target 2026: TBD Source : Transparency International Frequency: annual Indicator
Democracy Index Baseline (2020):  Target 2026: TBD Source : The Economist
Intelligence Unit; annual Indicator : Number of open data web portals on citizen
security and justice with gender-sensitivity Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):
Source: Ministry of Justice data web portal Indicator  Homicide rate per 100,000
inhabitants, disaggregated by sex  Women  Femicides Source : Infosegura Analysis
of citizen security based on approved figures from the National Police, Attorney
General’ Office and Institute of Legal Medicine; annual Output  Supreme
Electoral Tribunal has management systems modernized for more inclusive,
efficient and transparent electoral processes Baseline: (2020) : :  :  Target
2026: : TBD : TBD : TBD Indicator : Percentage of citizen participation in the
presidential and legislative elections, disaggregated by sex (SP) Baseline
Presidential:87% (2019) () men 89%; () women 11%  Legislative 68% (2018) () men
91%; () women 09% Indicator  Victimization rate Source : Ministry of the Economy
Dirección General de Estadística  Censos Survey on victimization and perception
of insecurity in El Salvador; annual Target 2026:  Presidential:55% Baseline
(2019):  Target 2026: TBD Directorate for the Reconstruction of the Social
Fabric UNICEF IOM Central American Integration System Vice-Presidency of the
Republic () men; () women  Legislative 00% () men; () women Source: Supreme
Electoral Tribunal Frequency: Legislative elections, every  years; presidential
elections, every  years  13 DP/DCP/SLV/ Solicitor for the Defence of Human
Rights National Search Commission for Missing Persons National Institute on
Women Salvadoran Institute for the Advancement of Women Office of the Public
Prosecutor Deputy Ministry of Transportation Output : State and civil society
institutions have better capacities to promote human rights, social cohesion,
protection and reparation for victims Indicator  New normative or institutional
frameworks that support social reintegration, improve the reception, protection
and reintegration mechanisms of people from mixed movements (internally
displaced persons, returned migrants, refugees and asylum seekers) (SP) Baseline
(2020):  Target 2026:  Source: Legislative Assembly, annual Output  Victims of
violence have institutional care and protection mechanisms that facilitate and
guarantee access to essential services Indicator : Number of gender-sensitive
citizen security policy initiatives in place aimed at improving care and
protection for victims of violence against women Baseline (2020):  Target
(2024):  Source: Solicitor for the Defence of Human Rights; Supreme Court of
Justice; annual Indicator : Percentage of people who feel safe on public
transport in selected municipalities of the San Salvador metropolitan area,
disaggregated by sex Baseline (2020)  San Salvador () 65% women () 61% men
Santa Tecla () 54% women () 56% men Target 2026:  San Salvador () 75% women ()
71% men  Santa Tecla () 64% women () 66% men Source: Salvadoran Foundation for
Economic and Social Development; annual  14