ENERGY PROFILE El Salvador COUNTRY INDICATORS AND SDGS  Access to electricity (%
population)  Access to clean cooking (% population)  Renewable energy (% TFEC)
Energy intensity GDP per capita  Real GDP growth rate  15%   98% %  100%   10%
93%              /          80%   %  60%          %  ' 40%   -%  20%   -10%  %
% 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  Per capita
renewable capacity  Air particulate matter (PM2)  Public flows to renewables
Urban Average Rural WHO safe 600 300 30 500 250 25     400 200       / 20 )
/   ( 300 150     15         200 100   10 50 100       2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 TOTAL
ENERGY SUPPLY (TES) Total energy supply in 2020 Total Energy Supply (TES) Non-
renewable (TJ) 2015 90 886 2020 90 662 Renewable (TJ) 82 224 90 809 Oil Total
(TJ) 173 110 181 471 Gas Renewable share (%) 47 50 50% Nuclear 50% Coal + others
Growth in TES Non-renewable (%)  -  -Renewables Renewable (%) +- % Total (%) + -
Renewable energy supply in 2020 Primary energy trade Imports (TJ) 2015 100 180
2020 96 233 % % % Hydro/marine Exports (TJ) Net trade (TJ) 833 - 99 347 812 - 95
421 Wind 22% Solar Imports (% of supply) Exports (% of production) Energy self-
sufficiency (%) 58  46 53  49 63% Bioenergy Geothermal RENEWABLE ENERGY
CONSUMPTION (TFEC) Renewable TFEC trend Renewable energy consumption in 2020
Electricity Commercial heat Bioenergy Geothermal Solar direct 120 108 102 97 20%
92 100 )   ( 80   60         40 80% 20    % 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  10%
Industry Consumption by sector Industry (TJ) Transport (TJ) Households (TJ) 2015
241   931 2020  926  11 244 Transport Households Other Other (TJ) 77 983 90 277
83% ELECTRICITY CAPACITY Installed capacity trend Renewable capacity in 2022
Non-renewable Fossil fuels Renewable Hydro/marine Hydro/marine Bioenergy Solar
Wind Bioenergy Geothermal  Total  149  686 573 553 54 302 204  835 41 Other Non-
RE 59 Solar 20 Renewable share 20  11  80% 100 Nuclear Wind Geothermal
Hydro/marine 12% Solar 34%  100% 18% Wind    Bioenergy %   Capacity change (%)
Non-renewable  ( Renewable     Hydro/marine    Solar    Wind Bioenergy
Geothermal  Total Geothermal  + 50 + 45 -  + 404  + 12  + 47  ) % ( + 60% 59%
+         +       +  20%  + 33%  )  Net capacity change (GW)  40% Fossil fuels
Renewable           %  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022     Net capacity
change in 2022 (MW)        Non-renewable Hydro and marine  -  + 378  2017 2018
2019 2020 2021 2022 Solar Wind Capacity utilisation in 2021 (%) + 10  Fossil
fuels 15% Nuclear Bioenergy Geothermal Hydro/Marine 36% +   Solar 37% Wind 33%
Bioenergy 34% Geothermal 87%  20 40 60 80 100 ELECTRICITY GENERATION Electricity
generation trend Generation in 2021 Non-renewable Renewable Hydro and marine
Solar Wind Bioenergy Geothermal Total GWh 986  063  825  643 132 904  559  050 %
14 86 26 23  13 22 100 Fossil fuels Nuclear Other Non-RE Hydro/marine Wind Solar
Bioenergy Geothermal Renewable share  100%   86%    80%    )    ( ) % (      Per
capita electricity generation (kWh)  60%      -        Total Renewable   500
40%   000   20% 500    % 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2021 LATEST POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND LEGISLATION El Salvador renewable energy
auction 2017  2017 El Salvador renewable energy auction 2014  2014 Master Plan
for Renewable Energy Development ()  2012 NSO 06: 09 Labelling  2012 NTS
08:14/NSO 06:09 - testing methods Air Conditioners  2012 ENERGY AND EMISSIONS
Energy-related CO2 emissions by sector Elec & heat generation CO2 emissions in
Elec & heat Other Industrial Transport Other Buildings %% 10 Coal + others
Gas       Oil  100%  2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 CO2 emission factor for elec
& heat generation Avoided emissions from renewable elec & heat Emitted CO2 RE
Avoided CO2 SLV Central America and the Caribbean World  000    500   000
/   500 ENERGY AND EMISSIONS   000         500    000  270 500  156   2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided emissions based on
fossil fuel mix used for power Calculated by dividing power sector emissions by
elec + heat gen RENEWABLE RESOURCE POTENTIAL Distribution of solar potential
Distribution of wind potential El Salvador World El Salvador World 100% 100% 80%
80%               60% 60%                           40% 40% 20% 20% % % <260
>1060 <  -   -   -   -   -  > Wind power density at 100m height (/m2) Annual
generation per unit of installed PV capacity (MWh/kWp) Biomass potential: net
primary production Indicators of renewable resource potential   Solar PV: Solar
resource potential has been divided into seven classes, each representing  range
of annual PV output per unit of capacity (kWh/kWp/yr) The bar chart shows the
proportion of  country' land area in each of these classes and the global
distribution of land area across the classes (for comparison)     Onshore wind:
Potential wind power density (/m2) is shown in the seven classes used by NREL,
measured at  height of 100m The bar chart shows the distribution of the country'
land area in each of these classes compared to the global distribution of wind
resources Areas in the third class or above are considered to be  good wind
resource   Biomass: Net primary production (NPP) is the amount of carbon fixed
by plants and accumulated as biomass each year It is  basic measure of biomass
productivity The chart shows the average NPP in the country (tC/ha/yr), compared
to the global average NPP of - tonnes of carbon 10  tC/ha/yr 200  11 = Global
average of - tC/ha/yr Sources: IRENA statistics, plus data from the following
sources: UN SDG Database (original sources: WHO; World Bank; IEA; IRENA; and
UNSD); UN World Population Prospects; UNSD Energy Balances; UN COMTRADE; World
Bank World Development Indicators; EDGAR; REN21 Global Status Report; IEA -IRENA
Joint Policies and Measures Database; IRENA Global Atlas; and World Bank Global
Solar Atlas and Global Wind Atlas Additional notes: Capacity per capita and
public investments SDGs only apply to developing areas Energy self-sufficiency
has been defined as total primary energy production divided by total primary
energy supply Energy trade includes all commodities in Chapter 27 of the
Harmonised System (HS) Capacity utilisation is calculated as annual generation
divided by year-end capacity  ,760h/year Avoided emissions from renewable power
is calculated as renewable generation divided by fossil fuel generation
multiplied by reported emissions from the power sector This assumes that, if
renewable power did not exist, fossil fuels would be used in its place to
generate the same amount of power and using the same mix of fossil fuels In
countries and years where no fossil fuel generation occurs, an average fossil
fuel emission factor has been used to calculate the avoided emissions These
profiles have been produced to provide an overview of developments in renewable
energy in different countries and areas The IRENA statistics team would welcome
comments and feedback on its structure and content, which can be sent to
statistics@irenaorg IRENA Headquarters Masdar City  Box 236, Abu Dhabi United
Arab Emirates  Last updated on: 8th August, 2023