Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/BOL/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework1  The country programme for
Bolivia responds to the development priorities identified in the Patriotic
Agenda, 2025; the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES), ; and the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, ; all of which are framed
in the “Vivir Bien” (Living Well) development model The programme contributes to
the Sustainable Development Goals (the ‘Goals’) and the UNDP Strategic Plan,
2022- Economic growth over the past two decades positioned the country in the
middle- income category, averaging gross domestic product growth of  per cent
Bolivia experienced reductions in extreme poverty (from 38 to 14 per cent
between 2006 and 2021  ) and inequalities, particularly for the most vulnerable
groups (Gini index from 59 to 42 between 2006 and 20214) Nevertheless, economic
development continues to depend on strategic natural resources, mostly fossil
fuels and minerals, which remain sensitive to international prices and have
limited productivity levels  The Global Climate Risk Index, 2021, places Bolivia
as the 10th most vulnerable country in the world, experiencing cyclical
droughts, forest fires and floods In the last four years, forest fires and
agricultural burning have affected more than 15 million hectares, damaging
biodiversity, ecosystems and life systems of rural communities  Bolivia is
risking its development sustainability: in 2020, the annual average rate of
deforestation was 178 ha/ year6 and 310 m2/person/year for 2016-Current mining
practices contaminate the water and soil, affecting communities and protected
areas where sustainable modes of production should be used The main
environmental challenges are deforestation, water contamination from human
settlements in rural and urban areas, mining and other productive sectors, and
air emissions, mainly in large cities  With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
and its compounded effects, the country saw an increase in self-employment (86
per cent in 20218) and higher levels of unemployment (from  per cent in urban
areas at the fourth quarter of 2019 to  per cent for the same period in 2021)
Women are mainly outside the labour market, representing 60 per cent of the
economically inactive population10 Young women are employed in fragile11 jobs,
with low wages and  greater burden of care Teenage pregnancies, standing at per
cent of the population, 12 comprise another stark indication of the structural
inequalities faced by adolescents and young women People with disabilities ( per
cent of the population13) and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer
persons, who represent between  and 10 per cent of the national population face
exclusion and marginalization, with harmful effects on their economic and social
well-being14  Public services face significant obstacles to guaranteeing the
realization of human rights In the health-care system, communicable and non-
communicable diseases prevail, as well as  Based on the common country analysis,
‘Living Well’ means living life in plenitude, in harmony with Mother Earth
National Institute of Statistics, 2021  INE, Gini index for monthly per capita
income, 2021  Vice Minister of Civil Defence, 2022  Nationally determined
contributions, 2022  Bolivia SDG Municipal Atlas, 2020  INE, 2021  INE,
Continuous Employment Survey, 2020 10 International Labor Organization (ILO),
2021, and López-Calva, 2021, Common country analysis (CCA), 2022 11 Precarious:
lacking security, with low salary, limited benefits and social protection 12
National health information system, 2021 13 INE, Census of Population and
Housing, 2012 14 CCA, 2022 /17  DP/DCP/BOL/ limited capacity for service
delivery (for example, per cent of childbirths take place in health facilities15
and childhood vaccination schemes reach only 68 per cent coverage16) The
coverage and quality of social programmes, health care services and services
addressing gender-based violence (which affects 70 per cent of women17), are
insufficient to meet the population needs18  Digital gaps limit access to
information, education, and social programmes, particularly for rural
populations and women In 2020, Internet connectivity stood at 45 per cent in
urban areas and per cent in rural areas Internet access was available to 92 per
cent of men and 04 per cent of women19  As the social cohesion index for Bolivia
in 2020 was ,20 it is important to improve people’ appreciation of democracy by
strengthening values, behaviours and attitudes that encourage collectivism –
such as collaboration, cooperation, reciprocity and trust  The proportion of
parliamentarian (deputy) positions occupied by women in the legislative assembly
is 50 per cent, compared to per cent for the 2020 general elections There was
historical participation of women in the senate assembly, at per cent
Nevertheless, 23 women are mayors of the 336 municipalities in Bolivia21,
equivalent to  per cent; two are mayors of largest municipalities22 The
programme will be informed by the findings and recommendations of the
independent country programme evaluation report, 2018-Other sources of learning
are the Multidimensional Poverty Index of the Ministry of Planning and
Development and the PDES evaluation,  UNDP developed the Municipal Risk Index as
useful metric for decision-making in the emergency response to the COVID-19
pandemic Localization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 18
subnational governments using multidimensional poverty approaches through
integrated, multilevel, and multisectoral planning interventions, contributed to
comprehensive analysis of the interaction between environment, development,
justice and household deprivation, as well as innovative tools to promote
evidence-based territorial planning24 In the context of COVID-19 impacts and
response, UNDP conducted socioeconomic analyses25 and provided leverage points
to support the entry and re-entry of women into the labour market, especially in
small and medium-sized enterprises The measurement of COVID-19 impacts on
households provided evidence of the magnitude of the shock and the need to
incorporate dimensions such as “catastrophic spending”26 and pandemic
information components into mitigation measures In the wake of increased
political polarization and conflict, UNDP worked to restore confidence in
democratic institutions Technical assistance was provided for national and
subnational elections (88 per cent citizen participation), including through
multi-stakeholder socio-political dialogues, implementation of gender parity,
alternation of political representation and the design of new prevention and
transformation of conflict tools Challenges remain in reducing social and
political polarization, increasing citizen confidence 15 PAHO, 2021 16 UNICEF,
2022 17 INE, Survey on Prevalence and Characteristics of Violence against Women
18 INE 19 INE 20 UNDP, Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation,
Social cohesion reflections, 2021 21 Supreme Electoral Tribunal, 2021 22 Supreme
Electoral Tribunal, 2020 23 UNDP independent country programme evaluation, 2022
24 Ibid 25 Socioeconomic Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Bolivia, UNDP and
other United Nations organizations 26 Expenditures for pandemic-related care
(including funeral expenses)  /17 DP/DCP/BOL/ in institutions, and achieving
national and regional agreements to advance institutional reforms that will help
improve governance effectiveness27 Across all its interventions, UNDP considered
the needs of men and women and promoted socioeconomic and political rights With
the launch of its Acceleration Lab, UNDP enhanced country capacities to break
ground through catalytic development interventions towards resilient urban work
In the new programme portfolio, UNDP adopts  systemic transformation approach,
applying collective intelligence methodologies to solve complex problems and
brokering co-created solutions to confront development challenges In 2021,
within the framework of South-South cooperation, UNDP provided technical
assistance on electoral issues to Ecuador, Honduras, Iraq and Mozambique,
fostered cross- fertilization of experiences in the care sector, and promoted
economic autonomy for women Exchanges on lithium governance and gender equality
best practices are planned with Argentina and Chile, and Paraguay, respectively
Between 2019 and 2022, UNDP established more than 25 strategic partnerships with
key actors in the Bolivian financial and private sectors, such as the Productive
Development Bank, the Financial System Supervisory Authority, and the
Association of Private Banks, and with international cooperation partners to
strengthen the ecosystem of sustainable finance and develop innovative financing
instruments under the lens of the Goals, with the aim of implementing impact
investments in social and environmental areas With UNDP support, the Productive
Development Bank developed  framework for issuing thematic bonds, and the
Association of Private Banks designed  system for measuring impacts on
sustainable development UNDP also provided support to the establishment of the
Sustainable Finance Roundtable (as part of the Global Compact in Bolivia) In
response to health care sector needs, especially on communicable and non-
communicable diseases, UNDP has been  major contributor to strengthening
national capacity for eradicating malaria and tuberculosis It also provided
critical support and coordination through the United Nations response to
mitigate and recover from the effects of COVID-28 These actions were brokered in
coordination with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) The UNDP
comparative advantages for the programme will leverage: () Its long-standing
collaboration with the Government and development actors as  strategic partner
contributing to the implementation of the 2025 Patriotic Agenda, the PDES, and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development () Its experience in developing
multilevel solutions to improve public service delivery that realizes people’
rights, increases sustainable productivity, reduces structural inequalities, and
strengthens democratic institutions These development solutions include the
creation of institutional capacities, space for inclusive multi-stakeholder
dialogue, and data generation that delivers evidence, metrics, and monitoring
and evaluation systems to better track development impacts29 () Its
organizational flexibility and modalities of implementation such as South-South
cooperation (in the areas of electoral processes, lithium, care and economic
autonomy); access to global networks of capacities, innovation and knowledge
(such as the Accelerator Labs, COVID-19 response, post-conflict and good
governance); and environmental and social safeguards and impact investments
related to sustainable finance () Its experience, in partnership with the United
Nations Volunteer (UNV) programme and the Ministry of Justice and Institutional
Transparency, in  new collaborative model and public policy that promotes
volunteerism as  mechanism for effective governance, and co-design of innovative
strategies based on human rights and gender equality 27 CCA (2022) 28 This area
is implemented with the Ministry of Health and Sports and resources from the
Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria 29 UNDP-ICPE (2022)  /17
DP/DCP/BOL/ () Its lessons learned, from social cohesion studies by the Spanish
Agency for International Development Cooperation, to strengthen social cohesion
in key localities () Its strategic partnerships and synergies with public and
private stakeholders, which have proved able and useful mechanisms to scale up
development responses II Programme priorities and partnerships The vision of the
programme for  30 is to promote transformational and multidimensional changes in
the systems and policies of Bolivia through  portfolio approach31 that delivers
positive peace and sustainable development in harmony with Mother Earth People
exercise their rights and benefit from social policies and sustainable
development results This area relates to UNDP signature solutions on poverty and
inequality, gender equality and governance The UNDP theory of change is that if
the provision of health services, digital inclusiveness, social programmes, and
the national care system are strengthened, then more equal societal outcomes can
be achieved whereby people can exercise their rights and enjoy greater well-
being during their life cycle, thereby benefiting from sustainable development
outcomes Because: () The update of epidemiological profiles to local contexts,
adequate management of the healthcare system information and use of
technological innovations in hospital administration will contribute to
improving the health-care system’ response capacity; () Creation of an inclusive
digital ecosystem that involves the digital transformation of public
administration and bridging digital gaps for women’ economic empowerment and
vulnerable populations’ inclusion will contribute to expanding people’ access to
information, education and opportunities for development; () Support to devising
integral social policies and programmes with criteria to improve distributive
justice, and the gathering of data and evidence for monitoring and evaluation,
will contribute to the development of  comprehensive social programmes for the
most vulnerable, based on the life cycle, social co-responsibility and equality,
to respond and build response capacity to shocks and crises; and () Support to
developing  regulatory framework for life-cycle based care systems, adequately
costed, aligned to national accounts and based on social and public co-
responsibility, will contribute to equitable distribution of the care burden and
expanded opportunities for women UNDP Bolivia will review the experiences of
Argentina and Uruguay to learn about the transformational changes that have
contributed to developing  policy and advocacy agenda to the benefit of the
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer population Actions related to the
improvement in health, social programmes and care services delivery will be
carried out in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Sports, the Ministry
of Development Planning, the Ministry of Justice and Institutional Transparency,
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Cultures, Decolonization and
Depatriarchalization and the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, local
government entities, civil society organizations and indigenous communities UNDP
will seek synergies and joint actions with UN-Women, PAHO/WHO, UNFPA, the United
Nations Children’ 30 In addition to four selected outcomes, the programme
contributes to other United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework outcomes and outputs 31 This approach promotes the integration of
thematic areas, budgets, technical capacities and learning to amplify results
and impacts  /17 DP/DCP/BOL/ Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and relevant
donors (including the Global Fund and Sweden) UNDP will support multilevel
public policies to strengthen health information systems; the establishment of
‘care laboratory’ for evidence generation; social programmes; access to
innovations and financial markets for women to carry out their enterprises;
consolidation of mechanisms for economic autonomy; and policies for the
promotion of youth Nature-based sustainable development model aligned with
inclusive economic and governance mechanisms This area integrates an inclusive
economic development model and  ‘Living Well in harmony with Mother Earth’
approach (outcomes  and ), in line with the UNDP nature strategy, , which
highlights how nature’ rights are undervalued in our anthropocentric economic,
development, political and social systems, which hold back bold, urgent actions
to protect, restore, manage and use its ecosystems in  just, inclusive and
sustainable manner and accelerate progress across the 2030 Agenda This area
relates to the six signature solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan The UNDP
theory of change is that if economic and productive activities are promoted
bearing in mind the preservation of ecosystems and their environmental
functions, mitigation of and adaptation to climate change and reduction of
vulnerability to climate risks and disasters; and if private and public
incentives are increased to improve employment quality, diversification and
improvement of productivity, generation of value, transformation of raw
materials, and access to sustainable finance, then the factors for achieving
sustainable economic growth in balance with Mother Earth can be comprehensive,
achieving inclusive socioeconomic recovery from shocks, reducing socio-
environmental conflicts and strengthening the response capacity of economic
actors to future environmental and health crises Because: () Implementing
strategies for the monitoring and sustainable management of protected areas,
forests, biodiversity, water sources and land benefit from the Living Well
approach and from environmental governance models based on innovation,
technology and digitalization, including in support of national commitments
(such as nationally determined contributions) () Strengthening disaster risk
reduction, including recovery preparedness, damage and loss assessment, early
warning and climate security systems, can contribute to reducing human and
ecosystems vulnerabilities; () Developing energy transition schemes and
institutional conditions to encourage public-private investments and shared
risks, and implementing environmental, social and governance standards, will
improve economic productivity and increase opportunities for implementing the
Living Well model; () Developing sustainable finance regulatory frameworks to
make social and environmental impact investments, close financing access gaps,
and implement new financial and non-financial sustainable mechanisms and
instruments, including thematic bonds, vertical and private investments funds,
will improve the quality of employment, economic autonomy, response capacity and
participation in the sustainable development model of the country; and ()
Implementing transparency and traceability mechanisms through innovation in data
collection, together with digital and technological transformation to improve
the productivity of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, industries that
prioritize strategic and income- generating sectors (agriculture, manufacturing
and energy), and prioritized agro-industrial sectors, will enable sustained and
diversified growth, and access to new niche markets that value sustainability
and resiliency practices South-South cooperation efforts in sustainable
financing, traceability of forest and non- forest products, halting
deforestation and transboundary integrated water resources  /17 DP/DCP/BOL/
management experiences will be critical to this priority Exchanges are planned
with Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Peru, to bring leverage and
lessons learned to shape the path of Bolivia These results will be achieved
through strategic partnerships with the Ministry of Productive Development and
Plural Economy, the Ministry of Development Planning, the Ministry of
Environment and Water, the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of
National Defence, subnational governments, civil society organizations, the
private and public financial sectors, international financial institutions and
indigenous communities UNDP will strengthen and consolidate synergies with ILO,
the United Nations Human Settlement Programme, the World Food Programme, UNICEF,
the Food and Agriculture Organization and donors including Germany, Sweden, and
the United Kingdom Positive peace to achieve social cohesion This area relates
to the signature solutions on poverty and inequality, the environment,
governance, gender equality and resilience The UNDP theory of change is that if
confidence in coordinated actions and dialogues between public authorities and
social actors increases and agreements are achieved granting legitimacy to
governmental management, all of which contribute to an inclusive democratic
institutional framework for peaceful conflict management, then the institutional
framework where the State, civil society and the market interact afford new
opportunities for effective governance as  precondition to delivering social
cohesion Because: () Multi-stakeholder, multi-sectoral dialogue, and citizen
initiatives on development priorities strengthen governance mechanisms,
including electoral systems; () The development of state capacities and civil
society structures that promote democracy can strengthen conditions for the
effective exercise of rights and contribute to safeguarding democratic
institutions; () The improvement in the performance of relevant public
institutions based on multi- stakeholder agreements and territorial and sectoral
prioritization – such as strengthening components of social cohesion and
sustainable economic development – can contribute to the implementation of
public policies that increase citizen trust in state capacity; () New governance
mechanisms aimed at strengthening social cohesion and building peaceful
coexistence incorporate actions to promote gender equality, inter-culturalism
and youth empowerment; and () Strengthening institutional and civil society
capacities for non-violent management of socio-political conflict can reduce
social and political polarization through conflict- sensitive actions UNDP will
work with the Vice President’ office, the Ministry of Development Planning, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Justice and Institutional
Transparency, the Ministry of Environment and Water, the Plurinational
Legislative Assembly and subnational government, working with UN-Women, UNHCHR
and UNICEF, among others UNDP will scale up  new governance approach to
strengthen multi- stakeholder agreements that make strategic public policies
viable In the electoral area, UNDP will promote the consolidation of gender
parity and  strong, actionable agenda against gender-based political violence
UNDP will apply the ‘Do No Harm’ tool from 2023 to the programme to generate
permanent context assessment process, internalizing the assessment' results in
the implementation strategies The analysis will allow UNDP to identify actions
that address dividing and connecting factors, particularly in preventing
conflict context and emphasizing  transformation perspective, as appropriate
/17 DP/DCP/BOL/ The country office will share its experience and good practices
with Chile and Ecuador through multicultural dialogues on conflict contexts,
constitutional reforms, and indigenous autonomy South-South cooperation efforts
in this area will seek best electoral practices in Latin America and the
Caribbean region (Panama) and good governance examples for the lithium industry
(Argentina and Chile), among others These programme areas are linked to cross-
cutting interventions: () data gathering, evidence, metrics and monitoring and
evaluation systems; () citizen co-responsibility in development; and ()
mainstreaming gender policy, intersectionality and  rights-based approach To
implement the programme, UNDP will engage entities and actors ensuring: ()
Political will and institutional commitment of government, private sector and
civil society and non-governmental organizations for strategic development
issues of social, political and environmental sensitivity, dialogue,
coordination and joint actions; and () Systemic approaches catalysing
sustainable financing and promoting public-private collaboration Within the
framework of technological autonomy, UNDP contributes to axis  of the PDES,
“Education, research, science and technology” The digital readiness assessment
developed with the AGETIC company will be  key input to strengthening the
digitalization agenda of Bolivia The programme sees innovation and
digitalization as ways to enable cost- including () innovative sustainable
financial mechanisms; effective () governance platforms; () multidimensional
measurement tools; () digitally improved performance of public administration
(PDES, axis  ‘Judicial Reform, Digitalized and Transparent Public
Administration’), entrepreneurship and new market access, digital gaps,
especially in employment, education and women’ equality; and () resource
mobilization through innovative instruments These enablers will catalyse
opportunities to scale programme results for greater sustainable impact
interventions, In coordination with UNV, UNDP will integrate volunteerism into
selected programmes,32 supporting capacity development efforts and inclusion of
people in different situations of vulnerability III Programme and risk
management This programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels
with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the UNDP programme and
operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework The
programme will be executed using mixed implementation modalities, including
national direct execution to enable response to force majeure The harmonized
approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated manner with other United
Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects The scope of the national execution of the programme will
respond to the institutional, political and social conditions for effectiveness
and risk management relevant to the portfolio The risk management strategy
includes early warning tools UNDP will maintain dialogues with all stakeholders
to identify any potential harm caused by UNDP and will promote the use of
grievance mechanisms and the UNDP social and environmental standards policy 32
Including acceleration labs, environmental and disaster risk reduction projects,
and democratic dialogue  /17 DP/DCP/BOL/ Coordination for monitoring and
reporting on the implementation of the country programme will be conducted with
the Ministry of Development Planning and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs UNDP
will be part of the National Steering Committee overseeing the implementation
and monitoring of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework The programme will be implemented according to results-based
management and capacity-building models to increase effectiveness and efficiency
and ensure its contribution to the Living Well approach, the PDES, and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development In addition to development project
interventions, UNDP will use programmatic instruments such as engagement
facilities, results-based payments, development services, innovation challenges
and other instruments that diversify the programmatic portfolio and drive
strategic innovation, digital transformation and sustainable financing for
development Programme risks relate to: () The increase in social and political
polarization and conflict hamper coordination and dialogue, increasing
uncertainty and citizen distrust in institutions In coordination with strategic
partners, UNDP will develop periodic social conflict mappings, promote conflict-
sensitive actions; and foster effective, inclusive and pluralistic governance
platforms UNDP will promote the benefits of socio-cultural diversity and
equality between genders in all of its actions; () The economic and fiscal
context limits development financing, creates redistributive conflicts, degrades
living conditions, deepens structural inequalities and weakens the response
capacity of the State to respond to environmental and socio-political shocks
UNDP will monitor socioeconomic, governance and social cohesion indicators,
contribute to evidence-based public policy design, strengthen access to public
services, and promote inclusive multi-stakeholder dialogues; () The persistence
of events associated with climate change (droughts, fires, floods, contamination
of water sources), environmental damage, land-use change and loss of
biodiversity, threaten livelihoods In the short term, UNDP will support disaster
risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation mechanisms by
supporting implementation of the nationally determined contributions – including
non-carbon market initiatives – fostering transitions to sustainable energy and
agriculture, and integrated management of water resources In compliance with
UNDP policies, each intervention will be subject to UNDP social and
environmental standards When the risks identified are substantial, targeted
studies, evaluations and action plans may be applied to feed back into the
design and implementation strategy of the intervention IV Monitoring and
evaluation UNDP will implement  monitoring and evaluation strategy with
comprehensive approach, agile tools and mechanisms for accountability and data
validation measures linked to the gender and communication strategies and the
programme management module, in accordance with the ‘Quantum+’ instruments The
country office gender strategy defines action lines and indicators to guarantee
gender equality, close gender gaps, and promote women’ rights The strategy will
contribute to integrating gender indicators to monitor its action plan The new
portfolio will aim at using the highest gender marker scores to ensure
mainstreaming The country office uses gender equality certification to support
staff capacity development The monitoring and evaluation of the programme will
source inputs and methodologies from the United Nations Inter-agency Monitoring
and Evaluation Group  /17 DP/DCP/BOL/ The evaluation system includes mid-term,
final and external evaluations through stakeholder consultations, and  knowledge
management subsystem to develop collective learning and improve internal
efficiency UNDP will ensure that methodological instruments used by the National
Institute of Statistics, the Social and Economic Policy Analysis Unit and
statistical systems are strengthened through enhanced monitoring of progress in
the PDES and achievement of the Goals UNDP will contribute by supporting
evidence-based public policies and innovations in multidimensional well-being
metrics  10 DP/DCP/BOL/ Annex Results and resources framework for Bolivia ()
National priority: Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES), axis  Rebuilding
the economy, retaking macroeconomic and social stability; ;  Health and sports
to protect life;  Judicial reform, digitized and transparent public management
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP # ( United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework – UNSDCF) Groups or populations in situations
of extreme vulnerability have access to social policies and programmes developed
by the State, at different levels, that respond to their most urgent needs
Related Strategic Plan outcome  No one left behind Estimated cost by outcome (in
$ thousands) Cooperation framework outcome indicator(), baseline(), target()
Data source and frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines, targets) Major
partners / partnerships / frameworks  Extreme poverty rate33 Baseline (2020): %
Target (2027): % Regular resources 657 Sources: Social and Economic Policy
Analysis Unit (UDAPE), National Institute of Statistics (INE), Ministry of
Development Planning (MPD) Frequency: Biannual  Public health-care management
levels have improved capacities to analyse timely and quality information for
decision-making MPD Ministry of Justice and Institutional Transparency (MJTI)
Ministry of Health and Sports (MSD) Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MRE) Ministry
of Cultures, Decolonization and Depatriarchalization Ministry of Labour and
Social Security (MTEPS) UDAPE Financial System Supervisory Authority (ASFI)
Plurinational Women’ and Depatriarchalization Service National Institute of
Health Laboratories Subnational governments (SNGs)35 United Nations
organizations Other resources 21,101  Human Development Index Baseline (2019):
718 Target (2027): 75  Number of strengthened national information systems for
communicable diseases34 (IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target (2025):  Source: UNDP,
MSD, annual  Number of strengthened HIV- AIDS monitoring and reference centres
that improve their management and resolution capacity and include differentiated
services Baseline (2022):  Targets (2025): 10 (, national , departmental)
Source: UNDP, MSD, annual Global Fund Unitaid Fiotec/Fiocruz Swedish
International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) Spanish Agency for
International Development Cooperation (AECID) Academia36 Global Compact Network
Bolivia (GCN- Bolivia)  Number of civil society organizations affected by and
vulnerable to HIV, tuberculosis and malaria strengthened to improve their
capacity to manage demand for quality health services at different management
levels Baseline (2022):  33 PDES 34 HIV, tuberculosis and malaria 35
Departmental, municipal and local associations 36 Universities, research and
study centres 11  DP/DCP/BOL/ Target (2025):  Source: UNDP, MSD, annual  People
and institutions have skills and conditions for digital transformation  Number
of evidence-based proposals37 that promote access (disaggregated by sex) and use
of digital tools in prioritized SNGs Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source:
UNDP, annual  Percentage of public and financial services users38 (by sex and
age) using digital tools (IRRF) Baseline (2022): to be determined (TBD) Target
(2027): 25% Source: UNDP, annual  Access to better opportunities through the
implementation of social programmes and care support systems based on gender
equality  Number of evidence-based methodological tools to design social
programmes and care programmes validated Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):
Source: UNDP, MPD, SNG, annual  Number of public policies of care system
developed with strategic stakeholders (IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):
Source: UNDP, MJTI, SNG, annual 37 Framed around the following areas:
infrastructure, public management, regulation, financing, inclusion, and people
(social programmes, health care services and crisis situation response) 38 See
footnote 36  12 DP/DCP/BOL/ National priority: PDES, axes ;  Industrialization
with import substitution; ;  Integration and international relations with
sovereignty Cooperation Framework outcome involving UNDP # ( UNSDCF): Actors of
the plural economy, with emphasis on those who make up the food systems and
other productive sectors, increase their production and participation in
markets, with sustainability and sovereignty Related Strategic Plan outcomes:
No one left behind;  Building resilience  Number of micro, small, medium, and
large enterprises and craftsmen (led by men and women) that increase
participation in the national market39 Baseline (2020): 946 Target (2025): ,450
Sources: MPD, UDAPE, INE Frequency: Annual Regular resources 800 MPD Ministry of
Productive Development and Plural Economy Ministry of Environment and Water
(MMAyA) MTEPS Ministry of Economy and Public Finance MRE SNG Plurinational
Authority of Mother Earth (APMT) ASFI United Nations organizations Global
Environment Facility (GEF) Green Climate Fund (GCF) Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Action Facility Adaptation Fund Development Bank of Latin America
(CAF) SIDA AECID BDP Academia GCN-Bolivia Foundations and NGOs Private sector
Micro, small, medium and large enterprises improve their capacities to increase
incomes, productivity, diversification, access to markets, digital
transformation and/or job quality Other resources 11,599  Number of micro, small
and medium enterprises, emphasizing those led by women, indigenous people, youth
and migrants (by sex and age), that adopt instruments to generate sustainable
incomes and response capacity Baseline (2022): 250 Targets (2027): ,000 Source:
UNDP, Productive Development Bank (BDP), SNG, business associations, annual
Amount of impact investment funding, from public and private sources, mobilized
to reinforce sustainable, resilient value chains (IRRF) Baseline (2022): $
million Target (2027): $500 million Source: UNDP, ASFI, BDP, annual  Number of
financial and non- financial reports on micro, small, medium and large
enterprises’ contributions to sustainable development impacts Baseline (2022):
Target (2027): 10 Source: UNDP, financial and non- financial institutions,
annual 39 PDES 13  DP/DCP/BOL/  Socioeconomic actors in food systems improved
their knowledge to move towards more sustainable practices and mechanisms,
biodiversity friendly, integrated natural resources management, and resiliency
to climate change  Percentage of total area of agribusiness production that is
managed under sustainable practices Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 20% Source:
UNDP, MMAyA, annual  Number of small-scale production units40 (led by men and
women) that adopt practices and mechanisms to increase their response capacity
and adaptation to climate change Baseline (2022): 50 Target (2027): 80 Source:
UNDP, MMAyA, SNGs annual  Women, youth and indigenous people, and those in
situations of vulnerability, strengthen their capacities to exercise their
rights as essential economic agents for inclusive development and diversified
responsibilities in the care economy  Number of evidence-based policies and
instruments designed, validated and/or funded to foster gender and generational
equality related to economic, financial and labour fields (IRRF) Baseline:
Target:  Source: UNDP, MJTI, SNG, annual 40 Family and communal  14 DP/DCP/BOL/
Number of production units (led by women, youth and indigenous people) in food
systems and strategic productive sectors having access to financial and digital
services Baseline (2022): 50 Target (2027): 80 Source: UNDP, MMAyA, SNG, annual
National priority: PDES, axes ; ; ; Deepening the process of industrialization
of natural resources;  Sustainable and balanced environment;  Cooperation
Framework outcome involving UNDP # ( UNSDCF): State agencies, social
organizations, in particular nations and rural indigenous peoples and afro-
descendant communities, manage the territory, natural resources, environment,
disaster risks and energy transition through inclusive, multi-level and
multisectoral governance mechanisms Related Strategic Plan outcomes:  Structural
transformation;  Building resilience Sources: MRE, MPD, MMAyA Frequency: Annual
Number of mitigation, adaptation and monitoring actions, emphasizing gender
gaps, to fight climate change through impact-effective response measures in
harmony and balance with Mother Earth41 Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 13
Regular resources 750  Plurinational State governmental authorities and social
actors strengthen their capabilities to implement nationally determined
contributions and Living Well in harmony with Mother Earth MPD MMAyA MEFP MRE
Ministry of National Defence SNG APMT ASFI United Nations organizations GEF GCF
NAMA Facility Adaptation Fund CAF SIDA AECID BDP Academia GCN-Bolivia
Foundations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) Private sector Other
resources 37,397  Number of climate change- vulnerable municipalities with
technical capabilities in gender- sensitive development, integral planning,
multi-hazard risk reduction, climate change adaptation, recovery preparedness,
and damage and loss assessment42 Baseline (2021): 20 Target (2027): 25
municipalities Source: UNDP, SNG, APMT, annual  Number of social actors43 (by
sex and age) and prioritized populations benefiting from forest-area
conservation incentives that implement sustainable practices44 (IRRF) Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027): 18 42 PDES 43 Indigenous people, with UNV support 44
Energy transition 15  DP/DCP/BOL/ Source: UNDP, MMAyA, annual  Area (in
hectares) of forest areas managed under conservation incentives through
sustainable practices Baseline (2022): 45,880 Target (2027): 61,145 Source:
UNDP, MMAyA, annual National priority: PDES axis ; ; ; Cultures decolonization
and depatriarchalization Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP # (
UNSDCF): The State and society strengthen social cohesion, inter-culturalism,
depatriarchalization and the constructive and peaceful transformation of
conflicts, and promote societies free of racism and all forms of discrimination
Related Strategic Plan outcome:  No one left behind  Number of annual reports on
monitoring and results of effective governance and gender sensitivity in the
fulfilment of autonomic competencies45 Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):
Sources: MRE, MJTI, MPD, INE Frequency: Annual MPD MRE MJTI Ministry of
Government MMAyA MEFP Vice-President’ office Plurinational Legislative Assembly
(ALP) SNG United Nations organizations Regular resources 750  Institutional,
public, private and social actors have capabilities to implement governance
mechanisms for multilevel coordination and articulation, and inclusive public
policies management Other resources ,860  Number of agreements to implement
multidimensional, resilient health-care systems integrated into local government
planning (IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Selected SNGs, annual
SIDA AECID European Commission Academia Supreme Court and Departmental Electoral
Courts  Number of subnational platforms that build public policy agreements to
reduce vulnerabilities and inequalities related to public services, gender and
other sensitive areas Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Selected SNGs,
annual )  Bolivian State strengthens its institutional framework to guarantee
the exercise of rights, administration of justice, transparency and
accountability 45 PDES  16 DP/DCP/BOL/  Gender-sensitive strategy to reform the
property registration system developed and validated by multi-actor and
multilevel platforms Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: UNDP, MJTI,
annual  Number of coordinated agreements between TSE and ALP to reform the
electoral system (IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: UNDP, TSE,
ALP, annual  Society and State reduce levels of polarization and distrust,
promoting dialogue, social cohesion and  peaceful climate, with participation of
vulnerable populations  Number of governance platforms to build agreements on
social cohesion, economic reactivation and environment function (IRRF) Baseline:
Target:  Source: MRE, selected SNGs, annual  Number of multi-actor and
multilevel platforms designed for monitoring, reporting and verification in
selected nationally determined contribution sectors with territorial and gender-
sensitive approach Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP, MMAyA, MPD, annual 17