Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/BIH/  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework  Bosnia and Herzegovina is an upper middle-income country in southeast
Europe with  population of about  million Accession to the European Union is an
overarching priority Over two decades after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, European Union accession is constrained by limited reform progress
and frequent institutional and political deadlocks that hamper public sector
performance and weaken citizens’ trust in government Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to be  fragile state The opinion on the Bosnia and Herzegovina
European Union membership application3 indicates the country needs to
significantly step up the process to align with European Union acquis and
enforce related legislation Aside from  broad consensus for joining the European
Union,  shared vision for the country has been difficult to achieve However,
with United Nations support, authorities at all levels collaborate in the design
of the Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina5, which
offers  unique opportunity for  common sustainable development agenda  The human
development and economic development trends show vulnerability The 2018 human
development index was 769, placing the country in the high human development
category Of critical importance, the population is shrinking and ageing Out-
migration is an urgent challenge, representing  loss of young people and skilled
workers upon which future sustainable development will depend: two million
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina are currently working or residing abroad6 –
the highest share in the western Balkans7 – and projections suggest the
population could decline to below  million by Unemployment stands high at per
cent, particularly among young people (per cent), women, persons with
disabilities, and Roma  large proportion of the population, especially the
elderly and the socially excluded, are trapped in hand-to-mouth existence, with
some per cent estimated to be living below the income poverty line10 The most
obvious source of exclusion is belonging to an ethnic group different from the
majority, followed by disability and sexual identity The unemployed, the
uneducated and older persons are highly excluded, while Roma represent the
smallest excluded group though historically they have experienced the highest
degree of exclusion by far11  Annual economic growth ranged from  to  per cent
between ;12 in 2020, this is expected to drop to - per cent owing to the
COVID-19 crisis13 To be stronger and more competitive, the economy requires
better infrastructure and  better policy and investment environment for private
sector growth The economy displays  high level of carbon and energy intensity:
carbon dioxide emissions currently amount to 25,539 Mt CO2, with the energy
sector, agriculture, industrial processes and waste the largest sources of CO2
emission  High energy inefficiency contributes to the highest air pollution in
Europe,14 which causes one of the highest average mortality rates by air
pollution in the world Cities are failing to  2013 population census in Bosnia
and Herzegovina; its final results have not been officially published due to
dispute between the two entities  2019 fragile state index  Analytical report,
Commission Opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina application for membership of the
European Union, May The European Union Stabilisation and Association Agreement
and candidacy for the European Union agreed in Supported by Sweden  Ministry of
Security of Bosnia and Herzegovina, migration profile, Trends in International
Migrant Stock: The 2017 Revision, the United Nations, United Nations Department
of Economic and Social Affairs population projections in the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina, ibid,
2019 labour force survey, Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina 10
Human Development Report: Beyond income, beyond averages, beyond today:
Inequalities in human development in the 21st century, UNDP, 11 UNDP, regional
Roma survey 12 World Bank, country report for Bosnia Herzegovina, 13 2020 growth
is projected at - per cent,  significant revision from the pre-COVID-19
projection of  per cent for The World Bank, April 14 World Air Quality Report,
2020 (Available at    DP/DCP/BIH/ cope with challenges associated with climate
change, higher demand for public services and shrinking public budgets, which
affects quality of life for nearly 50 per cent of the population  Natural and
human-induced hazards represent another aspect of vulnerability, with poor
people, women, persons with disabilities, elderly, minorities and farmers being
most at risk Landmines still contaminate  per cent of the territory,15 affecting
more than 500,000 people, while there are ,000 tons of ammunition surplus
Capacities to effectively address hazards and crises need to be further
strengthened, as was confirmed during the COVID-19 pandemic  Responding to the
country’ priorities, the new United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina, , represents  single coherent framework
for policy advice, advocacy, stronger coordination and delivery of results by
the United Nations system in collaboration with authorities and socioeconomic
partners These results will support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, towards sustainable and inclusive growth and
prosperity, with renewed efforts to give young people reasons to stay and to
create  better future for Bosnia and Herzegovina  UNDP programme and partnership
capabilities support and complement the United Nations system into  more
effective whole In the Cooperation Framework, UNDP will apply the established
platform of support for the efforts of national authorities and the United
Nations to nationalize Agenda 2030 towards effective localization of the
Sustainable Development Goals through public planning and financing systems and
through area-based integrated United Nations interventions Towards financing and
acceleration of Agenda 2030, UNDP will serve as  provider of innovative
solutions and  convener of broad-based partnerships, including with the private
sector and the international financial institutions (IFIs) UNDP brings its
engagement with over 80 per cent of local governments country-wide and with
authorities at all levels (villages, municipalities/cities, cantons, entities to
the state level) to serve as  ‘vertical connector’ towards effective policy and
programme results The independent country programme evaluation finds that “UNDP
has been able to facilitate cooperation between governmental entities in the
country For the country’ highly fragmented and politicized governance system,
this has been  significant contribution UNDP provides its partners with
compelling value proposition, and government entities have shown they are
willing to co-finance – often at significant amounts” Finally, UNDP brings
solid practice of collaboration with other United Nations organizations through
joint projects and programmes, leveraging and integrating multi-sectoral
development support in areas such as social inclusion, disaster risk reduction,
women economic and political empowerment  UNDP work in the previous country
programme period, , brought about positive country-level change in the areas of
governance, flood recovery, economic growth and employment, and climate change
adaptation and mitigation By offering people-centred and efficient recovery
assistance, and leveraging $74 million from donors and governments, UNDP helped
set the country back on its development path, following the 2014 devastating
floods16 The sound UNDP contribution to the country strategic planning and
management system should be utilized as the policy backbone for localizing
Agenda 2030, further strengthening local-level programme convergence UNDP made
significant contributions to institutionalizing energy efficiency in the public
sector and is well positioned in climate change adaptation and mitigation The
outcome evaluation recommends that “Further expansion in the environment and
energy sector is merited, including maintaining UNDP strong position in climate
change, energy and water management, while taking advantage of new opportunities
in waste, biodiversity and chemicals management” Leveraging its internal 15
Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Centre ( 16 After action review of UNDP
response to Bosnia and Herzegovina 2014 floods,   DP/DCP/BIH/ collective
thinking, UNDP identified that digital transformation, societal transformation
and governance transformation are accelerators for development17  UNDP will
contribute to three out of five outcomes of the Cooperation Framework, 2021-
2025: sustainable and inclusive growth, people-centred governance, and social
cohesion In the first two areas, UNDP is in  position to lead United Nations
efforts aiming at economic transformation, while capitalizing on its strong
environment and climate change portfolio, ensuring  sustainable growth lens In
developing the Cooperation Framework and country programme document, UNDP has
consulted with authorities, socioeconomic partners and the international
community National authorities have confirmed the relevance of the set
priorities and scope of work and have expressed their commitment to collaborate
towards sustainable development results II Programme priorities and partnerships
The programme aims to achieve  set of interconnected changes that will
strengthen institutional and community-level conditions for sustainable and
inclusive growth, with benefits that are more widely and fairly shared The 2030
Agenda is unlikely to be achieved by 2030 without rapid, ubiquitous change and
innovation By advancing its data systems and embracing continuous learning, the
UNDP is gearing up to be  front-runner in nurturing such capabilities and
offering support that can leapfrog development, based on its experience and wide
field presence that underpin its integrator role The UNDP Accelerator Lab is
powerful tool for innovative development work by the entire United Nations
system in the country While the country has yet to adopt  country-wide
development strategy, strategic priorities are expressed by: () the draft
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and () the
Socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina that are  response to the 2019
European Union opinion and analytical report The country programme will be
guided by and effectively blend the 2030 Agenda, European Union accession and
Green Deal priorities, promoting  forward-looking, resource-efficient approach
to development In line with the pathways defined by the UNDP Strategic Plan, ,
and national priorities, the country programme will work in the areas of
sustainable growth, people- centred governance and social cohesion These efforts
contribute to the country’ progress towards European Union accession and towards
better services for citizens delivered thanks to more effective, participatory
governance Inclusive, gender-sensitive and free-thinking communities contribute
to  society where people feel safe and secure Growth is more sustainable and
inclusive, steered by policies that enable  shift towards  circular economy,
skills and jobs of the future, while preserving ecosystems and biodiversity The
country is strengthening its resilience to climate change, natural or human-
induced disasters; and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic applies green and
smart solutions and makes communities and institutions stronger Improvements at
scale in these areas will create the space and conditions for improved quality
of life and will contribute to reducing outmigration To foster sustainable and
inclusive growth, UNDP will leverage and integrate the environment and economic
development sectors low-carbon economy, environment protection and resilience
The country programme will support low-carbon economic development focused on
productive sectors and fast-growing industries, including by tapping into
diaspora capital In partnership with national authorities, development partners,
United Nations organizations and the private sector, UNDP will support economic
towards  17 Sense-making protocol intelligence report, UNDP in Bosnia and
Herzegovina,  DP/DCP/BIH/ recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, including
by introducing -business, - commerce and digital economy assistance packages to
small businesses, and it will transition towards circular, low-carbon production
cycles To respond adequately to the complexities and interaction between
climate, the environment and  low-carbon economy, UNDP will galvanize
collaboration among the private sector, authorities, academia and technology
hubs, piloting innovative policy labs and solutions To support decent work and
contribute to people’ staying in the country, UNDP partners with the Government
of Norway, the European Union and the Government of Italy, to advance
entrepreneurship and 21st century skills and close the skill gaps that prevent
some groups – particularly youth, women and persons with disabilities – from
entering the labour market UNDP will facilitate private sector and IFI
engagement in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals Framework,
including by introducing sustainable business models and by helping overcome
natural and human-induced crises To ease pressure on the environment and ensure
resilient economy, UNDP will support measures towards the circular and digital
economy, stimulated by adequate policy frameworks UNDP will further raise the
level of ambition for  gender- sensitive climate policy and expand the climate
change adaptation and mitigation portfolio, with energy, water management and
disaster risk management and air quality serving as poles of growth Expanding
partnerships with the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund and
other vertical funds will be critical for achieving results UNDP will support
implementation of nature-based solutions, essential for tackling multiple
developmental challenges, be they climate crises, inequality or poverty
portfolio of innovative experiments by the Accelerator Lab will boost these
efforts This priority derives from the first outcome of the Cooperation
Framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina and contributes to Goals , , , , , , 10,
12, 13, Within the people-centred governance area, UNDP will add value to United
Nations system efforts to support authorities in integrating the Sustainable
Development Goals Framework into country strategic planning documents and in
subsequently implementing them UNDP will support the country-wide harmonized
strategic planning system and its effective connection with the budget In
partnership with the International Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations
Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the World Health Organization (WHO), UNDP
will support national authorities to align the public finance system with the
Goals and create conditions to catalyse private sector financing for sustainable
development UNDP will continue to engage with partners at all levels through
next generation local governance portfolio, focusing on quality and inclusive
service delivery, public finance management, utility governance, as well as
future cities and sustainable urban development UNDP will collaborate with
authorities at entity and state level on initiatives focused on new
capabilities, digital transformation and -governance, which is expected to have
democratizing effect, strengthening the social contract and improving public
performance As much as it poses challenges to public service, the COVID-19
pandemic provides  strategic opportunity for  shift towards -government and
-services that enables more effective, accessible and uninterrupted public
service, alongside improved inter- institutional crisis management and response
UNDP will further support security institutions for better cooperation in
harmonized system, particularly border and police structures, and for the
improved effectiveness and transparency of law enforcement institutions through
digitalization of systems and services Based on its strong experience, UNDP will
strengthen government resilience to shocks and crises, including the COVID-19
pandemic This priority derives from Cooperation Framework outcome  and
contributes to Goals , , , 10, 11, 13, 15, Social cohesion will also be among
the main priorities and act as an enabler for the rest of the programme In
partnership with UNICEF, UN-Women, the European Union and institutions across
governance levels, UNDP will continue to support active and inclusive
communities and civil society for sustained dialogue among citizens, including
those   DP/DCP/BIH/ marginalized, and between citizens and governments UNDP will
empower women to claim their space in public life and decision-making Social
innovation and modern technologies will be used to bolster solidarity among
people To address the latent risk of conflict and bridge social divides, UNDP
will support trust building and critical thinking, especially among young
people, and will seek to mobilize community action to contribute to mitigating
the COVID-19 crisis In collaboration with United Nations organizations and
international partners, UNDP will scale up existing domestic and regional peace-
building initiatives, further contributing to sustainable peace UNDP will
explore approaches to foster behavioural and mind-set changes in society and
mainstream them across the programme for maximized effect This priority derives
directly from outcome  of the Cooperation Framework and contributes to Goals ,
10 and The country programme will ensure synergies across all three areas:
sustainable growth, social cohesion, and good governance Accelerated,
sustainable, low-carbon economic growth and shared prosperity in the country
depends on the sustainable management of its considerable natural wealth and
adequate and integrated governance levers Social inclusion is instrumental for
sustainable growth and good governance via active citizens and empowered
communities Resilient development will only be in place if governance systems
and growth solutions are resilient to human-induced and natural risks and crisis
Each priority area is designed to reinforce the rest of the country programme
for improved quality of life and new opportunities, which motivate people to
stay in the country Diverse partnerships will be at the heart of country
programme implementation UNDP will expand its collaboration with parliaments and
governments at all levels, and seek to enlarge the network of civil society
organizations, youth-led groups, media, innovation centres, technological parks,
research and development organizations, universities, the energy community and
many others for more impactful programme delivery UNDP will expand regional
cooperation in the areas of environment, disaster risk reduction, water,
economic development, tourism, innovation, and vibrant civil society The private
sector will be among key partners, with  strong role towards sustainable and
inclusive growth UNDP will partner with the IFIs to catalyse development
financing for the Goals Main United Nations system partners include: the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO), ILO, the International Office of Migration (IOM),
UNICEF, UN-Women, UNESCO, UNFPA, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat) and WHO Strategic partners include the European Union, the
Governments of Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, the United Kingdom, as well as the
the European Union Force for Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR), German
international aid agency (GIZ), the Italian Development Cooperation, the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the Organization for Security and Co-
operation in Europe (OSCE), the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) and the World Bank Communication will be strategically
utilised to amplify development partnerships and policy efforts III Programme
and risk management This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions
to national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
country level The country programme will be nationally executed, as defined in
the Cooperation Framework, 2021-steering committee, set in the framework of the
Cooperation Framework and comprising  designated coordinating representative of
authorities and co- chaired by the Resident Coordinator, will ensure that UNDP
support is delivered in line with the defined priorities   DP/DCP/BIH/
Modalities for implementation will be agreed on with authorities and be selected
depending on need and project-related circumstances Projects supported by
vertical funds, as well as those previously approved, will use  mix of national
and direct implementation modalities, for which the country office is fully
capacitated Involvement of the country office in support of both modalities is
risk mitigation measure, considering the complexity and specificity of the
country governance structure When using the national implementation modality, or
engaging responsible parties in the implementation, UNDP will act in line with
the policy for the harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) to assess
potential implementing partners’ ability to manage resources, capacitate them on
wide range of project, financial and procurement related areas, and assure their
quality performance Authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and UNDP agreed that
the provision of support services by UNDP (for national implementation), as
required, would not involve  separate letter of agreement The main external
risks for programme delivery are related to political deadlocks, which will most
likely continue to hamper the pace of policy reforms and overall pace of
development The country may face major talent and labour gaps created by out-
migration and low birth rates Unfavourable economic and trade trends, including
global recessionary fears, may negatively affect the current account and balance
of trade There are risks of natural hazards, disease outbreaks – including new
waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, challenging the preparedness of authorities and
society IV Monitoring and evaluation UNDP has designed the country programme
results framework, , defining results, indicators, baselines, targets and other
relevant elements, in line with the UNDP Strategic Plan, , and the Cooperation
Framework, 2021-The monitoring framework will help assess UNDP contributions to
sustainable development in the country  multi-year plan will be developed to
guide UNDP work, based on research and data analytics to test certain hypotheses
of the country programme’ theory of change or strategic programmatic
opportunities The programme will reinforce innovative tools to manage data
collection and analysis at the country programme document outcome and output
levels The existing monitoring tools will be modernized to enable measurable
tracking of performance through collection of project-level data and lessons to
facilitate continuous organizational learning Evaluations will be conducted in
accordance with the evaluation plan, including project, programme and outcome
evaluations, joint United Nations programme evaluations, or other United
Nations-level evaluations The evaluation plan, , envisages ten mandatory project
evaluations, agreed and costed with donors and included in the approved project
documents An internal country programme mid-term review will be undertaken UNDP
will join other United Nations organizations in conducting the Cooperation
Framework, 2021- 2025, final evaluation To ensure effective implementation of
the monitoring and evaluation plans, at least  per cent of the country programme
budget will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation activities Knowledge
management measures will be implemented to maintain analysis of evaluation
recommendations and lessons from monitoring actions within the programme or
project and beyond Quality assessments of programming will be conducted against
UNDP quality standards for all projects throughout their entire life cycle
DP/DCP/BIH/ Annex Results and resources framework for Bosnia and Herzegovina ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: Smart growth pathway Joint socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, :  Sustainable and accelerated economic growth, increased
competitiveness of the economy and improved business environment COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : Outcome  By 2025, people
benefit from resilient, inclusive and sustainable growth ensured by the
convergence of economic development, and management of environment and cultural
resources RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : Advance poverty eradication
in all its forms and dimensions; Outcome : Accelerate structural transformations
for sustainable development ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME (United States dollars)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES MAJOR
PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines targets) Regular ,055,000 Relevant ministries, local governments,
communities, civil society organizations, diaspora, UNICEF, ILO, UN Women, UNEP,
FAO, the European Union, IFIs, the Governments of Sweden, Norway, GIZ, Italian
Development Cooperation, private sector, USAID, national nature parks,
innovation hubs, universities Indicator  Number of policy, financial or other
stimulus measures endorsed to promote sustainable, green economy and low-carbon
growth and living Baseline (2019): Target (2025): Official reports by
authorities (annually) United Nations and UNDP programme reports and (annually)
Output  Authorities and communities have in place capacities and tools to ensure
sustainable management and protection of natural resources Other 92,284,929
Indicator 1a Extent to which biodiversity is mainstreamed into strategies and
economic sectors (, agriculture, tourism) (Rating:  Full inclusion;  Partial;
Inadequate;  No inclusion) Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  Source, frequency:
National reports (annually); official documentation from the European Union
related to progress in the relevant sectors (annually); UNDP programme
monitoring (bi-annually) Biodiversity Assessment Tool, UNEP (annually) Progress
reports of the European Union (annually) Reports on the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina (annually)
Indicator  Number of people who benefit from new jobs and improved livelihoods
as  result of United Nations support Baseline (2019): - 28,057 people (,690
women) - Number of people whose jobs are safeguarded from COVID-19 crisis: /
Target (2025): - 31,000 people (,200 women) - Number of people whose jobs are
safeguarded from COVID-19 crisis: 400 (150 women) Indicator 1b Number of
persistent organic pollutants-contaminated sites with environmental management
plans drafted and approved Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  Source, frequency:
National reports (annually); UNDP programme monitoring (annually) Nationally
determined contributions and the national energy and climate plan and reports on
their implementation (annual) Output  Governments at all levels, particularly
sub-national governments, implement climate change adaptation and mitigation
measures for resilient and sustainable development Indicator  Change in
agriculture and rural development sector performance:  Number of agriculture and
rural development frameworks/strategies adopted WHO Global Health Observatory
data – Exposure to ambient air pollution Indicator 2a Extent of change in energy
consumption in public sector Baseline (2019): 205 kWh/m2 Target (2025): 180
kWh/m218 Source, frequency: Energy management information system (quarterly);
UNDP programme monitoring (annually) Local governments’ strategies and formal
reports United Nations programme reports  Number of value chains strengthened
Percentage increase in revenue of targeted agri-food operators 18 The baseline
was calculated based on the typology of public buildings in Bosnia and
Herzegovina   DP/DCP/BIH/ Baseline (2019):  Frameworks/strategies:   Value
chains:   Percentage increase in revenue: % Target (2025):
Frameworks/strategies:   Value chains: 12  Percentage increase in revenue: 20%
Reports from the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina (annual)
Indicator 2b Number of women benefiting from climate change adaptation or
mitigation activities Baseline (2019): 41,202 women Target: (2025): 60,000 women
Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly) Agency for Statistics of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (quarterly) Indicator 2c: Extent to which greenhouse gas
(GHG) data collection is systematised, institutionalized and informs
policymaking (Rating:  Fully;  Partially;  Inadequately;  Not in place) Baseline
(2019):  Target: (2025):  Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly)
Indicator  (SDG indicator ): Proportion of important sites for terrestrial and
freshwater biodiversity that are covered by protected areas, by ecosystem type (
Freshwater;  Land) Baseline (2019): : %; :  Target (2025): : 10%; : 42% Output
Smart growth principles accelerate sustainable, resilient and inclusive economic
development, contribute to decent work, and leverage development financing by
the private sector Indicator  Total annual emissions of carbon dioxide (in
millions of metric tons) Baseline (2019): 25,539 Mt CO2 Target (2025): 23,000 Mt
CO2 Indicator 3a Number of companies that strengthen their competitiveness or
apply sustainable growth and resilience principles in their business operation
as  result of UNDP support Baseline (2019): 638 companies Target (2025): ,140
companies Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly) Indicator
(SDG indicator ): Air pollution/annual mean levels of fine particulate matter
(PM2 mean annual exposure - micrograms per cubic meter) Baseline (2019): ug/m3
Target (2025): 21 ug/m3  Indicator 3b: Percentage annual increase of the volume
of investments leveraged from the private sector for development as  result of
UNDP work Baseline (2019): 21% Target (2025): % Source, frequency: Business
Intelligence System TRON, UNDP programme monitoring (annually) Indicator  (SDG
indicator /): Percentage of local governments that adopt and implement local
disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction  ( %;  extent to which action plans include gender
equity considerations and sex disaggregated data; Rating:  Full inclusion;
Partial;  Inadequate;  No inclusion) Baseline (2019):  40%;   Target (2025):
50%;   Indicator 3c: Number of innovative and scalable solutions developed and
applied for circular and green economy Baseline (2019):  Target (2025): 10
Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly) Indicator 3d: Number of
companies supported to mitigate the impact and recover from the COVID-19 crisis
and number of jobs safeguarded Baseline (2019): / Target (2025): 100 companies
and 300 jobs Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly) Output
Young people, especially women, Roma and persons with disabilities, gain 21st
century skills enabling them to get decent jobs   DP/DCP/BIH/ Indicator 4a:
Number of young people (especially women and young people) who gain 21st century
skills Baseline (2019): 589 (378 women; 211 men) Target (2025): 952 (585 women:
367 men) Source, frequency: UNDP programme monitoring (quarterly) NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and
Herzegovina: Good governance and public sector management pathway Joint
socioeconomic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina, :  Sustainable and accelerated
economic growth, increased competitiveness of the economy and improved business
environment COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP :
Outcome  By 2025, people contribute to, and benefit from more accountable and
transparent governance systems that deliver quality public services and ensure
rule of law RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development; Outcome : Strengthen resilience to
shocks and crises Regular 615,000 Parliaments; relevant ministries, local
governments, UNICEF, UN-Women, UNFPA, the World Bank, the Governments of
Switzerland, Sweden and the United Kingdom, the European Union, GIZ, UN-Habitat,
NATO, EUFOR, OSCE, universities, IFIs, civil society organizations, media
Indicator : Percentage of local governments and cantons with SDG-centred and
gender-sensitive development strategies and implementation plans as part of
coherent development planning and management system Baseline (2019): local
governments – %; cantons: % Target (2025): local governments – 60%; cantons: 80%
Reports from the development planning and management structures at state and
entity levels (annually) Output  Collaboration between authorities and societal
actors is supported for the design of evidence-based and gender-sensitive policy
and regulatory frameworks that enable reforms and system change Other 54,039,976
Indicator 1a: Number of new/revised policy, strategic and regulatory frameworks
designed in  collaborative, evidence-based and gender- sensitive manner Baseline
(2019):  Target (2025): Source, frequency: Adopted policy/strategic/regulatory
frameworks (annually) Indicator  (SDG indicator , ): Percentage of population
living in households with access to basic services Baseline (2019): water
supply: 75%; sanitation: 41% Target (2025): water supply: 85%; sanitation: 50%
Monitoring reports for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina (annually) Water sector reports from the
World Bank (annually) United Nations programme reports Indicator 1b: Number of
innovative and scalable solutions and approaches that evidently and sustainably
improve public consultation and citizen engagement in policy design and
delivery, including for the socially excluded Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):
Source, frequency: Public consultation tools, solutions utilised (annually)
Indicator  (SDG indicator ): % Population satisfied with the last experience of
use of public services Baseline (2019): 38%19 Target (2025): 45% Output
Governments across all levels have enhanced capacities for transparent and
effective policy and financial management, including digital capacity, which
translate into accelerated development results, accountability and people-
centred public services Transparency International (annually) World Bank
reports/global governance index (annually) United Nations programme reports and
citizen satisfaction surveys (biennial) SDGs dashboard (biennial) Indicator :
Availability of socio- economic assessments of COVID-19 impacts of vulnerable
groups and policy and financing options for stimulus support Baseline (2019): No
Target (2025): Yes Indicator 2a: Percentage of local governments which meet the
good local governance benchmarks Baseline (2019):  Target (2025): 30% Source,
frequency: Good local governance seal evaluation reports by local governments,
associations of municipalities and cities, UNDP programme reports (annually) 19
Transparency International, Perceptions of public administration Bosnia and
Herzegovina, 10  DP/DCP/BIH/ Indicator 2b: Number of institutions/local/cantonal
governments and/or utilities that, with UNDP support, leverage technology and
innovation for: () policy design; and/or (ii) information systems; and/or (iii)
-services; and/or (iv) future city and urban development Baseline (2019):
institution;  city;  municipalities;  canton,  utilities Target (2025):
institutions;  cities; 20 municipalities;  cantons ; 20 utilities Source,
frequency: Authorities’ annual reports, UNDP programme reports (annually)
Indicator 2c: Percentage of total savings/additional revenues generated annually
through improved public finance management by local governments and cantons
Baseline (2019): United States dollars % Target (2025): United States dollars %
Source, frequency: Authorities’ annual financial reports, UNDP programme reports
(annually) Indicator 2d: Number of medical facilities with improved health
treatment conditions Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  Source, frequency:
Ministry of Health reports, UNDP programme reports (bi-annually) Indicator 2e:
Number of individuals benefitting from improved COVID-19 prevention and case
management Baseline (2019):  Target (2025): Source, frequency: Ministry of
Health reports, UNDP programme reports (bi-annually) Indicator 2f: Number of
people with improved access to quality public services Baseline (2019): 478,791
(175,735 women) Target (2025): 700,000 (300,000 women) Source, frequency: UNDP
programme reports (bi-annually) Output  The judiciary and law enforcement
agencies have enhanced capacities to ensure rule of law, safety and security
Indicator 3a Percentage decrease in remnants of war ammunition surplus Baseline
(2019): ,000 tonnes of surplus ammunition Target (2025):  tonnes of surplus
ammunition Source, frequency: EUFOR progress report; Bosnia and Herzegovina 11
DP/DCP/BIH/ reports to the United Nations Official reports (annually) Indicator
3b Level of capabilities of the public security system for border management and
combatting illicit arms’ trafficking (Rating:  Fully;  Partially;  Inadequately;
Not in place) Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  Source, frequency: Official
reports from authorities (annually); UNDP programme reports; Sector-specific
reports from the European Union (annually) Indicator 3c Number of small arms and
light weapons disposal events led jointly with police agencies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina Baseline (2019):  events Target (2025): 10 events Source, frequency:
Official reports from authorities (annually); UNDP programme reports; Sector-
specific reports from the European Union (annually) NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Sustainable Development Goals Framework in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Society of
equal opportunities pathway COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : Outcome  By 2025, there is stronger mutual understanding,
respect and trust among individuals and communities RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome : Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development; Outcome : Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises Indicator :
Proportion of people who express  general level of trust in society Baseline
(2019): 23% (male: 27%; female: 19%/urban population: 26%, rural population:
Urban: 19% Target (2025): 24% (male: 28%; female: 20%/urban population: 27%,
rural population: Urban: 20%20 United Nations perception survey in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (biennial) Output  Citizens empowered with public and online spaces
and opportunities to engage in the creation of diverse, inclusive and gender
responsive communities Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina; local governments,
UN-Women, the Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, community hubs; civil society
organizations, media Regular 80,000 Other ,875,000 Indicator 1a: Number of
people who pro-actively participate in civic forums for inclusive decision-
making, peaceful and democratic development Baseline (2019): 30,427 (11,390
women; 19,037 men) Target (2025): 36,924 (13,700 women, 23,224 men) Source,
frequency: UNDP programme reports (bi-annually) Indicator  (SDG indicator  and
): Self-assessed levels of trust and engagement amongst young people, where  is
negative and  is positive: () young people’ () attitudes on inter- ethnic trust,
cooperation, education and the media; and () young people’ attitudes on their
civic engagement and partnership with government representatives Baseline
(2019): () /; () / Target (2025): () /; () / Dialogue for the future baseline
perception survey, United Nations perception survey (biennial) Indicator 1b:
Number of women who actively engage through collective mechanisms in social,
economic and political life Baseline (2019): 11,Target (2025): 14,Source,
frequency: UNDP programme reports (quarterly) Indicator 1c: Number of structural
interventions and innovative solutions introduced to accommodate participation
of women in decision-making Baseline (2019):  20 The targets for 2025 are set
relatively close to the baseline, still with an expected positive change In the
past several years, the findings showed negative results 12  DP/DCP/BIH/ Target
(2025):  Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports, assessments, studies
(annually) Indicator : Number of young people participating in community-level
initiatives that promote dialogue, social cohesion and appreciation of diversity
Baseline (2019): 25,000 (51% female) Target (2025): 27,500 (51% female)
Indicator 1d: Number of young people who improve critical thinking and
leadership skills and apply these skills in their communities to bridge social
divides Baseline (2019): ,162 (527 women; 635 men) Target (2025): ,012 (,086
women; 926 men) Source, frequency: UNDP programme reports, photos, media
coverage (quarterly) Output  Civil society organisations, including youth-led
civil society, have enhanced capacities to proactively engage in sustainable
development partnerships Indicator 2a: Number of civil society organisations
benefiting from enhanced organisational and technical capacity enabling them to
steer democratic processes and implement development- oriented initiatives
Baseline (2019): Target (2025): Source, frequency: Reports from the European
Union (annual) and UNDP programme reports (annually) 13