JICA JFY 2010 Energy Policy () NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Country Report: Bosnia
and Herzegovina March 2010 Prepared by JICA trainee Mile Srdanovic Country
Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO
J1000606 / ID 1080149 Bosnia and Herzegovina – basic energy related figures
Population ,843,000 data for 2007 estimated by the Agency for Statistics of BIH
Land area, thousand sq km (2009) 20 sq km GDP / Capita $,941 (nominal) data for
2007 estimated by the Agency for Statistics of BIH $,468 (PPP) data for 2007
estimated by the World Bank Energy consumption / Capita Average energy
consumption in BH is about 45 GJ per capita, compared with  world average of 70
GJ per capita and OECD average of 236 GJ per capita Total Primary Energy
Consumption – TPES (average for last five years, negligible deviation)  Hydro-
RES; 12% Gas; % Oil; 26% Coal; 56% Dependance on Imported Energy – 32% (Oil +
Gas) Total: 13,GWh Fossil fuel: ,GWh Nuclear:  GWh Hydro: ,GWh Generation
Electricity Market Size 10,450 GWh/year Installed Capacity ,659 MW Peak Demand
,117 MW Net Electricity Exporter ,701 GWh Natural Gas Imported 31 bcm Natural
Gas Consumed 31 bcm Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010
PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 ) Energy Resources & Power
Sector overview Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM
- Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Basic domestic energy - Coal Bosnia and
Herzegovina has available significant reserves of lignite and brown coal usable
for generation of electricity applying existing (classic) technology or through
new energy combustion and transformation technologies The existing TPPs in BiH
consume average annually around  miltons of appropriate types and qualities of
coal, that surely must be supplied until the end of the existing TPPs lifetime
Estimates are that aggregate coal reserves in BiH amount: ) Brown Coal 886
miltons ) Lignite 578 miltons Total 464 miltons This is preconditions for long-
run coal supply to the existing TPPs and for construction of new ones as well
When doing so, there must be taken care of optimal choice of new boilers in
thermal power plants according to realistically available qualities and
structures of coals Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010
PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Basic domestic energy - Hydro
Bosnia and Herzegovina' geography includes fast-flowing mountain streams and
powerful rivers that are very well suited for hydroelectricity production
Currently, hydroelectric power stations exist with  generating capacity of
around ,500 MW Most of these installations are more than 30 years old;
modernization of the existing plants is in the pipeline In 2007 Bosnia generated
,140 GWh of hydroelectricity, which was   percent generation increase from the
previous year (EIA, 2006) It is estimated that Bosnia has  hydropower potential
of 23,400 GWh Most of the potential is located within the Drina, Neretva and
Trebisnjica river basins The Drina River alone is estimated to have  power
generating potential of about ,000 GWh Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina /
JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Alternative
domestic energy (RES) – Small Hydros, Wind, Solar, Geothermal… Small Hydros
Bosnia has an estimated small hydro power potential of ,500 GWh/yr, what is the
potential to support app 356 large and small hydroelectric power stations Since
2006,  total of 120 licenses have been issued for new mini hydroelectric power
stations; mini hydroelectric power stations have capacities not in excess of 10
MW WindWind Hydros Small Hydros Small WindWind Wind  wind atlas for Bosnia and
Herzegovina was recently established The assessment shows that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has significant wind potential It is estimated that the total wind
power potential capacity is about ,000 MW, but only 900 MW are usable This
potential has not yet been exploited Solar The solar irradiation values in
Bosnia and Herzegovina vary accordingly with about ,240 kWh/m2 in the northern
region to ,600 kWh/m2 in the southern region In the southern region, the amount
of sunny days can get up to about 270 days per year The solar potential of the
region is approximately ,900 TWh Solar Solar Geo thermal Geo thermal Geothermal
energy According to available data, Bosnia & Herzegovina has  geothermal
potential of 33 MWth Due to the low temperatures, however, current activities
relating to geothermal energy continue to be limited to exploitation for thermal
use Biofuels, Biogas etc – negligible implementation, some pilot projects under
preparation Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM -
Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Imported energy – Oil & Gas Oil sector
Bosnia and Herzegovina Gas oil infrastructure comprises the oil products
distribution capacities, especially for motor fuels, oils and lubricants The
greatest share of the market is covered by small private distributors The demand
for motor fuels on the domestic market in the present conditions is
approximately  million tons annually The oil refinery delivers around 500,000
tons to the market, and the rest is imported Considering that the number of
private petrol stations is on the increase and has reached approximately 300
stations, objective estimates suggest that the commercial capacities in BiH
market are already oversized Some preliminary investigations have proved
significant Oil reserves in BiH Gas All natural gas is imported from the Russian
Federation and is transported to BiH via the gas transport systems in Ukraine,
Hungary and Yugoslavia Due to the above mentioned post-war dissolution of the
energy system, BiH is facing an absurd situation – in the entire gas transport
(over 5000 km) from the gas wells in Siberia to Sarajevo (which is the main
consumer in BiH) the intermediaries involved in the internal transport of gas in
BiH outnumber the transport intermediaries up to the BiH border The main
features of the gas system in BiH are: length of 191 km and the projected annual
capacities of  billion m3 The existing leased transport capacities to BiH are
750 million m3/year Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010
PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Power Sector – current status
Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy
NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Power Sector – reforms (unbundling) Completed so far
(2010) DISTRIBUTION  DISCOs:  -“North”, -“Central”, -“South” TRANSMISSION
-TRANSCO - ISO - SERC  GENERATION  Generation Companies - “UGLJEVIK” - “GACKO”
- “TUZLA” - “KAKANJ” - “DRINA” - “NERETVA” - “TREBIŠNJICA” - “VRBAS” TE Ugljevik
TE Tuzla HE Bo?ac HE Jajce  TE Kakanj HE Višegrad HE Rama HE Jablanica HE
Grabovica HE Salakovac HE Mostar TE Gacko PHE ?apljina HE Trebinje Country
Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO
J1000606 / ID 1080149 ) Energy Policy / Strategy Country Report – Bosnia and
Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149
Energy Policy – Demand/Generation scenariosc Total primary energy supply in BiH
Total final energy demand in BiH Source: Energy Sector Study BiH, 2007, Energy
Institute EIHP, Croatia Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010
PROGRAM - Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Energy Policy – key facts
Rather complex political/administrative constitution of Bosnia- Herzegovina is
affecting all segments of - economy, incl Energy (Power) Sector: Energy policy
should be just one segment of the overall national Economy policy (harmonized
with other sectors) and, also harmonized with regional Energy sector: Bosnia-
Herzegovina has no independent Energy Institute, all technical activities are
performed by three ministries (two on the entity level – FMERI & MERI, and state
level Department at the Ministry of Foreign trade and Economic Relations –
MOFTER) This causes harmful effect – we do not have proper Energy Balance,
Statistics, Analyses and Energy Forecasts Bosnia-Herzegovina is in the middle
of the EU integration process - “EU pressure” is the key driving force in all
internal reforms, incl Energy sector This is the most important and most
positive aspect Bosnia-Herzegovina has promising energy resources and, there is
one excellent opportunity to get the status of relevant regional energy exporter
Two thirds of total Power production was based on coal This ratio is likely to
remain, but new TPP technologies must be utilized: Bosnia-Herzegovina has
significant RES potentials which were not seriously utilized, so far New Tariff
policy is the key prerequisite to this New, RES encouraging tariffs are on the
horizon: -----------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------ Conclusion: The major goal of the & Energy policy, in the
next decade, would be – to modernize (re-power) existing Generation capacities,
new Energy related investments and development of the new Energy Management
Infrastructure Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM -
Energy Policy NO J1000606 / ID 1080149 Thank you !  Srdanovic, BiH Tokio, May
Country Report – Bosnia and Herzegovina / JICA JFY 2010 PROGRAM - Energy Policy
NO J1000606 / ID 1080149