Access to clean cooking services in energy and emission scenarios after COVID-19
| Nature Energy Skip to main content Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are
using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain             the
best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off
compatibility mode in             Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure
continued support, we are displaying the site without styles             and
JavaScript. Advertisement View all journals Search Log in Explore  content About
the journal Publish  with us Sign up for alerts RSS feed nature nature energy
analyses article                         Access to clean cooking services in
energy and emission scenarios after COVID-19                      Download PDF
Download PDF Analysis Published:  28 October 2021 Access to clean cooking
services in energy and emission scenarios after COVID-19 Shonali Pachauri 
ORCID:  orcid.org/0000-0001-8138-3178 1 ,  Miguel Poblete-Cazenave 
ORCID:  orcid.org/0000-0001-8280-910X 1 ,  Arda Aktas 2  &  … Matthew J. Gidden
              ORCID:  orcid.org/0000-0003-0687-414X 1 , 3   Show authors Nature
Energy volume  6 ,  pages  1067–1076 ( 2021 ) Cite this article 6382  Accesses
24  Citations 72  Altmetric Metrics  details Subjects Energy access Energy and
behaviour Energy economics Socioeconomic scenarios Abstract Slow progress in
expanding clean cooking access is hindering progress on health, gender, equity,
climate and air quality goals globally. Despite a rising population share with
clean cooking access, the number of cooking poor remains stagnant. In this study
we explored clean cooking access until 2050 under three reference scenarios, a
COVID-19 recovery scenario and ambitious climate mitigation policy scenarios.
Our analysis shows that universal access may not be achieved even in 2050. A
protracted recession after the pandemic could leave an additional 470 million
people unable to afford clean cooking services in 2030 relative to a reference
scenario, with populations in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia the worst affected.
Ambitious climate mitigation needs to be twinned with robust energy access
policies to prevent an additional 200 million people being unable to transition
to clean cooking in 2030. Our findings underline the need for immediate
acceleration in efforts to make clean cooking accessible and affordable to all.
Similar content being viewed by others Global scenarios of household access to
modern energy services under climate mitigation policy Article 05 August 2021
Miguel Poblete-Cazenave, Shonali Pachauri, … Bas van Ruijven A geospatial
approach to understanding clean cooking challenges in sub-Saharan Africa Article
Open access 12 January 2023 Babak Khavari, Camilo Ramirez, … Francesco Fuso
Nerini Factors associated with the use of liquefied petroleum gas in Ghana vary
at different stages of transition Article Open access 22 February 2024 Abhishek
Kar, Theresa Tawiah, … Kwaku P. Asante Main Energy for cooking is a most
fundamental need. Yet today, over three billion people still cook by burning
wood on open fires and in smoky stoves. The enormous social, public health and
environmental benefits of transitioning to cleaner cooking underpin the
inclusion of a universal access target for this under the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG 7) 1 , 2 , 3 . Even before the COVID-19
pandemic, data showed that efforts to provide clean fuels and stoves have been
lagging far behind those aimed at extending electricity access 4 . A recent
report claims that this sluggish progress in providing clean cooking access is
costing the world more than US$2 trillion each year as a result of health
impacts, productivity losses and environmental degradation 5 . Mounting evidence
of the impacts of air pollution exposure on COVID-19 mortality makes universal
access to clean cooking services more urgent 6 , 7 . Despite this, emerging
evidence suggests that the economic fallout of the pandemic might pose a further
setback to efforts to reach this goal, as many are forced to climb down the
energy ladder 8 , 9 , 10 . Previous literature analysing scenarios for achieving
universal access to modern energy services have focused predominantly on
electricity supply to assess the cost-effectiveness of alternative options to
provide connections 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 . There is a paucity of studies analysing
clean cooking scenarios, particularly at a global scale 15 , 16 . Existing
studies that focus on cooking access scenarios are limited in their
representation of multiple cooking fuel use (fuel stacking), population
heterogeneity and affordability constraints, which are critical to understanding
whether people will regularly use new fuels or stoves after they acquire them 17
, 18 , 19 . The limited existing evidence, preceding the pandemic, suggests that
the world is far off the mark of the SDG 7 goal, with nations in sub-Saharan
Africa projected to not achieve this target even in 2050 5 , 20 . In this study
we explored clean cooking access until 2050 under reference scenarios of
socioeconomic and demographic change, ambitious climate mitigation policy
scenarios and a slow economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic scenario (see
Methods  for scenario details). We applied existing microdata-based cooking
choice and demand models that explicitly consider fuel stacking and represent
affordability constraints for urban and rural populations, capturing
heterogeneity in household preferences across the entire income distribution 21
, 22 . We find that a slow recovery from the pandemic and fuel price changes
because of ambitious climate mitigation policy could substantially retard
progress in achieving universal clean cooking access if additional policies
related to energy access and poverty alleviation are not simultaneously pursued.
Those most at risk of not being able to afford to transition to clean cooking
are low-income households in sub-Saharan Africa (AFR), developing Asia, and
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAM). A faster transition to clean cooking
fuels can attenuate future growth in cooking energy demand, especially in
regions that currently depend largely on biomass and other solid fuels.
Populations without access to clean cooking In what follows, we define clean
cooking as cooking with modern fuels such as liquid petroleum gas (LPG),
electricity and piped gas, which when used in modern stoves result in little to
no household pollution. Newer options, for example, bioethanol or solar
electric, might become viable in the future, but were not included in our
analysis as we detected no use of these in the empirical datasets that we
employed. All other fuels, including solid biomass-based firewood or charcoal
and coal, are categorized as polluting, because prevailing stove technologies
that use these result in pollution levels that exceed World Health Organization
indoor air quality guidelines for household fuel combustion 23 . We categorize a
household as cooking poor if it depends on polluting cooking fuels, that is, on
fuels other than those we define as clean, for half or more of its cooking
energy consumption. In our analysis we compared an especially constructed
COVID-19 recovery scenario (COVID) with three reference scenarios, namely
sustainability (SSP1), middle-of-the-road (SSP2) and regional rivalry (SSP3),
from the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) framework 24 . We further compared
our recovery and reference scenarios with a set of scenarios that impose an
ambitious climate mitigation policy that limits warming to 2 °C by the end of
the century (CP2C) using a previous formulation that assumes a regionally
differentiated carbon price trajectory that rises gradually over time 25  (see
Methods ). Our findings show that the share of the population with access to
clean cooking rises under all scenarios until 2050, but no scenario meets the
rate of improvement required to achieve the SDG 7 2030 target (Fig.  1  and
Supplementary Fig.  1 ). Even under our most optimistic reference growth
scenario SSP1, we found that close to 38% of the global population could
continue to remain cooking poor in 2030. Slower growth and urbanization under
the SSP2 and SSP3 reference scenarios could leave an additional 1.2–3.9% of the
population unable to afford clean cooking in 2030. We found universal access may
not be achieved even in 2050. Fig. 1: Cooking poor populations. a , Percentage
of cooking poor population in 2030 by MESSAGEix regions under the SSP2 reference
scenario.  b , Percentage of cooking poor population until 2050 by scenario in
selected MESSAGEix regions. The bars depict shares in reference scenarios and
the crosses above the bars depict shares under the climate mitigation policy
scenarios. Full size image Under our COVID recovery scenario, an additional 470
million people may remain cooking poor in 2030 as compared with under SSP3, our
most pessimistic reference growth scenario. The COVID scenario has a persistent
impact, as, even though average income levels are assumed to revert to the
reference SSP3 trend in 2040, income inequality remains higher until the middle
of the century, leaving more families dependent on biomass even in 2050.
Ambitious climate mitigation policy in the absence of additional targeted
support policies could also make transitioning to clean cooking more difficult
for about 200 million people, specifically those in Centrally Planned Asia (CPA)
and South Asia (SAS), where fossil fuel demand for cooking is currently high and
most households are unable to afford electric cooking. In AFR, we observed only
very moderate improvements in access to clean cooking services over time as
population growth in this region outpaces the rate of transition to better
stoves and fuels in all scenarios. In contrast, in CPA, SAS and Other Pacific
Asia (PAS), clean cooking access becomes increasingly affordable, especially
under an optimistic SSP1 reference scenario. Overall, differences on account of
income growth, distribution and urbanization in our reference scenarios impact
clean cooking access more than shifts in fuel prices as a result of ambitious
climate mitigation policy. However, in regions of developing and emerging Asia,
climate mitigation policy could increase the cost of clean cooking services.
Implementing additional support policies to make clean cooking affordable will
be essential to achieve both climate goals and SDG 7 simultaneously in these
regions. Final cooking energy demand In many developing regions, cooking is
still the most energy-intensive activity in homes. Figure  2  shows future total
cooking energy demand by scenario. We see a decline in biomass use over time in
all reference scenarios with a faster phase out under SSP1 compared with the
other reference scenarios (Fig.  2a ). Under the COVID scenario, we observe a
much larger share of solid fuels, and higher total cooking energy demand because
of the inefficiency of these fuels. This large COVID effect could result in an
increase in biomass use until 2030, with a light rebound in 2040, when income
levels are assumed to go back to the reference SSP3 trend. Climate mitigation
policies could attenuate the transition away from polluting stoves by making oil
and gas-based fuels more expensive. The higher prices could also result in lower
average per capita final cooking energy demand under the climate mitigation
policy scenarios as compared with the reference scenarios and a much smaller
proportion of gas in the cooking energy mix. Fig. 2: Total and average cooking
energy demand. a , Total cooking energy demand until 2050 under different
scenarios.  b , Average cooking energy demand per capita in the reference year
2010, and in 2030 for biomass-dependent regions (AFR, LAM, PAS and SAS).  c ,
Average cooking energy demand per capita in the reference year 2010, and in 2030
in other regions (CPA, MEA and the rest of the world). Full size image We find
that the rate of change in cooking energy demand across regions varies. In
developed regions, there is little change in the reference scenarios as there is
little transition in fuels over time, and population and urbanization remain
quite stable. In emerging and developing regions, for example, CPA, income
growth and urbanization result in shifts from less efficient to more efficient
fuels, but population shifts could mean relatively little change in total
cooking energy demand. On the other hand, in AFR, total cooking energy demand
could increase over time on account of rapid population growth and a slow
transition away from polluting stoves. We also find demand may rise initially in
the region, as populations move out of extreme poverty. Cooking energy demand
can rise if households increase cooking frequency, shift diets to eating
different foods or simply cook more food. Differences in the average per capita
cooking energy demand in the year 2030 by scenario are depicted in Fig.  2b,c .
We distinguished regions that are more dependent on biomass (that is, AFR, LAM,
PAS and SAS) from other regions of the world that are not. The differences in
average cooking energy demand between the two are stark. Furthermore, the
differences between scenarios are more pronounced for the non-biomass-dependent
regions (Fig.  2c ). Under the climate mitigation policy scenarios, we find
cooking energy demand could be lower than in the reference scenarios, as the
consumption of gas may decrease substantially, more so in regions that are non-
biomass-dependent to begin with, and there could be an increase in electricity
consumption instead. In the COVID scenario, we find cooking demand could be
lower than in the reference scenarios in the biomass-dependent regions, because
of lower income levels (Fig.  2b ). In the non-biomass-dependent regions too,
biomass demand could be slightly higher in the COVID scenario. More biomass use
is also likely in the SSP3 reference scenario as compared with the SSP1
reference scenario. Cooking energy transitions In line with the literature, we
found that rising incomes and urbanization drive a transition to cleaner fuels
and stoves 17 , 26 , 27 . However, within and across regions, the nature and
pace of this transition vary vastly depending on several factors beyond income.
In Figs.  3  and  4  we present the total cooking energy mix in 2030 for the
full income distribution by region and scenario, separately for rural and urban
populations, respectively. Income is presented in the logarithmic scale to
better visualize the transitions at lower levels of income. Fig. 3: Total
cooking energy mix in 2030 for rural populations. a – f , Distribution of
cooking fuels by income and scenario in 2030 for rural households in different
regions, overlaid with the population income distribution: AFR ( a ), CPA ( b ),
LAM ( c ), MEA ( d ), PAS ( e ) and SAS ( f ). Full size image Fig. 4: Total
cooking energy mix in 2030 for urban populations. a – f , Distribution of
cooking fuels by income and scenario in 2030 for urban households in different
regions, overlaid with the population income distribution: AFR ( a ), CPA ( b ),
LAM ( c ), MEA ( d ), PAS ( e ) and SAS ( f ). Full size image Clear differences
in the pace and nature of the transition in cooking fuels across regions are
evident. In rural CPA in the COVID scenario (top left panel of Fig.  3b ), we
see most households with very low incomes per capita (approximately less than
US$5 per capita per day). We see a transition from high firewood dependence at
lower income levels to almost equal shares of firewood, gas and electricity at
the highest income levels. Households with middle-income levels could still rely
mostly on biomass fuels. By contrast, among urban households (top left panel of
Fig.  4b ), income per capita levels are higher (up to approximately US$17 per
capita per day). These households are likely to depend mostly on gas and
electricity. The pattern varies greatly across other regions, even at comparable
income levels. Nevertheless, overall, we see a strong income effect on the
choice of cooking fuels, with households with higher levels of income
transitioning to either gas or electricity in all regions, except in the Middle
East and North Africa (MEA), a region rich in fossil fuels and poor in biomass.
In MEA, higher-income households could continue to use cheap kerosene, in line
with what we observed in the empirical data (see  Methods  section). For lower-
income rural households, especially in AFR, SAS and, to a lesser extent, LAM, we
find a large share of total cooking energy demand could still be biomass-based
even in 2050, particularly in the COVID scenario. In the climate mitigation
policy scenarios too, an increase in fossil fuel prices could increase the
dependence on biomass, with the price effect dominating the income effect in
determining the choice of fuels. Considering regional heterogeneity, in AFR and
SAS, regions that are most acutely dependent on biomass today, we find price
sensitivity could be higher under the climate mitigation policy scenarios. In
addition to income, our analysis shows a clear urban–rural divide in fuel
choice, with even richer households in rural areas likely to continue relying on
solid fuels because of their easy access and the poor accessibility to cleaner
alternatives. Indeed, as we can see from the example of CPA, there are stark
differences in the choice of cooking fuels between urban and rural households
even at the same income levels. We observed this in other regions of the world
as well (Supplementary Fig.  3 ). Finally, we find energy prices also affect
cooking fuel transitions. For instance, in SAS, we find that in the climate
mitigation policy scenarios, rising fossil fuel prices could push LPG out of
reach of many. However, future transitions in this region remain the most
uncertain, as there are currently strong policies to expand LPG access to even
rural households in India. The effect of these policies are only becoming
evident now and are not reflected in the data that we used to estimate the
parameters for this region (see  Methods  section). Populations most at risk of
being cooking poor Our findings on the transition in cooking fuels discussed
above suggest that access to clean cooking is clearly a poverty issue. This is
further illustrated in Fig.  5 . In Fig.  5a  we show the relationship between
cooking poor and income poor populations (defined as those earning less than
US$5 per capita per day). We see that in AFR, and to a lesser extent in LAM and
PAS, income poverty strongly correlates with cooking poverty. In other regions,
this is less so, as the number of poor individuals is much lower than those
dependent on solid fuels. This can be explained by the existence of natural
resources that result in lower prices of liquid fuels in some regions (for
example, MEA), or sustained public policies aimed at poverty alleviation and
increasing access to clean cooking in others (for example, in CPA and SAS). Fig.
5: Relationship between income poor and cooking poor populations by region and
scenario. a , Cooking poor populations plotted against income poor in 2030. The
diagonal line represents equal numbers of cooking poor and income poor
populations.  b , Relative changes in cooking poor populations between 2010 and
2030 by scenario and region. Full size image In AFR, we find that future income
growth may not compensate for the effect of population growth, so that the
number of cooking poor could increase in all scenarios. What is also evident
from Fig.  5b  is that AFR could remain largely rural in 2030, and between 94%
(in SSP1) and 98% (in COVID) of rural households could earn less than US$5 per
capita per day and remain cooking poor in 2030. In SAS too, 78% (in SSP1) to 90%
(in COVID) of the rural population could earn less than US$5 per capita per day
and remain cooking poor in 2030. In other regions of the Global South, we found
that about 15% more people could remain income poor in the COVID scenario
compared with in the SSP3 scenario. In other regions of Asia, specifically in
CPA, but also in PAS, the number of cooking poor is likely to decline between
2010 and 2030. In these regions, not only do we find that many move out of
poverty, but also rising urbanization makes clean fuels more accessible and
affordable. For example, in CPA, in the COVID scenario, we observe that a little
less than half of the rural population could earn less than US$5 per capita per
day and depend on solid fuels, but the percentage of urban households in this
category is likely to be negligible. We find outcomes differ by scenario in MEA,
LAM and SAS. In these regions, in the SSP1 and SSP2 scenarios we observe there
could be a reduction in cooking poor, but in the SSP3 and COVID scenarios we
find that the extent of both poverty and cooking poverty could rise. In MEA and
SAS this is largely explained by differences in urbanization between the SSP1
and SSP2 scenarios as compared with the SSP3 and COVID scenarios. In LAM,
however, we find even urban households could remain cooking poor, as income
inequality is higher in this region, even in countries that have a gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita comparable to that in most developed regions.
Therefore, we find many people could remain income poor even in 2030. Especially
in the SSP3 and COVID scenarios, we find that 60% of rural and about 50% of
urban populations could earn less than US$5 per capita per day and depend on
solid fuels for cooking. In general, our findings show that clean cooking access
in the COVID scenario is likely to be lower than under the climate mitigation
policy scenarios. In SAS, however, the urban poor could be particularly affected
by rising gas prices under the climate mitigation policy scenarios, with the
dependency on solid fuels for this group almost doubling. However, even in this
region, solid fuel dependency is much higher at 7% in the COVID scenario in 2030
as compared with under the climate mitigation policy scenarios (2% in
SSP3-CP2C). Discussion and conclusions Our analysis provides new insights into
how access to clean cooking services may change under alternative reference
scenarios, a slow pandemic recovery scenario and climate mitigation policy
scenarios. Our findings show that the SDG 7 target of universal clean cooking
access by 2030 could be out of reach under all the scenarios we explored. In
regions that currently have the highest access gaps, specifically AFR, SAS, PAS
and LAM, universal access may not be achieved even in 2050. A protracted
recession following the pandemic could further retard progress towards achieving
this goal. Our findings resonate with recent analysis that suggests that the
aftermath of the pandemic could push half a billion people back into extreme
poverty 28 . Climate mitigation policies may also hamper a transition to fossil-
based cleaner burning cooking fuels by making these more expensive and putting
them out of reach of many if not twinned with appropriate additional policies
specifically targeting the cooking poor in AFR, parts of developing Asia and
LAM. The location and supply of fuels and their affordability are critical
drivers of the trends that we observed. In MEA, where biomass supply is limited,
we found dependence on cheap kerosene could remain high. In AFR and LAM, where
many households are remotely located, have easy access to biomass resources and
limited access to modern cooking services, we found biomass dependency is likely
to persist. For these populations, the inconveniences and health impacts of
cooking with polluting stoves need to be factored into the household choice
decision. This requires committed and sustained policies to provide easy access
to modern fuels and stoves at affordable prices, and information and behaviour
change messaging. If anything, studies in regions that are enforcing such
policies now (for example, India) show that these behaviours can be persistent,
and providing households access to new stoves and cleaner burning fuels alone
may not be enough to promote their regular use 29 , 30 . Our analysis has some
limitations that point to important avenues for future research. Our model can
capture a wide variety of heterogeneity in circumstances and population
characteristics, but our results are only as good as the input data used. As our
methods are based on empirical data, we could only include cooking options that
exist in the datasets that we employed. Although newer alternatives that might
become viable in the future were not explicitly modelled, our analysis can
inform policy of the price points and income levels at which populations in
different regions will be able to afford new fuels and technologies. Because
cooking behaviours appear to be quite persistent, future research should
consider using panel or pseudo-panel datasets that can better capture
longitudinal shifts. Our analysis could also be further expanded to better
assess how societal changes, such as better education and women’s empowerment
and labour force participation, relate to cooking energy choices. We did not
include institutional capacity and governance constraints that might limit the
expansion of supply of certain cooking options or the effectiveness of policies
in specific contexts. In addition, our analysis did not assume any climate
feedback on biomass availability. Both unsustainable harvesting and future
climate change could reduce the availability of abundant biomass resources in
certain regions. Alternatively, more sustainable land and biomass management
could make supplies more abundant and encourage new biomass-based clean cooking
options 31 , 32 . Insights from our analysis emphasize the increased urgency to
address this issue, which has been left on the back burner for far too long. A
recent report has highlighted the chronic underinvestment in the sector,
particularly in regions where this is needed most 33 . Recent estimates suggest
that achieving universal access to clean cooking services by 2030 will require
US$4.5–9.8 billion annually 5 , 33 . We estimate an average expenditure gap of
US$10.5 billion annually between 2020 and 2030, comparing the reference SSP3 and
COVID scenarios. This includes the cost of stoves and expenditure on fuels, and
is in line with previous estimates. These estimates are an order of magnitude
lower than the US$2 trillion of estimated losses incurred each year from a lack
of access 5 . Recent commitments pledged to COVID-19 recovery funds are in the
range US$9–15 trillion 34 , 35 . Directing even a fraction of 1% of these funds
to eradicating cooking poverty could help bridge the financing gap to meet the
SDG 7 target. Countries like Brazil, India and Indonesia have expanded access to
clean cooking services considerably in recent years 36 . This has been achieved
through strong government commitment and extensive subsidies. But sustaining
these subsidies can become a fiscal burden. Better targeting of subsidies,
through efforts like India’s Give It Up campaign, and better market segmentation
could help 37 . In addition, directing green and climate funds and revenues from
carbon pricing to the clean cooking sector can be another way to increase
financing to this sector 38 . Despite the challenges in extending clean cooking
access, recent advances in technologies 39  and new payment and financing models
40  can help clean cooking services reach even low-income households. In urban
centres, providing piped gas to dense settlements and introducing smaller LPG
cylinder sizes, pay-for-service financing models, smart metering for gas with
electronic payment options as well as more reliable and affordable electricity
can be instrumental in encouraging a more rapid transition to clean cooking. For
rural regions, awareness-raising and behaviour change campaigns are also
important to ensure that those who gain access use new stoves regularly 41 . Our
results suggest a need for much greater prioritization and coordinated policies
to provide access to clean cooking globally, with efforts targeted at the most
disadvantaged, specifically the poorest regions and populations. This will
require considerable upscaling of investment, capacity and commitment, but can
result in big benefits for planetary and population health and wellbeing.
Methods Data sources We used microdata from a large set of nationally
representative household surveys of different countries to estimate energy and
cooking technology choices for regions of the world. We aggregated nations in
line with the 11 regions of the MESSAGEix-GLOBIOM model 42 . The datasets used
to represent each of these regions are presented in Supplementary Table  1 ,
with a focus on regions of the world where access to clean cooking is lacking.
Regions where access is not an issue (that is, North America (NAM), Western
Europe (WEU) and Pacific OECD (PAO)) were included in our analysis and modelled
independently, but are presented clubbed together in a single other or rest of
the world region in some results. None of these surveys report energy
consumption for cooking purposes separately, but instead include data on total
consumption or expenditure by fuel. This was not an issue for the modelling
approach we followed for the Global North countries (as described further in the
following subsection), but was relevant for regions of the Global South.
Therefore, we used two different approaches to separate energy for cooking from
energy for other end uses. Both approaches required us to create profiles of
consumers who use the fuel for cooking and those who do not. Depending on the
particulars of the specific national dataset, we then either used a simple
regression approach to back out representative non-cooking consumption of
households depending on a set of characteristics, or we calculated simple
averages differentiated by income categories for urban and rural households
separately. Importantly, the simulation-based estimation approach we followed
largely minimizes the potential biases of such estimation, as we first obtained
a guesstimate of cooking consumption using unbiased simulators derived from the
first- and second-order moments of the empirical distributions, and next matched
the non-biased first moments from the simulated data with the empirical data
while minimizing errors in the second moments. Models and estimation We used two
different models for different regions of the world. For the Global South, where
energy stacking is more prevalent, we used a previously developed model of
household cooking fuel choices that allows for multiple fuel use 21 . For the
Global North, where households generally use only one type of fuel, we used a
different more general model of household energy and appliance choices 22 . Both
models follow a simulation-based structural econometric approach, wherein a
large set of simulated households are constructed to mimic the characteristics
found in the empirical data. Households choose between cooking alternatives to
maximize utility given budget constraints and the prices they face in the
market. All the simulated households have different characteristics (for
example, income, household size and location, among others), and therefore the
models capture heterogeneity with respect to these characteristics. The models,
although different, work by backing out household preferences for different
cooking fuels and technologies from the choices observed in the empirical data
sources using different simulation-based estimation techniques. Therefore, the
models only include options that appear in the different sources of household
data (Supplementary Table  1 ), namely, firewood, charcoal and coal (usually
lumped together), kerosene, LPG and natural gas (also usually lumped together),
and electricity. Unfortunately, this implies that preferences for fuels that are
lumped together cannot be distinguished from each other, and therefore are
modelled as a single option. Also, other potential viable alternatives (for
example, biogas and ethanol) cannot be included in the model. However, given
that preferences are estimated independently for different regions of the world,
the methods we employed allow for capturing local behaviours and preferences,
which add more relevant layers of heterogeneity to our results. Model of cooking
fuel choices For the Global South, we applied a simulation-based structural
econometrics model of household cooking fuel choice (details of the model are
available elsewhere 21 ). In brief, the approach assumes households maximize
their utility  U  by choosing between the consumption of cooking fuels (allowing
for fuel stacking, if households prefer to do so) and other items: $$\mathop
{{{\mathrm{max}}}}\limits_{C,F} U\left( {C,F} \right) = \left[ {C^ \alpha \left(
{\mathop {\sum }\limits_{f = 1}^{N_f} e_fF_f} \right)^{1 - \alpha }}
\right]^\gamma \left[ {\chi \left( {F_1...F_{N_f}} \right)} \right]^{1 - \gamma
}$$ subject to: $$p_cC + \mathop {\sum }\limits_{f = 1}^{N_f} \left( {p_fF_f +
{\Bbb A}_f} \right) = I$$ $$C,F_f \ge 0$$ where  C  is the consumption of items
other than cooking fuels,  p c  is the price of other consumption goods,  p f
is the price of cooking fuel  f ,  F f  is the consumption of cooking fuel  f ,
\({\Bbb A}_f\)  is an annualized representation of the cost of a cooking stove
of fuel  f ,  I  is the household expenditure and  \(\chi \left( {F_1...F_{N_f}}
\right)\)  is a function that represents preference shifts for reasons other
than the consumption of the fuel, such as time savings or health impacts. The
unobserved preference parameters of the model ( α ,  γ ,  \({\Bbb K}\) ,  δ 1 f
and  δ 2 f ) are backed-out from empirical data using the method of simulated
moments 43 , a simulation-based estimation procedure that seeks to identify
numerical parameter values that match a set of selected moments from the
empirical data with the same set of moments computed from the simulated dataset
of individuals with similar characteristics to their empirical counterparts in
the data, whose fuel choices are then determined using the model described
above. The parameters were estimated independently for each region. To be
representative, several sources of data were used for regions with very
heterogeneous realities (for example, urbanization rates, natural environments,
and supply of and accessibility to different cooking fuels and technologies).
The fit of the model can be seen graphically in Supplementary Fig.  2 .
Naturally, regions that present non-smooth distributions of cooking fuels over
income were harder to match (that is, CPA, LAM and PAS). Overall, the observed
trends over income were appropriately captured by the model. The full set of
matched moments are presented in the  Supplementary Data  file. Model of energy
consumption and appliance choices Cooking choices and demand in the Global North
were estimated using a different simulation-based structural econometrics model
that reflects the multiple choices of households in terms of fuels and
appliances for different end uses 22 . In this model, households, based on their
characteristics, make a discrete choice between available cooking technologies
in each region, which is finally reflected in their total energy consumption for
the respective fuel. Specifically, if households choose an electric stove, their
electricity consumption is calculated as: $$x_1 = \phi _0 + \mathop {\sum
}\limits_{j = 1}^m \delta _j\phi _j + \left[ {\lambda _1p_1 + \lambda _2p_2 +
\lambda _3\chi + \lambda _4\left( {y - \rho \mathop {\sum }\limits_{j = 1}^m
K_j\delta _j} \right)} \right],$$ whereas if they choose a gas or biomass stove,
their total alternative fuel consumption is calculated as: $$\begin{array}{l}x_2
= \frac{{\lambda _2}}{{\lambda _4}}\left( {\alpha - 1} \right) + \frac{\alpha
}{{\lambda _4}}\left( {\phi _0 + \frac{{\lambda _1}}{{\lambda _4}} + \lambda
_3\chi } \right)\frac{1}{{p_2}} + \frac{{\alpha \lambda _1}}{{\lambda
_4}}\frac{{p_1}}{{p_2}}\\ + \frac{\alpha }{{p_2}}\left[ {y - \rho \mathop {\sum
}\limits_{j = 1}^m K_j\delta _j + \mathop {\sum }\limits_{j = 1}^m \frac{{\phi
_j}}{{\lambda _4}}\delta _j} \right],\end{array}$$ where consumption  x i  is
modelled as the sum of the base consumption of electricity  ϕ 0  and consumption
due to ownership of appliances  δ j ϕ j , where  δ j  represents the ownership
of appliance  j   ∈   m  and  ϕ j  is the average electricity consumption of the
appliance. In addition, each household’s consumption is affected by the price of
electricity  p 1 , the price of alternative fuels  p 2 , a vector of household
characteristics  χ  and the household’s disposable income (that is, total income
y  minus the annualized investment cost of electric appliances  \(\rho \mathop
{\sum }\limits_{j = 1}^m K_j\delta _j\) ). Finally, the actual cooking energy
consumption is calculated as: $${{{\mathcal{E}}}}_{{\mathrm{cook}}} =
\frac{{\delta _{{\mathrm{cook}}}\phi _{{\mathrm{cook}}}}}{{\phi _0 + \mathop
{\sum }\nolimits_{j = 1}^m \delta _j\phi _j}}x_i,$$ where ‘cook’ refers to the
particular cooking appliance used by the household and  i  takes the value 1 if
households use an electric stove and 2 if they use another fuel. The unknown
preference parameters ( α  and the  ϕ s and  λ s) are estimated following a
similar procedure to the one described above, albeit using a different
estimation technique, namely indirect inference 44 , which is a generalized
version of the method of simulated moments. The empirical fit of the model can
be found in the  Supplementary Data  file. Scenario design and future
simulations We considered three different future reference scenarios following
the narratives of the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways, specifically sustainability
(SSP1), middle-of-the-road (SSP2) and regional rivalry (SSP3). Although the
population 45  and urbanization 46  projections by country for the SSP scenarios
that we used are as described in the references cited here, a special algorithm
was applied to obtain separate income distributions for urban and rural
households. Specifically, a machine learning algorithm 47  was applied to a
large longitudinal dataset including average household income and Gini
coefficient estimates for urban and rural households of all regions of the world
to obtain associations between these indicators and other SSP drivers. The
algorithm was trained on data from 1988 to 2010, and data from 2011 to 2015 were
used for validation. These associations were posteriorly applied to the
corresponding scenarios 25 , 45 , 46 , 48  to obtain the future income
distributions for urban and rural households separately in all countries and
regions. The COVID scenario deserves special attention. For its elaboration, the
original GDP trend for the reference SSP3 scenario from 2010 to 2019 was
retained (as this is closer to the actual GDP trends in the past few years). For
the years 2020 and 2021, we then used the most recent national GDP growth
estimates from the World Bank 49 . We assumed convergence in GDP growth trends
in the year 2040, considering a 20-year protracted recovery period from the
pandemic worldwide. The revised GDP estimates were used to adjust the level of
average household income in each region and period. The standard deviation,
which is used to estimate inequality, was also adjusted in line with its
association with GDP, urbanization and year. The  Supplementary Data  file
contains values of all scenario drivers for the period of analysis. We also
considered ambitious climate mitigation policy scenarios that limit global
warming to below 2 °C by the end of the century. The climate mitigation policy
simulated in this analysis considers regionally differentiated carbon price
trajectories as estimated by McCollum et al. 25 . Details of all key scenario
drivers and assumptions are presented in the  Supplementary Data  file. The
microdata-based structural estimation models described above are soft-linked to
the MESSAGEix-GLOBIOM integrated assessment model 42 , which allows
macroeconomic feedbacks via energy prices to be captured. These reflect changes
in the energy supply mix and land use to meet estimated demands at least cost.
Data availability Links to the micro datasets that were used in the analysis are
included in the  Supplementary Information , when available. Given that some of
these datasets are not publicly available, the data used for the estimation
module is only available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
The simulated datasets generated during the current study are also available
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. All estimated moments,
scenario assumptions and the datasets underlying the plots are available in the
Supplementary Data  file. Code availability The codes used during the current
study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References Rosenthal, J., Quinn, A., Grieshop, A. P., Pillarisetti, A. & Glass,
R. I. Clean cooking and the SDGs: integrated analytical approaches to guide
energy interventions for health and environment goals.  Energy Sustain. Dev.
42 , 152–159 (2018). Article                            Google Scholar 
Maji, P. & Kandlikar, M. Quantifying the air quality, climate and equity
implications of India’s household energy transition.  Energy Sustain. Dev.   55
, 37–47 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar 
Watts, N. et al. The 2020 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate
change: responding to converging crises.  Lancet   397 , 129–170 (2021). Article
                           Google Scholar                    IEA, IRENA, UNSD,
WB & WHO  Tracking SDG 7: The Energy Progress Report 2020  (World Bank, 2020);
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33822 Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program  The State of Access to Modern Energy Cooking Services
(World Bank, 2020);
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/937141600195758792/The-State-of-
Access-to-Modern-Energy-Cooking-Services Fattorini, D. & Regoli, F. Role of the
chronic air pollution levels in the Covid-19 outbreak risk in Italy.  Environ.
Pollut.   264 , 114732 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar
                   Pozzer, A. et al. Regional and global contributions of air
pollution to risk of death from COVID-19.  Cardiovasc. Res.   116 , 2247–2253
(2020). Article                            Google Scholar                    The
Covid-19 Crisis is Reversing Progress on Energy Access in Africa  (IEA, 2020);
https://www.iea.org/articles/the-covid-19-crisis-is-reversing-progress-on-
energy-access-in-africa Boza-Kiss, B., Pachauri, S. & Zimm, C. Deprivations and
inequities in cities viewed through a pandemic lens.  Front. Sustain. Cities   3
, 15 (2021). Article                            Google Scholar 
Shupler, M. et al. COVID-19 impacts on household energy & food security in a
Kenyan informal settlement: the need for integrated approaches to the SDGs.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.   144 , 111018 (2021). Article 
Google Scholar                    Dagnachew, A. G. et al. The role of
decentralized systems in providing universal electricity access in sub-Saharan
Africa – a model-based approach.  Energy   139 , 184–195 (2017). Article 
Google Scholar                    Dagnachew, A. G., Lucas, P. L., Hof, A. F. &
van Vuuren, D. P. Trade-offs and synergies between universal electricity access
and climate change mitigation in sub-Saharan Africa.  Energy Policy   114 ,
355–366 (2018). Article                            Google Scholar 
Panos, E., Densing, M. & Volkart, K. Access to electricity in the World Energy
Council’s global energy scenarios: an outlook for developing regions until 2030.
Energy Strategy Rev.   9 , 28–49 (2016). Article  
Google Scholar                    Moksnes, N., Korkovelos, A., Mentis, D. &
Howells, M. Electrification pathways for Kenya–linking spatial electrification
analysis and medium to long term energy planning.  Environ. Res. Lett.   12 ,
95008 (2017). Article                            Google Scholar 
Dagnachew, A. G., Hof, A. F., Lucas, P. L. & van Vuuren, D. P. Scenario analysis
for promoting clean cooking in sub-Saharan Africa: costs and benefits.  Energy
192 , 116641 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar 
Pachauri, S., Rao, N. D. & Cameron, C. Outlook for modern cooking energy access
in Central America.  PLoS ONE 13 , e0197974 (2018). Article 
Google Scholar                    Shankar, A. V. et al. Everybody stacks:
lessons from household energy case studies to inform design principles for clean
energy transitions.  Energy Policy   141 , 111468 (2020). Article 
Google Scholar                    Gould, C. F., Hou, X., Richmond, J., Sharma,
A. & Urpelainen, J. Jointly modeling the adoption and use of clean cooking fuels
in rural India.  Environ. Res. Commun.   2 , 85004 (2020). Article 
Google Scholar                    Jeuland, M., Soo, J.-S. T. & Shindell, D. The
need for policies to reduce the costs of cleaner cooking in low income settings:
implications from systematic analysis of costs and benefits.  Energy Policy
121 , 275–285 (2018). Article                            Google Scholar 
Dagnachew, A. G. et al. Integrating energy access, efficiency and renewable
energy policies in sub-Saharan Africa: a model-based analysis.  Environ. Res.
Lett.   15 , 125010 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar 
Poblete-Cazenave, M. & Pachauri, S. A structural model of cooking fuel choices
in developing countries.  Energy Econ.   75 , 449–463 (2018). Article 
Google Scholar                    Poblete-Cazenave, M. & Pachauri, S. A model of
energy poverty and access: estimating household electricity demand and appliance
ownership.  Energy Econ.   98 , 105266 (2021). Article 
Google Scholar                    WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality:
Household Fuel Combustion  (World Health Organization, 2014);
https://www.who.int/airpollution/guidelines/household-fuel-
combustion/IAQ_HHFC_guidelines.pdf O’Neill, B. C. et al. A new scenario
framework for climate change research: the concept of shared socioeconomic
pathways.  Clim. Change   122 , 387–400 (2014). Article 
Google Scholar                    McCollum, D. L. et al. Energy investment needs
for fulfilling the Paris Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals.  Nat. Energy   3 , 589–599 (2018). Article  
Google Scholar                    Foell, W., Pachauri, S., Spreng, D. &
Zerriffi, H. Household cooking fuels and technologies in developing economies.
Energy Policy   39 , 7487–7496 (2011). Article                            Google
Scholar                    Coelho, S. T., Sanches-Pereira, A., Tudeschini, L. G.
& Goldemberg, J. The energy transition history of fuelwood replacement for
liquefied petroleum gas in Brazilian households from 1920 to 2016.  Energy
Policy   123 , 41–52 (2018). Article                            Google Scholar 
Sumner, A., Hoy, C. & Ortiz-Juarez, E.  Estimates of the Impact of COVID-19 on
Global Poverty  WIDER Working Paper 2020/43 (UNU-WIDER, 2020);
https://doi.org/10.35188/UNU-WIDER/2020/800-9 Kar, A., Pachauri, S., Bailis, R.
& Zerriffi, H. Using sales data to assess cooking gas adoption and the impact of
India’s Ujjwala programme in rural Karnataka.  Nat. Energy   4 , 806–814 (2019).
Article                            Google Scholar                    Mani, S.,
Jain, A., Tripathi, S. & Gould, C. F. Sustained LPG use requires progress on
broader development outcomes.  Nat. Energy   5 , 430–431 (2020). Article 
Google Scholar                    Van de Ven, D.-J. et al. Integrated policy
assessment and optimisation over multiple sustainable development goals in
Eastern Africa.  Environ. Res. Lett.   14 , 94001 (2019). Article 
Google Scholar                    Hosier, R., Kappen, J., Hyseni, B., Tao, N. &
Usui, K.  Scalable Business Models for Alternative Biomass Cooking Fuels and
Their Potential in Sub-Saharan Africa  (World Bank, 2017);
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/28595 Energizing Finance:
Understanding the Landscape  (Sustainable Energy for All, 2020);
https://www.seforall.org/system/files/2020-11/EF-2020-UL-SEforALL_0.pdf
Andrijevic, M., Schleussner, C.-F., Gidden, M. J., McCollum, D. L. & Rogelj, J.
COVID-19 recovery funds dwarf clean energy investment needs.  Science   370 ,
298–300 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar 
Sovacool, B. K., Furszyfer Del Rio, D. & Griffiths, S. Contextualizing the
Covid-19 pandemic for a carbon-constrained world: insights for sustainability
transitions, energy justice, and research methodology.  Energy Res. Soc. Sci.
68 , 101701 (2020). Article                            Google Scholar 
Goldemberg, J., Martinez-Gomez, J., Sagar, A. & Smith, K. R. Household air
pollution, health, and climate change: cleaning the air.  Environ. Res. Lett.
13 , 30201 (2018). Article                            Google Scholar 
Tripathi, A. & Sagar, A.  Ujjwala, V2.0: What Should Be Done Next?
(Collaborative Clean Air Policy Centre, 2019);
https://ccapc.org.in/s/Ujjwala-V20-Jun-19b.pdf Cameron, C. et al. Policy trade-
offs between climate mitigation and clean cook-stove access in South Asia.  Nat.
Energy   1 , 15010 (2016). Article                            Google Scholar 
Batchelor, S. et al. Solar e-cooking: a proposition for solar home system
integrated clean cooking.  Energies   11 , 2933 (2018). Article 
Google Scholar                    Shupler, M. et al. Pay-as-you-go liquefied
petroleum gas supports sustainable clean cooking in Kenyan informal urban
settlement during COVID-19 lockdown.  Appl. Energy   292 , 116769 (2021).
Article                            Google Scholar                    Barnes, B.
et al. Behavior change communication: a key ingredient for advancing clean
cooking.  J. Health Commun.   20 , 3–5 (2015). Article 
Google Scholar                    Krey, V. et al.  {MESSAGEix-GLOBIOM}
Documentation - 2020 release . (IIASA, 2020);
https://doi.org/10.22022/IACC/03-2021.17115 McFadden, D. A method of simulated
moments for estimation of discrete response models without numerical
integration.  Econometrica   57 , 995–1026 (1989). Article        MathSciNet 
Google Scholar                    Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A. & Renault, E.
Indirect inference.  J. Appl. Econom.   8 , S85–S118 (1993). Article 
Google Scholar                    K.C., S. & Lutz, W. The human core of the
shared socioeconomic pathways: population scenarios by age, sex and level of
education for all countries to 2100.  Glob. Environ. Change   42 , 181–192
(2017). Article                            Google Scholar  
Jiang, L. & O’Neill, B. C. Global urbanization projections for the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways.  Glob. Environ. Change   42 , 193–199 (2017). Article 
Google Scholar                    Friedman, J. H. Stochastic gradient boosting.
Comput. Stat. Data Anal.   38 , 367–378 (2002). Article        MathSciNet 
Google Scholar                    Rao, N. D., Sauer, P., Gidden, M. & Riahi, K.
Income inequality projections for the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs).
Futures   105 , 27–39 (2019). Article                            Google Scholar
                  Global outlook: pandemic, recession: the global economy in
crisis .  In  Global Economic Prospects  1–66 (World Bank, 2020);
https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1553-9_ch1 Download references
Acknowledgements M.P.-C. received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement no. 821124 (NAVIGATE).
This work was partially funded by the contributions of the National Member
Organizations of the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis. Author
information Authors and Affiliations Energy, Climate, and Environment Program,
International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria Shonali
Pachauri, Miguel Poblete-Cazenave & Matthew J. Gidden Population and Just
Societies Program, International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis,
Laxenburg, Austria Arda Aktas Climate Analytics, Berlin, Germany Matthew J.
Gidden Authors Shonali Pachauri View author publications You can also search for
this author in                          PubMed   Google Scholar Miguel Poblete-
Cazenave View author publications You can also search for this author in
PubMed   Google Scholar Arda Aktas View author publications You can also search
for this author in                          PubMed   Google Scholar Matthew J.
Gidden View author publications You can also search for this author in
PubMed   Google Scholar Contributions S.P. and M.P.-C. conceived the initial
framework. S.P. and M.P.-C. designed the research. M.P.-C., A.A. and M.J.G.
prepared the data. M.P.-C. and A.A. performed the modelling, wrote the codes and
carried out the analysis. S.P. and M.P.-C. led the writing of the paper with all
other authors contributing to the writing, revisions and editing. Corresponding
author Correspondence to                  Shonali Pachauri . Ethics declarations
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. Additional
information Peer review information   Nature Energy  thanks Joshua Rosenthal,
Francis Johnson and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to
the peer review of this work. Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations. Supplementary information Supplementary Information Supplementary
Figs. 1–3 and Table 1. Supplementary Data Supplementary data including scenario
drivers, estimation results and data behind the figures. Rights and permissions
Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Pachauri, S.,
Poblete-Cazenave, M., Aktas, A.  et al.  Access to clean cooking services in
energy and emission scenarios after COVID-19.                      Nat Energy
6 , 1067–1076 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00911-9 Download
citation Received :  14 December 2020 Accepted :  31 August 2021 Published :  28
October 2021 Issue Date :  November 2021 DOI :
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00911-9 Share this article Anyone you share
the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link
Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy to
clipboard                             Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt
content-sharing initiative                          This article is cited by
Justice considerations in climate research
Caroline Zimm Kian Mintz-Woo Thomas Schinko Nature Climate Change  (2024)
Costs and health benefits of the rural energy transition to carbon neutrality in
China                                      Teng Ma Silu Zhang Yang Xie Nature
Communications  (2023)                                         A geospatial
approach to understanding clean cooking challenges in sub-Saharan Africa
Babak Khavari Camilo Ramirez Francesco Fuso Nerini Nature Sustainability  (2023)
Data are key to proving green-energy benefits
Gemma Conroy Nature  (2022) Download PDF Associated content Clean cooking access
may stall under slow post-pandemic recovery and ambitious climate mitigation
without explicit focus Shonali Pachauri Miguel Poblete-Cazenave Matthew J.
Gidden Nature Energy Policy Brief 15 Nov 2021 Advertisement Explore content
Research articles
Reviews & Analysis
News & Comment
Current issue
Collections                                  Follow us on Twitter
Sign up for alerts RSS feed About the journal
Aims & Scope
Journal Information
Journal Metrics
About the Editors
Our publishing models
Editorial Values Statement
Editorial Policies
Content Types
Contact
Research Cross-Journal Editorial Team
Reviews Cross-Journal Editorial Team                                  Publish
with us                                     Submission Guidelines
For Reviewers
Language editing services                                  Submit manuscript
Search Search articles by subject, keyword or author Show results from All
journals This journal Search                 Advanced search              Quick
links Explore articles by subject Find a job Guide to authors Editorial policies
Nature Energy ( Nat Energy )                  ISSN   2058-7546  (online)
nature.com sitemap About Nature Portfolio About us Press releases Press office
Contact us Discover content Journals A-Z Articles by subject Protocol Exchange
Nature Index Publishing policies Nature portfolio policies Open access Author &
Researcher services Reprints & permissions Research data Language editing
Scientific editing Nature Masterclasses Research Solutions Libraries &
institutions Librarian service & tools Librarian portal Open research Recommend
to library Advertising & partnerships Advertising Partnerships & Services Media
kits Branded                         content Professional development Nature
Careers Nature                           Conferences Regional websites Nature
Africa Nature China Nature India Nature Italy Nature Japan Nature Korea Nature
Middle East Privacy                 Policy Use                 of cookies Your
privacy choices/Manage cookies                  Legal                 notice
Accessibility                 statement Terms & Conditions Your US state privacy
rights © 2024 Springer Nature Limited Close banner Close Sign up for the  Nature
Briefing  newsletter — what matters in science, free to your inbox daily. Email
address Sign up I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the
Nature  and Springer Nature Limited  Privacy Policy . Close banner Close Get the
most important science stories of the day, free in your inbox. Sign up for
Nature Briefing