The Gambia ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 2013 Copyright © IRENA 2013 Unless
otherwise indicated, the material in this publication may be used freely, shared
or reprinted, so long as IRENA is acknowledged as the source About IRENA The
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental
organisation that supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy
future, and serves as the principal platform for international cooperation,
centre of excellence, and  repository of policy, technology, resource and
financial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption
and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy,
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy in the pursuit of
sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low carbon economic
growth and prosperity Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA), Safiatou Alzouma Nouhou
(IRENA) and Mohamed Youba Sokona (IRENA) About RRA  Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA) is  holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions and identifies
the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment This is
country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support and
expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders
While the RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each
country determines which renewable energy sources and technologies are relevant
and consistent with national priorities The RRA is  dynamic process that can be
adapted to each country’ circumstances and needs Experience in  growing range of
countries and regions, meanwhile, has allowed IRENA to continue refining the
basic RRA methodology In June 2013, IRENA published  guide for countries seeking
to conduct the process in order to accelerate their renewable energy deployment
For more information visit  Acknowledgements IRENA prepared this report in close
collaboration with Yacob Mulugetta (University of Surrey), Abeeku Brew-Hammond
and Edward  Awafo (The Energy Center, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology), and Sambou Kinteh (independent consultant, The Gambia) The report
benefited from review and consultations with the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) IRENA wishes to thank the following
experts for their insights and constructive guidance during the peer review
process: Manuel Fuentes (IT Power - UK), Haruna Gujba (African Union Commission
- AUC), Monica Maduekwe (ECREEE), Modou Manneh (Ministry of Energy, The Gambia),
(IRENA) Hans Noteboom (Gamsolar Gambia), Bah Saho (ECREEE) and Frank Wouters For
further information or to provide feedback, please contact: SAlzouma@irenaorg or
secretariat@irenaorg Disclaimer The designations employed and the presentation
of materials herein do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of the International Renewable Energy Agency concerning the legal status of
any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries The Gambia ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 2013 IV The Gambia FOREWORD The Gambia, at present, is totally
dependent on petroleum products for transport and electricity generation This
dependency has continued in spite of the existence of  formulated renewable
energy policy, main- taining pressure on the national economy and ensuring  weak
balance of payments Given the volatility of international fuel prices, The
Gambia has one of the highest electricity tariffs in the West african sub-region
The Renewables Readiness assessment (RRa) for the Gambia could not, therefore,
have come at  better time The availability of adequate, reliable, affordable and
sustainable energy is  critical milestone in the socio-economic development of
any country While less than half of all households in The Gambia have access to
elec- tricity, over 90% are still dependent on solid biomass for cooking and
heating This has intensified poverty Thus,  top priority in government energy
policy to promote the deployment and use of renewable energy and energy-
efficiency (Re/ee) technologies, in order to improve energy security and access
to modern energy services To fulfil this objective, the government has taken
number of steps: establishing The Gambia Renewable energy Centre (GReC);
adopting  policy of zero import duty on Re/ee technologies; and recently drafted
renewable energy law These efforts have been constrained by inadequate
financial, human and institutional resources, which remain major challenges, as
highlighted by the RRa Concerted efforts by all stakeholders are therefore
needed to bring down these barriers ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT   in recognising the strong support of our traditional
donors in the energy sector, it is our expectation that the international
Renewable energy agency (iReNa) will share this RRa report with  wider spec-
trum of partners Our hope is to attract more support, to reduce the constraints
identified, and bring more investment, so as to facilitate rapid renewable
energy deployment and broaden access to energy services, thereby improving
economic growth and reducing poverty in The Gambia We also have great hopes that
the experiences gained in The Gambia will also provide helpful lessons for
applying the RRa methodology in other countries my own, admittedly personal,
assess- ment is that the methodology has proven highly effective in defining the
barriers to rapid renewable energy technology development Hon Teneng Mba Jaiteh,
Minister of Energy, The Gambia VI The Gambia VI The Gambia FOREWORD The africa
high-Level Consultative Forum held by the international Renewable energy agency
(iReNa) in July 2011 highlighted the need for technical support for african
countries and regions to identify their renewable energy readiness The
Renewables Readiness assessment (RRa) process stemming from this involves
holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions and identifies the actions needed to
overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment This is  country-led process,
with iReNa primarily providing technical support and expertise to facilitate
consultations among different national stakeholders Since 2011, more than 14
countries in africa, the middle east, Latin america and the Caribbean, asia and
the Pacific islands have undertaken the RRa process, which generates knowledge
of good practices and supports international cooperation to enable the
accelerated deployment of renewable technologies The Gambia, in keeping with its
strong and consistent support of iReNa’ mission, is one of these pioneering
countries as the RRa highlights, The Gambia has relatively high electricity
tariffs however, with an electricity network consisting of mini-grids, the
country is well positioned to integrate solutions based on renewable energy
iReNa and several partners – with their understanding enhanced by the RRa
process – have initiated studies to demonstrate the commercial viability of
hybrid mini-grids in The Gambia and thereby attract investment ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT VII iReNa would like to thank minister Jaiteh and her team
for their patience and generosity in hosting this study Their engagement and
input have exceeded expectations, and we are grateful for their important
contributions, which have resulted in valuable insights for further RRas in the
period additionally, this report will feed into other iReNa regional work,
including modelling and analysis on planning and prospects for renewable energy
in West africa We sincerely hope that the outcomes of these RRa consultations
will help The Gambia’ to fulfil its aim to scale up renewable energy iReNa
stands ready to provide continuing support to The Gambia in implementing the
actions identified Adnan  Amin Director-General, IRENA VIII The Gambia CONTENTS
aCRONYmS LiST OF FiGUReS LiST OF TabLeS Xi Xii Xii eXeCUTiVe SUmmaRY Xiii
iNTRODUCTiON  COUNTRY baCKGROUND ROLe OF eNeRGY iN DeVeLOPmeNT iN The Gambia RRa
PROCeSS iN The Gambia    ii eNeRGY CONTeXT  ReGiONaL CONTeXT eNeRGY SUPPLY aND
DemaND iN The Gambia eLeCTRiCiTY GeNeRaTiON, TRaNSmiSSiON aND DiSTRibUTiON
ReNeWabLe eNeRGY ReSOURCe POTeNTiaL aND USe   11 14 iii eNabLiNG eNViRONmeNT FOR
ReNeWabLe eNeRGY 23 KeY eNeRGY STaKehOLDeRS aND iNSTiTUTiONaL STRUCTUReS eNeRGY
POLiCieS aND ReGULaTORY FRameWORK FiNaNCiNG aND iNVeSTmeNT 23 25 27 iV
OPPORTUNiTieS iN DePLOYmeNT OF ReNeWabLe eNeRGY iN The Gambia 30 GRiD-CONNeCTeD
ReNeWabLe eNeRGY OPTiONS OFF-GRiD ReNeWabLe eNeRGY OPTiONS biOmaSS FOR COOKiNG
aND heaTiNG OPPORTUNiTieS aND CONSTRaiNTS FOR SCaLiNG UP ReNeWabLe eNeRGY
DePLOYmeNT 30 38 46 50 ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT IX  SUmmaRY OF
ReCOmmeNDeD aCTiONS 55 Vi ReFeReNCeS 58 Vii aNNeX: DeTaiLeD DeSCRiPTiON OF
ReCOmmeNDeD aCTiONS 61 action : Speed up renewable energy law action : establish
standards and labels for renewable energy equipment action : Revive The Gambia
renewable energy centre (GReC) action : assess, update and validate solar,
biomass and 61 62 63 wind resource mapping 64 action : establish renewable
energy fund and identify funding sources action : build stakeholder capacity
(policy makers, regulator and the private sector) action : allocate land for
renewable energy use 65 66 67  The Gambia ACRONYMS eCOWaS eCReee FiT GDP GeF GeG
GiZ economic Community of West african States eCOWaS Centre for Renewable energy
and energy efficiency Feed-in-Tariff Gross Domestic Product Global environment
Facility Global electrical Group Deutsche Gesellschaft für internationale
Zusammenarbeit/ German international Cooperation agency Gambia Renewable energy
Centre Gambia Technical Training institute Gigawatt hours independent Power
Producer international Renewable energy agency Kilovolt Kilowatt Liquefied
Petroleum Gas ministry of energy ministry of Finance and economic affairs
ministry of Forestry and environment megawatt National Water and energy Company
Non-Governmental Organisation Programme for accelerated Growth and employment
Public Utility Regulatory authority Photovoltaic Renewable energy Renewable
energy association of The Gambia Renewable energy master Plan Renewables
Readiness assessment Terajoules Terawatt hours Total energy Supply Tonnes of Oil
equivalent United Nations Development Organization West african Power Pool Watt
Peak GReC GTTi GWh iPP iReNa kV kW LPG mOe mOFea mOFeN mW NaWeC NGO PaGe PURa PV
Re ReaGam RemP RRa TJ TWh TeS TOe UNiDO WaPP Wp ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT
XI LIST OF FIGURES 07 09           Figure  WaPP regional sub-programmes Figure
Total primary energy supply by fuel Figure  The Gambia electricity
infrastructure Figure  Solar radiation in The Gambia Gambia global horizontal
irradiance (Ghi) Figure  Figure  monthly wind speed at 30m in three sites in The
Gambia Figure  Figure  Gambia wind speed at 10m height Levelised cost of
generation with wind (comparison of refurbished and new wind systems at
different prices) Levelised cost of generation of different scale systems in The
Gambia Life cycle cost comparison between PV and diesel for off-grid
electrification Life cycle cost comparison between PV and diesel for 32 Figure
34 Figure 10 40 Figure 11 42 44 water pumping at different depths Figure 12
Solar heater cumulative cash flow and payback period LIST OF TABLES Table
installed electricity generation capacity and production per station in 2011
evolution of the electricity market electrification rate per region Comparison
of tariff affordability in selected West african countries energy potential of
agricultural residues in 2011 Tanji wind turbine power generation Solar power
installation by major local companies in              39 Table  Table  Table
Table  Table  Table  XII The Gambia EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Gambia, located in
West africa, has an estimated population of  million as of 2012, with an annual
growth rate of % per annum and the share of the urban population increasing from
37% in 1993 to about 55% today With about % of the population currently living
below the USD 25/day mark, The Gambia’ Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew
steadily at an average of % in , but declined sharply (to -%) in biomass,
including fuel wood, accounts for about 60% of the country’ energy supply and
more than 90% of household energy consumption, while petroleum products
(liquefied petroleum gas for cooking; diesel and heavy fuel oil for generating
electricity) account for 36%, and electricity for about % of energy supply Over
65% of the population lacks access to electricity The Gambia has great potential
to accelerate renewable energy use to power its growing economy The government
recognises that develop- ing local and renewable resources is critical to
meeting its economic and social objectives it is promoting this development by
creating the necessary policy space and developing appropriate regulatory and
legal frameworks The Gambia needs to overcome its dual challenges of energy
access and security of supply, which cut across all sectors and have an impact
on all Gambians Current biomass use is contributing heavily to land degrada-
tion and deforestation, and the pressure will continue to increase due to
growing population electricity is  key challenge in terms of both quality and
access The existing power infrastructure in The Gambia is dilapidated and
urgently needs modernising and refurbishing Voltage fluctuation, spikes, black-
outs, brownouts and other disruptions create concern for industrial, commercial
and residential customers The continued dependence on imported fuel for
generating electricity is also taking its toll on the wider economy in short,
the energy system has become  burden on the Gambian economy and society – part
of the problem of development rather than the solution The status quo is
unsustainable The Gambian government considers the provision of electricity to
all as critical to inclusive economic transformation it recognises off-grid
renewable energy as  practical, potentially cost-effective alternative to
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT XIII expanding the grid to every corner of the
country The government electrification strategy has embraced both grid-based and
off-grid options Gambia and can replace existing diesel- driven systems The
Gambia has yet to build its energy infrastructure in  planned and systematic
manner at the moment, much of its rural electrifica- tion programme relies on
international donors The national utility is strug- gling to maintain service to
existing customers as  distributed and scal- able option, many renewable energy
technologies are well suited to meet the need for power in remote areas
Renewable energy systems are well posi- tioned to play  critical role in
address- ing this growing energy demand for the following reasons: • The Gambia
has abundant renewable energy resources that could help meet growing demand The
Gambia has abundant solar energy resources across the country,  good biomass
resource in most areas, and  modest wind regime along the coast These resources
can be developed to bring higher-quality energy services to populations across
the country • The Gambia needs to increase the available capacity supplied to
the grid Power produced through renewable systems can be fed into the grid in
The Gambia, providing  clean and reliable power supply The country already has
some experience in this area at pres- ent, the government is working on  Feed-
in-Tariff (FiT) scheme, grid code modification and  standard Power Purchase
agreement (PPa) that would facilitate private-sector entry into The Gambia’
power sector • Renewable energy safeguards energy access The Gambia’ use of
locally available renewable resources will reduce its dependence on imported and
expensive fossil fuels, which it can ill afford There is already strong pent-up
demand for energy, especially electric- ity as national demand for electricity
increases, it will be necessary to look into options that are affordable,
reliable and have predictable cost attributes • The West African Power Pool
(WAPP) represents an important opportunity for The Gambia  large bulk of the
power likely to be generated through the WaPP will be hydropower,  renew- able
energy resource Given the scale of power produced through the power pool and
Gambian power produc- tion and transmission challenges, The Gambia is expected
to greatly benefit in terms of cheaper electricity supply • Renewable energy
costs have fallen significantly and are likely to continue declining The
increased dash for fossil resources is likely to push prices up, while increased
renewable technol- ogy deployment pushes prices down, in line with progress in
technology and economies of scale This offers an opportunity for The Gambia to
rethink its energy strategy The Gambia also needs to build up its tech- nical
and regulatory capacity The level of skills in The Gambia is not sufficient for
the magnitude of the energy challenge in the country The government will need to
revitalise its technical arm, the Gambia Renewable energy Centre (GReC), to •
Off-grid renewable power can meet demand in unserved rural areas in The XIV The
Gambia provide scaled-up technology develop- ment, finance, regulation and
management support Further capacity will need to be built in research
institutions and among community stakeholders energy resources and is considered
major milestone in delivering some of the key priorities in the Programme for
accelerated Growth (PaGe) ; its enactment, therefore, would be worth speeding up
employment and Renewable energy development represents an area of tremendous
opportunity for The Gambia This Renewables Readiness assessment report lays out
the energy challenges that The Gambia faces today, along with ways the country
has supported the development of renewable energy programmes it shows the impact
these programmes have had on the energy land- scape, as well as the enormous
constraints that still remain The report provides infor- mation about the role
of renewable energy in The Gambia so far and the policies that have been
implemented to support renew- able energy deployment it also outlines the
potential for renewable energy tech- nologies to be integrated into the Gambian
energy mix in  way that services the coun- try’ development priorities and goals
The Gambia currently has no renew- able energy technology standards most
operators in the renewable energy sector, despite having  solid track record in
deliv- ering power-generation projects, are not complying with any specific
standards The renewables market is expected to expand and new entrants appear in
the trading and system-installation market The draft FiT scheme and PPa mention
general codes and standards that should apply to renew- able energy plants
however, it would also be worth creating specific standards and codes for
renewable energy technologies, in order to ensure adequate quality, design,
safety, and operation and maintenance of equipment (whether imported or locally
manufactured) Thus, the role of GReC will need to be rede- fined and its
capacity developed further as  knowledge hub within the ministry of energy, GReC
could play  pivotal role in maintaining high standards of research and
development activities it could use its own human resources and work with non-
governmental organisations (NGOs), the private sector and tertiary educa- tional
institutions however, funding for the continuous support of research and devel-
opment in the renewable energy sector has been discontinued adequate staffing
was not maintained The Gambia should therefore support the revival of GReC by
entrusting the centre with  number of roles These include scientific,
technologi- cal and innovation research in renewable energy, promoting
renewables for industrial uses, and building the capacity of installers
Recommended actions  draft renewable energy bill was validated in December 2012,
pending presentation before the National assembly for adoption  number of
national stakeholders will play  part in rolling out the act The ministry of
energy is to recommend national targets for the use of renewable energy
resources, the ministry of Finance and economic affairs is to provide tax
exemptions to and renewable-energy the renewable-based electricity, while Public
Utility Regulatory authority is to implement  regulatory framework that includes
defining the rules for pricing renewable electricity through FiTs, as well as
setting up and managing  renewable energy fund This provides the legal foun-
dation for efficient promotion of renewable equipment ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT XV of renewable energy systems with proper certification in order to
attract qualified expertise for this purpose, the govern- ment of The Gambia
will need to allocate  specific budget from internal sources it will also need
to support partnerships between GReC and well-established inter- national
centres of excellence in the renew- able energy sector with similar mandate
dination The upfront cost of renewable energy systems is  disadvantage in rural
communities, with little income or funds to obtain electricity services Soft
loans can be attractive, with  small down payment being made on the total price,
and the rest being paid over  number of years at  preferential interest rate The
draft renewable energy law, currently under discussion, supports the
establishment of  renewable energy fund, which would be administered by the
Public Utility Regulatory authority and would provide financial incentives such
as capital subsi- dies, production-based subsidies and equity participation
These would be avail- able for mini-grid and off-grid renewable power systems
for remote areas and islands and should attract private investment in the sector
The expected challenge would be to ensure that the renewable energy fund has
sufficient resources to maintain the invest- ment momentum The government will
need to employ  variety of creative fund- raising mechanisms to sustain the fund
The Gambia has conducted solar and wind resource measurements at eight stations
across the country The study confirmed the existence of  good resource base,
including considerable solar energy, some wind-power potential along the coast,
and biomass, which could be used for improving the electrification rate and
diversifying the electricity mix, as envisaged in the PaGe Usually, sites are
screened on the basis of  solar/ wind atlas, validated with measure- ments from
meteorological stations, and monitored for about  year before wind turbines are
installed This procedure was not followed at the Gambian sites, given the
country’ poor meteorological intel- ligence The government must create the
conditions for attracting investments to strengthen the observation network, as
well as make the necessary preparations to obtain  good understanding of the
wind regime across the country This will help in making informed decisions,
including setting achievable targets, and will, further- more, help The Gambia
take advantage of the significant interest of private opera- tors seeking
involvement in the renewable energy sector The Gambia has built credible human
capacity in some renewable applications, such as solar photovoltaic (PV) and
water- heating systems however, as yet, there are no government or NGO-led
public education programmes and no formalised technical training programmes
Capacity development for planning and implement- ing large-scale off-grid (and
also on-grid) programmes will need to be increased if the promise of renewable
energy resources is to be fully realised Private-sector involve- ment will
require multiple skills in energy analysis, engineering, finance and manage-
ment in order to build  strong renewable energy business environment The rural
energy system, as it has evolved to date, is complex and not disposed to
adequate planning and resource coor- XVI The Gambia  INTRODUCTION countRy
backgRound The Gambia, with an area of 11570 km2, is located in West africa it
extends about 400 km inland along the banks of the Gambia River and is bordered
by Senegal on three sides The Gambia has an esti- mated population of 8m as of
2012, with an annual growth rate of % per annum and  population density of 120
people/km2 The coun- try is currently undergoing  rapid rate of urbanisation
with the share of urban population increasing from 37% in 1993 to about 55%
today (World bank, 2013) The Gambia’ Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew steadily
at an average of % in , but declined sharply (to -%) in 2011 due to sluggish
tourism and unfavourable weather conditions These led to  60% drop in crop
production (imF, 2013) With  partial rebound in agriculture and strong
performance in tourism, the economy showed signs of recovery in it continues to
make further gains, with real GDP growth expected to reach % and % in 2013 and
2014 respectively (aeO, 2012) The agriculture sector contributes approximately
25% of the GDP but employs nearly 75% of the population, provides 50% of the
national food requirement and accounts for 70% of domestic exports it is thus
subject to wide fluctuations conditioned by external market situations (africa
energy Outlook (aeO), 2012) The government has therefore prioritised the
development of the agricultural sector by putting in place measures that will
transform it into  market-oriented, modern and efficient sector The service
sector accounts for approximately 60% of GDP, within which tourism, re-export,
trade and telecommunication have been the major drivers of growth and job
creation Telecommunications are well developed with  mobile penetration rate of
89% (well above the 53% african average) ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT
manufacturing, mining and quarry- ing remain the smallest component of the
economy, accounting for % and % respectively of GDP in Despite government
efforts to promote manufac- turing, it has been stagnant for years This can be
explained partly by the small size of the market but also high energy costs, low
investment and weak trade facilita- tion mining and quarrying exploration is in
progress, as The Gambia is thought to be endowed with mineral products such as
clay, silica sand, titanium, tin and zircon by providing affordable and reliable
energy services to support small businesses and social services, the socio-
economic condi- tions of the population can be improved and the mDGs achieved
The government plans to focus on modernising the elec- tricity supply
infrastructure, improving the existing regulatory framework and increas- ing the
Re contribution in the energy mix Role of eneRgy in development in the gambia as
highlighted in PaGe  and earlier development programmes, The Gambia needs to
scale up its energy services, both in quality and quantity, to meet the country’
social and economic develop- ment needs Present per capita electricity
consumption is 136 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per year against an african average of
over 575 kWh and  global average of over 2770 kWh This makes the average Gambian
citizen among the lowest consumers of electricity in the world What is more,
over 65% of the population lacks access to elec- tricity, and the level of
suppressed demand in the national power sector is significant This suggests that
The Gambia needs to close the gap between electricity demand and what it is able
to supply to its citizens according to the World bank (2013), net flow of
foreign direct investment was around USD 36m in 2011, and reached  high point of
USD 82m in The distri- bution of financial flows was mainly from real estate,
construction and tourism The net official development assistance and official
aid received by The Gambia in 2011 amounted to USD 76m Poverty in The Gambia
remains pervasive it was placed 169th out of 189 countries in the 2012 human
Development index (hDi) rankings With about % of the popu- lation currently
living under the USD 25/ day (Gambian government, 2011), poverty alleviation is
national priority Poverty incidence is the highest among households whose main
income is derived from agri- culture and fisheries The government has developed
medium-term framework in the Programme for accelerated Growth and employment
(PaGe) for  with the aim to accelerate pro-poor growth and generate efficient
employment more than 90% of Gambian households rely heavily on traditional
biomass to meet their basic energy needs This comes at  significant price it
means poor fuel quality, with the associated health impacts as well as an
unnecessary amount of time spent in collection, though this is comparatively
modest compared to other countries The Gambia has ample biomass resources and
good potential to engage in sustainable harvesting for household fuel and possi-
bly for generating electricity it also has significant solar energy and modest
wind resources along its coastal areas that can be successfully harnessed for
power supply The government designed PaGe to focus on strategic areas of
intervention linked to the millennium Development Goals (mDGs) acknowledging the
importance of energy as  crucial input to economic development, PaGe has made
energy access  strategic focus it recognised that  The Gambia and water heating
There is some experi- ence in The Gambia of converting these resources into
useful energy This limited experience shows the untapped potential Renewable
energy (Re) technologies are well suited for both urban and rural energy
applications indeed, the time is ripe for The Gambia to take advantage of
critical global developments in clean energy sources, which are rapidly becoming
cost-effective options Furthermore, The Gambia’ high oil import bills and
financial losses expe- rienced by its struggling energy utility imposes  burden
on the national economy and is  handicap to growth Developing its Re programme,
opening the market to iPPs and upgrading grid infrastructure to reduce
distribution losses (both commer- cial and technical) should therefore be
central development strategy are not mutually exclusive but intertwined For The
Gambia, making  transition out of inefficient biomass use and imported fuel
dependency will not be easy however, it has an opportunity to deploy renewables
and use energy efficiently as part of its effort to build  resilient energy
system This will require sound policies, an effective regulatory framework,
robust and dynamic institutions and sustained capacity devel- opment programmes
ReneWables Readiness assessment (RRa) pRocess in the gambia  senior officer at
the ministry of energy (mOe) with  thorough knowledge and experience in
renewables was the RRa representative for The Gambia The Gambia’ future
development will largely be determined by whether it takes full advantage of
these opportunities it has done well in solving  number of devel- opment
problems in education, health and water services, and energy services have
played  major role in this respect To this end, there needs to be  major new
programme to improve access to clean energy services for rural communities and
enhance security of supply to its indus- tries and other key economic sectors
This is part of The Gambia’ aim to safeguard the welfare of its people and to
its drive towards economic transformation Following preparations by the national
consultant and mOe,  representative from the eCOWaS Centre for Renewable energy
and energy efficiency (eCReee) wrote to the key institutions selected to be part
of the technical/expert team They were invited to the formal launch of the RRa
at  kick-off meeting on 24 July The insti- tutions who took part in the process
are listed in section  of this report The tech- nical/expert team was divided
into three thematic subgroups The subgroups met on 21, 22 and 23 august 2012
respectively, having had time to go through zero draft templates prepared by the
national consultant in advance of their scheduled meetings The subgroups
reviewed the tentative list of 18 resource- service pairs suggested by mOe after
discussions with the national consultant and retained them Lack of access need
not be  permanent problem for countries such as The Gambia indeed, many of the
emerging economies that have now achieved universal access were once struggling
with the same ener- gy-related difficulties in many of these successful cases,
energy interventions in the social and economic sectors were implemented as part
of  comprehensive development strategy These two goals The 15 expert team
members met in the third week of September 2012 to review the 18 templates The
team reduced the initial ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT  18 resource-service
pairs to it further evaluated the 15 resource-service pairs and requested that
they be subject to further scrutiny and prioritisation RRa methodology and the
RRa process in The Gambia Section  presents the renewable and general energy
context in the region it includes an overview of the energy sector in The
Gambia, its challenges and an overview of Re potential and use it also provides
detailed discussion of the electricity sector Section  explores The Gambia’
energy institutions and the policy and regulatory framework as well as the
conditions of financing and investment in the country Section  presents the
emerg- ing concerns relating to solar/wind electric- ity (on-grid),  range of
decentralised (off- grid) applications as well as the biomass sector
Opportunities and constraints that affect deployment scale-up are discussed
along with the RRa findings Section  presents the recommended action neces- sary
for scaling up Re in The Gambia The annex presents  detailed account of the
recommended actions identified by the RRa  national workshop held on 18 December
2012 prioritised the 15 templates and to selected medium-term priority resource-
service pairs The workshop also identified and recommended  set of seven
concrete action points to resolve limited systemic, institutional capacity
constraints Resolving these will create good synergies and have  positive cumu-
lative effect on the country’ readiness to scale up Re deployment The five
priority resource-service pairs and action points are detailed in section  five
manageable short- individual and This report is structured in five substantive
sections Section  presents the introduc- tion covering country background, iReNa
The Gambia II ENERGY CONTEXT Regional context The total population of the
economic Community of West african States (eCOWaS) region1 in 2011 was about
309m and growing at an annual rate of about % (UNeSCO, 2012) Per capita GDP
remains low by world levels at USD 983, but variations between countries point
to  wide range: USD 245-Real GDP growth has generally remained strong over the
past decade and reached % in 2012 due to good rainfall and positive developments
in the mining and petroleum sectors (eCOWaS, 2013) The West african energy
system faces  number of interrelated challenges: low energy access, unstable
energy security and increasing environmental degradation Total primary energy
consumption in the region is about 155m tonnes of oil equivalent (mTOe) per year
(eCReee, 2012) Fuelwood and charcoal account for the largest sources of energy,
representing 77% of primary energy consumption Petroleum products account for
22m tonnes of petroleum equivalent (mTeP) of consump- tion as  whole the region
consumes about 43 terawatt hours (TWh) of electricity Sustained economic growth
in the past few years has been accompanied by  growing demand for energy
modernisation; governments are under pressure to enhance their energy production
to meet growing demand access to electricity in the eCOWaS region is low at 42%
(eCReee, 2012) Variations also exist between countries Some, such as Ghana, Côte
’ivoire, Cape Verde, Senegal and Nigeria, are doing better than others in
extending electricity services to their populations The volume of unmet
electricity demand was approximately -10 TWh in  (eCReee, 2012) is  regional
group of eCOWaS its mission is to promote economic integration in all areas of
economic activity, particularly industry, transport, telecommunications, energy,
agriculture, natural resources, commerce, monetary and financial questions,
social and cultural matters eCOWaS member states consist of benin, burkina Faso,
Cape Verde, ivory Coast, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea- bissau, Liberia, mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Togo 15 countries and was founded in
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT  The electricity systems in West africa also
face challenges arising from existing supply capacities unable to satisfy grow-
ing demand Furthermore, the region also faces the difficulty of raising
sufficient funds internally or attracting outside inves- tors willing to incur
the high perceived risk for its electricity sector Overall, unreliable power
holds back the region' enterprises and impacts negatively on productive activ-
ities Transmission and distribution losses are estimated to be around 30%,
increasing electricity tariffs significantly  number of countries in the region
have some of the highest tariffs in the world with  regional average exceeding
USD 20/kWh The cost of providing backup power (typically USD / kWh) handicaps
produc- tive industries The World bank (2010) estimates that blackouts reduce
annual economic growth in africa by % The energy Protocol was adopted in 2003 by
eCOWaS member countries This is  legal framework aimed at promoting long- term
energy cooperation it is based on complementary relationships and mutual
benefits to increase investment in the energy sector and develop energy trade in
the region (eCOWaS, 2003) The eCOWaS/West african economic and monetary Union
(UemOa) White Paper for  Regional Policy on access to energy Services to Rural
and Semi-Urban areas was adopted in Three targets were set for 2015: ) 100% of
the total population, or 325 million people, to have access to improved cooking
fuels and stoves, including % to Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) cooking devices
energy regarding Concerns access and security are not new in the region
Following the adoption of the first energy policy of eCOWaS, the region has been
engaged since 1982 in developing an inte- grated approach of the energy sector
This would provide better access to modernised energy services for populations
across the region Several measures have been taken in this direction Some of
these are discussed below ii) at least 60% of people in rural areas to have
access to productive energy services in villages, in particular motive power to
boost the productivity of economic activities iii) 66% of the population, or 214
million people, to have access to an individual electricity supply (eCOWaS,
2006) The Regulatory authority for Regional electricity Sector of eCOWaS (eReRa)
was created in its aim was to ensure the regulation of cross-border exchanges in
electricity and provide substantial support for national electricity regulators
of member states ( The West african Power Pool (WaPP) was established in 1999
with the aim of curtail- ing the power deficit prevalent in the region it did
this by integrating the operations of national power systems into  unified
regional electricity market (cross-border trade flows) This is intended to
facilitate stable, reliable and cost-competitive elec- tricity supply to all
eCOWaS citizens in the medium to long term in 2006, the WaPP Secretariat was
created and mandated to ensure the promotion and development of power generation
and transmission facili- ties ( The eCOWaS Centre for Renewable energy and
energy efficiency (eCReee) was estab- lished by the Council of eCOWaS in its
mandate was to promote measures to improve access to modern energy services,
increase energy security and reduce adverse impacts on the environment The
creation of favourable framework condi-  The Gambia Figure  WaPP regional sub-
programmes ����������� ������������������������������������
���������������������������������� ����������������������������������
����������������������������������� ���������������������������������������
���������� ���� ������� ����� ������ ������� ���� ������ ������ ������ �������
����� ��������� ������ ����� ���� ����� ����� �������� ���� ����������������
������� Source: mOe, 2012b ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT  Figure  tions and an
enabling environment for Re and energy efficiency are viewed as tools to achieve
these goals with timings for the different projects This master plan is
organised around 30 gener- ation and 26 transmission priority projects with an
objective of developing 10% Re (excluding large hydro) The implementa- tion of
the master plan will add an additional capacity of 10 000 megawatts (mW) and 16
000 km of transmission lines to the region This would consist of an electricity
mix of 21 hydropower plants, five thermal power plants and four Re plants (wind
and solar) Total Primary energy Supply by Fuel much effort will be required to
address the energy issues in the region and capi- talise on the opportunities
that clearly lie ahead eCReee developed and adopted in November 2012 the eCOWaS
Renewable energy Policy (eReP) The eReP is desi- gned to make Re  vector for
universal access to electricity by it is also intended to ensure  more secure
and sustainable supply of domestic energy for cooking This will meet the
objectives of the eCOWaS white paper for access to modern energy services by
From  purely economic standpoint,  number of countries would benefit from the
opportunity to reduce costs they incur at present by importing more than half
their power Savings for countries such as Guinea bissau, Liberia and Niger could
range from USD 05/kWh to 08/kWh (eberhard et al, 2011) The largest benefi-
ciaries of regional trade would be smaller nations that lack domestic hydropower
resources For these countries, it is esti- mated that the cost savings generated
by regional trade could repay the required investment in cross-border
transmission within less than  year This depends on neighbouring countries
developing suffi- cient surplus power to export WEST AFRICAN POWER POOL WaPP is
looking at developing  regional electricity market through successive stages:
Phase , starting in 2012, is when most regional is expected to be commissioned
This phase includes formalising trading arrangements, agreeing transmission
pricing and strength- ening the role of the regional regulator transmission
infrastructure Phase  is based on the preparations carried out during Phase  it
should include bilat- eral agreements on transit through third countries, short-
term exchanges through day-ahead markets, regional transmis- sion pricing and
regional system operator/ market operator functions Within the priority projects
at the regional level, The Gambia would participate in both generation and
transmission in its capacity as  member country of The Gambia River basin
Development Organisation (OmVG) Two generation and one transmission proj- ect
are to be implemented in the subregion These include  128 mW hydropower dam in
Senegal (Sambangalou) and  240 mW hydropower dam in Guinea (Kaleta) it also
includes  225 kilovolt (kV) transmission line of  677 km that interconnects the
four Phase  reflects  long-term vision, which includes regional optimisation of
opera- tions WaPP has approved  regional master plan for infrastructure
development  OmVG is  subregional organisation involving four countries (Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea bissau and Senegal) in implementing integrated development
programmes in the subregion it focuses on the rational management of common
resources of The Gambia, Kayanfa-Geba and Koliba-Corubal Rivers  The Gambia
Figure  Total Primary energy Supply by Fuel countries to the two generation
plants The government of Guinea has already launched the construction of the
Kaleta Dam while the financial and economic analysis for the Sambagalou Dam is
being concluded and is showing positive results practices however, the boundary
between what is up-to-date and what is traditional is not clearly demarcated For
example, in urban centres in The Gambia, the simulta- neous use of biomass
fuels, kerosene or LPG is common, even in relatively high- income households The
fragmented nature of the energy system creates enormous challenges for policy
makers and makes it difficult to overcome the energy challenge in an integrated
manner eneRgy supply and demand in the gambia The Gambia has  dual energy system
containing co-existing traditional and modernised energy systems and practices
On the one hand, traditional biomass fuels and technologies dominate household
energy needs On the other,  modernised energy system uses electricity and more
refined fuels as well as modern appliances There is also an urban/rural split in
terms of energy distribution and in 2010, Total energy Supply (TeS) in The
Gambia was 407 926 TOe The energy consumption per capita in The Gambia in 2007
was 81 kilogrammes of oil equiva- lent (KGOe) according to figures from the
Global environment Facility (GeF) and the United Nations industrial Development
Organisation (UNiDO) in biomass, inefficient ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT   Kuntaur Wharf on the River Gambia Source:
including fuelwood, accounts for about 63% of the country’ energy supply, and
for more than 90% of household energy consumption it comes to as much as 97% in
some rural areas Fuel imports cause major problems for Gambian policy makers as
they use up what little foreign exchange the coun- try generates in 2009, the
country spent USD 47m on petroleum imports This amounts to  share of about % of
total imports Furthermore, the energy intensity of The Gambia is about 51, which
is around the eCOWaS average but significantly higher than that obtained in
developed and emerging economies as an example, China’ energy intensity amounted
to 46, and the european Union (eU) and Japan had values of 11 and 09
respectively (eCReee, 2012) The high energy intensity points to the fact that
ample opportunities exist for The Gambia to engage in energy efficiency
improvements (from production to end use) Petroleum products consisting of LPG
for cooking and diesel and heavy Fuel Oil (hFO) for generating electricity
account for 37% The share of Re is negligible at 19% and is mainly solar in 2006
The Gambia imported 128 000 metric tonnes (mt) of petroleum products This had
been an increasing trend since 1995 (figure ) The two biggest energy consumers
are households and the transport sector LPG use has been increasing in urban
areas, but only marginally its use has been largely constrained by its high cost
10 The Gambia Figure  The Gambia electricity infrastructure Source: Public
Utility Regulatory authority (PURa) 2012 are iPP plants respectively owned by
GeG and Gamwind electricity is transmitted from these stations for distribution
via five radial 11 kV feeders and three 33 kV feed- ers The second category of
power supply comprises seven NaWeC owned small- scale power plants that operate
on diesel generator sets, served by stand-alone elec- tricity subsystems in the
provincial centres (table ) Together, these small-scale plants have an installed
capacity of about 75 mW (PURa, 2013) approximately 250 km of 30 kV transmission
lines are installed in the provincial grids plus 135 km of mV/LV lines and 94 km
of LV overhead lines electRicity geneRation, tRansmission and distRibution The
Gambia relies entirely on imported fossil fuel for electricity generation -
mainly hFO - for the main power plants and diesel for the provincial power
stations These are operated by National Water and energy Company (NaWeC) and
Global electric Group (GeG) - an independent Power Producer (iPP) effective
installed capacity in The Gambia is around 65 mW This is divided into two
generation and transmission categories The first comprises the Greater banjul
area which is supplied by two large hFO power stations in Kotu (25 mW at peak
load), brikama (26 mW) and the batakunku and Tanji wind power plants (120 kW
kilo- volt ampere (kVa) and 900 kVa respec- tively) The brikama, batakunku and
Tanji approximately 44% of the electricity produced is consumed by households
Small-scale industries, hotels and larger industries use approximately 39% and
commercial entities about % The remain- ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 11 Table
installed electricity generation capacity and production per station in 2011
Power station Kotu Installed capacity, MW 300 Production, kWh 99 824 000 brikama
000 119 834 000 essau 400 507 660 barra 480 982 710 Kerewan 920 507 660 Kaur 480
132 548 mansankonko 400 Farafenni 500  269 000 bansang 600  482 300 basse 800
4349 292 batokunku 150 119 000 Total 40 232 008 170 Source: NaWeC, 2011 ing % is
consumed by government and NaWeC (NaWeC, 2011) Demand for power continues to
rise in 2012, generation amounted to 232 gigawatt hours (GWh) against an
estimated electricity demand of 621 GWh and is expected to exceed 800 GWh by
This gap between demand and supply is further exacerbated by system losses of
about 30% Table  summarises the evolution of the structure of the electricity
market in  in terms of consumer population, power sales, system losses, power
and energy demand Load shedding is frequent its common practice for businesses,
hotels and health facilities to rely on on-site diesel genera- tion units and
occasionally solar photo- voltaic (PV) units when load shedding or outages occur
Data on these backup off- Table  evolution of the electricity market ITEMS
Customer population System losses per household Power demand mW energy demand
mWh Customer growth / % energy demand growth rate Power demand growth Rate
Revenue growth rate 2007 75034 39% 88 416 280  51 2008 86349 34% 90 473 040  19
2009 103883 % 108 501 420 20  - 2010 113845 % 126 596 030 10 - 2011 98116 % 132
621 680 -14   12 Source: PURa (2012) 12 The Gambia grid systems are not
available The result- ing effect of this system underperformance is high tariffs
for consumers and  rise in the number of back-up systems it also weakens the
financial position of NaWeC, thereby reducing its capability to raise sufficient
revenue to expand the electric- ity system beyond the Greater banjul area This
has wider economic implications The lack of reliable, affordable power and the
high cost of energy are seriously limiting investment in The Gambia and are
limit- ing growth in productive sectors such as the agro-processing and
manufacturing sectors (GeF/UNiDO, 2011) Table  electrification rate per region
Electrification Rate 93% Regions banjul 22% Western 14% Upper river 12% Lower
river % Central river % North bank region Source: mOe, 2011 National electricity
access is about 35%, concentrated in the Greater banjul area where access is
about 93% (table ) Recognizing the high suppressed demand and  weakness in the
transmission and distribution network, NaWeC has projected the need for 75mW of
additional capacity in the next three years it also estimates  need for
additional capacity of 135mW in  (government of The Gambia, 2012) The financial
requirement between 2013 and 2015 will amount to USD 5m and USD 182m in 2016-New
trans- mission lines consisting of  132kV power line between the two main power
stations (Kotu and brikama) are also planned in the Greater banjul They are
expected to be in place by the end of COSTS ANd TARIFFS Following an extensive
review, tariffs in The Gambia were increased by 17% in at present, consumers pay
the highest elec- tricity tariffs in the West africa region at USD 28/kWh (table
) This situation can be explained partly by the country’ reliance on imported
fossil fuels for elec- tricity generation, as well as its poor trans-
infrastructure mission and distribution Table  Comparison of tariff
affordability in select West african countries Effective residential tariff (US
cents) @ 100kWh/month 2009 monthly per capita GDP (USD) % of monthly per capita
GDP spent on 100kWh of electricity Country The Gambia 98 Senegal 139 burkina
Faso 103 Cote ’ ivoire 134  Ghana  128  Source: World bank 2012, NaWeC 2012
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 13 electricity generation and transmission costs
are passed onto consumers, resulting in high tariffs Nevertheless, tariffs are
not reflective of costs, and the utility has been experiencing major financial
difficulties Resources allocated to cover operation and maintenance costs are
inadequate the transmission and distribution networks and develop renewable
sources of energy This consists mainly of solar, wind and biomass important
features characterise Four the energy sector in The Gambia These include: The
typical distance of villages from the grid in The Gambia is -25 km The cost of
transmission lines to connect these communities with low electricity demand to
the grid could amount to USD 50  000/km While this is  finan- cial liability for
the utility it opens  window of opportunity for decentralised genera- tion This
is because the draft Re law also offers provision for Re-based entrepreneurs as
it will make more economic sense than grid extension Furthermore, grid connec-
tion fees can amount to USD  (with  median cost of USD 600) This is  prohibitive
cost for low-income households (Sanneh and hu, 2009) ) high dependence on
imported fossil fuels ii) the dominance of traditional biomass sources in the
country’ energy mix iii) low access to modern energy services iv) limited
investment in new assets and inadequate maintenance of old and ageing power
facilities ReneWable eneRgy ResouRce potential and use The energy sector in The
Gambia faces vexing problems This country will have budgetary constraints for
the foreseeable future due to its dependence on imported fuel and weak supply
infrastructure to support the desired economic and social development This
difficulty is especially in rural areas, which are pronounced generally
characterised by widespread poverty, low income, low demand and the inherent
disadvantage of being further from the grid For these communities, an increased
reliance on local energy sources at  decentralised level is needed to meet
emerging energy needs Substantial investments are needed to meet infrastructure
and plant modernisa- tion costs, although the greatest propor- tion of operating
costs are due to the high fuel costs  parallel strategy is also important to
meet the needs of low energy - consuming communities located far from the grid
The Gambia has the opportunity to create  more cost-effective off-grid Re supply
system This could play  major role in reducing the nation’ dependency on
imported fossil fuel, diversifying the elec- tricity mix and increasing access
to energy services The challenge is to develop  policy framework and functioning
business models that attract investment into  mix of on- and off-grid
electricity generation To meet these requirements, the govern- ment has
formulated several strategies its objectives are to rapidly expand installed
electricity capacity, expand and upgrade The Gambia has benefits from  good Re
resource, including considerable solar energy and some wind power along the
coast it also has considerable land area classified as forest at present, this
provides biomass energy for  significant 14 The Gambia Figure  Solar radiation
in The Gambia Source: Gambia RemP 2005 Source: Gambia RemP 2005 proportion of
the population but could be managed more sustainably  summary of the resource
and potential available in The Gambia is provided below it is based on the
Renewable energy master Plan (RemP) drawn up in 2006 under the direction of the
energy Division of the Office of the President ation values is small The lowest
radiation values are in December and January, which coincides with the rainy
season even during the rainy season, much of the country receives sufficient
amounts of solar radia- tion at about  kWh/m2/day however, the solar radiation
range is higher due to cloud cover Low values are still good enough for solar
energy applications SOLAR ENERgy RESOuRCES Solar energy applications currently
in use in The Gambia include: PV for off-grid appli- cations and solar water
heating for homes, hotels and community applications Solar radiation data was
collected through RemP at eight measurement stations spread across the country
The study concluded that The Gambia enjoys high solar radia- tion in all regions
with average solar radia- tion at - kWh/m2/day (figure ) The periods of high
insolation are between march and may when the diurnal variation between the
minimum and maximum radi- Numerous PV systems are in use across The Gambia for
rural off-grid electrifica- tion and water pumping purposes in places unlikely
to be reached by the grid The government and donors have funded most ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 15 Figure  Gambia Global horizontal irradiance (Ghi) The
Gambia Source: iReNa Global atlas of The Gambia’ PV investments as part of rural
energy service projects for health clinics, schools, households and street
lighting With funding from the eU and the Japanese government, local private
company Gam-Solar has installed solar pumping systems in about 80 villages This
provides clean potable water to more than 200 000 people There is little private
sector activity in the solar PV sector, and active commercial markets are yet to
develop The govern- ment has encouraged the PV market by introducing  duty
exemption for solar equipment however, more policy and regulatory push would be
needed to attract private sector participation in the PV field The GeF/UNiDO
study (2011) has identified  number of good opportunities in the PV sector,
including the introduction of PV in some of the diesel-operated isolated grids
16 The Gambia maintainance work in progress at the batokunku wind energy plant
in The Gambia Photo:  Kottmeier Source:  run by NaWeC in the provincial areas
installing PV power plants at these loca- tions could reduce the running costs
of these grids, and allow expansion of the system to run for 24 hours  day ing
these systems Gam-Solar has carried out numerous installations in hotels and
community centres such as rural clinics however with the exception of  few, most
hotels continue to use electricity or fuel oil boilers to heat water Solar water
heating systems have been operational in The Gambia for nearly two decades, and
there is ample experience and expertise in the country for install- investment
Potential in grid-connected solar PV also exists in The Gambia as the falling
cost of PV in recent years brings the ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 17 Figure
monthly wind speed at 30m in three sites in The Gambia The Gambia technology
closer to grid parity in many parts of the world The Gambia’ high elec- tricity
generation cost is likely to excite investor interest in PV on the grid however,
grid PV remains  capital-intensive venture that will require government
direction to create the appropriate institutional and regulatory framework This
would partly lower investment risks and therefore attract private sector players
age wind speeds of about  / mainly due to wind flow from the sea in the West
Figure  shows the wind regime in three of these sites While inland areas may be
restricted mainly for wind pumping purposes, there is grow- ing evidence that
some coastal areas offer opportunities for grid-connected power generation
combination of suitable wind turbine technology and the judicious inte- gration
of wind power to the existing grid in the Greater banjul area is an option it is
also important to highlight other limit- ing factors with regards to the
engineer- ing work associated with large wind generation plants with high
turbine hubs Transportation and craning infrastructure for large-scale wind
turbines beyond 35 metres is at present not available in The Gambia however, if
the wind programme expands in future, this could be met by self-erecting
turbines or by bringing in adequate cranes WINd ENERgy RESOuRCES Wind potential
in The Gambia was evalu- ated using data from the World Wind atlas to prepare
Zero-Wind map This was further refined using data gathered from eight
measurement stations throughout the country Data were collected at 30m height
over an eight month period includ- ing the harmatan dry wind period The study
concluded that wind conditions are moderate in the interior part of the coun-
try (less than  /), but rise to aver- 18 The Gambia Figure  Gambia wind speed at
10m height The Gambia There is limited experience in wind-related energy
projects in The Gambia much of the early work was restricted to village water
pumping projects in the 1990s, the Department of Water Resources (DWR) actively
promoted the use of wind pumps along coastal villages with support from the eU
The pilot systems were installed in three villages, but their operation has been
discontinued due to lack of proper main- tenance, and pumping systems
inappropri- ate for the local conditions Several other wind pumps are in use
across the country, mostly on private farms This clearly indi- cates that
capacity development in opera- tion and maintenance (&) is critical for
sustaining wind pumping programmes Similar experiences are also observed in
other parts of africa ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 19 in recent years, wind
power has generated some interest in multilateral institutions, donors and The
Gambian government The batakunku wind project was the first of its kind in The
Gambia to generate elec- tricity for local community use and supply surplus
power to the utility annual gener- ation is currently around 120 000 kWh
follow-up project started up in august 2012 further north in Tanji of household
energy consumption and is often used in inefficient stoves The RemP study
conducted one of the most compre- hensive fuelwood consumption investi- gations
it concluded that the standing stock of fuelwood would not be enough to meet
future demand in 2005 the technical potential for sustainable fuelwood produc-
tion was about 209 000 tonnes/year for an aggregated demand of 734 400 tonnes/
year resulting in  huge gap of about 535 000 tonnes/year (Jarju, 2008) This has
led to overexploitation and degradation of native forest, as well as fuel
imports from Senegal largely in the form of charcoal BIOmASS The Gambia has
rich variety of woodland ecosystems, including forests, closed and open
woodland, tree and shrub savannah, mangrove, riparian and fringing savannah The
Gambia’ forest cover has declined from 60% in the 1960s to 43% of the land area
today (Jarju, 2008) its forest and woodland ecosystems supply about 85% of
domestic energy requirements Fuelwood accounts for more than 90% Given the
favourable soil and climate as well as underground water conditions in The
Gambia, there is ample opportunity to establish highly productive and inten-
sively managed wood lots These could replace wood imports and ease the pres-
sure on natural forests although such Source: ministry of energy, The Gambia 20
The Gambia Table  energy potential of agricultural residues in 2011 Physical
potential GJ/year Heating value (GJ/mt) Amount residue (mt/year) Ratio residue/
kernel Amount (mt/year) Crop Groundnuts millet maize Sorghum Rice paddy (straw
residue) Rice paddy (husk residue) 83 858 87 234 23 613 20 556 51 131 51 131 43
50 15 25 157 174 468 70 839 41 112 66 693  669 17 427 676  070 637  239 683 723
571  007 058 106 041 Source: World bank 2012, NaWeC 2012 planned and managed
biomass schemes will not in themselves close the biomass gap, they could form
part of  comprehen- sive and sustainable biomass programme This would include
improved cookstoves to reduce demand ing energy potential (Food and agriculture
Organization (FaO), 2011) millet and maize have the highest poten- tial and this
has been estimated at 3000 terajoules (TJ) per year and 1200 TJ/ year
respectively (table ) however the residues for these crops are widely used for
animal fodder and for various house- hold uses apart from solid biomass, The
Gambia produces  significant amount of agricul- tural residues that have the
potential to make  meaningful contribution to energy needs most crops in The
Gambia are subsistence crops (rice, millet, maize and sorghum) with groundnuts
as the only cash crop agricultural production data provides the basis for
calculating the annual amount of residues produced and their correspond- hence,
the only real potential may lie in the use of groundnut residue through centra-
lised groundnut processing facilities across the country This would produce heat
and electricity to meet local energy needs Surplus would be sold to the grid
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 21 Fruit and vegetable drying using  solar food
dehydrator built by Solar association Tiloo of Kanifing Source:  22 The Gambia
III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY key eneRgy stakeholdeRs and
institutional stRuctuRes There are numerous players in The Gambian energy sector
They include government bodies and parastatal organisations, Non-Governmental
Organisations (NGOs) and associations as well as the private sector Some of
these play multiple roles in policy, regulation, finance, knowl- edge generation
and advocacy gOvERNmENT/PuBLIC-SECTOR INSTITuTIONS The Office of the President
plays  crucial role in receiving information from all the ministries as they
relate to each specific energy objective it has final authority on regulations,
tariffs and iPP contracting The mOe, under the Office of the President, is
tasked with the responsi- bility for establishing the policy and strategies for
the energy sector This includes electricity, petroleum products and Re The mOe
is aided by the energy Unit (eU) and GReC who provide support on policy analysis
and technical matters The utility National Water and electricity Company (NaWeC)
and the iPP GeG work under the mOe The National Water and electricity Company
(NaWeC) owns all except the GeG power plant and operates the transmission and
distribution network for the country NaWeC is responsible for establishing and
collecting electricity tariffs it also establishes and administers Power
Purchase agreements (PPas) with the private power producer and implements rural
electrification projects The ministry of Finance receives recommendations from
PURa, evalu- ates the financial implications and makes recommendations to the
presi- dent The ministry is involved in pricing petroleum products especially
for the transport sector Liquid petroleum products provide  significant revenue
stream for the national budget ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 23 PURa is
responsible for regulating the electricity, water and telecommunications sectors
This includes licensing and ensur- ing safety and quality standards as well as
tariff reviews PURa is actively engaged in drafting the Re bill and in
formulating and communicating the FiT rules it also acts as arbitrator between
the responsible network utility and people generate or plant to generate
electricity from Re resources The Department of Water Resources (DWR) in the
ministry of Water Resources and Fisheries is actively involved in rural water
supply using solar energy for water pumping PRIvATE-SECTOR INSTITuTIONS GeG is
an iPP contracted by NaWeC to build, own, operate and maintain one of the two
power generators in the Greater banjul area The ministry of Petroleum oversees
upstream and downstream activities in petroleum resources, in particular
explora- tion and marketing The ministry oversees the quality of service and
safety stan- dards within the petroleum subsector it is, however, unclear which
ministry has over- sight responsibility for LPG With  current membership of
enter- prises, the Renewable energy association of The Gambia (ReaGam) promotes
Re projects These include small solar PV installations, solar thermal, micro
hydro, cookstove improvements and the expan- sion of jatropha for oil production
in The Gambia The ministry of Forestry and environment (mOFeN) is responsible
for enacting forestry and environmental policies and legislation its forestry
department is responsible for managing the country’ forest resources it plays
lead role in policy formulation and regulation uNIvERSITIES ANd RESEARCh
INSTITuTIONS GReC advises government on Re and energy efficiency it was set up
to carry out adaptive research in Re and to develop and promote the use of Re
and energy effi- ciency technologies in The Gambia The Department of Community
Deve- lopment (DCD) is under the ministry of Local Government and Lands it is
respon- sible for promoting the efficient manage- ment of fuelwood resources
through the promotion of substitutes and improved end-use appliances for
firewood at the household level University of The Gambia (UTG) is respon- sible
for offering training programmes energy-related courses it also carries out
installation of community solar projects on  contract basis it has limited
research capabilities due to lack of resources The department is also involved
in commu- nity training activities in  wide range of sectors as well as research
and dissemina- tion of new and appropriate technology Gambia Technical Training
institute (GTTi) is responsible for research, development and training in Re and
energy efficiency appliances investment and export The Gambia Promotion agency
(GiePa) has the primary function of investment promotion in The Gambia energy is
among the eligible sectors in The Gambian investment code National agricultural
Research institute (NaRi) is responsible for research, devel- opment and
dissemination of Re technolo- gies, mainly solar and biomass 24 The Gambia
Source: ministry of energy, The Gambia There are four key laws and strategies in
place that affect the energy sector: the Public Utility Regulatory act (2001),
energy Policy (2005), electricity act (2005), and the GiePa act (2010) eneRgy
policies and RegulatoRy fRameWoRk PaGe is The Gambia’ development strat- egy and
investment programme for 2012- 2015, geared towards accelerating pro- poor
growth and generating employment One of the important pillars of PaGe is the
urgency to improve and modernise The Gambia’ infrastructure through public and
private sector investments in transport, energy and information and communica-
tions technology The Public Utility Regulatory act estab- lished PURa as the
body responsible for the regulation of public utilities includ- ing energy
services (electricity, petroleum and gas) The act was designed to enable
licensing arrangements to be adminis- tered by an independent and self-funding
regulatory body that protects the interests of the public utilities and
consumers The emergence of PURa has improved trans- parency and utility
accountability The energy Policy (2005) stipulates the need to ensure  reliable
and adequate supply of more specifically, PaGe established the goal of promoting
the use of Re resources for electricity generation and actively pursuing fuel-
switching from fossil to Re, particularly in rural areas ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 25 energy at affordable prices This is essen- tial to stimulate
necessary development in the productive sectors of the economy and to realise
the development aspirations of The Gambia in an environment-friendly way more
specifically, the policy aims to Gambian investment and export Promotion agency
(established under the GiePa act, 2010, formerly GiPZFa) provides incen- tives
to enterprises Priority sectors include Re from solar, wind, hydro and biochemi-
cal energy as well as LPG and electricity generation, transmission and
distribution Some of the incentives include  corpora- tion tax holiday for
period of five years and  waiver on import sales tax relating to manufacturing
plant This would comple- ment the much awaited Re law in making the energy
playing field attractive to local and international investors ) improve and
expand existing energy supply systems through private sector partnerships with
the public sector ii) promote  domestic fuel subsector, which clearly focuses on
sustainable management of forest resources iii) widen the population’ access to
modernised forms of energy to stimu- late development and reduce poverty During
the course of 2012, the draft electricity Strategy and action Plan and the Re
bill were developed by the ministry with the assistance of technical partners
institutional and human iv) strengthen resource enhance and capacity Research
and Development (&) in energy and The draft electricity Strategy and action Plan
considered different pathways for the national electricity sector including
busi- ness as usual, enabling cross-border trade, renewable generation and
reliability, and high Re integration in order to help policy decisions the draft
strategy recommends regional interconnection and  joint hydro- power project
with neighbouring countries This allows for greater renewables integra- tion in
both the main and isolated grids The plan is to integrate the isolated grids to
the main grid over time ) provide adequate energy security The policy has worked
as  major step supporting the implementation of Re systems The electricity act
of 2005 was passed to promote cost-effective generation, trans- mission and
distribution of electricity, set standards for electricity services and deter-
mine appropriate tariffs it also opened the generation sector to iPPs The act
desig- nates PURa as the authority over licensing and tariff setting for
electricity generation and sales it also elaborates the frame- work that
provides for the participation of the private sector in electricity generation
while transmission and distribution still falls under the public utility’
monopoly The draft Re bill was validated in December 2012 and is to be presented
before the National assembly members for adoption it will provide the legal
framework for an efficient promotion of Re resources and is considered  major
milestone in delivering some of the key priorities in PaGe 2012- number of
national stakeholders will play  part in rolling out the act mOe is to recommend
national targets for the use of Re resources The ministry of Finance and
economic affairs (mOFea) is to provide tax exemptions to Re equipment The GiePa
act of 2010 has been  welcome addition to The Gambia’ policy land- scape in
relation to the power sector, The 26 The Gambia and electricity generated
through renew- able meanwhile, PURa is to implement the regulatory framework
that includes defin- ing the rules for pricing renewable elec- tricity (FiTs),
setting up and managing the Re fund financing and investment as with other
countries in West africa, donor assistance in The Gambia represents the majority
of the energy sector invest- ments There are currently eight discrete projects
at various stages of preparation/ implementation They are divided into three
sets of energy sector development programmes, namely generation, trans- mission
and distribution and Re develop- ment programmes The financing institutions for
these projects comprise banks such as the islamic Development bank (iDb), the
investment and Development bank of eCOWaS (ebiD) and the arab bank for economic
Development in africa (baDea) it also includes the OPeC Fund for international
(OFiD), Development the and Development Social of Venezuela bank inves- (baNDeS)
and tors like GeF-UNiDO, the Danish international Development agency the
(DaNiDa) German international Cooperation agency (GiZ) The total budget is USD
86m (USD 7m for the only Re project, two wind turbines of 900 kVa, developed so
far) Government contributions towards these projects are in the form of counter-
part funds mainly arising from internally- generated sources such as direct and
indi- rect taxes, international trade taxes and non-tax revenues The government
also regularly borrows from international and local financial markets to finance
energy projects The Re fund objective is to provide finan- cial resources for
the promotion of Re by providing financial incentives, FiTs, capital subsidies,
production-based subsidies and economic Source: ministry of energy, The Gambia
and equity participation These will support both on-grid and off-grid
initiatives and invest- ments an attractive FiT rate will be intro- duced for
on-grid investors alternatively, they will benefit from  negotiated rate no
higher than the alternative cost of elec- tricity generation For off-grid
investors, it ensures that electricity from renewables and hybrid systems may be
sold to end- users at approved electricity tariffs up to the current national
retail tariff rates This excludes generation facilities greater than 200 kW
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 27 in order to attract domestic and foreign
investments in the main sectors of the economy including electricity generation/
distribution and Re, the government of The Gambia has adopted two main policies
These are the investment Promotion Policy and the 2001 Free Zone act renewable
technologies by their individ- ual members While the majority of these NGOs are
facilitators, five are currently active in savings and/or credit mobilisation
with good track records and wide cover- age in the rural areas These are
Reliance Financial Services, Social Development Fund, Gambians for Self
employment, Gambia Women’ Finance association and National association of
Cooperative Credit Unions of The Gambia The Gambia investment Promotion and Free
Zones agency has been established and provides  mandate to lay out the
investment promotion framework The framework stipulates national treatment and
equity participation of foreign inves- tors by assuring them security of title
The private sector in The Gambia has yet to show an inclination towards Re
businesses Local banks as well as microfinance institu- tions are averse to
building  portfolio of Re projects since their understanding of technology risk
is limited it also guarantees against expropriation investors have also been
offered an attrac- tive incentives package including exemp- tions from import
duties and tax holidays Privileges arising from any existing or future customs
union, free trade area, monetary union or similar international cooperation are
also available to investors moreover, most of the local banks lack capacity to
plan, structure and appraise  Re project with appropriate financial instruments
Combined with inadequate awareness, this reinforces the perception of Re
technologies as too expensive, lack- ing reliability and thus too risky Under
the Free Zone act, free zones are being developed in selected locations
activities and investment in these locations attract incentives for  period of
-30 years depending on the duration of the licence These incentives include,
among other things, exemptions from capital registra- tion payment and import
duty on capital equipment, excise duty and sale of goods and dividend tax This
may change when the Renewable energy act comes into force, ushering in the Re
fund This will be the responsibil- ity of PURa, providing financial incen-
tives, FiTs, capital subsidies, production based subsidies and equity
participation to renewable-based electricity projects Sources for financing the
fund will include the national budget, multilateral and bilat- eral donors,
donations, and various levies The financial market institutions in The Gambia
are well positioned to play  key investment role in scaling up Re deploy- ment
There are 12 commercial banks oper- ating These could act as  vibrant avenue for
investment resources for private entre- preneurs in the renewable technology
market The money from the Re Fund would also be available for, among other
things, the promotion of Re projects including capac- ity building for Re
development The government of The Gambia should take the opportunity to build
the technical capaci- ties of local financial institutions and the private
sector as well as civil society This will affect business opportunities within
the sector Similarly, The Gambia microfinance Network (GamFiNeT), with
membership of 17 NGOs, can channel credit for the purchase 28 The Gambia  solar
powered NGO farm in Nema Kunk in The Gambia Source:  ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 29 IV OPPORTUNITIES IN DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY IN THE GAMBIA
The Re market is largely subject to the resources available and the tech-
nologies that can be employed to convert energy sources into services This
section is divided into different subsections focusing on different resources
and conversion technologies, known here as service-resource pairs in each
subsection, the status of each particular subsector is reviewed, followed by the
problems that need to be solved and conclud- ing with  list of action points
recommended by the RRa gRid-connected ReneWable eneRgy options The grid remains
an important way to reach large numbers of people at low cost The situation in
The Gambia is such that the grid is faced with formidable technical,
institutional and financial barriers Less than 35% of people are served by the
grid, and the lack of reliable, afford- able power is seriously hampering
investment in The Gambia This limits growth in critical productive sectors such
as the agro-processing  number of Re technologies are becoming increasingly
cost-competitive Their development could help unblock the impasse by enabling
diver- sification of supply and building resilience in power infrastructure This
section considers wind and PV for The Gambia They offer high immedi- ate
deployment potential ON-gRId WINd There is at present one grid-connected wind
power generator with  capacity of 120 kW (150 kVa) that has been operating at
batokunku since There are also two 450 kW wind turbines at Tanji that started up
in late all three were installed by  local company (Gamwind), and GeF/UNiDO
provided part of the funds for the Tanji project Uniquely, the turbines were
acquired second-hand from europe where they had been operating in  wind farm
They were refurbished in The Gambia This explains why project lifetimes are
reduced to 15 years instead of the  years average for new systems The cost of
acquiring these turbines is estimated to be % lower than new turbines of similar
quality and size The investment cost for the plant at batokunku was about USD
220 000 and is expected to have  lifetime service of about 15 years at batukunu,
30 The Gambia Table  Tanji wind turbine power generation Monthly kWh to NAWEC
Monthly kWh from NAWEC Monthly grid (hrs) Difference hours Reading date Month
Grid (%) 01 01 01 01 01 01 Total July august September October November December
July-Dec 10 383 36 178 30 776  364 48 020 58 959 191 680      810 810 378 736
710 735 712 732  003 10  10   12 57 42 92 61 79 88 38 av Source: Gamwind
recording sheet (2012) some 80% of the power produced is used by the village
households who purchase elec- tricity at 75% of the utility tariff meanwhile 20%
is sold to the utility NaWeC The bene- fits from this project have gone beyond
just the provision of water and electricity  variety of new employment
opportuni- ties have been created through self-help businesses Wind speed
averages 51 / in the first six months since the turbine started up, the system
has transferred over 190 mWh of power to NaWeC against an annual target of 570
mWh (table ) Referring back to figure , it is important to note that august to
December is  period of low wind it would therefore be interesting to see what
the Tanji turbine will gener- ate during the relatively high wind period between
January and may The Tanji project had  capital cost of USD 577 000 and annual
running cost of USD 36 The project is expected to generate  total output of
about 572 000 kWh/year Power is sold to NaWeC via  PPa at about USD 17/kWh,
resulting in net income of approximately USD 59 000/year The turbines in Tanji
are bonus 450 with  hub height of 35m and contain three blades with  rotor
diameter of 37m as part of the installations, two step-up transformers and
transmission line were constructed to connect with the coastal 33kV transmission
ring operated by the national utility company, NaWeC The project used historical
wind data from the batakunku wind measurements Financial analysis for the Tanji
project uses the assumption that all the power gener- ated is fed into the grid
at the utility tariff of USD 28/kWh instead of the actual selling price of USD
17/kWh at that rate, the Tanji plant would generate an annual net income of
about USD 124 000 or have  simple payback of about  years on investment Further
analysis was under- taken comparing the refurbished turbines against new
turbines of the same capac- ity at market rates USD 1200/kW and USD 3000/kW3
(iReNa, 2013a) The result shows  lower levelised cost4 for the refur- bished
turbines at USD 13/kWh over  15  Taken from iReNa Renewable Power Generation
Costs in in figure , the total installed cost range of USD /kW is given as
representative for africa  Assumptions: Capital cost of refurbished system = USD
577 000; capital cost of new systems = USD  200/ kW and USD  000/kW; annual
running cost = USD 36 000 (annual variable cost = USD 01/kWh + annual fixed cost
= USD 30/kW); project time = 15 years; inflation =%; discount rate =12%
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 31 Figure  Levelised cost of generation with
wind Comparison of refurbished and new wind systems at different prices
trification it involves setting up  450 kW wind turbine to support  fishing
commu- nity to overcome high energy costs This project is raising funds before
being set up The plant will have  capital cost of USD 298 000 and an annual
running cost of USD 15 The interesting attribute of this project is that the
electricity generated would be used for productive purposes at the Tanji Fishing
Community This commu- nity cooperative produces ice, runs chilled storage and
fish market and rents shops and fish-processing areas The ice-mak- ing and
chilling process at the fisheries is energy-intensive and uses approximately 715
000 kWh/year at  cost of about USD 170 000/year This accounts for 80% of the
production costs (GeF/UNiDO, 2011) The Tanji Fishing Community has agreed to
provide 20% of the costs of the project while the rest would need to be obtained
from various donors The community believes that in the long run, the project
will reduce its reliance on expensive elec- tricity from the grid and provide
significant annual savings These can be reinvested to upgrade their operations
year lifetime it also shows  levelised cost of USD 15/kWh and USD 35/kWh for new
systems over  20 year lifetime (figure ) The analysis also reveals that the
cheaper option would yield  simple payback time of 11 years, and the more
expensive wind turbine would exceed the payback period of its lifetime (20
years) This indicates that for more expensive wind options the introduction of
FiT would be necessary to attract investment This demonstrates that, given the
moderate wind regime, wind power is still  cost-competitive option, especially
at the lower end of the capital cost price curve Wind power generation offers an
oppor- tunity to improve the electrification rate by harnessing the use of
locally available resources and diversifying the sources, as stated in PaGe This
necessitates the devel- opment of new business models that over- come the high
capital cost often associated with Re systems They lower investment risk in
order to meaningfully engage the private sector although positive results have
been obtained from the experiences in batokunku and Tanji, the market for iPPs
in the wind sector is yet to open up The much-awaited Re law is expected to
over- come some financial challenges through the introduction of  FiT, waiver on
import sales tax and favourable corporation tax for Re developers This would
need to be complemented by  strong effort in two The batokunku and Tanji
projects are designed to address electrification for community use and for sale
to the grid meanwhile,  new project is under devel- opment This is part of the
effort to support enterprises with access to elec- 32 The Gambia areas: firstly,
the construction of efficient administration and management capacity in the
responsible government agencies Secondly, skills would need to be improved in
engineering, business, finance, and contract negotiations end-users in countries
such as The Gambia looking to reduce the exposure to the high cost and volatile
fossil fuel market There is considerable experience of PV systems in The Gambia,
but all of it is restricted to the off-grid PV sector, while there is no
utility-scale PV system in coun- try Given The Gambia’ specific power sector
vulnerabilities, there is  growing interest among policy-makers in exploring the
considerable economies of scale asso- ciated with PV-based grid developments
pre-feasibility financial analysis of small- scale (100 kW) and larger scale
(1250 mW) systems was undertaken to assess the cost of different size PV systems
under resource and macroeconomic conditions in The Gambia Generation costs were
used from the latest iReNa study5 as the basis for the cost assumptions for PV
systems between USD 3000- 8000/kW in both cases it was assumed that power is
supplied to NaWeC at the current utility tariff of USD 28/kWh The wind projects
have been designed with very limited wind data to properly assess the
suitability of the sites for wind power applications Usually, sites are screened
on the basis of  wind atlas, validated with wind measurements from
meteorological stations and monitored for about  year before wind turbines are
installed This procedure was not followed in The Gambian sites given the
country’ poor meteoro- logical intelligence The government must invest in
strengthening its observation network and make the necessary prepara- tions to
obtain  good understanding of the wind regime across the country ON-gRId Pv
Solar resources in The Gambia are excellent, and thus offer the opportunity for
deploying  range of solar technologies at utility-scale plants and distributed
end-use applica- tions There has been  rapid fall in the cost of PV technology
globally, enabling grid- based PV to achieve grid parity in  number of markets
it is fast becoming  genuine alternative for countries faced with the twin
challenges of energy access and energy security PV module prices have declined
sharply from USD  700/kWp in 2009 to USD  200/kWp, making the balance of System
(boS)  crucial determinant of solar PV system costs (iReNa, 2013a) These trends
make PV  compelling product for The analysis demonstrated  number of important
features of PV grid systems in The Gambia The payback period for the smaller
system is  years depending on the per kWh system cost even more favourable
figures are obtained for the larger system, which produces  payback period of
-17 years This is also demon- strated in the range of levelised cost results
where the cost for larger systems are USD 10- 25/kWh while the smaller systems
are USD /kWh (figure ) This illustrates that the larger PV systems bring economy
of scale benefits as the marginal cost of additional power implies  reduc-
adapted from iReNa Renewable Power Generation Costs in in figure , solar PV
installed costs in non-OeCD regions for utility-scale projects gives an average
value of USD 3000/kW and  range of USD /kW in this analysis, the USD /kW range
is employed for The Gambia  Assumptions: Capital range = USD /kW; annual & cost
= USD 20/kW (for 25 mW plant size) and USD 30/kW (for 100 kW plant); inverter
replacement at 10 yrs = USD 11/Wp; project time = 20 years; inflation =%;
discount rate =12% ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 33 renewable resources it
would need to be sufficiently attractive to draw serious inves- tors at the same
time it would need to be pegged at  rate which will not adversely impact the
final consumers of electricity Figure  Levelised cost of generation of different
scale systems in The Gambia RRA FINdINgS The RRa process has highlighted  number
of technical opportunities and barriers facing the generation and transmission
infrastructure in The Gambia The process also brought to light some of the
institu- tional, financial and capacity issues that continue to bedevil the
power sector These are discussed below TEChNICAL CONSIdERATIONS The power sector
faces  dual dilemma The first relates to the ongoing and (increas- ing)
electricity supply shortages due to inadequate power generating capacity
characterised by the aging and high oper- ating cost of generating equipment in
addition to these technical shortfalls, the utility lacks adequate human
capacity in critical areas such as power plant manage- ment in 2011, about 99%
of the total oper- ating costs of NaWeC went into fuel and lubricants as well as
energy payment from the fuel-based iPP (NaWeC, 2011) This left little resources
for upgrades and criti- cal refurbishments The second dilemma relates to the
issue of power quality as unplanned outages cause damage to elec- trical
appliances The present transmission and distribution network is composed of mV
lines (33kV/11kV) covering 115km and 181 km respectively These are dilapidated
and not able to take significant additional power capacity without major
upgrades and new transmission network develop- ment to connect additional
generation Variable generation from solar and wind sources will create further
challenges for the energy system The Gambia does not tion in unit costs
Furthermore, present generation costs for NaWeC fossil-based electricity is at
USD 28/kWh This makes the PV option attractive from  cost as well as security of
fuel supply standpoint indeed, the bulk of the total cost of the PV systems is
in the initial cost, while fossil- based systems have higher recurrent costs
over the duration of their lifetime however, as the cost of PV systems continues
to fall, their value as  reliable and cost-effective option for power generation
increases, particularly for periods of peak electricity demand during the day
The Re bill being debated at present provides for the acceleration of the devel-
opment of Re resources through the establishment of  tariff system This is the
FiT for electricity produced from eligible 34 The Gambia have  grid code but
this is essential to ensure Re can obtain priority access to the grid, while
building in some flexibility in forecasting production taking into account the
recent decrease in Re technology costs (iReNa, 2013a costing study) TARIFF-
SETTINg in 2011,  loan agreement of USD 22m was signed between the government of
The Gambia and economic and Social Development bank of Venezuela (baNDeS) to
upgrade, rehabilitate and expand the network The first phase of the project has
been completed and has already led to an % reduction in transmission losses The
project is in progress and is likely to signifi- cantly reduce losses and
subsequently improve the finances of the utility in light of these developments,
the ability of the grid to integrate intermittent power gener- ated by
renewables would be higher The assessment of the grid along with the eval-
uation of the Re economic potential should inform policy makers in setting Re
targets that are both meaningful and achievable The technical suitability and
economic viability of integrating renewables into the grid go hand in hand  FiT
scheme is currently under preparation in The Gambia it has the support of the eU
and is based on the specific policy and market frame- work of the country for
wind, solar PV and biomass These are identified as the most appropriate
renewable power options in country in the short term it is designed to improve
the competitiveness of renewables and drive investment into the sector The
design of the FiT was based on the avoided cost methodology given the fact that
electricity generation is based on imported fossil fuel subject to market
fluctuation The proposed FiT is to be set at  ceiling price of  GmD/kWh (USD 26
/kWh) which is roughly equiv- alent to the current generation price of  GmD/kWh
(USD 25 /kWh) it will be valid for 15 years from plant commission- ing in order
to minimise impact on system stability, initially the maximum allowable plant
size for solar PV and wind could be limited to  mW Facilities greater than  mW
would not be considered under the FiT scheme but could negotiate  PPa directly
with the utility SETTINg RENEWABLE ENERgy TARgETS The comprehensive Re bill is
in the process of adoption Section  stipulates setting up mid- and long-term
national targets for deploying Re resources in electricity gener- ation The mOe
would be the designated authority for proposing the targets These would need to
be tailored for  specific technology and/or defined in terms of addition to the
electricity mix or capacity addition The draft electricity strategy has made
recommendation that renewable resources contribute to % to the electric- ity
generation mix by however, the basis for this target has not been made clear The
RRa underlines that the 2005- 2006 solar and wind assessment study in The Gambia
could serve as  good basis for evaluating the economic potential for wind and
solar systems This would provide some preliminary country-specific costs Setting
up FiTs equivalent to present generation costs is likely to cause an extra
burden on NaWeC it already borrows heavily from local banks at high rates to
meet the current supply anticipating this challenge, the Re law will set up
fund to provide finance for the FiTs and other Re commitments This would be
covered by annual contributions from the national ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 35 budget, registration fees from commer- cial organisations and
individuals in the renewables sector, as well as grants for Re activities
additional resources could be raised through the introduction of an Re levy on
service sectors such as tourism and the banking sector that manage remit- tances
in 2010 The Gambia received up to USD 82m in remittances, according to Women
World’ banking The government could also consider working with interna- tional
agencies to develop  credit line for community and small business Re or other
power generation projects mandatory priority dispatch for renew- able
electricity as well as grid connection/ access agreements The grid code should
consider near time or real time scheduling instead of the widely applied day-
ahead forecast in order to meet the intermittency criteria of Re resources
Capacity building for successfully conclud- ing PPa negotiations and managing
poten- tial conflicts of interest in the future is also critical in project
finance training Guidance is necessary on international best practice in
procurement, particularly in manag- ing iPP and PPa negotiations This needs to
include the importance of managing potential conflicts of interest and ensur-
ing appropriate separation from potential bidders although electricity
generation has been opened to the private sector following the 2005 electricity
act, only two iPPs have been established This is due to the complexity of the
permitting process for energy projects GiePa has nevertheless registered many
energy project propos- als involving the use of renewable With its growing
experience in diesel-powered and wind power iPPs, NaWeC has devel- oped skills
to foster fair relationships with iPPs The practical experience gained could
accelerate the establishment of many more Re projects by iPPs QuALITy CONTROL
ANd STANdARd SETTINg in addition of being the regulatory body, PURa is also in
charge of conducting inspection and site visits to all power plants and network
facilities This is to inspect quality of service delivery and monitor health and
safety standards There are currently no Re technology standards in The Gambia
however, the draft FiT and PPa mention general applicable codes and standards
that the Re plant should comply with it would be worth creating specific
standards and codes for Re technologies to ensure adequate quality, design,
safety, operation and maintenance of equipment GReC could take up this task and
therefore its capacities should be built to facilitate the development of Re
standards and certifica- tion of equipment as required international cooperation
could be facilitated by iReNa in this segment PURa will have to build its
capacity of relevant personnel in order to ensure it can make adequate
performance appraisals of Re plants, as required in the Re law at present, the
process of obtaining permits for Re projects means dealing with multi- ple
players and institutional barriers This can lead to significant administrative
and transaction costs This process needs to be simplified to ensure that project
develop- ers are not discouraged Under the Re law, the mOe task will be to
streamline permit- ting by simplifying the process and provid- ing clear
guidelines for land and water use among others in addition, to stimulate private
sector interest in the renewables sector, there is  need to develop  grid code
with  favourable set of clauses for Re systems elements of  grid code are
already emerging in the draft FiTs and standard PPa which includes clauses for
36 The Gambia Box  Power Up Gambia The SULeimaN JUNKUNG GeNeRaL hOSPiTaL located
in the town of bwiam sees over 20 000 patients every year and has  catchment
area of over 100 000 inhabitants Since 2006, the hospital has relied on three
diesel generators, which it could only afford to run for -10 hours  day
depending on fuel availability They saved most of these hours for after dark
because the staff and patients desperately needed the lights The remaining -
hours of electricity were used during the day, when the hospital was busiest
Without constant electricity, the hospital could not safely store medication or
provide oxygen and incubators for infants as well as running the water pump
hospital services grew considerably as did the electricity demand The hospital
CeO and  non-profit called Power Up Gambia (PUG) raised USD 300 000 for the
installation of  solar system to meet the hospital needs in  sustainable and
cost effective way Gam-Solar, the leading solar panel contractor in The Gambia,
assessed the power requirements of the hospital it concluded that 108 solar
panels were required to provide the hospital with power, 90 for electricity and
18 for running water in 2009, six PV tracking units with an installed capacity
of 12 kWp were installed and have been powering the hospital ever since Over the
past four years the hospital learned  lot about the opportunities and challenges
of managing an off-grid solar system, especially issues related to electricity
storage While expanding the programme to other rural hospitals and clinics, PUG
intends to connect the Suleiman Junkung General hospital to the national grid
This was extended to the town of bwiam in early it has  net meter arrangement
with the utility to send excess solar power to the grid and draw it back at
night Net metering would save battery power for emergencies and load shedding,
reduce wear on the batteries, lower the hospital’ electricity cost and increase
renewable power production to the grid PUG intends to work on the business
model, test it out and replicate it in other rural clinics with access to  grid
For more information visit   healthcare project powered by solar power in The
Gambia Source:  ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 37 understanding of the limits
to conventional grid extension will be required to balance needs, population
distribution, costs and resources Some small-scale Re technolo- gies are
commercially maturing, such as PV, wind energy and biomass, and new and
innovative service delivery mechanisms are surfacing This means off-grid
electrifica- tion has emerged as  viable alternative for electricity access,
especially in areas too remote from the grid The Gambian leadership has long
recognised the need for  dual approach to energy provision This includes
expanding both on-grid and off-grid systems to accelerate access to modernised
and clean energy services ACCESS TO INFORmATION One of the major barriers to
attract- ing investment is Re project developer access to the required
information for robust project proposals The Gamwind and GeF-UNiDO pilot project
developers have acquired considerable experience Workshops and seminar training
on these projects would provide practical founda- tions for future projects
Given that The Gambia is changing its energy landscape,  communication strat-
egy must be developed it should involve key stakeholders, namely GiePa, PURa,
NaWeC, mOe and ReaGam GiePa and PURa should take the lead in communicat- ing
timely, detailed and commercially-rele- vant information to ensure the
investment market is fully informed of opportunities within the country There is
plenty of experience of off-grid PV electrification, water pumping and solar
heating systems for hotels, clinics and households each of these will be
explored below off-gRid ReneWable eneRgy options OFF-gRId Pv ELECTRICITy The
main decentralised Re system being promoted on The Gambian market for
electricity is solar PV it has been exten- sively used since the early 1980s for
rural water supply and remote power for tele- communication facilities about ten
retail companies are active in The Gambia in PV for rural applications, and in
these companies installed  total cumula- tive capacity of 53 kW (table ) The
government of The Gambia places  high premium on providing its citizens access
to electricity With  less than 35% electrification rate at present and
increasing demand for power for social and economic development, broadening
energy access is an important policy Grid extension has been traditionally
associated with electrification options in The Gambia however, there are limits
to what can be achieved through the grid alone, espe- cially in areas of highly
dispersed popula- tions, small loads and low load densities extending
transmission lines to these areas will be financially prohibitive Connection
fees often approaching USD 1000 per household may be beyond the reach of most
people in  country where about 48% are currently living on under USD 25/day
Clearly, an integrated approach as well as an There is considerable potential
for deploy- ing solar home systems in The Gambia The successful implementation
of solar PV water pumping, solar home systems and PV-diesel hybrid projects in
Darsilami, sponsored by the eU, is  case in point With  popula- tion of  000
inhabitants, Darsilami is not connected to the grid and is at about 10 km from
the grid line The cost of establishing transmission lines at USD  000/km 38 The
Gambia Table  Solar power installation by major local companies in  2010     675
75 516 COMPANY Gam-SOLaR SERVICE electricity (kW) Water (kW) electricity (kW)
Water (kW) electricity (kW) Water (kW) electricity (kW) Communication
electricity (kW) Water (kW) electricity (kW) Water (kW) electricity (kW) Water
(kW) electricity (kW) Water (kW) 2004 2005 2006 2008 2007 205 42 2009
eNGiNeeRiNG*   77 96 52 83 16 89 eSeim SOLaR**  &  SeRViCeS^ 352 24  59  98 22
SWe-Gam 95    15 95 95 SUN FaCTORY SaNFOSi 38 63 37 ChYbON    325  26 ReGiONaL
SOLaR ^^ electricity (kW)         Water (kW) electricity (kW) Water (kW) Gambia
eLeC^^^ 36  04 GRAND TOTAL 38 87 68 *Power System engineering, **eseim Solar Co
Ltd, ^Communication & electrical Services, ^^Regional Solar energy Co Ltd,
^^^Gambia electrical Co Ltd Source: mOe, 2011 was seen as too costly Generation
capacity in The Gambia would not be sufficient to meet the energy demands for
small towns such as Darsilami The project consists of  000 watt peak (Wp) PV,
300 ah battery and 9kW diesel components that supply continuous power to the
Darsilami health centre This is equipped with  vaccine refrigerator and small
lab with medical devices for blood analysis and sterilisation The diesel
generator is used only during the rainy season and contributes less than % of
the total energy mix Other load includes water pumping, battery charger and
elec- tricity supply for public service providers The hybrid system allows
upgrades to 15 kW to bring electricity to 300 households, with  daily
consumption of 200 KWh per household and with  total daily primary load of 60
kWh (Geipel, 2009) Other community-based initiatives include the Solar Street
Light Project This resolves non-payment of street lighting bills by improves the
municipal councils and NaWeC budget position while maintaining the security
provided by street lights This project’ progress is detailed in text box  The
success of the Street Light Project led to further feasibility studies These
exam- ined potential programmes for solar home systems in rural households and
other PV ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 39 used to meet the daily load of kWh
of  rural community (figure 10) Figure 10 Life-cycle cost comparison between PV
and diesel for off-grid electrification Firstly, over  20 year project life, the
PV systems are significantly cheaper, with levelised costs of USD 29/kWh and USD
36/kWh, and the payback period is five years in contrast, the diesel system is
costlier over the longer term with  leve- lised cost of USD 53/kWh Secondly, the
85% share of fuel cost for the diesel system and  share of capital cost of about
80% for the PV systems Clearly, this has implica- tions for rural households and
communities in The Gambia who do not have disposable incomes to cover high
upfront PV costs or cannot access adequate bank support This will mean
developing sound government policies, testing new business models and the
introducing finance schemes designed to support off-grid renewable systems The
role of the new Re law and associated regu- latory and financial instruments
will be crit- ical in creating  viable market supported by  sustainable
financing mechanism )    (         -      systems for social services (schools,
clin- ics) and productive uses (rural telecom- munication centres) it is
expected that the african Development bank (afDb) would make loans available for
the Solar Street Light project and provide grants for the solar home systems
programme One measure that PV systems have pene- trated The Gambian market is
the increas- ing numbers of shops in banjul and the Greater banjul areas that
trade PV solar accessories and various system compo- nents Solar panels in these
shops range in size from  Wp, and controllers as well as efficient appliances
can be readily obtained This is  positive development in that PV systems are
entering the main- stream market and having greater visibil- ity however, the
unregulated nature of the market is letting in unlabelled equipment with no
specifications The government has passed The Gambia Competition act and is
expected to pass the Consumer Protection act These need to be given sufficient
Solar PV and diesel systems should be compared on the basis of life cycle costs
of providing the final service in order to account for the major operational
differ- ences between these systems The four broad components of life cycle
costs are initial costs, replacement costs, & costs and running costs (including
fuel use) Two observations can be made from the life cycle cost comparison
between two  kW PV systems and  diesel generator This is  Assumptions: Capital
range = USD /kW for the PV module (system cost of USD 18 417 and USD 23 520);
battery size = 1800 ah ( Deka Gel batteries at USD 700/unit) and replace every
years; inverter cost = USD 11/Wp and replace every 10 years; annual & cost = USD
20/kW (for 25 mW plant size) and USD 30/kW (for 100 kW plant); project time = 20
years; inflation = %; discount rate =12% 40 The Gambia Box  NAWEC Street Light
Project Started in 2006 to resolve • • • Non-payment of street lighting bills by
municipal councils NAWEC budgetary difficulties Lack of security from street
lighting Several centralised solar tracking systems supply poles with light • •
• Makes cleaning panels easier Prevents damage from vehicle road accidents
Replaces conventional street lights to relieve NAWEC financial losses from
powering street lights without customer revenue NAWEC can extend its supply to
more households & businesses • Cost & achievement by 2012 • • • Total cost of
USD 216 467 (2006 exchange rate) 75 poles erected Tracking system of
substations of  100 Wp each completed Savings from 12 hour lighting period • • •
• Energy consumption per pole 55 kwh Annual saving per pole at USD 25 tariff
rate = USD 120 NAWEC annual saving for 75 poles = USD  000 Project payback
period  years enforcement powers to safeguard the rights and welfare of
consumers tor in The Gambia, groundwater sources meet most of the potable water
needs, hence energy use for pumping water is  critical input for water access
handpumps, diesel generators, PV systems and some wind pumps are in use at
present OFF-gRId Pv WATER PumPINg Since 1990, steady progress in extend- ing
rural water coverage was made in The Gambia, and it was reported in 2010 that
80% of the country has now access to water This would be sufficient to meet the
millennium Development Goal by 2015 (amCOW, 2010) access to an improved water
source refers to the percentage of the population with least 20 litres per
person/ day within one km of the dwelling from an improved source This could be
house- hold connection, public standpipe, bore- hole, protected well and
rainwater collec- Ongoing and upcoming projects in The Gambia will improve
access to rural water services The Gambian government has recently initiated
large-scale Rural Water Supply Project, with the USD  875m from the islamic
Development bank (iDb) This will provide 90 drilled wells with hand pumps and
ten systems with  borehole, tank and pipe distribution network to ten
communities The government recently finalised and signed  USD 7m grant with
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 41 the afDb for  rural water supply and sani-
tation project to be completed by in  life cycle cost analysis using country-
specific data conducted for The Gambia it is shown that over the longer term, PV
performs better than diesel (figure 11) it provides  more reliable alternative
for  continuous water supply This illustrates how emerging price trends and
technol- ogy development favours PV over diesel This is likely to continue into
the future The project will provide 18 new solar-pow- ered drilled boreholes and
pumping units and elevated water tanks and distribution networks with public
stand-taps it will rehabilitate and upgrade four water supply facilities,
provide sanitation in schools, rural health centres and markets With funding
from various development partners,  local solar firm, Gam-Solar, has installed
smaller scale solar pumping systems in about 80 villages They serve more than
200 000 villagers The need to provide water services is not limited to the
household sector, but also extends to commercial and productive sectors as The
Gambia pushes to enhance its agricultural sector to improve food secu- rity as
well as diversify its trade, the need for improved irrigation will assume
greater importance affordable and reliable energy for pumping water for
irrigation could play  central role in enabling smallholders to extend their
production into the longer dry season This would improve their earn- ings,
transforming rural economies and The source of the energy used is critical to
the overall cost of water pumping systems as PV prices are falling and the
volatility of the fossil fuel market increases globally, PV pumps are rapidly
becoming more attrac- tive than the traditional pumps powered by diesel and
gasoline Figure 11 Life-cycle cost comparison between PV and diesel for water
pumping at different depths 42 The Gambia allowing them to play  key role in The
Gambia’ development plans as detailed in PaGe 2012-Gam-Solar has installed
several agricultural solar irrigation systems funded by donor organisations and
NGOs, such as the recent eight hectare drip-line irrigation project at Sifoe
Farm based on these experiences, the viabil- ity of solar water heaters in the
resource and economic context of The Gambia is convincing For  typical load like
the Kombo beach hotel and  capital cost of about USD 15 000, the solar water
heater could have  payback period of under  years This is for  system with
lifetime service of 20 years (figure 11) SOLAR WATER hEATINg Water heating is
major consumer of energy in The Gambia – mainly in hotels, clinics and some
households Significant savings can be made if hotels and other large
institutions are able to capitalise on the energy savings opportunities from
solar water heating systems, which have been around for several decades The
technology is mature, simple to repair and replicate, and heats water cost-
effectively Continuing to rely on grid electricity would mean that water heating
services are subject to higher costs and less reliable service delivery due to
load shedding and other technical problems Since one of the grid challenges is
inadequate generation capacity, shifting the water heating load to solar means
grid electricity could be freed up for other end-uses it could release pent-up
demand in various sectors Conclusions were drawn as early as the 1980s that
major hot water users could financial savings by make significant switching from
diesel-powered and elec- tric water heating systems to solar heating systems The
most common type of solar water heater in The Gambia incorporates  2m2 flat-
plate solar collector and  300 litre storage tank, and has  payback period of
less than one year Since 2000, considerable experience has been obtained and
skills developed in solar heating systems in The Gambia in 2004, the ministry of
energy (mOe) developed  solar water heater using  converted elec- tric water
heater tank in collaboration with GTTi This is significant because it means two
types of solar water heating are avail- able to households They have  market
price of about USD 400 for the flat white bed type and USD  for the more
expensive vacuum type Some hotels have already invested in solar water heating
systems, due to increasing awareness of ecotourism practices and motivated by
the high cost of electricity Kombo beach hotel has installed   000 litre solar
water and hot water storage system it is backed up by  thermal heat- ing system
using fuel oil in the event of  hot water shortfall from the solar system
however, the high initial investment cost has remained an obstacle for most
hotels, although increasing numbers of smaller hotels located away from the grid
are investing in solar heating systems While this has been  productive Doe/GTTi
collaboration, it could have benefitted from  strong national promotion
programme This would have mainstreamed the tech- nology to  wider end-user base
beyond  few private initiatives Looking ahead, design regulations with  specific
mandate for different sectors (industrial, tourism and households) to install
solar water heaters would help the technology gain further traction ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 43 Figure 12 Solar heater cumulative cash flow and payback
period high electricity access in the Greater banjul area when compared to the
very low rates of access in other areas, points to this real- ity although the
recent NaWeC electrifica- tion experience is encouraging, there is still  need
for  clear rural electrification strat- egy Despite electricity demand growth in
the provincial centres, generation fell due to high operation and maintenance
costs This resulted in shorter electricity supply Part of the challenge is that
consumer tariffs in the provincial areas do not reflect costs (they are heavily
subsidised) This has contributed to the NaWeC overall low financial strength and
credibility RRA FINdINgS The RRa has demonstrated that off-grid renewable
systems have already made  significant contribution to social and economic
development in The Gambia it is also important to note that decentra- lised Re
development in The Gambia will not be  ‘silver bullet’ for universal access it
will, however, probably be an important component of any expansion in electric-
ity access The following are some specific findings from the RRa relevant to
off-grid electrification ImPORTANCE OF CLEAR RuRAL ELECTRIFICATION STRATEgy
robust rural electrification strategy would be aligned with local (provincial)
development plans This would result in  more coordinated and effective approach
in meeting the electricity needs of the rural population The strategy should
define short, medium and long-term access targets supported by technology
specific targets within defined geographic areas for off-grid electrification
One way would be to introduce rural energy service conces- sions This would
allow an entity (private in The Gambia, as in most countries in the region,
rural electrification campaigns were conducted using grid-based technologies
This is understandable since grid-based technologies enable lower cost
connections to those closer to the grid The challenge with  grid-based approach
is that it will not reach remote or dispersed communi- ties it may even cause
people to go to the grid rather than the grid come to them The 44 The Gambia
sector, NGO, community organisation etc) to exclusively serve one or more
defined areas under  concessionary agreement operated by NaWeC offers
compelling case for its hybridisation with Re sources Since solar radiation is
abundant through- out the country, detailed feasibility data on hybridizing the
diesel mini-grids with solar PV would help to demonstrate the economics of these
systems to potential investors The resource assessment carried out shows that
provincial areas have adequate radiation all year round to enable renew- ables
to play  significant role in off-grid electrification STANdARdS ANd LABELS
(ACCREdITATION ANd CERTIFICATION) ALIgNmENT OF RE BILL WITh IPP NEEdS The draft
Re law under discussion supports the establishment of off-grid Re/hybrid
facilities run by iPPs For systems up to 200 kW, the iPP would be allowed to
charge electricity tariffs to consumers up to the national retail tariff an iPP
wish- ing to operate  larger system or charge electricity tariffs above the
national retail tariffs would need to negotiate the terms with the regulator The
Re fund, which will be administered by PURa, would provide financial incentives
such as capital subsi- dies, production-based subsidies and equity participation
These would be available for mini-grid and off-grid renewable power systems for
remote areas and islands This should attract private sector investment in the
sector The expected challenge would be to ensure that the Re Fund will have
sufficient resources to maintain the invest- ment momentum The government will
need to employ  variety of creative fund- raising mechanisms to sustain the fund
The lack of accreditation and certification of Re technologies restricts the
promotion of PV-based electrification and solar water heating most companies
currently operat- ing in The Gambia have  long and solid track record in
delivering high standard projects it is anticipated that the renew- ables market
will expand and that possibly new entrants into the trading and system
installation market will emerge it is impor- tant to establish standards and
labels for renewables equipment (whether imported or locally manufactured) and
ensure their proper installation and operation it is not clear who would oversee
this important task gREC CAPACITy dEvELOPmENT The role of GReC will need to be
redefined and its capacity developed further as  knowledge hub of the mOe, GReC
could play  pivotal role in maintaining high stan- dards of research and
development activi- ties it could use its own human resources and work with
NGOs, the private sector and tertiary education institutions however, funding
for the continuous support of & in the Re sector has been discontinued adequate
staffing was not maintained This means GReC consists of only one full-time
technician with an office at the ReaGam facilities plus some administrative
support as matters stand, GReC does not have  qualified expert that could fulfil
its origi- ECONOmIC ASSESSmENT OF hyBRIdISATION There is plenty of experience of
variety of technologies in The Gambia it is impor- tant to document and assess
the cost of single and combination (hybrid) technolo- gies in the different
regions This produces dynamic data on the range of technolo- gies and their
performance under differ- ent conditions The diesel-based mini-grid ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 45 nal mandate of Re & and the provision of sound technical
support to the mOe The Gambia should therefore support the revival of GReC by
entrusting the centre with  number of roles gENERAL CAPACITy dEvELOPmENT The
Gambia has built  credible human capacity in some renewable applications such as
PV and water heating systems however, as yet, there are no government or NGO-led
public education programmes, no Re industry associations and no forma- lised Re
technical training programmes Capacity development for planning and implementing
large-scale off-grid (and on-grid) programmes will need to be increased if the
promise of Re resources is to be fully realised Private sector involve- ment
will require multiple skills in energy analysis, engineering, finance and
manage- ment in order to build  strong Re business environment These include
scientific, technological and innovative research in Re, promoting Re for
industrial uses and building the capacity of installers of Re systems with
proper certi- fication This was outlined in the Re bill in order to attract
qualified expertise for this purpose, the government of The Gambia will need to
allocate  specific budget from internal sources it will also need to support
partnerships between GReC and well-established international centres with
similar mandate AvAILABILITy OF SOFT LOAN SChEmES OR OThER CREdIT LINES FOR
SOLAR Pv biomass foR cooking and heating The upfront cost of Re systems is
disad- vantage to rural communities with little income from obtaining
electricity services The rural energy system as it has evolved to date is
complex and not disposed to adequate planning and resource coordina- tion Soft
loans can be attractive  small down payment of the total price is made and the
rest paid over  number of years at  preferential interest rate  range of solid
biomass resources are used in The Gambia, consisting of fuelwood, charcoal,
agricultural residues and indus- trial wastes of agricultural origin in the
Greater banjul area, much of the fuelwood and charcoal is imported from Guinea
and southern Senegal in rural Gambia, fuel is mainly gathered from community
wood- lands or shrubs near the villages Officially, charcoal production has been
banned by  presidential decree since 1977, but although the law is well
articulated, compliance is low Charcoal continues to be produced in several
villages in the West coast region through often obsolete and inefficient
production methods in The Gambian context where bank loans come with an 18%
interest rate,  grant from  multilateral agency or donor could be ring-fenced
This would get soft loan schemes up and running for household or community
electrification purposes amid growing concerns for sustainable supply of energy
services to the house- hold sector,  household energy Strategy (heS) was devised
for the energy sector it had the support of Comité inter etats de Lutte contre
la Secheresse au Sahel- interstate Committee for Drought Control (Regional
(lCiLSS)/PReDaS in Sahel While this cannot be considered as  long- term funding
solution, it could address energy for social development needs and may also
serve to stimulate the renewables market in rural areas The Re fund will be
instrumental in providing finance to kick start subsidies and loan schemes 46
The Gambia Box  Production and promotion of groundnut shell briquetting for
cooking and heating GreenTech is  private company established in early 2011 with
the aim of improving the cooking fuel supply chain The company produces and
supplies high quality fuel briquettes from groundnut shell residues it also
researches, designs and markets fuel-efficient stoves, allowing end-users to
save time, money and natural resources GreenTech has  briquette production
capacity of 800 kg/hr and supports the production of fuel-efficient stoves made
from recycled metal by local welders GreenTech' innovative stoves also emit less
smoke than the traditional firewood alternative These are especially beneficial
to women and children, who are most involved in the cooking process Fuel
switching from charcoal in an open stove to briquettes in fuel-efficient stoves
can save  family 60% of their cooking fuel cost The briquettes can also be used
in restaurants, canteens or industries using heat from biomass for boilers or
smokeries Nevertheless, GreenTech realised that  lot of effort is still needed
to sensitise and convince potential users of their environmental and economic
advantages The company received the SeeD award in 2011 and has since been
approached by several institutions to present and demonstrate the products,
service and concepts at national and international level This has allowed the
company to become  knowledge hub for biomass briquettes to establish
decentralised, independent sales points For more information visit:  Programme
for the Promotion of Domestic and alternative energies in the Sahel) and was
approved by the cabinet in it was the outcome of four sector studies undertaken
in These focused on household energy consumption, charcoal, charcoal briquetting
from agro-industrial residues and community-based natural resource management
GReC it was locally called Furno Jambar Prior to this period, other improved
cookstoves were promoted, including the metal ring for firewood Local production
of the Furno Jambar in The Gambia started after Construction of  bulk storage
facil- ity for LPG The heS recommended an increased use in alternatives to fuel-
wood given concerns about woody ecosystem degradation LPG was identified as one
of the alternatives in 2009,  new bulk storage facility for petroleum products
of 51 000 tonnes was commissioned including 1000mt for LPG Prior to this period,
all LPG into the country was imported mainly from Senegal using truck tankers
The construction of bulk storage for LPG increased the security and reliability
of based on the heS recommendations in 2006, the mOe has outlined specific
action points, including increased efficiency in the production and utilisation
of forest resources These are as follows:  Promotion and development of improved
cookstoves in 2007, the mOe supported the local produc- tion, testing and
dissemination of the JiKO improved charcoal stove through ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 47 supply, but the high retail price for LPG remains an obstacle ii)
lack of institutional coordination and collaboration among stakeholders and with
financial institutions  Production of groundnut shell briquettes Groundnuts are
The Gambia’ principal agricultural export crop in the 1980s, the Groundnut Shell
briquette Project was initiated and  plant commissioned it converted groundnut
shells into fuel briquettes with  capacity of six tonnes of briquettes per hour
as part of  house- hold energy solution however, the plant was not extensively
used and the proj- ect failed due to household resistance to change This was due
to excessive smoke, stoves unsuited to briquettes, the absence of  widespread,
intensive marketing strategy, and the relatively high cost of briquettes
compared to wood and charcoal (DmCi, 2005) however, most of these problems could
have been solved with commitment and  marketing and awareness-rais- ing strategy
about the advantages of briquettes These include lower energy cost per calorie
of heat provided in 2009, the mOe, the Department of Forestry and GreenTech
Company initiated the re-establishment of  groundnut shell briquetting plant
with the intention of solving these problems (box ) iii) absence of efficient
cookstove stan- dards as well as inadequate aware- ness-building campaigns to
encourage behavioural change in energy usage Some specific areas of intervention
were identified during the RRa Role of the ReneWable eneRgy laW The mOe is
mandated to carry out an impact assessment for the use of biomass for
electricity and other energy purposes (heating, cooling and transport fuel) This
is to take place within one year of the Re act coming into force in The assess-
ment is to include among other things:  The most appropriate use for waste
biomass in relation to cooking fuel  Forestry and agricultural impacts of using
different biomass energy sources for cooking/heating  The feasibility and
economic impacts of using different biomass energy sources This assessment
should mean  strategy for the sustainable use of biomass energy is drafted and
adopted The biomass strat- egy would ensure the sustainable supply of biomass-
based cooking fuel and promote the use of alternative fuel as well as effi-
cient cooking equipment/devices RRA FINdINgS During the RRa, discussion focused
mainly on improved cookstoves and forest/agri- culture waste-based alternative
fuels  number of problems were identified that are specific to the biomass
sector They include: dEvELOP/uPdATE mASTER PLAN FOR FuELWOOd SuPPLy ) the
absence of  clearly defined policy on the use of biomass, including waste
biomass and energy crops for various energy applications The stakeholders felt
that the strategy should lead to the development/update of  master plan for
fuelwood supply 48 The Gambia Source: ministry of energy, The Gambia This should
reinforce the current forest management plans and identify optimal ways to
access/produce alternative fuels at affordable prices it was also suggested that
the strategy should have three main components: have highlighted that the
reluctance of households to use improved cookstoves is not only due to their
cost Other reasons are  lack of financial management and planning skills and
different household spending priorities Yet even when the life cycle cost of
different stoves is assessed, briquettes stoves are more cost-effective than
traditional stoves (GreenTech) ) promotion of improved cookstoves produced
locally; ii) promotion of biomass-based alterna- TEChNOLOgy BARRIERS tive fuel;
and The current stoves need further improve- ment for meeting users’
requirements in terms of cooking time Women complain that cooking with the
improved stoves takes longer compared to open fire stoves GReC could be
designated as technical centre for working with users in designing and testing
improved cookstoves to bring them in line with their design expecta- tions GReC
technical capacity should be built and adapted to the technical chal- lenges
faced by The Gambia end-user need to know more about energy, technol- iii)
stronger sustainable production of fuelwood through community-based wood lot
management ThE NEEd FOR PuBLIC AWARENESS-RAISINg The sector is informally
organised, and this is one of the major barriers preventing the rollout of
improved cookstoves it lacks adequate communication, sensitisation campaigns and
advocacy Some surveys ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 49 ogy and finance to
enable them to adopt new technologies and use existing ones properly This
minimises the burden of high fuel cost and reduces time spent collecting
fuelwood Public communication or local community training could be provided
through outreach workers This aims to expand Re through  variety of delivery
mechanisms and business models introducing these policies is not easy in
country heavily reliant on fossil fuel, with growing demand for electricity and
weak transmission and distribution infrastruc- ture The Gambia is also taking
strong position in its energy policy and strategy to ensure the private sector
plays an impor- tant role in developing the power sector To realise this goal,
The Gambia is preparing  series of regulatory instruments such as  FiT and
bankable PPas to meet Re sector requirements FINANCINg mEChANISmS ARE CRITICAL
improved cookstoves mainstreaming is fraught with challenges many failed exam-
ples testify to this reality in countries where cookstove promotion had
succeeded, there was strong collaboration between policy makers, the private
sector and financial institutions to provide structure and coher- ence in the
sector The stakeholder mix should also include finance organisations such as
microcredit institutions These would be in  position to provide finance to serve
low income groups existing wood retailers can also be used for marketing/
communicating these technologies as they work within  strong national network
WAPP EFFECT West african regional power develop- ment work is progressing with
number of transmission and rehabilitation projects already completed it is
expected that The Gambia will benefit from importing more power than it will
produce domestically Furthermore, Re technologies are likely to play  major role
in developing an inte- grated power pool This is because their share in the
region could amount to as much as 52% in 2030 if the cost of these technologies
continues to fall and fossil fuel prices continue to rise (iReNa, 2013b)
oppoRtunities and constRaints foR scaling up ReneWable eneRgy deployment For
smaller countries like The Gambia, this could mean  reduction in the long-term
marginal cost of power by USD 02–07/kWh (eberhard et al 2011) WaPP could usher
in an era of cheaper and more secure power supply This should be welcome, but
cross-border power transmission will still require considerable investment,
high degree of collective ownership and  new terrain of engage- ment which has
little precedent in africa ALIgNmENT OF ENERgy POLICIES WITh BROAdER dEvELOPmENT
PRIORITIES The Gambia is pushing through  series of energy and development
programmes to improve social and economic development its PaGe has the aim of
accelerating pro- poor growth and generating employment The programme also
reserves ample space and attention to the development of the national
infrastructure, including energy, as  way to meet these goals On the energy
front, The Gambia is now preparing  robust Re law The effect of  highly
interconnected power infrastructure on rural energy services in The Gambia is
uncertain, as most people will continue to rely on decentralised 50 The Gambia
systems There are clear opportunities for The Gambia however, it is important to
carry out  further assessment that consid- ers the real implications of this for
the whole range of energy users The Gambia has an attractive investment
environment in tourism and other develop- ment sectors it needs to broaden this
to the energy sector That means building its own capacity to implement its
policies to promote and support Re The right condi- tions need to be created to
enable local manufacturing and/or assembly of renew- able technologies
ImPORTANCE OF LEAdERShIP Policy makers across africa have been among the last to
embrace Re as  solu- tion to their energy problems They are often locked into
crisis management on  day-to-day basis The country’ policy makers need to be
persuaded that Re has  real future in the energy mix of The Gambia They need to
demonstrate this by their actions The Gambia has already started this process by
setting up  strong policy that includes Re as part of its energy future it is in
the process of building the institutional and legal framework that will help to
deliver this promise ENERgy EFFICIENCy AS  RESOuRCE Limiting energy losses along
the power system chain, , from generation to end-use, is critical This should
form part of The Gambia’ future energy strategy high transmission and
distribution losses (over 30% in The Gambia) worsen the energy security problem
They also deepen suppressed demand Those with the ability to pay will turn to
on-site generators all these have economic, social and environ- mental costs The
success of the Re mission will be judged by what transpires on the ground in
generating tangible results, improving live- lihoods and creating stability in
the energy system The significance of energy efficiency is highlighted in The
Gambia’ 2005 energy Policy however, the country’ struggle with generation and
transmission has side- lined the tangible gains from demand-side measures
investment in end-use energy efficiency technol- intervention or awareness-
raising) ogy increases the availability of system-wide electricity generation
and transmission capacity for other uses The role of the public sector then
becomes critical in balancing the wider medium- term needs of society and
country with short-term measures sufficiently attractive to the private sector
This means build- ing investor confidence by simplifying the business
environment in which investment can flourish, and having clear and transpar- ent
governance (whether through in other words, end-use efficiency can be considered
resource it could provide energy savings comparable to the elec- tricity
generated by power plants Due to the high capital cost of Re technologies, there
are benefits in making demand- side efficiency improvements They yield  greater
impact per unit of investment in renewables  sustainable energy economy thus
requires major commitments to both energy efficiency and Re development One
practical step would be to set out clear mechanisms for calculating the PPa
tariff for renewables This gives potential investors sufficient confidence to
plan and finance projects with  full view of future revenues Future investment
only occurs if there is sufficient confidence that investors today are gaining
good returns ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 51 Source: ministry of energy, The
Gambia age options, robustness of design and social acceptance into
consideration it would help The Gambia develop its off-grid energy strategy
through informed and tailored technical and business models compatible with
local resources, institu- tions and economic factors it would also be useful for
private sector players as it would provide them with updated infor- mation about
various technologies in the context of The Gambia This role could be taken up by
GReC CAPITALISE ON OFF-gRId OPPORTuNITIES, BuILd kNOWLEdgE SySTEmS ANd PLAN
AhEAd Off-grid energy systems can play  signifi- cant role in electrification
programmes in rural areas however, more work is needed to ensure that prices are
competitive and affordable The range of pro-poor financing mechanisms needs to
be tested and evalu- ated with this aim it is therefore important to produce an
inventory of experiences specific to The Gambia in terms of the range of
delivery mechanisms and busi- ness models hIgh COST OF dEBT For any given
project, financial institutions will assess both the risks and returns of the
project each individual risk is analy- sed and studied in terms of managing its
potential impact on the project Different risk categories include country risk,
market risk, business risk, interest rate risk, project risk and foreign
exchange risk The Gambia provides  mixed picture when viewed against these risk
categories however, its banking system has been characterised it is also
important to assess whether the new regulatory and legal frameworks will act as
enablers or obstacles to main- streaming off-grid Re into the energy mix This
process of energy knowledge generation could help develop  dynamic techno-
economic assessment framework for off-grid system design This would take
material sourcing, installation cost, available energy resources, energy stor-
52 The Gambia by high interest rates for some time This is the fiscal policy for
limiting inflation rate increases and maintaining stability in the national
currency at present, the bank loan interest rate stands at 18% This will have an
impact on the evolution of the Re market and the types of market players likely
to play  defining role financing  programme of this kind would need to be seen
as an important national development strategy The Gambia could continue to
encourage external investors by offering an attrac- tive investment environment
such as tax holidays and waivers on import tariffs for components These
investors would, however, expect to set their own prices and would be inclined
to make rapid returns on their investment, and this presents another challenge
moreover, international play- ers who have invested equity in the sector would
expect to cash in their returns in scarce foreign currency while they sell elec-
tricity in The Gambian Dalasi internally Numerous studies show that high
interest rates and relatively short loans add signifi- cant amounts to the cost
of Re invest- ment This situation places The Gambia in  difficult position even
if the cost of debt servicing falls, access to low cost equity and limits on
foreign exchange are likely to present additional medium-term barriers to growth
in the Re sector The value of this longer term engagement is that energy would
be treated as  means to achieving broader development objec- tives The
availability of reliable electricity supplies would translate into wider socio-
economic gains There are  few paths The Gambia can pursue independently or in
collaboration with other partners The Gambia should strengthen its effort to
bring to bear inter- national funds as  means of providing soft loans with
generous repayment terms, low interest rates and flexible timeframes The RRa
identified  large number of issues with decisive implications for the effective
deployment of Re resources in The Gambia Some of these are specific to the five
priority resource-service pairs for scaling up renewable deployment in the
short- to medium-term however, some are generic in nature Section  summarises
the key actions identified by the RRa This can be ring-fenced as  resource that
is exclusively used to boost capac- ity, increase technology visibility, develop
robust institutions and build experience in Re applications The Gambia could
involve its national development bank to finance Re projects with low cost and
longer term ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 53 Source: ministry of energy, The
Gambia 54 The Gambia  SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS The following table
identifies seven recommended action points revealed by the RRa They all apply to
priority resource-service pairs This action is not presented in any order of
prior- ity, and this rapid assessment is unlikely to produce an exhaustive list
of measures needed The detailed list of action can be found in annex  ACTION
STEPS Speed up RE law enactment (by end 2013); include regulation on solar water
heating systems • MOE to seek and obtain written agreement from all stakeholders
on appropriateness, adequacy and suitability of the bill for enactment into law
• MOE to present to cabinet for approval following which it then presents it to
the National assembly for ratification • Law signed into an Act by the President
• MOE ensures all activities needed to be carried by PURa for effective
implementation of the act are duly completed, signed by the minister as
necessary and published Establish standards and labels for RE equipment • Engage
with organisations with similar experience in other countries and regions (
morocco, egypt) • Begin process of developing nationally-specific standards and
labels for different Re equipment • Consult with PURA ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS
aSSeSSmeNT 55 • Engage an RE expert with good track record in research Establish
standards and labels for RE equipment to undertake an evaluation of past GReC
activities and outline lessons learnt • Bring in donor assistance to equip the
centre, and explore mechanisms to obtain adequate continuous funding • Improve
centre staffing and build staff capacity • Establish stronger ties with
university and technical institutes in The Gambia and abroad Assess, update and
validate solar, biomass and wind resource mapping • Undertake  robust gap
analysis of data based on priority areas for Re development • Identify
assessment gaps relating to resource potential • Identify, map and begin
dialogue with stakeholders and existing data collection initiatives for
including in the observatory currently being set up by eCReee • Establish  plan
and protocol for data collection Establish RE Fund and identify sources of
funding • Conduct feasibility study which defines the institutional, management,
administrative and the regulatory frame works of Fund • Develop guidelines for
how fund will be utilised • Initiate engagement with bilateral and multilateral
donor agencies • Establish RE Fund 56 The Gambia • Map out capacity gaps across
MOE, PURA, GREC, NARI, Build capacities of various stakeholders (policy makers,
regulators and the private sector) Rural Development institute (RDi), ReaGam, Re
Fund, private sector manufacturers and equipment suppliers at technical,
management, regulatory and procurement levels • Establish contact with
international agencies and other countries which have developed these
technologies to monitor development of standards and codes for power system
installations • Raise resources for capacity building • Allocate land for RE use
• Incorporate use of land for RE project as priority in the land use policy •
Develop land use maps • Carry out detailed assessment of impact of land
requirements for energy crop production, forestry and food production targets;
identify land tenure rights wherever possible and incorporate into  land use
policy • Identify extent and basis of private company participation in energy
crop production ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 57 VI REFERENCES (african aeO
economic Outlook)(2012),  “Gambia Country Note”, aeO, amCOW (african ministers
Council on Water) (2010), Water supply and sanitation in The Gambia: turning
finance into services for 2015 and beyond, AMCOW Country Status Overview, WSP
(Water and Sanitation Program) World bank, Washington, DC (Development DmCi pp
“household  international) Gambia”, management Consultant (2005), 136, Strategy
energy (heS) The for eberhard, , et al (2011), Africa’ Power Infrastructure:
Investment, Integration and Efficiency, World bank, Washington, DC eCOWaS
(economic Community of West african States) (2013), “Press Communiqué, No 55”,
march 2013,  (accessed June, 2013) eCReee (eCOWaS Centre for Renewable energy
and energy efficiency)(2012), ECOWAS Energy Efficiency Policy, eCReee, Cape
Verde energy Division Office of the President of the Republic of The Gambia
(2005), Renewable Energy Study: Draft Renewable Energy Master Plan – Module
Energy Demand Assessment and Projection, Lahmeyer international Gmbh, bad
Vilbel, pp energy Division Office of the President of the Republic of The Gambia
(2006), Renewable Energy Study: Draft Renewable Energy Master Plan – Module II:
Resource Assessment, Supply Options, Demand-Supply Balance, Economic Study and
Investment Plan, Lahmeyer international Gmbh, bad Vilbel, pp Foster,  and
briceño-Garmendia (2010), Africa’ Infrastructure:  Time for Transformation,
agence Française de Développement and World bank, Washington, DC GeF (Global
environment Facility) and UNiDO (United Nations industrial Development
Organization), “Promoting renewable energy based mini-grids for productive uses
in rural areas of The Gambia”, GeF, Washington DC,
documents/document/-%20ID3922%20Gambia%20Coundil%20Letter%20revpdf Geipel, , et
al(2009), “experience with the electrification of the health Centre of Darsilami
in The Gambia”, Small PV-applications Rural electrification and Commercial Use,
may 2009,  theelectrificationofthehealthcentreofdarsilamiinhtml 58 The Gambia
Government of The Gambia (2011), Integrated Household Survey, Income and
Expenditure Poverty Assessment - 2010, UNDP (United Nations Development
Programme) and Gambia bureau of Statistics, pp Government of The Gambia (2012),
“Rio+20, Republic of The Gambia: National Report 2012”,  imF (international
monetary Fund) (2013), “The Gambia”, IMF Country Report No 13, imF, Washington,
DC iReNa (international Renewable energy agency) (2013a), Renewable Power
Generation Costs in 2012: An Overview, iReNa, abu Dhabi iReNa (2013b), West
African Power Pool: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, iReNa, abu
Dhabi Jarju, , (2008), Fuelwood: Effects of consumption and production on the
general popula- tion and natural resources of The Gambia, NaRi (National
agricultural Research institute), brikama, pp mOa (ministry of agriculture) (),
“Crops of Gambia”  tion/plants-veg-nutshtml (accessed September 2013) mOa
(ministry of agriculture) (2007), Marketing Survey and Market Research for Non-
Timber Forest Product and Alternative Cooking Energy Resources, PiWam
(Participatory integrated Watershed management Project) Project Special studies
on Fuelwood, mOa, banjul ministry of energy (2005), “National energy Policy:
Policies and Strategies”, ministry of energy, banjul,  mid=30 ministry of energy
(2011), Development of Energy Database, ministry of energy, banjul ministry of
energy (2012a), Draft National Investment Program on Access to Energy Services
in The Gambia, ministry of energy, banjul ministry of energy (2012b),
“electricity Strategy and action Plan”, aF–meRCaDOS emi,
-E902ADD45B7D2A452709F9AC4639D7F5/48C1A355-967D-4C62-ABFA- Download
2CD49944EA4B/sites/default/files/files/field_pblctn_file%20Gambia%20-%20
Electricity%20Strategy%20v3-%-pdf Id ministry of Finance and economic affairs
(2002), “Strategy for Poverty Reduction (SPaii) (PRSP)”, pp 166,  ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 59 ministry of Finance & economic affairs (2007), “Poverty
Reduction Strategy ii: ”, imF, Country Report No 07,  ministry of Finance and
economic affairs (2011), Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment ,
ministry of Finance and economic affairs, banjul National Water and electricity
Company (NaWeC) (2012), The NAWEC Annual Report 2011, NaWeC, banjul PURa (Public
Utilities Regulatory authority) (2012), PURA Annual Report 2011, PURa, bakau, pp
Republic of The Gambia (2011), Development of Energy Database, UNDP Support to
the energy & environment Sectors for the attainment of the mDGs and PRSPs
Government of The Gambia, Office Of The President, energy Division (2006a),
Renewable Energy Study for The Gambia: Feasibility Study, Small Scale Wind Park,
Lahmeyer international Gmbh, bad Vilbel, pp Government of The Gambia, Office Of
The President, energy Division (2006b), Renewable Energy Study for The Gambia:
Feasibility Study, Solar Home System Programmme, Lahmeyer international Gmbh,
bad Vilbel, pp United Nations System in The Gambia (2011), Common Country
Assessment Report UNeSCO (United Nations educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization)(2012), eCOWaS eFa Profile, UNeSCO, Dakar Office,
Dakar/pdf/RECProfileECOWAS_ENGpdf World bank (2012), Energy Sector Diagnostic
Review, Government of the Republic of The Gambia World bank (2013a), "Urban
population (% of total)",  SPURBTOTLINZS World bank (2013b), “World Development
indicators: Global Private Financial Flows”,  60 The Gambia VII ANNEX : DETAILED
DESCRIPTION OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS The RRa process identified and recommended
the action below it is not given in any order of priority, and the list of
action points from  rapid assessment is unlikely to be exhaustive This action
could improve the Gambia’ readiness to scale up its renewables deployment it is
designed to be taken in the short- to medium-term, largely through decisions
made by the government of The Gambia Action : Speed up renewable energy law
Action Speed up Re law Resource-service pair() Centralised and decentralised
grid electricity, all Re resources Description The Re bill preparation funded by
the eU energy initiative has just been completed and validated bill enactment
will be initi- ated and followed up by mOe, the line ministry responsible as
with all other bills, this may not require extra funding beyond the normal
budgetary allocation of the implementing agency, mOe mOe is to be responsible
for seeking and obtaining written concurrence of all stakeholders on the bill’
appropriateness, adequacy and suitability for enactment into law it would then
present it to cabinet for approval following which it would present it to the
National assembly for ratification Finally, the ministry will ensure it is
signed into an act by the president The ministry will ensure all the activities
needed to be carried out by PURa to effectively implement the act are duly
completed, signed by the minister as necessary and published This may require
financial expenses beyond the budgetary allocations of the ministry These could
be sought from available potential donor sources Stakeholders mOe, cabinet,
PURa, National assembly, donors and all other stakeholders including ReaGam
ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 61 Timing by end 2013 Keys to success enactment
of the bill will require consensus on the terms of the text its effectiveness
will depend on the extent to which it gives incentives for Re The availability
of funds to support its promulgation will be crucial and will depend in part on
contin- ued engagement with donors Action : Establish standards and labels for
renewable energy equipment Action establish standards and labels for Re
equipment Resource-service pair() Centralised and decentralised grid
electricity, all Re resources Description The Gambia bureau of Standards was
established in however, there are no established standards and labelling
requirements that aim to prevent the sale of unsafe and inef- ficient Re
equipment and technologies The need for standards in Re equipment and
technologies was recognised as early as Solar cook stoves, solar powered water
and wind pumps were developed, promoted and continued to be promoted without any
systematic attempt to standardise/streamline the technologies also, no quality
control was actively introduced, especially for fuel efficiency, to guarantee
satisfaction and avoid  negative reputation One cannot over emphasise the need
for standards and labels for Re equipment as part of  concerted effort to
accelerate deployment of Re resources and technologies Only through
standardisation and labelling is the vendor, manufacturer or importer still
liable for the safety of the Re equipment where testing and/or voluntary
approval has not been sought Stakeholders mOe, the Gambia bureau of Standards,
NaWeC, PURa, ReaGam and potential investors (private companies, utilities and
commercial banks) Timing early 2013 Keys to success engagement with
organisations with similar experience in other countries and regions (, morocco,
egypt) 62 The Gambia 62 The Gambia Action : Revive GREC Action Revive GReC
Resource-servicepair() Centralised Re resources and decentralised grid
electricity, all Description GReC was established in 1987 as the technical arm
of the Doe in the field of Re and energy efficiency its primary function was to
conduct adaptive research in Re, develop and promote the use of Re and energy
efficiency technologies and advise government on Re and energy efficiency Since
its establishment, the centre has organised  series of biannual energy shows and
exhibitions, assessed and tested household energy appliances and carried out
training in Re and energy efficiency appliances it has also conducted sensiti-
sation and communication campaigns and liaised with energy companies however,
due to limited highly-qualified person- nel and equipment the centre has become
dormant Reviving the centre would thus require staffing it with qualified
person- nel supported by an Re expert on  technical assistance basis it would
also mean appropriately equipping it and allocating it an adequate continuous
budget Stakeholders mOe, DOe, PURa and mOFea Timing 2013 Keys to success
engagement of an Re expert with  good track record in research, improved
staffing, donor assistance to equip the centre and ensure adequate continuous
funding ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 63 63
Action : Assess, update and validate solar, biomass and wind resource mapping
Action assess, update and validate solar, biomass and wind resource mapping
Resource-service pair() Wind, solar and biomass for all applications There is at
present  broad understanding of resource avail- ability and potential, but this
is generally not sufficient to enable project development or  comprehensive
assessment of potential Similarly, there is some data collection from actual
projects, but this is not comprehensive or centralised Description Comprehensive
data will facilitate the implementation of the draft renewable energy strategy
and future project develop- ment Particular gaps exist in solar, wind and
biomass; bene- fits could also be gained from an assessment of bioenergy
potential Likely action in implementing  mapping process could include: - engage
with existing initiatives for data collection, including observatory currently
being established by eCReee - identify precise requirements for resource
mapping, based on priority are as for Re development - establish  plan for data
collection - explore the potential for funding ground measurement campaigns with
multilateral/bilateral organisations mOe, NaWeC, eCReee, project developers,
GReC, NaRi, DWR and donors Stakeholders mid-2013 for definition of requirements
and protocol, on going for data collection Timing Technical and human resources
available for data collec- tion, identify and secure funds for data collection,
establish  protocol for sharing data Keys to success 64 The Gambia Action :
Establish renewable energy fund and identify funding sources Action establish Re
fund and identify sources of funding Resource-service pair() biomass, wind and
solar for all applications Description One of the key objectives of the
government’ energy policy is to widen the population’ access to modernised forms
of energy so as to stimulate development and reduce poverty Communities who do
not have access to the electricity network are one of the main groups with
potential to bene- fit from renewable electricity support however, community
investment in the Gambia presents serious challenges it is difficult for
communities to access finance and develop the skills and knowledge required
Similarly factors like high initial costs, high private lending costs,
commercial sustainability of members of ReaGam and financial and technical
performance risks have limited the rapid expansion of enterprises This is
compounded by the lack of  fully transparent framework for private sector
investment establishing the Re fund providing soft loans, capital subsi- dies
and other financial incentives for renewable generation projects as outlined in
the draft Re law will thus be an essen- tial it will drive the acceleration of
renewables deployment in the short- to medium-term The government should
identify specific internal sources of funding and lobby financial and
development partners to further support the fund Stakeholders mOe, mOFea, donor
community, cabinet, National assembly and iReNa Timing mid-2014 Keys to success
Feasibility study to identify internal niches of funding that could support the
Re fund along with consultation with key bilateral and multilateral donor
agencies to further support the fund ReNeWabLeS ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 65 Action :
Build stakeholder capacity (policy makers, regulator and the private sector)
Action build stakeholder capacity (policy makers, regulator and the private
sector) Resource-service pair() Off-grid and on-grid services, wind and solar
resources Description The Gambia appears to have  shortage of relevant skills
for the power sector inadequate technical skills are felt at all levels:
engineers, mechanics and technicians Often these skills are recruited from
outside the country, from the wider eCOWaS region or German, Lebanese or French
expats GeG employs around 60 expats, for example The mOe, NaWeC and PURa have
also expressed  need for more capacity in the power sector The mOe includes
“capac- ity building for mOe, NaWeC and other stakeholders” as part of its draft
Strategic Plan 2010-Specific capacity-build- ing programmes are not identified
management and project finance training may be beneficial, particularly for
managing iPP processes Furthermore, capacity building at the management, regula-
tory and procurement level will be important for mOe, NaWeC and PURa, as they
lead and manage the transition to  fit-for- purpose power system UTG and
technical training institutions will play  key role in continuously working with
government and private sector to deliver capacity-building and training
activities at several levels: • At the academic level with the development of
master programmes and the training of engineers, designers, etc • At the
professional level, with their support in the capacity-building activities for
professionals (installers etc) • At the grassroots level, by supporting
awareness campaigns 66 The Gambia Stakeholders mOe, PURa, GReC, NaRi, RDi,
ReaGam, Re Fund, private sector manufacturers and suppliers of equipment, other
tech- nical, vocational institutes and the UTG and iReNa Timing From 2013 Keys
to success Capacity-building activities and training programmes are essential to
developing  national industry establishing contact with international agencies
and other countries which have developed these technologies will be important
This will help monitor the development of standards and codes for power system
installations Action : Allocate land for renewable energy use Action allocate
land for Re use Resource-service pair () Solar, wind and biomass for on-
grid/off-grid electricity Description Given the small size of the country,
developing Re plants will mean setting up  robust procedure in consultation with
all relevant stakeholders to allocate land suitable potential for the developing
Re power plants Stakeholders mOe, ministry of Local Government & Lands and its
technical departments of Community Development, Physical Planning and Lands and
Surveys, mOFeN, Tourism Development authority (TDa), legal advisor, NaRi and
NGOs including ReaGam Timing by end of 2014 Keys to success - identifying and
responding to public concern relating to land use allocation and associated
conflicts - inclusive participation of all stakeholders throughout the review -
an understanding of the need for land use policy and its implications ReNeWabLeS
ReaDiNeSS aSSeSSmeNT 67 IRENA Secretariat Ci Tower, Khalidiya (32nd) Street  box
236, abu Dhabi United arab emirates  Copyright © iReNa 2013