Table of Contents:  Programme rationale  : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships   : Page:  III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV
Monitoring and evaluation : Page:  DP/DCP/GMB/  Programme rationale  The Gambia
has enjoyed two decades of relative peace and  stable political environment,
despite two failed attempted coups, in 2006 and The Gambia Human Development
Index value increased from 330 to 441 between 1990 and 2014, reflecting progress
towards the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, with goal 22 and
goal 43 achieved by Its long-term ‘Vision 2020’, developed in 1996, sets the
goal of attaining middle-income status by Three medium-term development plans4
have not generated the growth required for the achievement of middle-income
status, as economic reforms are affected by policy slippages and other shocks
The successor plan being formulated is aligned to Vision 2020, the sustainable
development goals, and ‘Agenda 2063’ of the African Union  Poverty, inequality
and exclusion are challenges in the Gambia due to: limited productive natural
resources; limited resilience capacities to climate change and external shocks;
disproportionate distribution of growth benefits between urban and rural areas;
limited employment opportunities for youth and women; restrictive productive
assets for women; limited institutional capacity for oversight; and absence of
state-supported welfare programmes and social safety-nets   poverty headcount in
2010 indicated that per cent of the population lived below the poverty line of
$25 per day The multidimensional poverty index, 2013, shows that per cent of
people are poor10 while an additional per cent live near multidimensional
poverty, with marked disparities and inequalities among regions11 and genders
Over per cent of the rural population lives below the poverty line, against per
cent for urban population Inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient,
remains high, at 46 in 2010,12 and unchanged due to limited comprehensive social
protection programmes to address inequality Growth averaged  per cent over the
last five years,13 while the unemployment rate was per cent, with women (per
cent) and youth (38 per cent) affected disproportionately14 Low productivity
across sectors is due to the high illiteracy rate (48 per cent) and limited
professional skills,15 resulting in  dearth of employment, income-generating
opportunities, and distributive income16 – which perpetuates exclusion,
especially among rural women and youth  The World Bank Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment indicated  deterioration of the policy and
institutional environment with the decline of the rating of the Gambia from  in
2011 to  in 17 The Gambia is on the list of fragile states, 2016,18 due largely
to weak institutional capacity for effective economic management19 and limited
policy coherence The midterm review of  Human Development Report, Gross
enrolment rate reached per cent in 2015: per cent for girls and 99 per cent for
boys Millennium Development Goals status report, Infant and child mortality
rates dropped to 34 and 54 per 1000, respectively, against the target of 42 and
per ,000 births by Millennium Development Goals status report, The most recent
national development plan is the programme for growth and employment, , extended
to Real per capita gross domestic product was around $ 271 in 2014, far off
track to achieve middle-income status by Sustainable development goals launched
nationally, and initial prioritization of the goals completed through
consultation process (2015 report)  Rural poverty rate of , against urban
poverty of per cent (Multidimensional poverty study, 2015)  In the Gambia, per
cent of women lack land ownership, against for men (Gambia Demographic and
Health Survey, 2013)  Fifty-six per cent of the labor force is categorized as
working poor (labour force survey, 2012) Source for income poverty: integrated
household survey, Poverty declined from 58% in 2003 to % in 10 The
multidimensional poverty index measures deprivation at household level on
dimensions of education, health and living standards Scoring is based on
weighted indicators for each dimension, using ten indicators and  cut-off 33 per
cent was taken as poverty line Households with total weighted scores above /,
are multi- dimensionally deprived (poor) Households with  score below / are non-
deprived 11 UNDP study on multidimensional poverty, The two most impoverished
regions are Kuntaur (90 per cent) and Janjanbureh (85 per cent) Basse has the
largest number of poor people 12 Integrated household survey report, volume , 13
Gambia Bureau of Statistics, national income accounts data, 14 Labour force
survey, 15 Labor force survey, 16 Programme for accelerated growth and
employment, midterm review, 2014 (supported by UNDP) 17 Country Policy and
Institutional Assessment, Gambia report, 18 World Bank harmonized list of
countries in fragile situations, recent study by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) indicated that fiscal policies and institutions have played  significant
role in building resilience in sub-Saharan African countries during  Economic
management challenges have resulted in  widening fiscal deficit, which was
around 11 per cent of gross domestic product in 2014, largely financed by  /13
DP/DCP/GMB/ the Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment revealed weak
economic management, minimal alignment between priority areas and resources
allocation, and low outcome-level results; further constricting growth, with
negative impact on poverty and employment20 In 2015, the Government recognized
the institutional weakness and established the Ministry of Planning and Policy
to separate the planning functions from the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Affairs and create coherence between the different arms of the state  The impact
of climate change is high in agriculture, which is still heavily dependent on
rainfall 21 The contribution of agriculture to the economy contracted from 29
per cent in the 1980s to 23 per cent in 2015, leading to  downturn in economic
growth Climate change also affects the tourism, fisheries and forestry sectors,
limiting opportunities for economic diversification Vulnerability to sea-level
rise22 puts pressure on the environment and livelihoods of coastal communities23
Environmental degradation, loss of biodiversity, and deforestation – coupled
with limited adaptive capacity – are leading the economy along an unsustainable
development pathway24 Limited access of women25 and youth them
disproportionately Livelihood opportunities to the increasing youth population
in the rural areas could curtail migration to urban areas and other countries26
resources and decision-making opportunities have affected to productive  The
United Nations Development Assistance Framework midterm review, 2014, indicated
that progress had been made in deepening democratic governance but significant
challenges remained The slow pace of reforms has constrained citizen
participation in decision-making, particularly concerning women,27 anti-
corruption and accountability, and promotion of rule of law and human rights,
while hampering implementation of the decentralization policy and strategies for
improved economic and political governance, as illustrated by the evaluation of
the civil service reform programme28  Women and girls suffer disproportionately
from deprivation due to social and traditional norms and practices, as
manifested by  high prevalence of female genital mutilation (76 per cent), child
marriage29 and female high-school dropout rates30 UNDP advocates strong policy
and legislative gender equality frameworks and women’ empowerment in decision-
making processes  The Independent Elections Commission organizes periodic
elections However, the country could benefit from widening the political space
and participation UNDP has shown comparative advantage in improving the
efficiency of the judiciary through innovative mobile legal aid clinics,
decentralized legal aid services, and  dispute resolution secretariat for
accessible dispensation of justice31 Support for performance audit at the
National Audit Office, the Joint Public Accounts Committee and the Public
Enterprise Committee at the National Assembly have strengthened the
accountability frameworks, promoting economic governance  UNDP contributed to
addressing challenges identified by the midterm review of the country programme
action plan, , and the midterm review of the Programme for Accelerated Growth
and Employment, UNDP support to policy formulation and its development of
sectoral plans improved coordination and monitoring of the medium-term planning
frameworks Support to the national Millennium Development Goals status reporting
and development forums, and strengthening domestic debt, pushing the country
into macroeconomic imbalances The wage bill and interest payments climbed above
70 per cent of the total budget, reducing funds available for development IMF
report, September The high interest rate of treasury bills (above 20 per cent)
has reduced private sector accessibility to credit/finance (- per cent) in
African Economic Outlook, 20 Programme for Accelerated Growth and Employment,
midterm review, October 21 More than 98 per cent of agricultural lands in the
Gambia are rain-fed, making the sector highly vulnerable to rainfall variability
22 It is estimated that  one-meter rise in sea level will inundate about  per
cent of total land area 23 Common Country Assessment 24 To address this
challenge, the Government formulated  national climate change policy in 25 Women
account for only  per cent parliament seats, according to the MDG status report,
2014 26 According to Eurostat data, over 12, 000 Gambian migrants requested
asylum in 27 Women represent  per cent in parliament and below 20 per cent in
local councils 28 Terminal evaluation of public service reform and institutional
strengthening, 2012 29 Gambia Demographic and Health Survey 2013: Median age for
first marriage is years Women  years old, married 30 MDG status report of the
Gambia, 2014 31 Gambia Ministry of Justice, annual report of the National Agency
for Legal Aid and the Alternative Dispute Resolution Secretariat, 2015-11875 /13
DP/DCP/GMB/ statistics, contributed to effective pro-poor policies and
strategies formulation32 Support to the social sector public expenditure review
led to the preparation of the social protection policy UNDP and the African
Union facilitated the development of the African development gender index33
UNDP, in partnership with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, supported preparation of the Human Rights Commission Act, the
Universal Periodic Review report, 2014, and national compliance with special
procedures Institutionalization of the value-added tax, in partnership with the
International Monetary Fund and World Bank, led to an increase in tax revenue
collection34 Future support should focus on improving expenditure management,
restoring macroeconomic stability, and developing policies and programmes to
address the needs of rural women and unemployed youths In collaboration with the
Government, UNDP piloted the Songhai project through South-South cooperation and
replicated the model, where 165 jobs have been created Forty-five young people
were trained in self-employed oriented skills, and 256 hectares of land
transformed for productive use Forty per cent of the beneficiaries were women
Although the Gambia is one of the least-aided countries,35 the UNDP comparative
advantage in economic and political governance, human capital development,
poverty eradication and resilience development proved effective in mobilizing
resources for programming, while effective collaboration on policy reform (with
the World Bank, the IMF and other United Nations partners) improved development
effectiveness Continued support, informed by analytical studies in institutional
strengthening and development of pro-poor policies and strategies, positioned
UNDP as  major thought leader in policy dialogue and capacity development, and
as  coordinator for international agendas such as the sustainable development
goals Lessons learned from past support have contributed to the design of the
proposed country programme The proposed programme is underpinned by the logic of
accelerating inclusive, sustainable economic growth, reinforced by  holistic
resilience-building approach that promotes sustainable management of the
economy, natural resources, and the environment, through capacity-building of
national institutions and communities, focusing on selected strategic areas with
multiplier effects The development of evidence-based policies, rooted in lessons
from downstream interventions, will be prioritized to promote growth,
inclusiveness and empowerment of women, youth36 and the rural poor, through
skills development, employment creation, income generation and resilience-
building, using innovative approaches Important components are governance reform
and partnership-building to open financial space with renewed inflows of
private-sector investment; official development assistance and foreign direct
investment to supplement domestic resources to accelerate inclusive growth; and
implementation of sustainable development goals II Programme priorities and
partnerships UNDP, in alignment with the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework, , and the UNDP strategic plan, 2014–2017, will focus on: () inclusive
economic growth and poverty eradication; () governance and human rights; and ()
environment and resilience development UNDP will leverage its comparative
advantage by addressing the root causes of vulnerability37 to accelerate growth,
build resilience and promote good governance while complementing the efforts of
the United 32 The national human development report, focused on youth
employment, has led to  youth agenda in the policy sphere as well as the review
and reformulation of the youth policy and strategy of the country 33 Includes
gender equality and women’ empowerment in legal and institutional frameworks 34
Tax to gross domestic product ratio increased from 15 per cent in 2007 to 17 per
cent in 2015 (UNDP 2015), Gambia policy brief on domestic resources
mobilization, 35 According to the 2011 report of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, the Gambia is among the top ten least-aided
countries Only  few donor entities, such as the European Commission, the IMF and
the United Nations are resident in country 36Youth, according to the national
youth policy, are  years of age 37 Weak institutions for economic and social
service provisions, weak governance systems, frequent extreme weather events,
lack of integrated early-warning and disaster risk management system, limited
endowment of natural resources, and high population growth  /13 DP/DCP/GMB/
Nations country team The strategic choices are in line with the broad objectives
of the post-2015 agenda, Agenda 2063 of the African Union, and the Istanbul
Programme of Action The small size of the country office and limited resources,
both human and financial, dictate that the programme adopts  more focused
approach The midterm reviews demonstrated that UNDP contributed to the
formulation of  climate-resilient strategy and adoption of sustainable
agricultural practices for small-scale producers, rehabilitation of mangrove
ecosystems, and coastal protection and early-warning systems for better planning
and management of climate-related disasters and shocks UNDP supported the
enactment of legislation and the formulation of policy frameworks to integrate
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation into national policies and
promote renewable energy Inclusive economic growth and poverty eradication UNDP
will address the poverty, inequality and exclusion nexus, providing both
upstream and downstream support and building on current programme cycle
achievements: evidence-based planning, livelihoods and employment promotion;
inclusive growth; and social protection In collaboration with the World Bank,
the IMF and African Development Bank, UNDP will support the recently created
Ministry of Planning and Policy and the Gambia Bureau of Statistics UNDP will
work with key ministries to align resources with national priorities, and
assessment risks to the achievement of national development objectives, and will
mobilize resources UNDP will prepare high-quality analytical products – the
National Human Development Report, the sustainable development goals status
report, and other relevant studies This will enhance the environment for
evidence-based policy planning, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation, in line
with the sustainable development goals The capacity of relevant institutions
will be strengthened to design and implement skills and entrepreneurship
development to sustainably lift target groups out of poverty in the Central
River and Western Regions UNDP will institutionalize and harness the linkage
between skills development and export promotion; and strengthen linkages with
microfinance institutions to help local communities to produce, add value, and
support diversification of the economy in partnership with UNCDF In reducing
poverty and inequality, UNDP will assist the implementation of the social
protection policy and strategy by implementing  comprehensive social protection
programme targeting the most vulnerable children, women and youth, in line with
the sustainable development goals objective of leaving no one behind This will
contribute to the attainment of goals1, , 10 and interventions38 for increased
employment and productivity, Governance and human rights This programme will
consolidate governance-related reforms, strengthening national institutions to
promote the culture of democracy, human rights, access to justice, anti-
corruption through improved accountability and transparency, and the rule of
law, using innovative approaches to reach the poorest UNDP will focus on the
nexus between political and economic governance to achieve improved economic
management for poverty eradication through bilateral and multilateral
relationships, with positive consequences for foreign direct investment,
business growth and government revenue UNDP will support access to justice by
strengthening capacities of enforcement authorities in justice delivery and
human rights institutions to provide services, enlarge citizen participation in
decision-making and elections, and uphold the rule of law, tapping into its
global network through South-South and triangular cooperation Building upon
lessons learned from the  cycle, this programme will deepen the foundations for
coordinated delivery of high-quality justice services to the poor, focusing on
children and women through legal aid and assessments of development results
UNDP, in collaboration with United Nations organizations, development partners
and civil society 38 Selected interventions from the Empretec and Songhai
initiatives will be scaled up to reach more unemployed youths and women  /13
DP/DCP/GMB/ organizations, will strategically leverage its position as  neutral
convening entity to dialogue and advocate on sensitive issues, governance risks
and mitigation strategies Support to promoting gender equity and women’
empowerment will focus on the implementation of policies through  joint Gambia
Government-United Nations system programme UNDP will continue to advocate for
implementing the national human rights commission act and support human rights
monitoring mechanisms The programme will support citizen participation and
strengthen capacities of oversight and accountability institutions, the National
Council for Civic Education, and the Association of Non- Governmental
Organizations Support for implementing the citizen engagement framework will
target the media and emphasize providing voice to women and excluded groups
Implementation of the decentralization policy and strategy will be prioritized
for capacity-building This pillar will contribute to the attainment of
sustainable development goals  and Environment and resilience development UNDP
will support the application of evidence-based policymaking for increased
resilience; improved absorptive, adaptive and transformative capacities of at-
risk communities; and the establishment of appropriate, coordinated and timely
responses to risks and shocks UNDP will lead the climate change and resilience-
building agenda while forging effective partnerships within national and
international frameworks39 The support will enable the Government to implement
the national climate change policy, 2015, and the Paris Agreement reached at the
twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties, and promote natural
resources management and the roll-out of the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative, the disaster risk reduction policy and strategy, , and the renewable
energy policy UNDP will strengthen national capacity to assess, respond to and
coordinate disaster and climate risk management The programme will support
implementation of the national biodiversity strategy and action plan, and
strengthen protected areas management, sustainable use of natural resources and
reforestation of degraded lands through the land use policy UNDP will support
the mainstreaming into development plans of low emissions, climate resilience,
risk assessment and management; development of early warning systems; and
implementation of priority mitigation and adaptation measures to reduce
vulnerability across key sectors UNDP support will enhance the effectiveness of
post-disaster recovery; the rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems and watering
points; and construction of climate-resilient infrastructure The development of
climate readiness plan will be critical for resource mobilization UNDP will
introduce innovative production techniques linked to agricultural value chains
to facilitate local communities’ adaptation to climate change The programme will
engage the private sector in issues of natural resources management UNDP will
provide catalytic support to assist the Gambia in accessing the Green Climate
Fund and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) to implement its national
obligations,40 while strengthening dialogue and exploring funding opportunities
with Qatar, the European Commission and the Government of Japan South-South and
triangular cooperation will be explored for community-based poverty reduction,
renewable energy and  green economy The pillar will contribute to the attainment
of sustainable development goals12, 13, 15 and Building on the experience gained
during the Millennium Development Goals period, and leveraging its leading role
in the Development Partners’ Group, UNDP will strategically support the roll-out
of the sustainable development goals,41 working with the Government, civil
society organizations, the private sector, United Nations organizations and
development partners 39 Sustainable development goals, multilateral
environmental agreements, the Montreal Protocol and Capacity 40 The obligations
include the Rio conventions: the United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity, the United Nations Conventions to Combat Desertification and the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 41 Key
sustainable development goals to which the country programme will contribute: ,
, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and  /13 DP/DCP/GMB/ III Programme and risk management The
country programme will be nationally executed in collaboration with key national
counterparts to ensure ownership, leadership and accountability for the
realization of UNDP support for achieving development results Different
implementation, non- governmental organizations and direct UNDP implementation,
or combinations thereof – will be selected to maximize efficiency, flexibility
of operations, and effective UNDP contributions to development results
Implementing partners will be selected with  view to building sustainability and
based on comparative advantages and capacity assessments When required, UNDP
will provide necessary support to national implementing partners to address
capacity gaps Fast-track procedures can be adopted to provide timely response to
crisis situations and respond efficiently to emerging demands for UNDP support
implementation modalities – national For both national and direct
implementation, and pursuant to Executive Board decision 2013, cost definitions
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged
to the concerned projects UNDP is committed to implementing harmonized cash
transfer principles in coordination with relevant United Nations partners Using
these procedures, including macro and micro assessment, will mitigate the risk
of insufficient implementation capacity UNDP will ensure that the country office
has adequate human capacity, structures, and management systems, to implement
the country programme successfully The financial sustainability plan will be
reviewed regularly for best use of resources and optimal management ratios The
country office will effectively collect host government contributions to
increase its delivery capacity in accordance with government contributions
towards local office costs guidelines 42 Staff capacities will be developed
through continuous training and exchange programmes The country office will use
resources such as those of the Regional Service Centre to expand capacity to
deliver on its programme, and will employ innovative approaches such as
attracting young, talented graduates through internships to augment staff
capacity Economic and political dynamics and uncertainties are likely to
continue, exposing programme implementation to considerable risks, including:
limited resource mobilization potential, given donor concerns over the
governance record of the Gambia; high attrition rates within the Government, and
brain drain, loss of institutional memory and limited continuity, which
exacerbate the already weak capacities of implementing partners, and possible
disruptions in programme implementation due to the planned National Assembly and
local elections The country office will formulate  contingency plan to respond
to electoral risks and will regularly update the business continuity plan Based
on the Gambia Intended National Determined Contribution, UNDP will support
policy reforms to reduce the impact of climate change In relation to resource
mobilization-related risks, the country office will identify new and innovative
sources of finance43 and support the Government in identifying domestic sources,
including through efficiency gains in resource allocation and utilization The
country office will strengthen project quality assurance and social and
environmental safeguards for sustainability, and reemphasize integrated,
flexible, innovative programme design, systems of data collection, and evidence-
based results reporting and communication to address lessons learned and scale
up best practices This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to
national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
the country level Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the
UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures, and the internal control
framework 42 Government contributions towards local office costs have been
collected partially during the current country programme The country office will
put in place  mechanism for full payment of future costs in the Gambia 43 The
country office will work with emerging donors such as China to explore options
for cooperation while targeting thematic funds such as the European Commission
Migration Fund, GEF and the Green Fund  /13 DP/DCP/GMB/ IV Monitoring and
evaluation Guided by  results-based management approach, the country programme
monitoring and evaluation platform44 will be aligned with the monitoring and
evaluation framework of the United Nations Development Framework and the
national system Most of the data to monitor UNDP support at the outcome level is
sourced from national systems45 UNDP, collaborating with partners,46 will
strengthen national statistical capacity This will enable the country to monitor
its own national development plan and report on progress towards the sustainable
development goals and United Nations Development Assistance Framework and
country programme outcome-level indicators The country office will strengthen
in-house capacity for data collection, analysis and utilization to track the
contribution of the programme to transformative change At  east  per cent of
programme resources will be earmarked to cover costs of monitoring, evaluation
and relevant studies The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor country
programme expenditures and improve planning and decision-making The new country
programme will intensify efforts in monitoring and operationalizing real -time,
specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and trackable gender-disaggregated
data collection for continuous assessment of UNDP contributions communication
strategy linked to the partnership and resource mobilization strategies will be
formulated to increase the transparency, visibility and impact of UNDP
interventions, and thought leadership in priority programme areas United Nations
Development Assistance Framework outcome boards will oversee and continually
track the progress of United Nations and UNDP contributions to achieving
outcomes, adjusting the strategies of the country programme accordingly The
United Nations inter-agency monitoring and evaluation group will monitor overall
performance and testing of the theories of change The country office will
conduct evaluations to determine progress, identify lessons and challenges, and
offer solutions Projects will undergo systematic reviews to ensure environmental
and social safeguards 44 Within the country programme and as part of the
monitoring and evaluation system, multi-year, issues-based policy research and
studies will be commissioned through think tanks, universities and the private
sector to test underlying theories of change The findings will contribute to
learning and adjustments to the programme strategies and outputs 45 Preliminary
assessment of the data for sustainable development goals reporting in the Gambia
shows that about 36 per cent of the data was available for monitoring Millennium
Development Goals progress over the last 15 years For the already-finalized 100
goals indicators, there is limited up-to-date data Thirty-two per cent have data
less than  years old (UNDP policy brief: Data gap to implement and monitor SDGs
2015) 46 World Bank, IMF, African Development Bank and other United Nations
organizations  /13  /   Annex Results and resources framework for the Gambia ()
National priority or goal:  and  Accelerating and sustaining economic growth,
agriculture and natural resources for food security United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF) outcomes  and  By 2021, accelerated inclusive and
sustainable economic growth to reduce poverty and inequality for the vulnerable
groups Related strategic plan outcome  Growth and development are inclusive and
sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and
livelihoods for the poor and excluded Data source, frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities Indicative resources by outcome (in thousands of $) UNDAF
outcome indicators, baselines, and targets Indicative country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines, and targets) Major partners, partnerships and
frameworks Indicator  Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth,  Baseline: %
(2016) Target: % Ministry of Youth and Sports Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Employment (MOTIE) Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs (MOFEA) Department
of Social Welfare Ministry of Energy (MOE) Data source: Regular $,000 Output
National and subnational institutions enabled transformation of productive to
achieve structural capacities that are sustainable and employment- and
livelihoods- intensive National accounts Annual project reports Indicator
Number of gender-sensitive strategies, in place at the national and sub-national
levels to generate and strengthen employment and livelihoods Baseline:
sectoral;  regional strategies47 Target:  sectoral;  regional strategies Other
$,000  Indicator  Percentage of population below $75 per day (‘poverty
headcount’) Baseline: % (2010) Target: 20% Integrated Household Survey Indicator
Number of schemes that expand and diversify the productive base Baseline:
central;  urban;  rural48 Target:  central;  urban;  rural Indicator : Real GDP
per capita Baseline: $271 (2014) Target: $,250 (Vision 2020) National accounts
Indicator  Number of new jobs and other livelihoods generated, disaggregated by
sex and age Baseline: 700 men; 600 women; 600 youth; Total: ,100 Target: ,000
men; ,000 women; ,000 youth; Total: ,000 Indicator : Unemployment rate, ages
Baseline: National, %; rural, , urban, % Male: %, Female: %, 2012 Target: 10%
Labour force surveys Output  Options enabled and facilitated for inclusive and
sustainable social protection Indicator  Proportion of vulnerable children,
women and youth receiving social protection support, disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 50,000 (29, 000 women, 10,000 youth) 49 Target: 220,000 (100,000
women, 120,000 youth)50 Output  Capacity of national and subnational-level
improved basic institutions strengthened to deliver         /  / 47 Data source:
Government budget and MOTIE reports Frequency: annual 48 Data source: Government
budget and sectoral reports Frequency: annual 49 Estimated based on the
assumption that only  per cent of the total vulnerable groups as per the SP
policy are covered currently 50 Source: Social Protection Survey report
Frequency: every two years /   -              /    /   Gambia Bureau of
Statistics Ministry of Planning and Policy MOFEA services, strategies and plans
formulate pro-poor and gender-sensitive / / Indicator  Number of national and
subnational governments with functioning planning, budgeting and monitoring
systems Baseline:  51 Target: 652 Indicator  Number of national statistical
surveys that produced informed, gender-sensitive policies and plans Baseline:
253 Target:  National priority or goal: improving governance and fighting
corruption UNDAF outcome  Institutional reforms implemented to ensure rule of
law and guarantee the protection of the human rights of all, including access to
justice, gender equality, access to basic services, and democratic participation
in decision-making processes Related strategic plan outcome  Citizen
expectations for voice, development, the rule of law, and accountability, are
met by stronger systems of democratic governance Indicator  Governance index: Mo
Ibrahim ratings, and World Bank country policy and institutional assessment
(CPIA) Baseline: Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG): (2014) CPIA: (2015)
Target: IIAG: 55; CPIA:  (2021) Ministry of Justice Gambia Press Union National
Council for Civic Education Coalition on Elections Development partners
Independent Electoral Commission Inter-party Advisory Committee National
Assembly Association of Non- Governmental Organizations (TANGO) Joint Public
Accounts Committee Public Enterprise Committee Data source Output  Electoral
institutions enabled to perform core functions for improved accountability,
participation and representation, including for peaceful transitions Regular
$,500 Ibrahim Index on African Governance Frequency: annual Indicator
Proportion of eligible registered voters, disaggregated by sex Baseline:
Presidential elections, 82%; National Assembly, 50%; local government, 12% ()54
Target: Presidential, 88%; National Assembly, 65%; local government, 40% ()
Other $,000 Universal Periodic review Frequency: annual Indicator : Voter
turnout Baseline: 70% Target: 85% Number of women participating as Indicator
candidates in local and national elections Baseline: 20 for local government,
/48 for national assembly55 Target: 40 for local government; 15 for national
assembly Voter registration database and election results (Independent Electoral
Commission) Indicator : Percentage of women serving in local councils, national
assembly Baseline: %; Local government areas (LGAs): 12% Target: 20); LGAs: 30%
51 MOFEA and MOTIE 52 Two national institutions (Ministry of Policy and Planning
and MOFEA) and four subnational institutions 53 Rating scale of -: =low; =below
average; =average; =above average; =high 54 Data source: Independent Electoral
Commission reports Frequency: annual 55 Data source: National Council for Civic
Education Frequency: annual   -        /   Data source Output  Enhanced
institutional capacity of the justice system to deliver accessible, efficient
and accountable justice to all, especially women and vulnerable groups Reports
by Women’ Bureau Annual report of the National Assembly Ministry of Justice
report Annual report of the National Assembly Indicator  Number of legal aid
centres established Baseline:  Target:  Indicator  Number of beneficiaries,
particularly women and vulnerable groups, using legal aid centres, disaggregated
by sex Baseline: 672 cases, 40% women Target: ,000 cases, 60% women Output
Frameworks developed for effective and including transparent engagement of civil
society, women’ organizations, in national development Indicator  Number of
civil society organizations, including women’ organizations, using open
platforms and networks to engage in national and local governance and decision-
making processes Baseline: 256 Target:  Output  Strengthened operational
capacities of oversight and accountability institutions actively engaged in the
public sphere Indicator  Number of backlogged audit reports and performance
reports produced by National Audit Office Baseline:  audit reports; 40
performance reports Target:  audit reports;  performance reports National
priority or goal: Accelerating and sustaining economic growth UNDAF outcome  By
2021, National institutions and community capacities are strengthened for
effective disaster risk management, climate change response actions and
resilience Related strategic plan outcome  Countries are able to reduce the
likelihood of conflict, and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from
climate change Indicator  Number of institutions responsible for disaster risk
management supported with human resource capacity-building Baseline:  Target:
NDMA National Environment Agency Gambia Red Cross Society Concern Universal MOE
Ministry of Environment Ministry of Local Government Output  Preparedness
systems to effectively address the consequences of and response to natural
hazards57 Regular $,500 National Disaster Management Agency (NDMA) yearly
progress reports to Government Indicator  Number of end-to-end early warning
systems for man-made and natural hazards Baseline:  Target:  Indicator  Number
of contingency plans at national and sub-national level to prepare for and
recover from disaster events with adequate financial and human resources, Other
$30,000         /  Gambia progress report to the UNFCCC; INDC report / /   -
56 Data source: report of TANGO Frequency: annual 57 Geo-physical, climate
related and man-made crisis at all levels of government and community         /
/   capacities and operating procedures Baseline:  Target:  Central,  regional
plans / Indicator  Per-capita carbon dioxide emission (metric tons) Baseline:
Target: 01 Reports from the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change, Forestry,
Water and Wildlife / Indicator  Existence of clearly defined institutional
responsibilities and multi-stakeholder coordination mechanisms for disaster and
climate risk management at national and subnational levels Baseline: At national
level58 Target: National,  regional, 48 districts Indicator  Percentage of the
at-risk population covered by national and community level contingency plans for
disaster events59 Baseline: 15% (% women) Target: 50% (25% women) Output
Gender-responsive disaster and climate risk management integrated into the
development planning and budgetary frameworks of key sectors60 Indicator  Number
of districts with plans or strategies for enhanced resilience to climate change
impacts Baseline:  Target:  Output  Scaled-up actions on climate change
adaptation and mitigation implemented Indicator  Number of systems in place to
monitor, report and verify use of climate finance Baseline: 261 Target:
Indicator  Number of comprehensive plans, strategies, policies and programmes
implemented to achieve low- emission and climate-resilient development
objectives Baseline: 362 Target:  Output  Inclusive and sustainable solutions
adopted to achieve increased renewable energy access and efficiency63 Indicator
Number of new development partnerships for improved, efficient and sustainable
energy solutions targeting underserved communities/groups and women Baseline:
164 58 Data source: NDMA and water resources reports Frequency: annual 59
Evacuation procedures, stockpiles, search and rescue, communication protocols
and recovery preparedness plans 60 Water, agriculture, health and education 61
Data source: NDMA, Department of Water Resources (DWR) reports Frequency: annual
62 Data source: NDMA, DWR reports Frequency: annual 63 Off-grid renewable energy
64 Data source: sectoral reports Frequency: annual   -        /   Target:
Indicator  Proportion of population with access to energy Baseline: 37%65
Target: 76% Output : Capacities of national and subnational administrations
enabled to enhance conservation, sustainable management, and use of natural
resources, biodiversity and ecosystems Ministry of Environment, Climate Change,
Water, Wildlife and Fisheries National Environment Agency Indicator  Number of
communities benefiting from sustainable natural resources management Baseline:
communities (85% women’ groups) Target:  communities (90% women’ groups)
Indicator : Number of protected areas established and managed for biodiversity
conservation Baseline:  Target: 10         /  / /   -      65 Data source:
National Water and Electricity Company and basic services reports Frequency:
annual