Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… ……: Page:  III Programme and risk management
……………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and
evaluation……………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/HTI/  UNDP within the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  From 2017 to 2022, Haiti
experienced  series of multidimensional crises In this period, the country
experienced the assassination of the President and had six successive Prime
Ministers, each of whom remained in office for an average of nine months The
combined impact of weakened social cohesion and political, economic, health,
institutional, constitutional, security and natural crises aggravated an already
complex humanitarian situation In 2021, more than  million people, or about 40
per cent of the population (57 per cent of whom are women), depended on
emergency assistance for their survival On 14 August 2021,   magnitude
earthquake struck the southern peninsula of Haiti, the same areas still
recovering from the devastation of hurricane Matthew in Recovery needs were
estimated at $ billion The number of people needing humanitarian assistance
increased from  million in 2021 to  million in 2022, some 43 per cent of the
total population, of whom 58 per cent are women The rate of women’ participation
in decision- making remains very low, particularly at the central level In the
last legislature, women held only three seats in parliament Integrating gender
into public policies and implementing positive actions and other policies to
promote gender equality and profound social transformation remain necessary
Progress on most development indices is losing momentum, raising fears that the
country is unlikely to meet the targets of its Sustainable Development Goal
action plan by 2030, exacerbated since 2022 by  significant deterioration in
security and rising inflation, leading to extensive protests and lockdowns,
including slowdowns in social and economic activity  This country programme is
aligned with the Strategic Development Plan  (Plan Stratégique de Développement
’Haïti (PSDH)) and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF) 2023-It contributes to the UNDP Strategic Plan  and its
signature solutions The UNDP programme benefited from the process for developing
the UNSDCF, led by the Ministry of Planning and External Cooperation (Ministère
de la Planification et de la Coopération Externe (MPCE)) and  multi- stakeholder
reference group Based on the Common Country Analysis, the Ministry and the
reference group validated the priorities of the UNSDCF, which are aligned with
the four priority areas of the PSDH In the proposed programme, UNDP will
exercise its comparative advantage, which lies in its multidimensional and
human-centred approach to development, its capacity to intervene in all aspects
of the humanitarian, development and peace nexus and its role in multi-actor
coordination This makes UNDP  key interlocutor for technical and financial
partners and other actors in the United Nations system, including the political
mission  The 2020 evaluation of the previous country programme found that the
strengths of UNDP are its strategic positioning in governance, poverty reduction
and support for disaster risk management; its ability to adapt and respond
quickly to recurrent crises; and its mainstreaming of gender across its
programmatic areas  Through South-South partnerships, UNDP has contributed to
greater national capacities to access renewable energy, strengthening electoral
processes and vocational training Programmatic and complementary collaboration
with other actors in the United Nations system in key areas has been crucial to
ensuring coordinated action and greater impact aligned with national priorities
For example, joint work with the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(Bureau intégré des Nations Unies en Haïti (BINUH)), the United Nations Office
for Project Services, the International Office for Migration, the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the United
Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the areas of the rule of law and governance and
support of the electoral cycle resulted in greater synergy and streamlining of
resources and more effective advocacy for key reforms Coordination with the
World Food Programme (WFP) and other agencies in support of the National Policy
for Social Protection and Promotion (Politique nationale de protection et de
promotion sociale (PNPPS)) promises to continue to bear fruit by promoting
national  /15 DP/DCP/HTI/ protection system for the most vulnerable The close
collaboration between UNDP and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in response to the multiple disasters between 2017 and 2022
demonstrates the importance of supporting national leadership in crisis
preparedness and response  Despite structural and cyclical crises, over the past
five years, UNDP has contributed to strengthening the coordination capacity of
actors and the National Disaster and Risk Management System (Système National de
Gestion des Risques et des Désastres (SNGRD)), whose legal framework was created
in In addition, the systematic consideration of gender equality issues under the
programme contributed to the country office being awarded the UNDP Gender
Equality Seal The presence and advocacy of UNDP resulted in initiatives for
better protection and employability of youth and women via innovative
partnerships with the private sector  The country programme evaluation strongly
recommended that  transformational theory of change support the programme for
in alignment with the UNDP Strategic Plan,  and its three directions of change
UNDP Haiti will consider the best approach to address the structural causes of
the country’ fragilities and accelerate recovery from current crises and shocks
II Programme priorities and partnerships  The programme’ vision is that national
and local institutions: () encourage citizen and civic participation to restore
trust between the State and the population; () contribute to institutional
stability and modernization of the State; and () participate in the improvement
of the country’ socioeconomic conditions The UNDP transformational theory of
change leverages its value added in governance, institution-building and public
policy development and promotion as  cross-cutting approach for developing
national capacities for integrated, coordinated and inclusive development and
for implementing public policies Priority area  (UNSDCF pillar ): the rule of
law, good governance and human rights  The underlying hypothesis is that if
independent and democratic systems in Haiti are enhanced and effective, and
security is gradually guaranteed through an effective security sector, then the
management of public affairs will serve the general interest of the nation
responsibly, and be accountable and transparent towards the Haitians most
exposed to vulnerabilities and inequalities including women, girls, youth,
persons with disabilities and communities in hard-to-reach geographical areas
UNDP will build on its good reputation and ongoing decades of experience working
alongside national authorities and developing their capacities Adopting an
integrated programmatic approach, UNDP will advocate for the most marginalized
and those at risk of discrimination, focusing particularly on supporting agency
and defending the rights of women, youth and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, intersex and other (LGBTI+) communities More systemically, UNDP
will progressively contribute to restoring trust between the State and the
population, to political and institutional stability and to reducing gender
inequalities UNDP will implement the global gender strategy to reduce gender
inequalities, encouraging institutional transformation In collaboration with
other United Nations actors, including BINUH, national partners and regional
bodies, UNDP will implement initiatives encouraging civic engagement to restore
trust between the State and the Haitian population via the electoral process The
ongoing work of UNDP to support national efforts at the community and national
levels to reduce community violence, combat impunity and corruption, increase
access to justice and strengthen the capacities of the Haitian National Police
not only builds on existing programmes and partnerships but is  complementary
effort to address systemic deficiencies which have hindered positive civic
engagement and mutual accountability, and ultimately the exercise of the rule of
law Addressing the serious levels of gender-based violence will continue to be
focus of UNDP work on prevention and response UNDP will advocate for inclusion,
including on LGBTI+ issues, as  cross-cutting aspect of its work  /15
DP/DCP/HTI/ Drawing on experiences from the Latin American and Caribbean region,
UNDP will seek to expand its South-South collaboration, including but not
limited to the experiences of Mexico and Brazil in areas such as electoral
support and law enforcement Innovation will continue to be critical to the
success of UNDP work in these areas, partly due to the instability in the
functioning of some services, such as judicial hearings and overcrowding For
example, UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Justice and Public
Security (Ministère de la Justice et de la Sécurité Publique (MJSP)) to find
ways to hold exceptional hearings to reduce pretrial detention levels and
increase the use of alternatives to the application of criminal law for civil
matters Long-standing national partners such as the MJSP, the Provisional
Electoral Council, the Office of the Ombudsperson, national anti-corruption
bodies and key civil society actors will continue to be critical for UNDP
engagement as it also seeks to diversify its national partnerships and expand
its work in governance and the rule of law The ongoing and evolving
collaboration with BINUH will require UNDP to adjust its programming while
remaining aligned with the UNSDCF Priority area  (UNSDCF pillar ): Equitable and
sustainable growth The hypothesis is that if  new economic model, vector of
growth and sustainability – favourable to livelihood creation and retention for
young people and women, and capable of substantially reducing poverty and
inequality – is developed and implemented, then national economic growth will be
inclusive and reduce poverty and inequalities Significant effort is needed in
Haiti to engage effectively in equitable economic development and tackle gross
economic inequalities UNDP will work with national partners like the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, the MPCE, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the
Ministry of Public Works, Transport and Communication to become  recognized
thought leader and to further develop public policies in  coordinated manner
UNDP will focus on the transition to green, sustained and inclusive economic
growth that eliminates economic and social inequalities and leaves no one behind
Informed and coordinated public policy development must be based on technically
sound analysis that consider the country’ multi-faceted complexities and
vulnerability to climate-induced disasters UNDP will explore opportunities to
support  blue economy and renewable energy strategies, building on strong
examples from other countries in the region and the experiences of other small
island developing States Public and private investments and expenditures related
to the Sustainable Development Goals will be promoted through an integrated
national financing framework under the leadership of the MPCE and the Ministry
of Economy and Finance, in partnership with the private sector UNDP efforts will
contribute to longer-term engagement in reducing economic and social
inequalities while remaining flexible enough to respond to sudden-onset crises
In this manner, UNDP will contribute to breaking the cycle of fragility UNDP
will focus its partnership strategy on supporting the development of national
capacities, which is its raison 'être Building on the example of its ongoing
collaboration with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, UNDP will: ()
strengthen institutional capacities for more equitable provision of services to
economic actors, particularly micro and small enterprises; and () promote
sustainable consumption and production within the public and private sectors
UNDP will rely on the added value of the United Nations system agencies, funds
and programmes present in Haiti and the partnerships it can forge with technical
expertise available outside the country, such as the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, and will work with agencies with experience in Haiti such
as the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Environment
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime UNDP will support
national partners to engage with new and different sources of financing for
development, building on the initial support for the integrated national
financing framework in 2021 and  /15 DP/DCP/HTI/ Priority area  (UNSDCF pillar
): Social services, protection and inclusion This hypothesis is that if national
policies are designed and implemented to strengthen the social contract and
improve access to quality basic social services for the most vulnerable, then
the population will be more resilient to shocks UNDP will direct its unique
efforts and capacities (using  human rights-based approach grounded in the
principle of leaving no one behind) to bring together and mobilize national and
international actors to support the Government’ promotion of inter-institutional
and multi-stakeholder policy development and implementation, particularly
concerning social protection and access to basic social services UNDP will
support institutionalizing the national architecture established in the PNPPS
UNDP will collaborate with ECLAC, UNFPA, UNICEF and WFP, which have considerable
experience in this regard Lessons learned from previous experiences will be
applied to advocate for  continued expansion of social protection so that more
long-term and sustainable strategies and programmes are prioritized The
convening power of UNDP as  provider of integrated solutions for the United
Nations system will be critical in this area Previous efforts of integrating
multidimensional poverty into vulnerability registers need to be sustained, and,
where possible, complementary to the existing UNDP multi-risk mapping In
parallel, UNDP will continue to reinforce the functions, funding and capacities
of subnational institutions to provide better basic and quality social services,
especially in the aftermath of crises, that meet the needs of the population
most at risk of vulnerability, including women and youth, especially victims of
gender-based and community violence Collaboration will be deepened with the
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour (Ministère des Affaires Sociales et du
Travail (MAST)), the Ministry of Education and Professional Training, the
Ministry of Health and local authorities to complement the actions of other
international partners in this sector, in particular the international financial
institutions with major programming and investments in Haiti, the World Bank and
the Inter- American Development Bank In working with this diverse range of
partners, UNDP can leverage its vast experience in human-centred sustainable
development to ensure that the strategies designed by national counterparts
include governance reforms and yield longer- term dividends beyond crisis
management Priority area  (UNSDCF pillar ): Multidimensional territorial
governance and environmental management According to this hypothesis, if
national and local authorities, communities and other relevant actors are aware
of gender-sensitive normative to pilot multidimensional risk management to
support territorial governance and environmental management, then stakeholders
will be better equipped to manage risks and develop in  climate-sensitive and
resilient manner at the national and local level frameworks Over the last 20
years, UNDP has worked to strengthen the capacities of national actors in
addressing multidimensional risk It has sought to ensure that the tools and
policies developed together with the Ministry of the Interior and Territorial
Communities and its Directorate of Civil Protection, the Ministry of Environment
and the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development, among
others, take into account the full range of the country’ vulnerabilities to
disasters and the impact of climate change UNDP will support standardizing,
implementing and monitoring integrated sectoral, environmental and energy
policies that preserve and protect natural ecosystems and ensure the alignment
of national with international standards The consolidation and expansion of the
progress made to date will depend on: () strengthened national capacities
(government and civil society) to institutionalize and disseminate the knowledge
and tools related to risk prevention, response and mitigation as well as climate
adaptation; and () the capacity of stakeholders to apply these tools and
strategies at the national and local levels to inform local development,
including planning and governance in  resilient manner The experience of other
small island developing States, especially those in the region, will continue to
be relevant as Haiti seeks to combat its extreme vulnerability to  /15
DP/DCP/HTI/ multidimensional risks and increase its capacity for resilience
Lessons from other contexts where the critical humanitarian, development and
peace nexus will be studied and applied as relevant Here, UNDP global knowledge
and technical capacities can be leveraged so that Haitian institutions can adapt
and develop their strategies in this regard UNDP programming will also consider
the nexus in its conception and implementation III Programme and risk management
This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board
for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country
level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter
levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’
programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework
The programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may
be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable
response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used
in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial
risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects The MPCE will oversee
this programme The multi-stakeholder reference group, chaired by the Minister of
Planning and External Cooperation and the Resident Coordinator, will oversee the
implementation of the UNSDCF UNDP will continue to maintain  degree of
flexibility in its programming Political instability and exposure to disasters
will require UNDP to consider the changing dynamics between political, economic,
social and natural forces to contribute to the resolution of the current crisis
The  proven ability of UNDP to strike  balance between maintaining the core
orientation of its programming while adapting to  highly volatile context will
likely continue to be relevant in the programme cycle UNDP will support
inclusive platforms for consultation on national priorities, to the extent
possible, to contribute to  gradual restoration of confidence between the State
and the Haitian population To minimize the risk of volatile contexts, UNDP will
support its national partners in adopting planning approaches, digital
transformation and innovation In collaboration with civil society organizations,
UNDP will facilitate empowerment dialogues and interventions, raising awareness
among key stakeholders of the added value, benefits and opportunities that
digitalization and innovation can bring to their sectors UNDP will maintain
dialogue with all stakeholders to identify potential undue social and
environmental harm caused by UNDP and will promote the use of grievance
mechanisms as appropriate and the application of the organization’ social and
environmental policies UNDP will review its capacity and determine appropriate
measures to ensure its financial sustainability, including improving cost
management and allocating human resources according to the programme’ needs UNDP
will also need to maintain flexibility to mobilize relevant human resources
according to the context and potential increased brain drain, as well as
emerging areas where additional or different expertise might be required In the
event of significant changes to the context, UNDP will respond to early warning
signals, activate the corporate enterprise risk policy and escalate risks as
appropriate The national context has significant structural fragilities,
cyclical crises and uncertainties; change in any of them is  source of concern
Ongoing and strengthened partnerships at the technical level within national
partner institutions have proven to be  reliable risk mitigation strategy and
successful vehicle for strengthened national ownership UNDP will mitigate the
risks inherent in the administration of the programme through regular monitoring
and scenario-based analysis by making the necessary adjustments if the situation
deteriorates  /15 DP/DCP/HTI/ IV Monitoring and evaluation Based on the
recommendations of the evaluation of the previous programme, the monitoring
system for the implementation and evaluation of the programme will focus on
results at the outcome and output levels This will enable UNDP to strengthen its
capacity to analyse the impact of its interventions on the UNSDCF outcomes and
national priorities to which it is aligned, especially considering the limited
national statistical capacities in the country UNDP will invest resources in
developing  dynamic gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation system that
supports national statistical efforts and integrates learning and uses new
information technologies, including digitalization, to document the impact of
its action on change actors disaggregated by age, gender, vulnerability and
geographical location The UNDP gender marker will track gender gaps and ensure
that at least 70 per cent of total programme expenditure is in line with the
gender equality strategy The monitoring and evaluation system will identify the
follow-up actions needed to support Haiti and its national monitoring systems in
being back on track with the Sustainable Development Goals To cover monitoring,
evaluation and communication costs, UNDP will allocate at least  per cent of
project budgets to cover monitoring, evaluation and communication costs UNDP
will implement  balanced evaluation plan to ensure learning and accountability
in agreement with the Government and in line with the UNDP evaluation policy and
the United Nations Evaluation Group guidelines UNDP will support the Resident
Coordinator in strengthening the integrated monitoring and evaluation capacity
for the UNSDCF, particularly in the areas UNDP is committed to leading on behalf
of the United Nations in Haiti Capacity-building in implementing the programme
should enable national partners to adopt and use new information and
communication technologies for analysis, reflection and decision-making Partners
such as the ministries mentioned above and their subsidiary organs or
institutions will benefit from strengthened statistical or data analysis
capacities As the primary institutional partner of UNDP, the MPCE will be
critical to the overall monitoring of progress towards the targets of the
country’ Sustainable Development Goal action plan Given the current national
context, the programme’ implementation will be reviewed twice  year to
transparently review its relevance and adapt it, if necessary, as national
governance developments occur  /15 DP/DCP/HTI/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Haiti () NATIONAL PRIORITY: Institutional Rebuilding (PSDH )
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #, UNSDCF Outcome : Legitimate and
accountable institutions ensure the rule of law, good governance and respect for
human rights RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Structural transformation
accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions; ESTIMATED
COST BY OUTCOME ($) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES,
TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines and
targets) MAJOR PARTNERS/ PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS Regular resources: $,590,000
Population’ level of confidence in the existing Government Baseline (2022): not
available Target (2027): More than 50% of the population has confidence in the
Government BINUH, Semi-annual Output1: Public and private sectors are encouraged
to restore trust between the authorities and the citizens in electoral matters
Prime Minister  Ministries of Defence; of Foreign Affairs; of Interior and
Territorial Collectivities; of Justice and Public Security; of Planning and
External Cooperation; of Public Works, Transport and Communication; of Women’
Affairs and Women’ Rights; of Youth, Sports and Civic Action UNDP, Annual Other
resources: $77,270,000 Indicator : Number of inclusive electoral consultation
mechanisms, including at least one with women’ organizations and at least one
with youth organizations Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Provisional
Electoral Council  Superior Council of Judicial Power  Directorate of the
Penitentiary Administration  National Council for Legal Assistance  Anti-
Corruption Unit  Central Financial Intelligence Unit  General Inspectorate of
the National Police of Indicator : Percentage of women in elected positions in
parliament and local and regional authorities Baseline:   Haiti Interministerial
Task Force   National Police  National Commission for Disarmament, % in
parliament  30% to the Board of Directors of the Communal Section), Assembly of
the Communal Section and town halls Dismantling and Reintegration  Provisional
Electoral Council  Office for the Protection of the Citizen  Haitian Women’
Collective for Women’ Target level: 30% in all instances Source: Provisional
Electoral Council Political Participation Indicator : Percentage of elected
positions filled with elected authorities: Baseline (2022): % Target (2027): 80%
Source: Provisional Electoral Council  Foundation Je Klere  People for
Development  Haitian Vision of Human Rights  Citizen’ Organization for  New
Haiti  Blue Earth Foundation  Lawyers Without Borders -Canada  Lakou La Pè  Viva
Rio Indicator : Percentage of public decision- making positions held by women
/15 DP/DCP/HTI/  Mobile Institute for Education and Baseline (2018): % Target
(2027): 40% Source: Office of Management and Human Resources Output1: The
judiciary is more independent, and the most vulnerable are better able to access
fair justice that respects human rights, and the fight against corruption
Democracy  Governments of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Switzerland, United
States  European Union  Organization of American States IMF   BINUH IOM   OHCHR
UNFPA  UNICEF  UNOPS  UNODC  UN-Women Indicator : Number of measures to
strengthen accountability (including social accountability), prevent and
mitigate corruption risks, and integrate anti-corruption in the management of
public funds, service delivery and other sectors at the national and provincial
level (integrated results and resources framework (IRRF)) indicator) Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Ministry of Justice and Public Security,
National Council for Legal Assistance Indicator : Number of complaints filed by
women Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): ,000 Source: Ministry of Justice and
Public Security , National Council for Legal Assistance Indicator  Percentage of
cases of prolonged pretrial detention in the republic’ detention centres
Baseline (2022): 82% Target (2027): 75 % Source: DAP Indicator : Percentage of
judicial jurisdiction which has  functioning Legal Assistance Office Baseline
(2022): 38% Target (2027): 100% Source: National Council for Legal Assistance
/15 DP/DCP/HTI/ Indicator : Corruption Perception Index Baseline (2022): 20
Target (2027): 25 Source: Transparency International Output1: The security
sector is supported to promote human rights and combat impunity, and
holistically integrate security, protection of property and people, and recovery
of communities affected by violence Indicator : Ratio of police officers per
100,000 inhabitants Baseline (2021): 128 Target (2027): 155 Source: Haitian
National Police Indicator : Number of national policies, strategies, and action
plans for conflict prevention and peacebuilding (IRRF indicator) Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027):  Ministry of Planning and External Cooperation NATIONAL
PRIORITY: Economic Refoundation (PSDH ) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP #, UNSDCF OUTCOME :  new inclusive, equitable economic model, vector of new
investments, growth and sustainability, favourable to the rapid creation of
decent jobs with  focus on youth and women, capable of substantially reducing
poverty and inequalities, is formulated, endorsed and implemented RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  No one left behind, centring on equitable access to
opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development
World Bank, Semi-annual  Annual growth rate of real gross domestic product
Baseline (2020): -% Target (2027): + to +% Output2: The inclusive development
and implementation of public policies are better coordinated by national
institutions to facilitate  transition to green, sustained and inclusive
economic growth  Ministries of: Economy and Finance; of Regular resources:
$,290,000 Environment; of Planning and External Cooperation; of Social Affairs
and Labour; of Trade and Industry Other resources: $16,930,000  National
Institute of Vocational Training  Central Bank of Haiti  Chamber of Commerce
Haitian Association of Economic Journalists : Poverty Rate Baseline (2022): 59%
Target (2027): 56% Indicator : Existence of  national SDG road map Baseline
(2022): No Target (2027): Yes Source: Ministry of Planning and External
Cooperation for Sustainable Development : Per capita income Baseline (2019 ):
,272 USD Target (2027): ,959 USD  Groupe Croissance   European Union  World Bank
University Agency of La Francophonie IMF Indicator : Number of institutions
strengthened to promote the employability and IDB  10 DP/DCP/HTI/  ECLAC  FAO
ILO   UNCTAD  UNICEF  UN-Women job creation of youth and women in support of
promising sectors of agrifood, manufacturing and digital technologies Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Ministries of Agriculture, Natural Resources
and Rural Development; of Commerce and Industry; IFAD Output2: Public and
private sector invest and promote expenditure on sustainable development through
an integrated national approach Indicator : Existence of an integrated national
financing framework Baseline (2022): No Target (2027): Yes Source: Ministry of
Planning and External Cooperation Indicator : Number of sectoral ministries
involved in monitoring and reviewing progress in different funding flows and
controlling public spending in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals
Baseline (2020):  Target (2027):  Source: Ministries of Planning and External
Cooperation; of Economy and Finance; of Commerce and Industry NATIONAL PRIORITY:
Social Refoundation (PSDH ) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #,
UNSDCF OUTCOME : The population, particularly vulnerable and marginalized
groups, has better access to equitable, inclusive and quality basic social
services, with an emphasis on respect for human rights, gender equality and
disability inclusion, with  view of strengthening the social contract RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  No one left behind, centring on equitable access to
opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Ministries of Planning and External  National coverage of the Information System
of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor Baseline (2021): 25% Target (2027):
60% Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour Economic and Social Assistance Fund
PNPPS, annual Output : Public institutions are supported in an inclusive way to
implement the PNPPS Prime Minister Regular resources: $,790,000 Cooperation; of
Economy and Finance; of the Interior and Territorial Collectivities; of Social
Affairs and Labour; of Women’ Affairs and Women’ Rights; of Youth, Sports and
Civil Action Economic and Social Assistance Fund Local Authorities Other
resources: $12,740,000 Indicator : Number of gender-sensitive reports analysed
on the implementation of the PNPPS at the national and departmental level
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):   Placement in the Human Development Index
11 DP/DCP/HTI/  Korea International Cooperation Agency  Governments of Canada,
Chile, Japan   World Bank  ECLAC  FAO  ILO  UNICEF  UNFPA  WFP Baseline (2021):
170th place out of 189 countries Target (2027): 168th place out of 189 countries
Source: PNPPS Observatory, Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour IDB Output3:
Subnational institutions have stronger functions, funding and capacities to
provide basic and quality social services that meet the needs of the population
most exposed to vulnerabilities, including women and youth  Level of financing
for the PNPPS from the national budget Baseline (2022): 10% Target (2027): 45 %
Indicator : Extent to which the country has policy measures and institutional
capacities in place which aim to increase access to social protection schemes
targeting the most vulnerable, including marginalized communities (IRRF
indicator) Baseline (2022): Not adequately Target (2027): Partially Source:
Ministries of Social Affairs and Labour; of Women’ Affairs and Women’ Rights
Output : Comprehensive community and gender-based violence prevention and
response programmes enable women and men to escape structural violence Indicator
Number of central and local institutions whose capacities have been strengthened
to address violence against women and girls Baseline (2022): 200 Target (2027):
500 Source: Ministries of Social Affairs and Labour; of Women’ Affairs and
Women’ Rights  12 DP/DCP/HTI/ NATIONAL PRIORITY: Territorial Refoundation (PSDH
) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #, UNSDCF OUTCOME : Information
systems and financial mechanisms and normative frameworks sensitive to gender,
protection and social inclusion, are put in place to help State authorities,
local communities and other national actors to pilot and coordinate public
policies to strengthen resilience based on risk management, territorial
governance and environmental management RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk Ministries of
Planning and External Cooperation; of Environment; of the Interior and
Territorial Collectivities Local authorities on the National Disaster Risk
Management Plan Annual SDG Indicators: Output4: Public institutions at the
national and local levels have stronger capacities to control and disseminate
knowledge in preventing and responding to disasters and protecting the
environment Regular resources: $,600,000 Ministries of Agriculture, Natural
Resources and Rural Development; of Planning And External Cooperation; of
Environment; of the Interior and Territorial Collectivities; of Public Health
and Population; of Public Works, Transport and Communication Local Authorities
Proportion of local governments that adopt and implement local disaster risk
reduction strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Other resources: $38,820,000 Indicator :
Number of knowledge dissemination and decision support tools for disaster risk
prevention and management and climate change adaptation developed and
communicated Baseline (2022): 12 Target (2027): 15 Source: Civil Protection
Agency and Ministry of Environment annual reports   National Directorate of
Potable Water and General Directorate of Civil Protection, Annually  Existence
of nationally determined contributions, long-term strategies, national
adaptation plans, strategies as reported in adaptation communications and
national communications Baseline (2022): No Target (2027): Yes Sanitation
Ayitica (company)  Alliance for Risk Management and Business Continuity  Media
Haiti Climate   New Grand’ Anse Foundation   World Bank  Government of the
United States  Helvetas (NGO)  Heifer International    UNEP  UNESCO  UNFPA
UNICEF  UNOPS  WFP Le Nouvelliste, Indicator : Number of new information
technologies to disseminate knowledge and good practices in the prevention and
management of disaster risks and environmental protection Baseline (2022):
Target (2027):  Source: see  above Output4: Public institutions at the national
and local levels have stronger capacities for the integrated implementation of
the National Disaster Risk Management Plan and the National Climate Change
Adaptation Plan  Institute of Technology and Animation IDB FAO IOM Indicator :
Number of members of the National Disaster and Risk Management System that
integrate multidimensional risks and gender, including the prevention of gender-
based violence in disaster contexts in their planning and programming Baseline
(2022):   13 DP/DCP/HTI/ Target (2027):  Source: National Disaster and Risk
Management System Indicator : Number of new information technologies to document
and update the integrated implementation of the National Disaster Risk
Management Plan and the National Action Plan for Climate Change Baseline (2022):
Target (2027): 10 Source: National Disaster Risk Management Plan, National
Action Plan for Climate Change Indicator : Number of concrete actions for
prevention and multidimensional risk reduction at the national and/or local
level carried out by National Disaster and Risk Management System actors
identified and updated using new information technologies disaggregated by
gender of its promoters Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  of which at least
promoted by women Source: Civil Protection Agency Annual reports Output  Public
and private institutions, including civil society, youth and volunteer networks,
have stronger capacities to support local development and spatial planning with
solutions based on terroir and nature that focus on the green and inclusive
economy Indicator : Number of transformative models of resilient landscapes that
have  concrete impact on the multisectoral resilience of communities implemented
on  pilot basis Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Ministries of
Environment; and of the Interior and Territorial Communities, annual reports  14
DP/DCP/HTI/ Indicator : Number of local initiatives, including civil society,
youth and volunteer networks, supported in the application of green and circular
economy standards disaggregated by geographical area and category of
intervention, disaggregated by gender of its promoters Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027): 10 total,  promoted by women Source: Ministries of: Environment; and of
the Interior and Territorial Communities, annual reports Indicator : Number of
departmental sector tables and departmental technical councils that improve the
quality of public services by integrating the green and circular economy into
gender-sensitive local development plans Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):
Source: Ministries of the Environment; and of the Interior and Territorial
Communities, annual reports  15