 Ministry for Public Works, Transportation and Communications Bureau of Mines
and Energy Electricity of Haiti (With the technical assistance of the
International Atomic Energy Agency) Haiti Energy Sector Development Plan 2007 -
2017 * This document was prepared by Ministry for Public Works, Transportation
and Communications - Bureau of Mines and Energy, and Electricity of Haiti The
IAEA’ role was to provide overall co- ordination and guidance throughout the
conduct of the study, and to guarantee that adequate training in the use of IAEA
energy planning models was provided to the members of the Haitian national team
November 2006  TABLE OF CONTENTS ABSTRACT IV PREFACE  COUNTRY OVERVIEW  PRESENT
STATUS OF THE HAITIAN ENERGY SECTOR    PRESENT FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY
ENERGY FORM AND BY SECTOR PRESENT STATUS OF ENERGY SUPPLY SUBSECTORS Fuel wood
and charcoal, deforestation  Petroleum products  LPG : Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Coal/Lignite  Domestic oil and coal exploration (institutional aspects)
ELECTRICITY Electricity generation system  Electrical networks  Technical and
non-technical electricity losses  Illegal consumption of electricity in
households Hydro potential  Wind energy  Solar energy   MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE
ENERGY OTHER LOCAL ENERGY RESOURCES 10    KEY ISSUES INVOLVING THE HAITI ENERGY
SECTOR10 FIREWOOD AND CHARCOAL10  OIL AND GAS SECTOR 10  COAL (LIGNITE)
DEPOSIT11   ELECTRICITY SECTOR11  WIND ENERGY11 SOLAR ENERGY 11   MUNICIPAL
SOLID WASTE ENERGY11 BAGASSE11   FUTURE ENERGY NEEDS AND SUPPLY OPTIONS 11
FINAL ENERGY DEMAND FORECAST BY ENERGY FORM AND BY SECTOR 11 ENERGY SUPPLY
SECTOR DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS 12 Fuel wood and charcoal, energy substitution to
avoid further deforestation12 Energetic forests 14 Energetic crops 14 Petroleum
products 15 Domestic lignite production15 ELECTRICITY15 Generation system
expansion until 2015 15 Systematic provision of resources for power generation21
Transmission and distribution network 21 Systematic maintenance of capacities21
Periodic study on electric system development21 Electricity commercialisation 21
New legal framework 22  ii Logistic and human resources 22  WIND ENERGY22  SOLAR
ENERGY 23  MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE ENERGY23  OBJECTIVES OF THE ENERGY POLICY OF
THE HAITIAN GOVERNMENT 23  ENERGY SECTOR REFORM 24  ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
PLAN26  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 30  REFERENCES31 10 APPENDICES 32 iii
Abstract Although self-sufficient for about 80% of its energy needs filled by
domestic biomass fuel and some hydro-electrical sources, Haiti faces  severe
energy crisis This crisis is characterized by numerous factors, including: ()
the burden to the economy of the importation of petroleum products for fuel, ()
very low per capita consumption and high energy intensity (energy consumption
per GDP), () the insufficient development of the manufacture industry sector
(19% of total energy consumption) and predominance of the residential sector
(65% of consumption), () excessive biomass use leading to high levels of
deforestation and land degradation, () increasing population growth at about 02%
per year and () decreasing growth of the GDP per capita at about  % per year
Most fuel wood and charcoal (80%) is used in the household sector, mainly for
cooking The efficiency of stoves (mainly open) is very low (around 22% for
traditional stoves and 30% for improved charcoal stoves) The intensive use of
the fuel wood for cooking and production of charcoal, without systematic
regeneration, causes further deforestation of the country To offer the decision
makers and various stakeholders  tool to improve this situation,  National
Development Plan of the Energy Sector of Haiti is elaborated, with the support
of the International Agency for Atomic Energy (IAEA), covering the period
2007-This Plan has the following objectives: The objectives of the Haitian
Government related to the energy sector are as follows: − Support the
recapitalization of enterprises in difficulty (case of EDH1); − − − Strengthen
the State’ regulatory role in key sectors of the economy, including energy; −
Prepare and implement the reforms needed to create  favorable environment for
local and Improve and modernize the management of public enterprises in key
sectors, including EDH; Improve the production and distribution of electricity
in the country; foreign investment; − Put  priority on  significant improvement
in the provision of electricity in the country; − Promote alternatives to fuel
wood and promote renewable energies including energetic crops and forests As far
as the electricity sub-sector is concerned, the Government of Haiti has
established the following priority objectives for the public utility EDH: −
management contract with clear performance targets for the company − Maintaining
electrical service for at least 12 hours per day in Port-au-Prince and in the
rest of the country; Increase the billing rate from 47% to 75% in the next 15
years and increase the commercial profitability of the company; − −
Stabilization of EDH and establishment of conditions necessary for its recovery;
− Improvement of the quality of the provided electricity and customer service; −
Reduction of technical losses and increase of efficiency; − Reduction of fraud
and theft of electricity; − Obtaining better conditions in the PPA2 contracts
with private producers, taking into account the interests of both parties  EDH :
Electricité ’Haïti, the Haitian electrical public utility  PPA : Power Purchase
Agreement iv To stabilize EDH and enhance its services,  medium-term ( years)
management contract is considered, as well as implementation of  medium-term
investment plan designed to increase access to electricity of the population
from % in present to 20% by critical issue, both in terms of energy and of
environmental integrity is the conservation of natural resources, especially
forests through several measures: − Support for more efficient use of charcoal
and fuel wood; − Reforestation of strategic areas for the safety of the
population, environmental protection and tourism; − Generation of energetic
forests and crops; − Conversion to diesel, bio-diesel and to LPG of ,000 small
enterprises that use wood as fuel; − Financial support to cellulose briquette
producers; − Initiation of  study to determine the feasibility of wood imports
or exchanges with lime; − Promotion of renewable energies (wind and solar)
through institutional reinforcement (and improved access for the poor to energy
services) Promotion of bio-fuels through incentives for growing energetic crops
and by encouraging investments in facilities for bio-fuels production and use
Main bio-fuels are bio-diesel, ethanol and methanol produced from bagasse and
different fast growing plants Energy sector reform is also  key concern The
reform of the energy sector today should be guided by the idea of finding the
most suitable form of partnership between public needs and private interests
There is  need for state intervention through the reform of the energy sector,
institutional and legal framework, new institutions and new and immediate
measures In conclusion, the present National Energy Development Plan aims to
provide policy makers with quantitative and qualitative information on the
Haitian energy sector, in order to design appropriate policy and strategies to
achieve sustainable goals It shall serve as  tool to meet the objectives of the
Government strategy It is consistent with the provisions of the Interim
Cooperation Framework (ICF) up to the end of year 2006, but analyzes the energy
sector more in detail on  longer time horizon, up to It also aims at
recommending specific improvement and development measures for this sector for
short (until end of 2008), medium () and long () terms  vi Preface The present
Haiti National Energy Sector Development Plan (NESDP) aims at providing policy
makers with quantitative and qualitative information on the Haitian energy
sector With this, decision makers will be better equipped to design appropriate
policy and strategies to achieve sustainable goals This Plan shall serve as
tool to meet the objectives of the Government for all forms of energy and in
correlation with related issues such as economic and social development The
NESDP is consistent with the provisions of the Interim Cooperation Framework
(ICF) up to the end of year 2006, but analyzes the energy sector more in detail,
on  much longer 25-year time horizon, up to This rather extended period of time
is selected in conjunction with the proposal, by the present Government, to
elaborate  long term vision for the sustainable development of Haiti The PNDSE
also recommends specific improvement and development measures for the Energy
sector of Haiti for the following time horizons: short-term actions (until
2008), medium-term actions (2008- 2013), long-term actions ()  Energy
Development Plan for Haiti until 2017  Country overview  Haiti is located in the
center of the Caribbean region in the Central America, western part of the
island of Hispaniola, directly neighbour to Dominican Republic Total area of the
country is 250 square kilometres in  very mountainous morphology In general, the
country has two seasons – wet and dry – where the annual weighted average rain
accounts for 1300 (from 400 to 3000) millimetres  The Haitian population
increased by % during the period , from 486 to 959 million inhabitants, leading
to an average annual growth rate of 56 % over the last fourteen years Average
population density is about 300 inhabitants per square kilometre while in the
western part of the country and Port-au-Prince, it exceeds more than double In
rural areas, where 60% of population lives, two third of the workforce is
involved in agricultural production There is considerable additional pressure on
the urban areas: the urban population has more than tripled from 1982 to 2003
going from 04 million to  million inhabitants Overall, the population’
vulnerability is very high: 65% live under the poverty threshold The principal
health indicators are very alarming – infant and maternal mortality rates remain
very high, half of the population does not have access to clean drinking water
and only 28% have access to decent sanitation facilities In terms of active
population, the country has sufficient potential labour force as the population
of the country is relatively young - 50% of population is less than 20 years old
With an annual per capita GDP of US$ in 2005 (from US$ 635 in , US$ 510 in 1996
and US$444 in 2000), Haiti is the only country on the continent that appears on
the list of least-developed countries Over the past decades, Haiti experienced
consequent decline of real per capita GDP with negative average annual growth
rates of % in the 1980s and % in the 1990s, respectively Such economic
performance was particularly affected by the mismanagement of market
liberalization of the 1980s, the military coup of 1991 and the (subsequent)
international embargo of the beginning of 1990s, and finally the political
crisis that lasts until the elections in Economic situation in the country is
still fragile due to continuing socio-political fluctuation, which adversely
effects the rehabilitation and maintenance of economic, social and institutional
infrastructure As the results, the country faces at present, considerable
decrease of export revenues from industrial goods, increase of unemployment
rates and weakening of tax collection and in turn, the control of public
expenditures Imports are three times higher than exports, counting in 2005 for
roughly US$ ,200 million Any measures to increase imports for energy purposes
should be taken with extreme caution due to low revenues of the population and
therefore incapacity to afford  In terms of distribution of GDP by economic
activities, service sector accounts 45% share to the total GDP (including % of
energy) followed by agriculture and mining and construction with 24% and 21%,
respectively Industrial sector appears to represent only 10% Over the past
decades, the distribution of GDP had remained as such due to the limited
technology available and the low level of capitalization, in addition to the
weak socio-political environment  Per capita annual final electricity
consumption is only 84 kWh in 2000 the least amount in the Caribbean area, as
only % of the population is regularly connected to the grid  Present status of
the Haitian energy sector  Present final energy consumption by energy form and
by sector  The total final energy consumption for year 2000 was ,687 thousand
toe Fuel wood and charcoal with ,262 thousand toe had the biggest share (75%),
followed by motor fuels and fossil fuels, accounting 258 thousand toe (15%) and
89 thousand toe (%), respectively Electricity accounted 66 thousand toe (%) and
feedstock 12 thousand toe (%) 3Inventaire des gaz  effet de serre : BME/FAMV
pour le compte du MDE, 2000   By sector, industry consumed 328 thousand toe (19%
of the total final energy consumption), transportation sector 203 thousand toe
(12%), households ,094 thousand toe (65%) and services 62 thousand toe (%)
Haiti has  very low final energy consumption per capita, amounting 209
kgoe/capita in year 2001, as compared to other countries in Latin America and
Caribbean []: Bolivia 306, Nicaragua 403, Honduras 445, El Salvador 473, Ecuador
542, Guatemala 570, Dominican  626, Costa Rica 639, Panama 653, Cuba 806,
Jamaica 876, Mexico 945, Venezuela (see Appendix )  The final energy intensity,
final energy consumption per GDP, shows approximately 570 kgoe US$1995 in 2001,
or the equivalent of kgoe/1000Gdes Compared to other countries in Latin America
and Caribbean []: Jamaica 431, Cuba 403, Guatemala 361, Dominica  306, El
Salvador 264, Mexico 195, Panama 195, Costa Rica 167, it shows  very inefficient
use of energy in Haiti (see Appendix ) 10 The main part of fuel wood and
charcoal (80%) is used in household sector mainly for cooking The efficiency of
stoves (mainly open) is very low (around 22% for traditional stoves and 30% for
improved charcoal stoves) The intensive use of the fuel wood for cooking and
production of charcoal causes further deforestation of the country 11
Electricity consumption represents only % of the total final energy Less than
30% of the households are connected (including illegal connections) to the grid
and only % are regularly connected with meters The largest sector for
electricity consumption is industry (43%) But this sector represents only 10% of
the GDP 12 More than half (59%) of the motor fuels are used for passenger
transportation The car ownership is relatively low (about  car for every 100
persons) as compared to other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean) in
year 1994: Colombia , Brazil , Venezuela , Mexico and Argentina  The average
distance travelled by car is about 5500 km per car yearly  Present status of
energy supply subsectors Fuel wood and charcoal, deforestation 13 As stated in
paragraph  the most important sources of energy in Haiti are fuel wood and
charcoal, which account for 75% of the final energy consumption by all sectors
in the year Charcoal is used by 90% of the households from Port-au-Prince and
other major cities, and the charcoal chain from production to final consumption
employs more than 150 thousand persons Charcoal is made from trees, with  low
conversion efficiency of about only 20% ( kg of wood for  kg of charcoal) In
terms of heat content, the conversion factor may be higher (60% for high
moisture content wood and 40% for average moisture content wood) (see Appendix )
14 In the year 1982, available wood stock was estimated to millions of cubic
meters4 while about  millions of cubic meters were used for different purposes,
including wood in construction/building sector where metallic pools should be
used instead Such consumption is equivalent to approximately 30 millions of
trees annually harvested At the same time it was estimated that only 20 millions
of trees were planted but the survival rate is not given However, the World Bank
has indicated in 19915  survival rate of about 40%, which implies that over the
000 trees planted only 000 are saved The yearly reforestation capacity is then
estimated at about 26% of the consumption, which is equivalent to  millions of
cubic meters However, the annual capacity of self-reproduction of natural wood
without new plantations was also evaluated to  millions of cubic meters,
roughly 26 % of the total wood used annually If those figures are reliable, the
country is left today with less than half of his wood stock of 1982 that is to
say millions of cubic meters, and if such trends were to be continued without
any corrective actions, it is not pessimistic to forecast complete depletion of
that resource in  very near future  BDPA, 1989 : Gestion des Ressources
Naturelles pour un Développement Durable en Haiti  ESMAP, 1991: Stratégie pour
’Energie Domestique  Petroleum products 15 Haiti has no domestic production of
crude oil and refining capacities Therefore, all needed petroleum products are
imported The petroleum products subsector, which represents only % of the
national energy supply, uses more than % of external receipts of the country
Consequently, it limits the local multiplier effects in economic development
through insufficient domestic investment in other economic activities Between 15
to 25% of these products are used for electricity generation Moreover, some
small distributors are mixing diesel and gasoline with kerosene to take
advantage of the comparative low cost of this product 16 Haiti is importing its
petroleum products from Venezuela, via its refinery based in Curacao, from
Trinidad and Tobago (LPG) and sometimes from Panama on  market price basis
Recent years prices increases in oil and oil products put  higher pressure on
the import / export commercial balance of the country 17 During  very short
period in the past the country benefited from the preferential terms of the San
Jose Accord according to which Mexico and Venezuela supply  total of 160,000
barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil (half of the total each) to 11 Central
American and Caribbean nations (Barbados, Belize, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua and
Panama) at discount prices The accord came into existence on August , 1980
(after the second oil price shock) and it has been renewed on August , The pact
also establishes “ cooperation mechanism to promote the economic and social
development of the beneficiary nations” The cooperation accord finances social-
economic development projects in the participating nations, as well as trade of
goods and services by Mexican and Venezuelan firms The countries may also recoup
up to 20% of expenditures under the Pact in the form of low interest long-term
loans for development projects If development projects are not achieved, then
the 20% deferred payment is to be settled within five years Haiti is not
currently benefiting from San Jose Accord due to some unpaid balance in the past
18 The Caracas Energy Accord is an extension of the San Jose Accord and now it
co-exists with that accord It has been in effect since October 2000, after
President Chavez and the leaders of the beneficiary countries, including Haiti,
signed separate bilateral agreements It does not involve Mexico, while Cuba is
included in the list of twelve beneficiaries, next to Barbados, Belize, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica,
Nicaragua and Panama The accord provides even “softer” conditions than San Jose
pact The Agreement is to be exclusively enforced by the public entities
supported by Venezuela and the beneficiary country However, each country may
designate private companies to handle the logistics of transporting the imported
volumes of hydrocarbons The Caracas Accord is currently under full
implementation by the Ministry of finance The accord states that saved money due
to the concessionary terms of the accord is dedicated to energy project
implementation 19 The Petro Caribe Accord also with Venezuela was signed in May
According to this accord  credit will be granted to the State of Haiti for
purchasing petroleum products 20  total of  different institutions are presently
managing the petroleum products subsector: Ministry of Commerce through his
Bureau of Petroleum Procurement, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the
Central Bank and the Importer/supplier companies, among them Total/ELF, Texaco,
Esso and, Le National (DINASA) which recently took over from SHELL 21  very
dynamic new commercial company called ECOGAZ is currently operating in the LPG
market and related stoves sales not only in the metropolitan region but also in
the north, central and south parts of the country Together with TOTAL/ELF,
ECOGAZ is selling LPG in very small amounts through small refilling facilities
to ease LPG penetration in less fortunate areas and even in suburban or rural
areas 22 Total petroleum product storage capacity is ,688,451 barrels (bbl) Of
this total storage capacity, diesel accounts for 852,405 bbl, gasoline for
369,000 bbl, fuel oil for 178,095 bbl, kerosene for 139,200 bbl and LPG for
23,271 bbl Comparing this storage capacity to the total annual consumption of
petroleum products, including the fuel consumption of power plants, it seems to
be currently () sufficient for - months of petroleum product consumption (see
Appendix ) In terms of storage capacity it is quite sufficient but it is
important to know how much of this capacity holds all the time  strategic
reserve of petroleum products to decrease the country vulnerability to oil
product disruption As an example, European Union countries are obliged to
maintain an oil and oil products stock to cover 90 days of consumption  LPG :
Liquefied Petroleum Gas 23 LPG is one of the sources of energy used by the
household sector and which represents % of the energy balance, with one ton of
LPG being the useful energy equivalent of  tons of charcoal On this basis, it
would require 60,000 tons of LPG to replace the total demand of charcoal [] In
previous study [], the highest annual consumption level for the LPG used in
households was evaluated to 6480 tons Based on the assumption that an average
household uses  cylinders ( cylinder = 25 pounds) of LPG per month, this means
that approximately 31,300 households might be entirely reliant on LPG Also LPG
is used by  number of hotels, restaurants and small enterprises (bakeries, dry
cleaners etc) Coal/Lignite 24 Lignite is founded in three different locations in
the country: Camp Perrin and Lazile in the south, and Maïssade in the central
plateau Camp Perrin lignite is  very small deposit of about less than one
million tons while Lazile is known only for some outcrops The best deposit
according to today studies is located at Maïssade 25 The Maïssade lignite
deposit is located 12 kilometers north-west of Maïssade town (200 kilometers
north of Port-au–Prince), in the central region of the country, with the
following characteristics: − Proven amount − Average depth − Average calorific
content − Average ash content − Average sulphur content  million of tons 10 to
35 meters 2050 kcal/kg 40% % 26 An oil drill located at about  kilometers north-
east of the main deposit, made during oil exploration back in the sixties,
indicates that at about 300 meters depth there are several lignite layers
totalizing 250 meters of thickness Furthermore, the feasibility study of the
above main  million tons deposit has indicated that at about  km south-east and
north-west of this main deposit there are two other probably small lignite
deposits to be linked to the main one by two drills of about 100 feet each in
order to complete the evaluation of the basin 27 Imported coal was mainly used
in fuelling  cement plant but since mid-1980’ Haiti has stopped its imports
Domestic oil and coal exploration (institutional aspects) 28 Haiti is
investigating the potential oil and coal reserves Their exploration is the
responsibility of the Bureau of Mines and Energy (BME), which is in charge of
negotiating concession contracts with private companies, supervise their works
in accordance with the terms of the contracts and report to the Ministry of
Public Works, Transportation and Communications (MTPTC)  Electricity Electricity
generation system 29 According to the law of August , 1971, the Electricité
’Haiti (EDH) was established EDH is an autonomous state-owned, vertically
integrated enterprise that has the monopoly of the production, transmission,
distribution and commercialization of electricity throughout the country EDH is
reporting to the MTPTC that names its Board of Directors 30 The Board of
Directors is based at Port-au-Prince in Metropolitan region while in each other
region the utility maintains delegates to manage its assets The metropolitan
region is the most important area, with three big power plants (total installed
capacity: 87 MW: two thermal, Varreux (95 MW) and Carrefour (92 MW), and one
hydro, Péligre (54 MW) which is subject to  severe sedimentation since long time
yet The other electric regions are: North (65 MW), Artibonite (10 MW), South (25
MW) and Centre-West (92 MW) and the semi-autonomous centre of Jacmel (32 MW)
They have medium and small power plants with installed capacities between 300 kW
and 9850 kW Countrywide the total  installed capacity of EDH is of 11 MW, out of
which 36 MW in thermal technology and 75 MW in hydro power plants The thermal
units are diesel motors using generally diesel oil and rarely heavy fuel oil 31
Independent Power Producers (IPP) have been operating in the electricity sector
in Haiti since The first IPP to sign  contract with EDH, in Cap Haitian, was
Interselect SA in In 1998  Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) was signed in Port au
Prince with the company Haytian Tractor / Energy International for 20 MW
supplied at the Varreux site Next Asservin signed  contract for  capacity of 20
MW, also at Varreux in Asservin became Alstom in 2004 and increased its
contracted capacity to 30 MW with an additional 20 MW standby capacity Outside
of the capital city, Sogener signed four PPAs in 2002 for  total installed
capacity of 24 MW in four regions: Cap Haitien ( MW), Artibonite ( MW), Petit-
Goave ( MW) and Cayes ( MW) 32 The total available capacity is much less than
the installed capacity due to serious problems of maintenance, which lead to
frequent scheduled and unscheduled outages The scheduled overhauls or regular
visits cannot be done on schedule due to lack of spare parts Consequently, EDH
has 172 MW installed capacity in Port- au-Prince, however most of the time only
90 MW are available during the rainy season and 45 MW during the dry season
Total available capacity is higher because at this capacity it should be added
the generation capacity of the IPPs 33 For the fiscal year , EDH had generated
and distributed 469,44 MWh at  very high production and transmission costs
Relatively to the total installed capacity of 11 MW, it shows  very low capacity
factor (degree of utilization of installed capacity) of 25%, as compared to
other Caribbean countries: Dominican  37%, Cuba 37%, Saint Lucia 44%, Trinidad
and Tobago 46%, Jamaica 51%, Barbados 54% and Saint Kitts and Nevis 63% and to
an average of % for the entire region (See Appendix ) 34 The electricity
generation units are supposed to be retired at the end of their lifetime,  after
standard number of operating hours But, because of weak management of scheduled
maintenance and also their inappropriate operation, some installations are
deteriorating faster than normally expected and sometimes they cannot be
repaired or replaced Even though the scheduled maintenance is applied, other
unexpected problems can come up due to bad operation with frequent shortages,
unstable network etc Because of the financial problems the obsolete units cannot
be retired in spite of their low efficiency 35 Because of the deficit of
production registered in the country since the late seventies, EDH lost year by
year its capability of investment, and has decided since 1991 to buy energy from
private companies to overcome this problem During the fiscal year , EDH bought
from private sector 78,181 MWh Consequently, the total electricity supply for
the period was 548,621 MWh Electrical networks 36 At present, electricity in
Haiti is supplied in four main regions The largest, Port-au-Prince, is the only
one with an integrated distribution network, and in the South, Artibonite, and
North there are isolated distribution networks in each region, which are not
connected, neither in the region, nor in between regions Peak load in 2005 was
estimated at about 161 MW in Port-au-Prince,  MW in the South region, 14 MW in
the Artibonite region and 12 MW in the North region 37 Each region has at least
one hydro power plant and several thermal power plants connected to  local grid
For instance, the Metropolitan Region has  local grid where Carrefour, Varreux
and Péligre power plants are interconnected Péligre, located in Plateau Central,
is linked to the Dispatching site in Port-au-Prince by  115 kV transmission line
of 56 km Dispatching Centre interconnects the three power plants by  69 kV
transmission line of 53 km The grid is completed by  /47 kV distribution line of
900 km and  /16 kV distribution line of 20 km The total length of transmission
and distribution lines for the Metropolitan Region is of about 1029 km 38
Because there is no large distance between the power plants and the distribution
area in other regions, the voltage level of transmission and distribution lines
is generally the same Generally it is /23 kV, but for some power plants and
grids of the same region, voltage levels are /47 kV or /16 kV So,  Northern
region has 186 km of lines, Artibonite 219 km, Southern km and Centre-West 150
km The countrywide total length of both transmission and distribution lines is
of 50 km 39 The rate of countrywide electrification is % (legal connexions),
with Metropolitan region %, Northern 12%, Artibonite 32%, Southern 06% and
Centre-West (Jacmel) % 40 The Metropolitan and the Jacmel grids in South-East
region were renovated in 1984-Saint Marc grid in Artibonite region was renovated
in In fact, all the grids are very old and need to be rehabilitated 41 As the
availability rate of the units is low relatively to the demand, the company is
forced to limit the electricity supply in certain regions or/and to purchase
energy from private producers The electricity supply varies in time and from one
region to another, depending on the availability of the units, energy purchase
capability of EDH and the inflow energy of hydroelectric dams:  hours in
Metropolitan region,  hours in Northern, Artibonite, Southern and Centre-West
regions, and 24 hours in Jacmel in October (see Appendix ) In 2005, in Port-au-
Prince Metropolitan area the electricity supply was  to 12 hours daily Technical
and non-technical electricity losses 42 As the majority of the grids are old and
unreliable, and the rate of countrywide electrification is low, the rate of
losses is very high, and consequently, the rate of billing is very low (see
Appendix ) 43 Because of the low reliability of the grids, EDH evaluates the
technical losses at 18% So, from the rate of total losses situated between 02%
and 59%, the non-technical losses or losses by illegal connections vary between
31,02% and 59% during the past five years Although the total losses are also
high in other developing countries: Nigeria 32%, India 27%, Togo 27%, Kenya 22%,
Cameroon 21%, the ratio of unpaid electricity seems to be nowhere as higher as
in Haiti (see Appendix ) 44 Non-technical losses represent financial losses to
the utility mainly due to illegal connections and bad revenue collection Because
of the non-technical losses, the utility is not capable to make the current
maintenance of installations, to buy fuel and thus to start  new production
cycle The lack of electricity contributes to further increases in non-technical
losses and it affects the economic growth, which result in lack of revenues for
people and in the impossibility to pay the electricity bill and also in lack of
revenues for the budget of the Government, which is not able to give direct
subsidies to very poor Finding  solution for  normal electricity production -
selling - money collection - new production cycle is one of the most important
and urgent problems for the utility Illegal consumption of electricity in
households 45 According to Haitian utility data, the invoiced consumption, which
was measured with household meters, was 115 GWh in Under the assumption that 65%
of all commercial (non-technical) losses are in household sector, 151 GWh would
be the illegal consumption in households without meters Total electricity
consumption in households was estimated at 266 GWh About 57% of all consumption
of electricity in households of Haiti represents non-technical (commercial)
losses 46 The number of households with meters in 2002 was 158,000, which is %
of total number of households in Haiti Based on the rough estimate that 30% of
all households are connected to the grid, the number of illegally connected
households is 289,Residential Annual Consumption in 2002 number number % GWh GWh
% KWh/household 159840 36 115 43 727 with meters 284160 64 151 57 528 Without
meters all connected 444000 100 266 100 600 The average annual residential
consumption is 600 kWh Households with meters consume in average more, 727 kWh,
and average non metered (illegal consumption) is 528 kWh 47 The main categories
of electricity consumption in households today are refrigerators, lighting and
TV-audio It is believed that the households illegally consuming electricity use
it mostly for lighting, TV-audio and around one third of them also for
refrigerators Annual Consumption per Appliance kWh per appliance % of households
kWh per connected household 100 84 390  20 600 100 100 900 100 30 30 25 13  20
lighting TV refrigerator wash-machine Rest Total 48  complete analysis and
comments are based on assumed number of households without meters and their
consumption Consumer registration, billing and collecting system should be
improved also to provide more reliable data With such improved data it would be
possible to make more accurate estimates of consumption in households with and
without meters 49 Analysis conducted over available information shows the
following conclusions: 36% of connected and with meter households consume 43% of
the total electricity Those who mainly consume electricity illegally are the
households without meters, but  part of households with meters also use
electricity without proper authorization Out of total electricity consumption by
households in 2002, 57% are commercial losses If we assume that 10 US cents is
the average price of electricity for commercial losses, that means that the
value of commercial losses in households is as large as million US$
Unfortunately, for any under-developed country (with high unemployment, low
purchasing power, and high electricity prices compared to purchasing power),
illegal use of electricity is very widespread phenomenon in households without
meters, but partly also in households with meters Those who duly pay for
electricity see that no measure is taken against those who do not pay for it,
moreover, against those who steal energy, and therefore, it works as  motive for
them to delay their payments 50 The program for the stabilization of the
situation should start by introducing meters on utility account (credits,
donations) where they do not yet exist This initiative is affordable for the
utility and would give the best results in the shortest period of time This will
contribute to  substantial reduction of commercial losses and the residential
consumption could slightly decrease At least one third of households illegally
connected to grid are capable to pay the electricity consumption In  short
period it is possible to install at least 100,000 meters in such households,
this measure bringing yearly around  million US$ to EDH 51 With adequate laws,
regulations and institutions, the illegal electricity consumption could be
reduced Possible measures might consist of installment of pre-payment meters for
careless clients, considerable penalties for illegal energy consumption, and the
possibility of pursuing in court the non-paying consumers  52 The authorities
should apply  program to establish the “social” category of inhabitants and take
their responsibility for these people, having in mind both needs for energy and
social care Measures to help vulnerable customers to pay the consumed
electricity will reduce the illegal electricity consumption 53 Another option
could be the decrease of the consumption by energy efficiency measures as the
distribution of subsidized energy efficient lamps to poor households connected
to grid, and have in this way savings on fuel cost of  US$ per lamp yearly On
the amount of 200,000 lamps it would represent  saving of  million US$ in
electricity bills Hydro potential 54 National hydro potential of Haiti is about
153 MW of which 15% (88 MW) are in 27 micro sites ranking from  to 57 MW with
falls going from 50 to 400 meters These falls can be taped for providing energy
services in isolated areas where the lack of adequate energy services is an
important constraint for local development In the remaining potential are
included  major sites, Artibonite 4C is the most important, totalizing about 130
MW Wind energy 55 Based on wind measurements carried out in 2005 and 2006
general map of the available wind resources was established Detailed maps for
specific regions of interest are currently under elaboration These measurements
confirm past analyses showing that significant wind potential exist in three
parts of Haiti (West, North-west and North) 56 In the western part of the
country, where the electricity demand is higher, there is  site located in
Plaine du Cul de Sac, at North East of Port-au-Prince, between two big mountain
chains named La Selle and Chaine des Matheux known as very windy This “wind
corridor” crossing the Lac Azueï has been confirmed and serious consideration is
being made to take advantage of this resource by building  wind farm 57 In the
north-west,  site with good wind potential is located near the island of La
Tortue, in the Canal du vent between Haiti and Cuba In 1978,  wind farm of 150
kW was installed in Port-de-Paix by EDH with the support of the German
cooperation Two years later, this plant was shut down due to lack of
technological skill and capacity for maintenance Solar energy 58 Haiti has  good
solar energy radiation According to existing estimates, the average radiation is
of about  kWh/m2/day But there is not enough detailed data on the solar
potential Moreover, technical and logistic capabilities to carry out appropriate
studies are not in place 59 Solar energy is mainly used by individuals to
produce electricity and hot water The total solar installed capacity has been
evaluated at about  MW Most of this capacity (80%) is used for lighting and the
rest (20%) goes to vaccines and seafood conservation, pumping, audiovisual and
communication It is important to mention that initial investment costs are very
high for photovoltaic and thermal equipments The propagation of solar technology
in Haiti is restricted also by the following local peculiarities: culinary
habits preventing the use of solar stoves in household sector, corrosion of the
pipeline in the solar water heater, lack of maintenance capability, even theft
of photovoltaic panels at private and public installations etc 60 Solar water
heaters are mostly used in hotel, residence and health centres It is also used
in  slap-dash manner for drying fruits But as said, culinary habits of the
households are also preventing  larger use of the solar stoves  Municipal solid
waste energy 61 The production of urban wastes in metropolitan area (Port-au-
Prince) is evaluated at 730,000 tons/year, at 191,000 tons/year for eight other
big agglomerations (Cap Haïtien, Gonaïves, Les Cayes, Saint-Marc, Verrettes,
Jérémie, Port-de-Paix, Limbé) and at 766,000 tons/year in the rural regions and
small towns The  components of the metropolitan waste6 are the following:
organic maters (75%), stones, charcoal and sands (%), plastics objects (%),
metal (%), paper and cartoon (%), tissues (%) and glasses (%) Many
neighbourhoods do not have public trash removal services Some small private
services exist, but they are relatively expensive There is no separation of
waste from households, companies, hospitals, and construction debris Then,
generally, the gathering is done by hand truck and the removal by truck The two
important landfill sites are located in Truitier, at about 10 kilometers from
Port-au-Prince and in Madeline, at Cap-Haïtien The rate of wastes removal is
estimated to be less than 30% in MAPAP In other cities, they are generally
dumped in rivers and ends up on the coasts Those wastes are generally burnt
However,  little part is used in some areas to produce compost 62 The legal
framework is insufficiently clear regarding the roles of those involved in waste
management, particularly concerning MAPAP and it lacks of technical standards,
adequate financial instruments, coordination mechanisms and  true strategy
regarding the removal, disposal of waste material and eventual energy recovery
For about  years,  Research Unit, with the technical support of the Cooperation
University in Development (CUD) of Belgium, based at the Faculty of Sciences
(State University of Haiti) carried out some research activities in term of
landfill management  Other local energy resources 63 Bagasse: Due to closure of
the sugar cane industry7, the bagasse production and consumption decreased in
Haiti However, the potential of this local energy resource is still remaining
The quantity of the bagasse available each year in the sugar cane mills and
guildives (artisanal alcohol plant) is estimated to 140,000 tons but only 15%
are used The yearly energy potential of the bagasse produced in alcohol industry
(distilleries) in Haiti is between 37 and 56 thousand tons oil equivalent – toe
64 Animal waste (manure): Some pilot experiments have been made in the past to
use those wastes to produce biogas for heating But the production centres were
located in non-appropriate areas The transportation of the raw materials was
handicap for those activities  Key issues involving the Haiti Energy sector
Firewood and charcoal - Deforestation/depletion of forests; - Insufficient
reforestation programmes; - Over use of fuel wood in the economy; - High
consumption of wood in the small and medium enterprises and in households to
generate heat; - Low efficiency of charcoal production technology; - No or
inadequate actions in term of fuel wood substitution/conservation and forest
protection; - Use of wood in construction/building sector, where metal poles can
be used instead; - No incentives to use alternative fuels instead of wood and
charcoal;  Oil and gas sector - No national oil reserves yet discovered; - No
ongoing oil exploration throughout the country; - No use of San Jose accord; -
High financial costs to import derivative petroleum products; - High
vulnerability to oil product price volatility No regulation on strategic oil
product stockpiling; - Lack of enough LPG filling facilities; - Mixing of
gasoline with kerosene to take advantage of the low cost of kerosene; - High
profits of LPG retailers in absence of  price regulation or control  Source: CHF
(Corporation Housing Foundation)  Four sugar plants operated in Haiti during the
1980’: at Léogâne (Darbonne), Cayes, Cap-Haïtien, Port-au-Prince (Varreux) 10
Coal (lignite) deposit - Relatively low proven reserves, capable to feed only
40 MW power plant over 17 years; - High sulphur and ash contents; - Need to have
complete evaluation of the sedimentary basin  Electricity sector - Some thermal
plants are not available for operation due to lack of maintenance; -
Sedimentation of the main hydro dam (Peligre); - Chronic unsupplied electricity
demand; - Illegal connections to the grid and illegal consumption; - Financial
resources not available for purchasing fuel, for repairing some existing plants
and for expanding the electricity generation system; - Isolated electric grids
are not interconnected in an unique national grid; - Insufficient transformers
and meters to replace the damaged ones; - Low reliability of the grid and high
technical losses; - Very high production and transmission costs - Lack of
available capacity in the distribution circuits  Wind energy - High wind
potential, but not used; - Detailed wind maps under elaboration; - Lack of
technical and logistic possibilities to carry out appropriate analysis and
implementation; - Relatively high costs of wind technologies  Solar energy - No
available data on the solar potential; - Lack of technical and logistic
possibilities to carry out appropriate studies; - Initial investment is very
high for photovoltaic and thermal equipments; - Difficult access to financial
credits to purchase equipments for individuals; - Lack of technical expertise to
maintain these equipments; - Corrosion in the pipeline of the solar water
heaters; - Culinary habits of the households preventing the use of the solar
stoves; - Stealing of the photovoltaic solar panels at private and public
installations  Municipal solid waste energy - Uncontrolled landfill waste
disposal; - No sorting of the waste  Bagasse - No utilization of the total
bagasse production; - Hesitation of the alcohol industry owners to use bagasse
as an energy source, under the pretext of its low calorific content  Future
energy needs and supply options  Final energy demand forecast by energy form and
by sector 65 The final energy demand forecast is derived from the MAED (Model
for Analysis of Energy Demand) study, which is part of the “Plan Energetique
National” of Haiti undertaken by Bureau des Mines et de ’Energie (BME),
Electricité de Haiti (EDH) and Ministère des Travaux Publics Transports et
Communications (MTPTC) with the technical support of the International Atomic
Energy Agency 66 The basic assumptions for the final energy demand forecast are
as follows: The expected GDP for year 2015 is 109,84 billion Gourdes, that is
48% higher than in year The corresponding yearly average growth rate during that
period is 65% This relatively low growth rate reflects the political and 11
economical situation during last two years and includes an expected yearly
growth rate of % between 2000-With the international support, particularly with
the ICF (Interim Cooperation Framework),  better economic situation is expected
in the future, reflected by  yearly growth rate of % between  and % between
2010-As far as the future economic structure is concerned, the Manufacturing
subsector of Industry is expected to have the highest growth rate (at least %)
during the period  It is expected to have  slow increase of the population
growth rate until 2015 (% in average for the period , as compared to ,96% during
the recent past years) Under this assumption, the expected number of inhabitants
in 2015 is assumed to be 10,68 million, that represents an increase of 26%
compared to At the same time, the number of households is expected to increase
more,  with 41% in the same period, reaching around  million in It is assumed
that the purchasing power of the population will improve, in turn, more families
would be able to connect to the electric grid and use the electricity (at least
50% of the households will be connected to the main electric grid by 2017) 68 It
is assumed that more efficient equipment and better technologies will be used in
industry, but with higher penetration of the overall electricity use in this
sector As  result, GDP increase will not imply the same rate of energy
consumption 69 By year 2015, it is expected an improvement in the car ownership
to 84 persons per car instead of 100, and  steady decline of fuel consumption
per 100 kilometres due to replacement of the older cars by newer ones and to
improvements in the road infrastructure 70 For year 2015 the total amount of
final energy consumption is estimated at ,04 million toe, which is more than %
compared to year As the increase of the GDP is expected to be of 48% in the same
period, it means  reduction of the energy intensity at the country level (more
efficient use of energy for the generation of value added by economic sectors)
The structure of final energy consumption in year 2015 is expected to be as
follows: fuel wood and charcoal 50% (75% in 2000), motor fuels 20% (15% in
2000), fossil fuels 20% (% in 2000), electricity 10% (% in 2000) and feedstock
close to % (same as in 2000) It can be noticed that the structure of final
energy consumption changes from 2000 to 2015, with the reduction of the share of
non-commercial energy, the increase of the share of motor fuels, fossil fuels
and electricity and no share of feedstock 71 The structure of the final energy
demand by sector in year 2015 shows that households are expected to consume 14
million toe (56%), industry 46 million toe (23%), transportation 34 million toe
(16%), services  million toe (%) Compared to year 2000, it can be noticed
slight decrease in the share of household’ final energy consumption and  slight
increase in the share of the other sectors: industry, transportation and
services 72 Elasticity of final energy, defined as the ratio of average annual
growth of final energy demand during  and average annual growth rate of GDP for
that same period, is 48, which shows an improvement in the final energy
intensity of the country On the other hand, elasticity of electricity for the
same duration is , showing  faster increase of electricity penetration in all
economic and social activities than the GDP growth  Energy supply sector
development options Fuel wood and charcoal, energy substitution to avoid further
deforestation 73 Although the industry and service sectors are not affecting
considerably the total consumption over time as compared to household sector, it
is important to reduce fuel wood and charcoal use in those two sectors Indeed,
the share of fuel wood in industry will decrease from 60% in the year 2005 to
44% in the year 2015 while in service sector its share will go from 56% in 2005
to approximately 30% in 74 Available actions are conservation measures through
dissemination of more efficient charcoal stoves in residential and service
sectors or improved boilers or ovens in small industry, and substitution of fuel
wood by kerosene, LPG, imported charcoal and briquettes produced from waste
cellulosic materials, 12 mainly office paper, cartoon and agricultural wastes
Replacement of wood in construction/building sector by metallic pools may also
be implemented The objectives of ICF concerning the substitution of fuel wood
and charcoal with alternative energy forms are: Deadline Additional households
with LPG ,500 ,700 Additional SMEs with LPG/diesel 100 200 Towns quipped with
solar panels -  kerosene ,500 ,300 March 2005 September 2005 March 2006
September 2006 ,000 ,800 ,000 ,200 350 350   000 000 000 10 Total In addition,
ICF provided for the reforestation of ,000 hectares for energy purposes and
financial support for fuel briquette producers by September 2005 and formulated
National Action Plan for Forests by March Significant efforts in terms of
investment must be made in order to achieve efficient results By 2010, it is
urgent that the following programme of actions for reconstructing/rebuilding the
wood stocks needs to be implemented: - Starting from 2005, annually % of the
total urban families need to switch to another source of energy This implies
that by the year 2015, about 25% of those families (509,400) will be converted
Adding the number of existing families (%) that are already using another energy
source, the respective achievement for the previous target year is % - Beginning
2005, implementation of  conservation programme consisting in the dissemination
of improved stoves to 17% of the families in urban area by the year 2015, that
is approximately 166 thousands of households (see Appendix ) 75 Indeed, the
results of this programme will include 36% of the households using either
kerosene, LPG or improved stoves by the year 2015, the rest will be using
electricity and wood and some traditional stoves Of course, this is  very huge
programme but it is urgent to implement it if the target is to provide enough
fuel for cooking to the population in  relative comprehensive and effective
manner without completely depleting the very small amount of wood stock now
available 76 The number of stoves to be disseminated by 2015 is respectively
153,000 for kerosene, 357,000 for LPG and 166,000 for improved stoves 77 In
addition to this very important substitution and conservation programme,
importation of charcoal must be also implemented and equally effective
implementation of laws that prevent improper wood harvesting to expect relative
conservation and start increasing wood stock by the year To achieve this,
charcoal import should start with 117,000 tons in 2006, to reach approximately
700,000 tons in the year 2009 and then decreasing significantly to less than
200,000 tons by the year 78 If the assumption for the today stock of 18
thousands cubic meters is correct, the above four measures are needed If the
estimated stock is higher than assumed here, there will be no need for such
amount of imported charcoal On the opposite, if the actual estimates are lower,
then the wood sector situation is worst 79 Modeling the future evolution of wood
stock as  function of currently available stock, annual wood consumption,
natural reproduction rate and yearly reforestation indicates how sensitive is
the future 13 wood stock to the variation of the above parameters For example,
any small negative or positive changes either in the natural reproduction rate
of wood or yearly reforestation activities or energy consumption by even less
than 10% it implies automatically  huge variation in the available stock
Consequently, there is  very urgent need to carry out  more comprehensive and
complete study for the fuel wood subsector 80 Yearly cost of the LPG program is
about  million US$, while kerosene is about  million US$ and improved stoves
million US$ Those costs count with  50% of subsidies and also include the
managerial cost of  US$ per stove On the other hand, coal import will cost about
million US$ yearly if  price of US$ 350/ton can be obtained The price of 350/ton
reflects an increment of about 16% of the current price on the local market 81
Substitution of fuel wood by imported energy sources should be considered
carefully The high cost of imported fuel might increase the export/import
imbalance and deteriorate the economic situation of the country Also the country
will be more exposed to external price variations of primary fuels Other
measures should be considered first, such as increase use of local resources
like renewable energy sources and production and use of energetic crops and
forests 82 Some countries in the region like Guyana have lots of wood that can
be exchanged for limestone, which is  very abundant and excellent quality raw
material in Haiti They need limestone for different purposes like soil
amendment, construction, pharmaceutical industry etc They may have interest in
such transactions Energetic forests 83 Energetic forests are  good way to supply
the need for fuel wood and fight deforestation They consist in reforestation by
using fast growing species like “Bayahonde” or regenerating species like
“Bamboo” In fact, the Bayahonde grows anywhere and can be harvested in three
years Concerning the Bamboo it re-grows spontaneously after it is cut Haiti has
lot of land that can be suitable for energetic forests For example “La
Plantation Dauphin” (6000 hectares in one piece of land), “la plantation de
Madras”, Savane désolée, “La-Pierre region”, near Gonaives, the cap of St Marc,
dry region near Port-au-Prince and plain of Cul-de-Sac, west side of the Azuei
lac, dry regions of Cotes de Fer, Miragoane and western part of Gonave island
The trees will be used to produce fuel wood and charcoal Energetic crops 84
Energetic crops might be used as  primary source for bio-fuels These are fast
growing plants, which can be harvested once or twice  year One species of
interest is the “Jathropha” plant which grows well in tropical climates and can
be used for production of bio-diesel or used as fuel wood 85 The Government
should investigate the possibility to promote energetic crops and bio-fuels and
determine the country’ potential for such products Main bio-fuels are: 86
Biodiesel is  renewable fuel that can be manufactured from vegetable oils or
recycled vegetable cooking oil and greases (see Appendix 10) 87 Ethanol is an
alcohol-based alternative fuel produced from any biological feedstoks that
contain appreciable amounts of sugar (sugar beets, sugar cane) or materials that
can be converted into sugar (see Appendix 10) 88 Methanol is an alcohol fuel
made usually from natural gas It could also be made from landfill gas, bagasse
or wood chips Methanol is  liquid fuel that can be used in an internal
combustion engine or  fuel cell (see Appendix 10) 14 Petroleum products 89
Haiti, without domestic crude oil resources, nor refining capacities, is highly
vulnerable to the oil product disruptions and to the volatility of oil product
prices Several response measures are possible to diminish this vulnerability 90
The Government should continue to take advantage of San Jose and Petro Caribe
energy accords They offer to the country various opportunities: preferential
prices for the imported oil products, security of supply and, if necessary,
provide low interest long-term loans for development projects 91 The total
petroleum product storage capacity of roughly ,688,000 barrels (bbl) is
currently () sufficient for - months of petroleum product consumption and for
months in year In terms of storage capacity it is quite sufficient but it is
important how much of this capacity holds all the time  strategic reserve of
petroleum products As  reference, the net importing member states of the
European Union have the obligation to hold oil reserves equivalent to more than
90 days of the previous year’ average daily consumption Some countries have
special laws that regulate the strategic oil reserves and special agencies that
hold and administrate the reserves (Germany, Spain, Hungary, the Republic of
Korea, Czech Republic, Finland, Ireland etc) The experience of Germany [] in
solving the problem of emergency oil reserves could be useful for any oil
importing country The new regulatory body intended to be established in Haiti
should study the necessity of including in the future Energy law() of the
obligation for petroleum companies to hold permanently emergency reserves for
specified period in order to decrease the country vulnerability to oil product
disruption 92 The Government should consider also the implementation of
recycling programme for the used engine oil around the country, which would
reduce the import of this petroleum product and would be also beneficial from
environmental viewpoint 93 The Government should encourage  closer integration
of Haitian petroleum product sector with that of the Dominican Republic, to take
advantage of economy of scale in some joint imports of petroleum products
Domestic lignite production 94 The possible uses of the Maïssade lignite deposit
are: − Feeding  steam power plant of 40 MW running ,500 hours/year for 17 years
or of 30 MW for 25 years, if proved economically effective in comparison with
other plant types, or − Cement production (lignite used as raw material and as
fuel in cement plant) The estimated production cost and necessary investment to
exploit this deposit are: − Production cost: − Total investment cost:  cents/kWh
US$60 million (1980), including the construction of two bridges that will give
access to the mine  Electricity Generation system expansion until 2015 95 The
MAED study had predicted that the electricity peak load for the Port au Prince
grid would reach about 150 MW between 2000 and 2010 and about 165 MW between
2010 and 2015 due to expected economic and social development of the country In
fact in 2005 the peak load had reached 161 MW The Artibonite region is expected
to be connected to the main transmission grid in , when the maximum load will be
30 MW The Northern region will be interconnected in  with  peak load of 37 MW
Because of its low consumption and long distance to the existing transmission
grid, the South region will not be connected to the main transmission grid until
In 2015, this region will reach the peak load of 26 MW All load and electrical
energy needs of these three regions, in the specified time horizons, will be
covered with small diesel units, wind farms and small hydro units Until 2015 the
following new capacities will be required: 25 MW in Artibonite region (until
2012), 25 MW in 15 South region and 30 MW in North region When interconnection
will be in place,  more concentrated generation can be considered with larger,
slower running diesel units or steam turbines 96 In the same period, some
existing electricity generation capacities will be retired, as they will reach
their standard lifetime: about 50 MW during the period  and 45 MW between 2010
and Therefore, new electricity generation capacities will be necessary to meet
the demand with  satisfactory level of reliability of the supply If some 20% of
reserve capacity are considered, then about 200 MW of new capacity must be
installed between  and 240 MW between 2010-The least cost expansion programme
for the Haitian electricity generation system was determined using the IAEA’
model WASP (Wien Automatic System Planning) In order to obtain sound expansion
cost evaluations for the period up to 2015,  longer period (up to 2020) was
considered for the WASP model analysis (see Appendix 11) 97 In recent years
there have been no substantial investments in generation by the public sector
The most recent investments made by EDH were 10 MW in the VARREUX power plant
(1996) and also 10 MW in Carefour power plant (1998) On the other hand, IPPs
have been operating in the electricity sector in Haiti since Currently (2006)
there are PPA contracts between EDH and Alstom for  capacity of 30 MW with an
additional 20 MW standby capacity and with Sogener for  total installed capacity
of 24 MW in four regions: Cap Haitien ( MW), Artibonite ( MW), Petit-Goave ( MW)
and Cayes ( MW) Therefore, for the immediate future () the purchase of
electricity by EDH from private companies will continue to be needed 98 To
attract private investments in electricity generation and at the same time to
protect the end users,  proper legislative and regulatory framework should be
put in place Institutional improvement is also needed, preferably via an
independent regulatory entity  99 IFC plan proposed the addition of  diesel
units of 12 MW at Carrefour power station in 2007, one new power station of 120
MW (  20 MW) in 2012 and some units out of Port-au-Prince (combined cycle, if it
is possible) No hydro units are provided in IFC plan, however Haiti has  good
hydro potential 100 Having in mind all above considerations, the following
electricity generation system expansion options have been considered: Technology
type Fuel Size Construction time Available for operation from year: 2007 2008
2009 2010 2010 2010 2011 2011 2011 2013 2015 Diesel engines Imported heavy fuel
oil  MW 12 MW 10   MW 20 MW 30 MW 60 MW 30 MW 60 MW 120 MW 30 MW 30 MW <  year
year  year  years  years  years  years  years  years  years  years Wind farms
Combustion turbines (simple cycle) - Imported heavy fuel oil Combustion turbines
(combined cycle) Imported heavy fuel oil Steam power plant Hydro power plant
(Artibonite 4C) Domestic lignite - No other hydro options, beside Artibonite 4C
have been considered because the respective technical and economic data were not
available in the detailed format as required by WASP model The new generation
facilities could be either build by EDH or by private investors or by both The
decision of which plants to be build by either party will depend upon analysis
of each particular situation 101 An installation programme for small standard
diesel engines ( MW) in isolated regional networks has been decided exogenously
from WASP optimisation according to the increase in electricity demand in those
regions as follows: 16 Region Year Number of  MW thermal engines Artibonite West
Nord  South 2007 2008 Subtotal (2007- 2008) 2009 2010 2011 2012 Subtotal (2009-
2012) 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Subtotal (2013- 2017) Total              10
18                   32  11   The unit size of  MW or multiples of this size are
suitable for the small annual increase in electricity demand of the respective
regions The localisation by regions (except Port-au-Prince) of these units, in
terms of installed capacity, would be as follows: − − − − region Artibonite –
MW, region South – 20 MW region North – 25 MW region West - 10 MW According to
investors’ experience and preferred equipment, the size of the units may vary,
but the total installed capacity must be fulfilled as in the above table to
cover the estimated electricity demand 102 All the other expansion options were
subject to WASP model optimisation, and the least cost development programme for
the Haitian electricity generation system has been determined based on the
following hypothesis: • discount rate of 14%; • unserved energy cost of
1US$/kWh; • • possibility of electricity purchase by EDH from private companies
at  similar cost to that of the existing purchase agreement (supply fuel and pay
certain amount for the purchased electricity) which results in  total cost of
about 100 US$/MWh salvage value of assets determined based on linear
depreciation method; Optimisation criterion is the minimization of the total
discounted cost (investment + fuel + & + unserved energy – salvage value) of all
possible expansion paths for the electricity generation system 103 The selected
value of the discount rate is consistent with the figures being currently used
in similar studies undertaken for Haiti, with the current interest rates
practiced by the banks for credits in relatively high country risk environment
as is considered for private investments in Haiti 104 In assessing the average
cost of unserved energy for WASP calculations, two reference figures were
available: − the current marginal electricity supply cost of about 100US$/MWh
for the existing electricity purchase agreement; 17 − the final electricity
intensity (ratio of annual final electricity consumption to total GDP) for Haiti
in year 2000 is, according to MAED study, of 256 MWh / 1000 US$ (762 GWh / 2970
million US$), which is equivalent to about ,900 US$/MWh The selected value of
unserved energy for WASP calculations is of  US$/kWh, which is equivalent to
1000 US$/MWh and represents an intermediate penalty, ten times higher than the
current marginal electricity supply option (100 US$/MWh) and 39 times lower than
the equivalent (,900 US$/MWh) of the average final electricity intensity at the
country level (see Appendix 11) 105 In determining the least cost expansion
programme for the Haitian electricity generation system,  difficult decision has
to be taken for the very next years () when some of the considered system
development options: combustion turbines (simple cycle), combustion turbines
(combined cycle), steam power plant, hydro power plant are not available for
operation because their respective long construction time and other practical
reasons In fact, for the very near future only the following electricity supply
options are available: installation of small diesel engines ( MW) in some
isolated regional networks and additional purchase of electricity by EDH from
private companies, which can be applied from 2007 and installation of diesel
engines (12 MW) and/or wind farms (10x1MW), which could be operational by 106
After considering of all the above electricity supply options, with their
respective constraints, the reference least cost programme of electricity
generation system expansion and operation determined with WASP model is the
following: Year Electricity purchase Diesel engines Wind farms Combustion
turbines (simple cycle) 30 MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Combustion turbines
(combined cycle) 60 MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Lignite- fired steam plant
30 MW Hydro power plant 30 MW (GWh)  MW        10      18 32 12 MW - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - 10x 1MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20 MW - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - 60 MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 120 MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- 30 MW - - - -  -     -    11 166 212 378 266 - - - 266 - - - - - - 644 2007
2008 Subtotal 2009 2010 2011 2012 Subtotal 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Subtotal
Total - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - -   107 The following
comments can be made in relation with the reference least cost programme of
electricity generation system expansion and operation: − the installation
programme for the small diesel engines ( MW) in isolated regional networks has
been decided exogenously from WASP optimisation according to the increase in
electricity demand of those regions; the WASP optimisation doesn’ confirm the
provisions of the ICF plan related to the addition of  diesel units of 12 MW at
Carrefour power station in 2007, one new power station of 120 MW (  20 MW) in
2012 and some units out of Port-au-Prince (combined cycle, if it is possible);
the diesel engines of 12 MW are not chosen in competition with the electricity
purchase in period  and with installation of combined cycle units, 30 MW, in
period  because of their high overnight pure capital investment cost (950
US$/kW) and of their low efficiency (%); the wind farms of 10   MW are not
selected in competition with the electricity purchase in period  and with
installation of combined cycle units, 30 MW, in period  because of their high
overnight pure capital investment cost (1500 US$/kW) and low capacity factor of
30% (reflected in WASP calculations through the forced outage rate parameter); −
− − 18 − the combustion turbines (simple cycle), in all size options, are not
selected in competition with the electricity purchase in year 2007 and with
installation of combined cycle units, 30 MW, in period  because of their lower
efficiency (%); the combined cycle units of 30 MW are preferred to all other
expansion options, starting with their first year of availability for operation
(2010), because of their higher efficiency (%); this technology can have an even
higher efficiency but conservative figures have been selected purposely in this
study; the size of 30 MW for the combined cycle units is preferred to the other
two sizes (60 MW and 120 MW) for the same technology, in spite of its higher
specific investment cost, because of its better fit to the consumption and the
low annual increase of the electricity demand; the lignite-fired steam power
plant, 30 MW, is not selected in competition with combined cycle units, 30 MW,
because of its higher overnight pure capital investment cost (2300 US$/kW) and
of its lower efficiency (%); the hydro power plant Artibonite 4C is selected for
installation in 2014, and its availability for operation the next year(2015) − −
− − 108 The capital cash flow for electricity generation system expansion and
operation for the reference least cost expansion programme is as follows:
Capital cash flow for electricity generation system expansion and operation, by
year and by period (million US$) New capacity construction (including IDC1)
Electricity purchase Year Fuel cost & cost Total 2007 2008    Subtotal 2009 2010
2011 2012 91 13 - - - - - - - -  Subtotal 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 127 Subtotal
Grand total Note:  IDC - Interest during construction It should be mentioned
that the cost of new capacity construction are not specified for the
commissioning year of the unit but for its construction years, according to the
“-curve” of capital expenditure 109 The average cost of the sent out electricity
from the power plants, calculated as the ratio of the “discounted total
expansion and operation cost” and “discounted electricity demand” is of US$/MWh
(79 US¢/kWh) if calculated for the period , and US$/MWh (47 US¢/kWh) if
calculated for the period 2007-The average cost is lower when calculated for the
period  because between  many existing generating units with low efficiency are
retired and replaced with combined cycle units with higher efficiency 110 The
total costs for electricity generation system expansion and operation will
represent between % (in 2007) and % (in 2009) of the total GDP of Haiti, out of
which the expansion costs will be between % (in 2007) and % (in 2009) of total
GDP As it can be noticed, the year 2009 will be the 19 year with the highest
financial effort both for the operation of the electricity generation system and
for its expansion (in this year several combined cycle units, 30 MW, and two
diesel units,  MW, will be in different construction stages 111 The above least
cost expansion programme is valid for the following intervals of variation of
the main economic parameters: • discount rate: %; • • cost of unserved energy: -
US$/kWh; cost of additional electricity purchases from private companies:
inferior or equal to 126 US$/MWh 112 For the discount rate of 13%, the hydro
power plant Artibonite 4C is advanced by one year, in 2014 instead of For the
discount rate of 12%, the hydro power plant Artibonite 4C is also advanced in
2015 but, in addition, one wind farm is included as part of the least cost
expansion programme in year 2007 and some combined cycle units, 30 MW, are
postponed for one year, the total number in years 2016 and 2021 remaining the
same For the discount rate of 20%, the hydro power plant Artibonite 4C is not
selected anymore as part of the least cost expansion programme and, on the other
hand, some combined cycle units, 30 MW, are advanced by one year, 12 units being
asked until 2016, instead of 11 units in the reference expansion programme 113
For the cost of unserved energy of  US$/kWh, only 10 combined cycle units, 30
MW, are selected until 2016, instead of 11 units in the reference least cost
expansion programme and three wind farms of 10 MW are selected in years 2007,
2011 and For the cost of unserved energy of  US$/kWh, some combined cycle units,
30 MW, are advanced by one year but the total number of asked units until 2016
remain the same (11 units) 114 For the cost of additional electricity purchases
from private companies equal or superior to 127 US$/MWh the installation of
wind farm in year 2007 become more attractive than the electricity purchase 115
The annual amounts of additional electricity purchases by EDH from private
companies or from Dominican Republic (if possible) are quite large: 166 GWh in
2007 (% of the estimated annual electricity demand), 212 GWh in 2008 (%) and 266
GWh in 2007 (%) If they are not available at  cost inferior or equal to 126
US$/MWh or they are not entirely available, than the only possible alternative
options are: • unserved electricity in years , before the commissioning of the
five combined cycle units, 30 MW, in 2010, with the inherent damages caused to
consumers (see the rationale for the cost of unserved energy); installation of
five diesel units, 12 MW, and of four wind farms, 10   MW, in year 2008
(alternative expansion programme) • 116 This alternative expansion programme
will result in additional total cost of million US$, as shown in the next table
Difference in costs between the reference expansion programme (with additional
electricity purchase) and alternative expansion programme (without additional
electricity purchase) (million US$) New capacity construction cost (including
IDC) Expansion programme Electricity purchase Fuel cost & cost Total Reference
Alternative Alternative – Reference  -117 The construction costs of the new
capacities are higher in the case of Haitian electricity generation system
because of its small size, asking for small unit sizes with higher specific
investment cost than the 20 larger similar units From this point of view,
deeper integration of the electric systems of Haiti and Dominican Republic would
be beneficial to both countries, but especially to the lower system, for several
reasons: - Scale effect: larger interconnected system would allow for higher
unit sizes with smaller specific investments; - Peak load of interconnected
system lower than the sum of the respective peak loads at isolated operation
and, therefore, lower necessary peak capacities; - Mutual assistance in case of
unit outages and, consequently, lower necessary reserve capacities; -
Coordination of unit scheduled maintenance Systematic provision of resources for
power generation 118 Currently EDH is facing many problems in procuring the
necessary fuel (diesel oil and heavy fuel oil) for electricity generation
Sometimes, units are not running because EDH doesn’ have enough financial
resources to buy fuel or spare parts Generation division of EDH always
elaborates fuel budget that is never applied Therefore, the company must benefit
some financial assistance to restart  normal activity cycle: electricity
production – selling - money collection - new production cycle Transmission and
distribution network 119 Transmission and distribution network must be
rehabilitated to facilitate the energy transfer to the customers Some
substations and distribution networks need to be upgraded and due to population
growth and extension of cities 50,000 new customers per year must be reached but
only 15 km of extension line are built per year Broken transformers and poles
must be replaced by new ones, too Systematic maintenance of capacities 120 EDH
must be given the capability to implement the scheduled maintenance program of
its generating units and lines according to its internal standards and to the
international good practice Periodic study on electric system development 121
The Public Utility Ministry, MTPTC, should undertake periodically (every two
years, for example)  comprehensive study, with  time horizon of about 10 years,
on electric system development, including generating capacity additions,
transmission grid reinforcement, distribution network extension to new areas,
the role of renewable energy resources in grid-connected regions and for local
electricity production in remote from grid areas (for example, hybrid
combinations of small diesel units + wind farms + solar energy) etc The
conclusions of this study, including the list of necessary investments with
probable deadlines, should be made available to interested entities (investors,
banks etc) Ministers in other countries usually publish this public document on
their web sites [] In this way the prospective investors will be informed on the
future needs of the utility and will be able to respond to solicited timetable
and capacity requirements Electricity commercialisation 122 EDH has the
objective to increase the billing rate from 47% to 75% during 15 years by: - - -
- verifying the good conditions of each meter; rehabilitating ,700 existing
meters and connections per year (PREPSEL Project); establishing collective
meters for overpopulated areas; eliminating the illegal connexions by using
tough measures as arrest, promotion of new energy law and acquiring new meters
and accessories to connect consumers; reducing the customer’ debt by
implementing an aggressive policy of electricity cost recovery; building new and
“performing” service centres close to the customers; - - 21 - Increasing the
number of customers by extending the networks 123 The previous measures will
contribute also to fulfill the objectives of ICF related to the increase of
billing rate in Port-au-Prince (reduction of non-technical losses): − March
2007: − September 2007: − March 2008: − September 2008: 55% 57% 60% 62% 124
Increase the number of hours of electricity supply per day according to the
objectives of ICF: Port-au-Prince 12 hours/day 18 hours/day 24 hours/day Rest of
the provincial networks  hours/day 18 hours/day 24 hours/day − September 2007: −
September 2008: − September 2009: New legal framework 125 In order to make
possible fulfillment of the above objectives the revision of the existing
legislation and proposal for  new legal framework to appropriately reflect the
new situation in the electricity sector is necessary For example, the proposal
for the law against illegal connection to the electric networks was elaborated
and submitted to the parliament before This proposal was never voted until now,
in spite of the fact that it is crucial for solving the problem of non-technical
losses Logistic and human resources 126 The utility company needs to buy new
machinery and equipment to improve the maintenance of the grid EDH needs to
upgrade and make reliable also its information and telecommunication (IT)
system, which is not working satisfactorily Due to political and socio-economic
problems,  lot of well-trained employees left the company to go abroad or to
another job These human resources have not been replaced and some young
employees who just came don’ have enough experience EDH needs to invest into
staff and technician formation and to hire motivated young engineers Incentives
should be used to motivate employees, such as  good salary policy  Wind energy
127 Modern wind farms can produce electricity for US$/MWh, all cost (initial
capital cost, maintenance) included, depending on the site wind resource
variation For new large wind turbines (>  MW) the investment cost is of about
1500$/kW, while for small wind turbines (<  MW) the investment cost will be
higher:  $/kW Therefore, fiscal (tax incentives) and regulatory instruments
(“net metering” concept, mandatory dispatching, promoting schemes) might be
applied to improve the economic feasibility of small wind development Average
capacity factor (CF) of wind farms is site- dependent and usually ranges between
% Reliability has improved steadily and most wind turbine manufacturers now
guarantee availabilities of 95% 128 In the case of renewable energy projects, in
general, and also for wind energy projects, one of the main prerequisites for
attracting potential investors is  basic set of data identifying key resource
and describing the likely quantity and quality of such resources In this
respect, wind mapping of the country and site-specific monitoring is necessary
wind mapping activity is ongoing and is scheduled to be finished at the end of
129 United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) developed the Solar and Wind
Energy Resource Assessment (SWERA) pilot project (June 2001 – July 2004), for
wind and solar resource assessment in major areas of developing countries (DCs)
in South America, Central America (including Caribbean region), large portions
of Africa, and South and East Asia [] The thirteen countries included in the
SWERA pilot project include: Bangladesh, Brazil, China, Cuba, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Ghana, 22 Guatemala, Honduras, Kenya, Nepal, Nicaragua, and Sri Lanka
The objective of SWERA project is to provide high resolution solar and wind
resource data and geographic information assessment tools to public and private
sector executives who are involved in energy market development The overall goal
is to promote the integration of wind and solar alternatives in national and
regional energy planning and sector restructuring as well as related policy-
making Global and regional maps will be available to all DCs  Solar energy 130
Solar energy can be used in two ways: using solar water heaters (SWH) to produce
hot water and thus to offset the need for electric or fossil fuel water heating
or using photovoltaic (PV) cells to convert the sun’ light into direct current,
which can be used as it is or stored in batteries United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Division for Technology, Industry and Economics (DTIE), Solar
and Wind Energy Resource Assessment (SWERA) pilot project, can provide also
detailed information (mapping) on the solar resource in Haiti  Municipal solid
waste energy 131 The transition strategy of the Haiti Government has three
priorities related to solid waste: - Ensuring the effective and efficient
collection/removal of solid waste in MAPAP and main secondary cities; - Ensuring
an adequate treatment/elimination of solid waste in compliance with social and
environmental norms; - Strengthening the legal, institutional, and financial
framework at the national and municipal level, including the adoption of
“National Plan for Management of Solid Waste” by March 2007 and creation of
National Waste Agency (NWA) by September No mention is made about the intention
of energy from waste recovery 112 The available options for the resource
recovery from solid waste are: recycling, composting, incineration with/without
energy recovery, fuel production through  fermentation process, and landfill
disposal (with/without collection of the methane gas generated by the landfill)
The future National Waste Agency will certainly decide what are the most
suitable actions to take on this matter However, the technologies for energy
from waste recovery are costly and Haiti probably will not afford them until
2017, the time horizon of the present Energy Development Plan  Objectives of the
energy policy of the Haitian Government 132 The objectives of the Haiti
Government related to the energy sector are as follows: − Support the
recapitalization of enterprises in difficulty (case of EDH); − − − Strengthening
the State’ regulatory role in key sectors of the economy, including energy; −
Prepare and implement the reforms needed to create favorable environment for
local and Improve and modernize the management of public enterprises in key
sectors, including EDH; Improving the production and distribution of electricity
in the country; foreign investment; − Put priority on  significant improvement
in the provision of electricity in the country; − Promotion of alternatives to
fuel wood and the promotion of renewable energies 133 More specifically, the
Government of Haiti has established the following priority objectives for EDH: −
Establishment of  management contract for EDH − Maintain electrical service for
at least 12 hours per day in Port-au-Prince and in the rest of the country; −
Stabilization of EDH and establishment of conditions necessary for its recovery;
− Improvement of the quality of services and customer care; 23 − Reduction of
technical losses and increase of efficiency; − Special attention to improve
collection rate and commercial profitability; − Reduction of fraud and theft of
electricity; − Obtaining better conditions in the PPA contracts with private
producers, taking into account the interests of both parties 134 To stabilize
EDH and enhance its services,  medium-term ( years) management contract is
envisaged, as well as implementation of  medium-term investment plan designed to
increase access to electricity of the population from % at present to 20% by 135
Conservation of natural resources, especially forests This can be done by
several measures: − Support for more efficient use of charcoal and fuel wood; −
Reforestation of strategic areas for safety of population, environmental
protection and tourism; − Generation of energetic forests; − Conversion to
diesel, bio-diesel and to LPG of ,000 small enterprises that use wood as fuel; −
Financial support to cellulose briquette producers; − Initiation of  study to
determine the feasibility of wood imports or exchanges with lime; − Promotion of
renewable energies (wind and solar) through institutional reinforcement (and
improved access for the poor to energy services) 136 Promotion of bio-fuels This
can be achieved through incentives for growing energetic crops and by
encouraging investments in facilities for bio-fuels production and use Main bio-
fuels are bio-diesel, ethanol and methanol produced from bagasse and different
fast growing plants  Energy sector reform 137 The reform of energy sector today
should be guided by the idea of finding the most suitable form of partnership
between public needs and private interests Haiti public needs in energy sector
are mainly defined by the terrible deforestation of the country and low level of
electricity supply Public interest is to switch cooking from firewood and
charcoal to fossil fuels, and increase the efficiency of cooking, and to enlarge
electricity distribution network, to connect more households to the grid, to
have secure and reliable electricity supply and increase electricity generation
capacity Private interest is to make profit Only market forces are not capable
to acceptably solve all of these issues There is need for state intervention
through the reform of energy sector, institutional and legal framework, new
institutions such as  regulatory entity and new and immediate measures In such
design of rules in energy sector, there must be enough space for private
capital, and through the laws and secondary legislation, clear and secure way to
make profit in energy activities 138 There is  need to prepare the Concept of
Energy Sector Reform compatible with this National Energy Plan This Concept,
adopted by government, must have the consensus of all parties in the country In
such  concept must be stressed the basic ideas about all main issues in energy
sector, including the ways of privatisation, ways of development of energy
markets, ways of regulation, ways of implementing renewable energy sources and
energy efficiency, needed new institutions and measures etc After the adoption
of such an integral concept, there is need to prepare Energy law and secondary
legislation 139 Basically, Haiti needs to develop transmission and distribution
of electricity Generation of electricity, especially in new units could be
private through the concept of IPP (Independent Power Producer) is now  reality
in Haiti The presence of IPPs, plus free access to the electric networks define
the concept of the “single buyer market” 140 In order to have  management with
better skills immediately, which is really needed, there is the option to call
tender for the operator of the electrical networks In this way, ownership is by
the state, so government can provide energy strategy, but  private company is
operator of the electrical networks 24 and can transfer knowledge and technology
In this way the private capital is not an owner, and is not interested to
maximise the profit through slow enlargement of networks If such operators have
to build and operate networks, it is necessary to introduce new institutions,
regulation of energy activities, to define tariffs and interest rate on invested
capital, and to protect the consumers 141 Oil products market is typically
private activity, but in order to prevent deforestation by replacing fuel wood
and charcoal consumption with LPG and kerosene, there are needs to have clear
definition of relations between private investors and government (subsides,
incentives), which can be defined in Oil sector law and secondary legislation
For the implementation of these laws  National Authority and agencies working on
site need to be established 25  Energy sector development plan Energy
Development Plan for Haiti until 2017 Deadline Responsible institution Action
Necessary financial resources (million US$) Short-term actions (until end 2008)
Fuel wood and charcoal Implement the objectives of ICF concerning the
substitution of fuel wood and charcoal with alternative energy forms: 21,000
households converted to LPG; ,000 households converted to kerosene; 1000 SMEs
converted to LPG/diesel oil; 10 villages equipped with solar panels ,000
hectares reforested, and financial support for fuel briquette producers
Implement the following fuel wood and charcoal substitution programme: 669,000
households converted to LPG 287,000 households converted to kerosene 166,000 new
stoves in households 143,000,000 tons of imported charcoal Initiate  feasibility
study on an exchange (barter) wood-limestone between Haiti and Guyana or other
countries Implement an energetic forest programme in the following regions: -
Dauphin Plantation (,000 hectares), Madras Plantation, Savane désolée, “La-
Pierre region”, near Gonaives, the cap of St Marc, dry region near Port-au-
Prince and plain of Cul-de-Sac, east side of the Azuei lac, dry regions of Côtes
de Fer, Miragôane and western part of Gonave island September 2008 (according to
ICF) SEEMT/BME/MDE   12, (LPG) , (kerosene) ,997 (stoves) , (import of charcoal)
(according to this Plan) SEEMT/BME/MDE  SEEMT/BME/MDE February 2007 COST NOT YET
DEFINED  MDE/MARNDR May 2007 COST NOT YET DEFINED  Petroleum products
MTPTC/SEEMT/BME/ MEF Activate and take advantage from Caracas energy and
PETROCARIBE accords Initiate  study on the possibility of producing domestic
alternative fuels: biodiesel, ethanol, methanol etc Initiate  study on the
possibility of implementing  recycling programme for the used engine oil March
2006 COST NOT YET DEFINED -  MTPTC/SEEMT/BME/ MDE 2007 COST NOT YET DEFINED
MTPTC/SEEMT/EDH/ BME 2007 COST NOT YET DEFINED  Encourage  closer integration of
26 Haitian petroleum product sector with that of the Dominican Republic
MTPTC/SEEMT/MEF/ MCIT/BME  COST NOT YET DEFINED  Electricity SEEMT/MTPTC
Financial audit by international firms launched for EDH February 2006 (according
to ICF)  Preparation of  management contract for EDH SEEMT/MTPTC March 2007
(according to ICF) March 2007 10 Improvement of the EDH Formation Centre
Implement the objectives of ICF related to the increase of billing rate in Port-
au- Prince: EDH COST NOT YET DEFINED 11 March 2007 - September 2008 (according
to ICF) EDH − March 2007: 55% − September 2007: 57% 60% 12 March 2008: September
2008: 62% Implement the objectives of ICF for the increase of the number of
hours of electricity supply per day in Port-au- Prince: September 2007 –
September 2008 (according to ICF) − September 2007: 12 hours/day − September
2008: 18 hours/day − September 2009: 24 hours/day EDH and in the rest of the
provincial networks: 13 - - September 2007:  hours/day September 2008: 18
hours/day September 2009: hours/day 24 Install at least 100,000 meters in
households, this measure bringing yearly around  million US$ to EDH Disseminate
200,000 energy efficient lamps to households and have in this way savings on
fuel cost of  million US$ yearly Start undertaking the necessary studies and
procedures for the installation until the end of year 2009 of the five combined
cycle units included in the reference expansion programme of the electricity
generation system Implementation of the reference programme of the electricity
generation system expansion for : 2007:  diesel units,  MW 2008:  diesel units,
MW Rehabilitation of engines at Varreux and Carrefour power plants and
rehabilitation of heavy fuel oil auxiliaries Upgrade of the 10 MVA power
transformer at Croix des Bouquet power station Upgrade of the 10 MVA power
transformer at Canape Vert power station Addition of 2x20 MVA, 69 kV at Varreux
substation EDH March 2007  14 EDH June 2007 28 15 EDH June 2007 COST NOT YET
DEFINED 16 EDH  * 17 EDH 2006  18 2007 33 EDH 19 2007 33 EDH 20 2007 29 EDH 21
22 Renewal of tool sets for network repair Conversion of voltage level from 16
2007  EDH 27 kV to 47 kV at Carrefour Feuille substation Addition of  wind farms
of 10 MW Rehabilitate small hydro units Establish spare parts stock for the
power plants EDH   23 EDH EDH EDH 2008 2007 2007 13  24 25 26 27 Study on the
interconnection Peligre – EDH 2007 01 Hinche Supply of new equipment for Port-
au- Prince metropolitan distribution network EDH 2007  28 29 Expansion of 600 km
distribution lines in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area 30 Expansion of 720
km distribution lines in urban area out of Port-au-Prince 31 Rehabilitation of
720 km electric lines EDH 2007  EDH 2007 34 EDH 2007 73 around Port-au-Prince
Rehabilitation of ,200 km electric lines in urban area out of Port-au- Prince
Initiate  study on  deeper integration of the electric systems of Haiti and
Dominican Republic Undertaking of  periodic comprehensive study on electric
system development (time horizon of 10 years) with public conclusions Initiate
study on the possible improvements of electricity tariff system EDH 2007 95 32
EDH 2007  33 EDH 2007 and every two-three years  34 EDH 2007 COST NOT YET
DEFINED 71 19 35 36 New line Peligre / Hinche + substation 37 EDH EDH
Increasing the level of Peligre dam from  to   Wind and solar energy Contact
UNEP, SWERA pilot project, in order to receive all the available information on
the wind and solar resources in the country SEEMT/BME/MDE 2006 COST NOT YET
DEFINED 38 Energy sector reform Prepare and summit to the Parliament for vote
the document Concept of Energy Sector Reform Prepare Energy law() and secondary
legislation of the energy sector TOTAL COST NOT YET DEFINED MTPTC/SEEMT/BME EDH
MTPTC/SEEMT/BME EDH 2007 39 2007 COST NOT YET DEFINED 40 Medium-term actions ()
Electricity Implementation of the reference programme of the electricity
generation system expansion and operation for : 2009:  diesel units,  MW 2010:
diesel units,  MW and  combined cycle units, 30 MW 2011:  diesel units,  MW
2012:  diesel units,  MW and  combined cycle unit, 30 MW New Peligre / Cap
Haitien, 107 km, 115 kV, single circuit line EDH  *  EDH  New line Fort Liberté
– Ouanaminthe, EDH   24 km, 23 Kv Energy sector reform 28 Summit to the
Parliament for vote the Energy law() TOTAL MTPTC/SEEMT/BME/ EDH 2008 COST NOT
YET DEFINED Long-term actions () Electricity Implementation of the reference
programme of the electricity generation system expansion and operation for :
2013:  diesel units,  MW and  combined cycle unit, 30 MW 2014:  diesel units,
MW and  combined cycle unit, 30 MW 2015:  diesel units,  MW and Artibonite 4C
hydro power plant, 30 MW 2016:  diesel units,  MW and  combined cycle unit, 30
MW 2017:  diesel units,  MW and  combined cycle unit, 30 MW TOTAL EDH  *  Note:
* The costs of new capacity construction in electricity generation sector are
not specified for the commissioning year of the unit but for the construction
years, according to the “ curve” of capital expenditure (in one year/period may
be specified  cost amount including expenditures from several units that will be
commissioned in future years) 29  List of abbreviations and acronyms Bbl BME Bpd
CCI (ICF) DCs EDH ESMAP GDP IAEA IEA ICF (CCI) ICFC IHSI IPP Kgoe LPG MAED MAPAP
MARNDR Barrel of oil Bureau des Mines et de ’Energie (Bureau of Mines and
Energy) Barrels per day Cadre de Coopération Intérimaire (Interim Cooperation
Framework) Developing countries Electricité de Haiti (Electricity of Haiti)
Energy Strategic Management Assessment Program Gross Domestic Product
International Atomic Energy Agency International Energy Agency Interim
Cooperation Framework (Cadre de Coopération Intérimaire) Institute of
Cooperation Franco-Caribbean ’Institut Haitien de Statistiques et ’Informatique
Independent Power Producer kilogram of oil equivalent Liquefied petroleum gases
Model for Analysis of Energy Demand Metropolitan area of Port-au-Prince
Ministère de ’Agriculture des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural
Ministry of Environment (Ministère de ’Environnement) Municipal solid waste
Ministère des Travaux Publics Transports et Communications (Ministry for Public
Works, Transportation and Communications) National Waste Agency Latin American
Energy Organization (Organisation Latino- Américaine de ’Energie) Projet pour la
Réduction des Pertes sur le Système Electrique Small and Medium-size Enterprise
Solar and Wind Energy Resource Assessment Solar water heater Tons of oil
equivalent United Nations Environment Programme Wien Automatic System Planning
package MDE MSW MTPTC NWA OLADE PREPSEL SME SWERA SWH Toe UNEP WASP 30
References [] Latin American Energy Organization, European Commission, Energy-
Economic Information System, Energy Statistics, Version No 14, Quito, July 2002
[] Pete Young and Bétonus Pierre, Haiti Energy Situation, April 1996 [] Energy
Strategic Management Assessment Program (ESMAP), Stratégie pour ’énergie
domestique en Haiti, 1991 [] Republic of Haiti, United Nations, World Bank,
European Commission, Inter-American Development Bank, Interim Cooperation
Framework , Summary Report, July 2004 [] Klaus Johanssen, The German
Stockholding System and Experience, IEA/China Seminar on Oil Stocks and
Emergency Response, Beijing, China, -10 December 2002 [] National Grid Company,
National Grid Seven Year Statement, March 2004,  [] United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), Division for Technology, Industry and Economics (DTIE), Energy
and Ozon Action Unit, Solar and Wind Energy Resource Assessment (SWERA) pilot
project,  31 10 Appendices Appendix : Final energy consumption per capita in
Latin America and Caribbean in 2001 Appendix : Final energy intensity in Latin
America and Caribbean in 2001 32 Appendix : Charcoal production conversion
factor Average heat content of fuel wood: 10-20MJ/kg, depending of the moisture
content; lets suppose 15MJ/kg for an average moisture content; average heat
content of charcoal: 30MJ/kg; Heat content of  kg of wood =   15MJ = 75MJ; Heat
content of  kg of charcoal = 30MJ; So, the conversion efficiency is 30 = 40% for
average moisture wood, 30 = 60% for high moisture wood and 30 = 30% for low
moisture wood; Depending on what kind of wood is used for charcoal preparation
Appendix : Petroleum product storage capacities STORAGE CAPACITY (IN BARRELS)
LPG GASOLINE DIESEL KEROSENE AVGAS FUEL OIL ASPHALT OTHER TOTAL Companies Public
& Private ESSO 18,000 43,000 ,000 11,000 ,400 83,400 NATIONAL ,340 27,500 47,500
10,000 45,000 ,780 ,300 143,420 TEXACO 23,500 50,000 46,000 112,000 231,500 ,000
TROPIGAS ,000 HAITI GAS 714 714 TOTAL/ELF 14,265 300,000 650,000 76,200 ,040,465
,952 ECOGAS ,952 STATE ENTERPRISES 84,000 84,000 GOVERNMENT 61,905 38,095
100,000 TOTAL 23,271 369,000 852,405 139,200 112,000 178,095 ,780 ,700 ,688,451
Supposing that final consumption represents only 75% of total consumption of
petroleum products, because 25% represents the fuel consumption of power plants
(see item 15 in the main report) Total annual consumption Monthly consumption
bbl 5549002 7643091 10294334 14071770 10308810 bbl 05 88 462417 25 1172648
Current storage capacity Storage capacity (in monthly consumption) bbl ,688,451
months        33 Appendix : Capacity factor of electricity generation in the
Caribbean, 2002 Capacity factor of electricity generation in the Caribbean, 2002
Installed capacity (MW) Net generation (GWh) Capacity factor (%) Saint Kitts and
Nevis 20 110 63 Aruba (NETH) 150 810 62 Barbados 170 800 54 Netherlands Antilles
(NETH) 210 1000 54 Jamaica 1400 6290 51 Puerto Rico 4900 22090 51 Saint
Vincent/Grenadines 20 90 51 Bahamas, The 400 1720 49 Trinidad and Tobago 1420
5740 46 Virgin Islands, British () 10 40 46 Saint Lucia 70 270 44 Grenada 40 150
43 Antigua and Barbuda 30 110 42 Dominica 20 70 40 Cayman Islands () 120 410 39
Cuba 4410 14410 37 Dominican Republic 2950 9580 37 Virgin Islands,  320 1040 37
Guadeloupe (FR) 420 1160 32 Haiti 240 620 30 Martinique (FR) 120 1180 -
Montserrat ()   - Total 17440 67690 Source: US-DOE, Energy Information
Administration, Caribbean Fact Sheet, July 2004 Appendix : Electricity supply
hours by Regions in 2004 Electric supply hours (hours/day) From 12 to 16 20 to
24 20 to 24 20 to 24  to  24 Region or city Metropolitan Region Northern Region
Artibonite Region Southern Region Center-West Jacmel city Appendix : Statistics
of EDH commercialization Department from  to  Item Total production (GWh) Total
energy sold (GWh) Total losses (GWh) Rate of total losses Rate of billing Rate
of money collection Average tariff      10 58 12 92 98 65 02% 32% 98% 68% 50%
72% 23 85 38 33% 67% 04% 87 95 92 58% 42% 41% 29 22 07 59% 41% 66% 35 gourde/KWh
7607 7607 0934 0934 1883 Appendix : Electricity losses by country (%) OECD
average  Ethiopia Indonesia & Egypt Philippines Sudan Algeria Cameroon &
Zimbabwe 21 Kenya India & Togo 27 Nigeria Haiti 10 14 15 16 22 32  Source: IEA,
World Energy Outlook 2002, Chapter 13 - Energy and Poverty Appendix : Energy
substitution and conservation programmes ENERGY SUBSTITUTION PER PRODUCT 2007
,029 ,155 ,184 247,273 ,474 2012 ,184 ,155 ,339 450,854 ,692 2017 ,357 ,155 ,512
669,506 13,706 2022 ,551 ,155 ,706 910,683 17,797 LPG number Existing Total LPG
LPG usef GWh LPG final Toe LPG final 1000  Kerosene number Existing Total
kerosene kero usef GWh kero final Toe kero final 1000  ,012 ,067 ,079 105,974
,346 ,079 ,067 ,145 193,223 ,154 ,153 ,067 ,219 286,931 ,874 ,236 ,067 ,303
390,293 ,627 LPG and KERO RELATED INVESTMENT TILL 2017 with  subsidy of 50% of
the equipment    30  33 18,173 ,211 KEROSENE 15  18 ,248 ,283 Equipment ( US$ )
Managerial cost ( US$) Investment per unit ( US$) Investment for 10 years (106
US$) Yearly cost (106 US$) 36 ENERGY CONSERVATION PROGRAMM 2000 2007 2012 2017
2022 2027 2032 15, ,100 ,600 ,220 ,400 ,148 ,509 ,509 ,000 ,220 ,000 ,000 ,340
,220 ,000 15, ,100 ,591 ,220 ,409 ,149 ,578 ,578 ,000 ,220 ,000 ,000 ,340 ,220
,000 15, ,106 ,556 ,236 ,444 ,164 ,582 ,511 ,878 ,220 ,071 ,122 ,340 ,235 ,071
16, ,115 ,520 ,259 ,480 ,184 ,587 ,421 ,717 ,220 ,166 ,283 ,340 ,254 ,166 19,
,126 ,480 ,280 ,520 ,206 ,581 ,297 ,511 ,220 ,284 ,489 ,340 ,279 ,284 21, ,138
,440 ,309 ,560 ,234 ,569 ,151 ,266 ,220 ,418 ,734 ,340 ,308 ,418 25, ,150 ,400
,340 ,600 ,264 ,547 ,000 ,000 ,220 ,547 ,000 ,340 ,340 ,547 Eff Noncomm Eff Wood
Share Eff Charcol Share Eff Noncomm number of HH with Charcol Old Share eff Old
New Share eff New Eff Charcoal new Charcoal stove numb INVESTMENT COST TILL 2017
Equipment cost with 50% of subsidies Managerial cost per stoves Total Yearly
investments  US$  US$  US$ ,640 millions US$ ,640 millions US$ ,280 millions US$
,131 millions US$ Appendix 10: Potential domestic production of alternative
transport fuels (biodiesel, ethanol, methanol) Biodiesel : (Fatty acid methyl
ester): domestically produced, renewable fuel that can be manufactured from
vegetable oils (which can come from soy, rapeseed, linseed or sunflower seeds),
animal fats, or recycled vegetable cooking oil and greases collected from
restaurants, hotels, schools etc Blends of 20% biodiesel with 80% petroleum
diesel (B20) can generally be used in unmodified diesel engines Biodiesel can
also be used in its pure form (B100), but it too may require certain engine
modifications to avoid maintenance and performance problems  % blend is sold in
France Biodiesel is safe, biodegradable, and reduces serious air pollutants such
as particulates, carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and air toxics Emissions of
nitrogen oxides increase with the concentration of biodiesel in the fuel
Glycerine (used in pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, among other markets), lecithin
and vitamin  are produced also as by-products Biodiesel production represents
also  positively recycling of waste cooking oil, which constitutes  serious
environmental problem Possible incentives: lower taxation than standard diesel
Ethanol : (Ethyl alcohol): alcohol-based alternative fuel produced from any
biological feedstoks that contain appreciable amounts of sugar (sugar beets,
sugar cane) or materials that can be converted into sugar, as starch (corn,
barley and wheat) or cellulose (trees and grasses) The ethanol produced from
"cellulosic biomass" such as trees and grasses is called bioethanol Ethanol is
most commonly used to increase octane and improve the emissions quality of
gasoline Ethanol can be blended with gasoline to create E85 ( blend of 85%
ethanol and 15% gasoline) or with even higher concentrations of ethanol, E95
Techniques are under development to make ethanol from waste paper, sawdust and
other low-cost materials All today’ petrol motors can operate with 10% ethanol
mixed with gasoline without the need for adjustments Jamaica is looking into
producing ethanol from sugar cane to reduce oil imports and the high cost
associated with it 37 Methanol : an alcohol fuel made usually from natural gas
It could also be made from landfill gas, bagasse or wood chips Methanol is
liquid fuel that can be used in an internal combustion engine or  fuel cell
Appendix 11: Electricity generation system least cost expansion programme
According to the results of the MAED study, the electricity peak load will
increase with about 150 MW from year 2000 to 2010 and with 165 MW from 2010 to
2015 due to economic and social development of the country Artibonite region is
expected to be connected to the main transmission grid in , when the maximal
load will be 30 MW Region North will be interconnected in  with  peak of 37 MW
Because of its low consumption and long distance to the existing transmission
grid, the region South will be not connected to main transmission grid until In
2015, this region will reach the maximal load of 26 MW All load and electrical
energy needs of these three regions, in the specified time horizons, will be
covered with small diesel units, wind farms and small hydro units Until 2015 the
following new capacities will be required: 25 MW in region Artibonite (until
2012), 25 MW in region South and 30 MW in region North In the same time, some
existing electricity generation capacities will be retired, as they will reach
their standard lifetime: about 50 MW during the period  and 45 MW between 2010
and Therefore, new electricity generation capacities will be necessary to be
installed to meet the electricity demand with  satisfactory level of reliability
of the electricity supply If some 20% of reserve capacities are considered, than
about 200 MW of new capacities must be installed between  and 240 MW between
2012-The least cost expansion programme for the Haitian electricity generation
system will be determined using the IAEA’ model WASP WASP model is designed to
find the economically optimal expansion policy for an electric utility system
within user specified constraints It utilises probabilistic estimation of system
production costs, unserved energy costs, and reliability, linear programming
technique for determining optimal dispatch policy satisfying exogenous
constraints on environmental emissions, fuel availability and electricity
generation by some plants, and the dynamic programming method for optimising the
costs of alternative system expansion policies In order to obtain sound
expansion cost evaluations for period until to 2017,  longer period (till 2022)
will be considered for the WASP model analysis 38 As during the period  only 10
MW (VAREUX ) have been added, the main investment effort will have to be done
during the period 2007-Building  new power plant requires however  preparation
period consisting in studies and construction time, variable from one technology
to another Therefore, for the immediate future () some purchase of electricity
by EDH from private companies and technologies requiring quick construction time
(diesel engines, wind farms) should be considered ICF plan propose the addition
of  diesel units of 12 MW at Carrefour power station in 2007, one new power
station of 120 MW (  20 MW) in 2012 and some units out of Port-au-Prince
(combined cycle, if it is possible) No hydro units are provided in ICF plan but
Haiti has  good hydro potential Having in mind all above considerations, the
following electricity generation system expansion options have been considered:
Technology type Fuel Size Construction time Available for operation from year:
2007 2009 2008 2009 2009 2009 2010 2010 2010 2012 2014 Diesel engines Imported
heavy fuel oil  MW 12 MW 10   MW 20 MW 30 MW 60 MW 30 MW 60 MW 120 MW 30 MW 30
MW <  year  year  year  years  years  years  years  years  years  years  years
Wind farms Combustion turbines (simple cycle) - Imported heavy fuel oil
Combustion turbines (combined cycle) Imported heavy fuel oil Steam power plant
Hydro power plant (Artibonite 4C) Domestic lignite - No other hydro options have
been considered because the respective technical and economic data were not
available in the detailed format as required by WASP model In addition to the
above electricity generation system expansion options, the purchase of
electricity by EDH from private companies or from Dominican Republic, if
possible, is considered as  transitory solution for the period  The technical
and economic characteristics assumed for the above electricity generation system
expansion options are as follows: Electricity generation system expansion
options ("candidates") Lignite- fired steam plant  MW 12 MW 10x1MW 20 MW 30 MW
60 MW 30 MW 60 MW 120 MW 30 MW Hydro power plant Combustion turbines (simple
cycle) Combustion turbines (combined cycle) Wind farms Technical/economic
parameter Unit Diesel engines ART4 D2 DI12 WF10 SC20 SC30 SC60 CC30 CC60 C120
LI30 Available for operation from year 2007  2006  2008 2009 2009 2009 2010 2010
2010 2012 2014 Maximum unit generating capacity MW 10 20 30 60 30 60 120 30 30
25 12 Minimum operating level MW  10 15 30 15 30 60 10   Plant (fuel) type
number (,,, …, ) -         33 33 Efficiency at maximum operating level % 100 35
35 35 55 55 55 30 Heat rate at maximum operating level kcal/kWh 2606 30 2606 30
860 2457 2457 2457 1564 1564 1564 2867 Efficiency at minimum operating level %
100 30 30 30 40 40 40 23 Heat rate at minimum operating level kcal/kWh 2867 2867
860 2867 2867 2867 2150 2150 2150 3739 Average incremental heat rate between
minimum and maximum operating levels kcal/kWh 2345 3127 860 2048 2048 2048 977
977 977 2430 (% of maximum generating capacity) Unit spinning reserve    15 10
10 10 10 10  Unit forced outage rate % 70 10 30 10 30 20 20 20 10 10 10 12
Scheduled maintenance days/year  30 35 40 40 45 50 45  10 Maintenance class size
MW 10 20 30 60 30 60 120 3030 Domestic fuel cost (¢/Gcal)          Foreign fuel
cost (¢/Gcal)  3186  3186  3186 3186 3186 3550 3550 3550  Fixed & cost ($/kW-
month)           Variable & cost $/MWh         Heat value of the fuel used
kcal/kg  9500 9500 9500 9500 9500 10150 10150 10150 2050 40 1000 950 Overnight
pure capital investment cost $/kW 1500 700 650 600 900 850 800 2300 2000
Depreciable capital cost $/kW 900 855 1500 665 570 855 760 2185 2000 -
Depreciable domestic capital cost $/kW 225 75 375 25 38 75 875 190 25 600 -
Depreciable foreign capital cost $/kW 675 25 1125 75 13 25 625 570 75 1400 Non-
depreciable capital cost $/kW 100 95  35 30 45 40 115  - Non-depreciable
domestic capital cost $/kW            - Non-depreciable foreign capital cost
$/kW 100  95    35 30 45 40 115   Construction time years        Discount rate %
14 03 14 03 14 03 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 89 IDC from pure capital investment
cost % 21 21 21 91 $/kW Total construction cost (Overnight pure cost + IDC) 69
69 69 43 43 43 11 11 11 21 48 IDC from total construction cost % 20 20 50 Plant
lifetime years 20 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 41 An installation programme for small
diesel engines ( MW) in isolated regional networks has been decided exogenously
from WASP optimisation according to the increase in electricity demand in those
regions as follows: Region Year Number of  MW thermal engines Artibonite West
Nord  South 2007 2008 Subtotal (2007- 2008) 2009 2010 2011 2012 Subtotal (2009-
2012) 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Subtotal (2013- 2017) Total              10
18                   32  11   The unit size of  MW or sometimes multiples of
this size are suitable for the small annual increase in electricity demand of
the respective regions The localisation by regions of these units, in terms of
installed capacity, would be as follows: region Artibonite – MW until 2015,
region South – 20 MW, region North – MW and 10 MW for West until All the other
expansion options were subject to WASP model optimisation, and the least cost
development programme for the Haitian electricity generation system has been
determined based on the following hypothesis: • unserved energy cost of
1US$/kWh; • discount rate of 14%; • • possibility of electricity purchase by EDH
from private companies at  similar cost to that of the existing purchase
agreement (supply fuel and pay  certain amount for the purchased electricity)
which results in  total cost of about 100 US$/MWh salvage value of assets
determined based on linear depreciation method; Optimisation criterion is the
minimization of the total discounted cost (investment + operation + unserved
energy – salvage value) of all possible expansion paths for the electricity
generation system The selected value of the discount rate is consistent with the
figures being currently used in similar studies undertaken for Haiti, with the
current interest rates practised by the banks for credits and with relatively
high country risk for private investments in Haiti The cost of unserved energy
is  kind of penalty for the electricity non-supplied to customers and reflects
the average value of damages they may have if not supplied with electricity
according to the agreed reliability standards The rationale of the penalty for
the unsupplied electricity demand is the following: • When used in economic
productive sectors, the electricity contributes to economic growth, creation of
new jobs, and consequently to additional revenues for individuals, poverty
alleviation • When used in social services (culture, education, medical
assistance etc) and in households, electricity use has beneficial effects, more
difficult to evaluate in monetary terms but undeniable from social viewpoint: -
- increase in the cultural level of individuals; better sanitary conditions and
medical care; 42 - increased social security etc Unsupplied electricity
constitutes, therefore,  loss of these economic and social benefits and must be
penalised in the energy planning studies If not penalised, the unsupplied
electricity represents the cheapest “development” option for electricity
generation system In assessing the average cost of unserved energy for WASP
calculations, two reference figures were available: − the current marginal
electricity supply cost of about 100US$/MWh for the existing electricity
purchase agreement; the final electricity intensity (ratio of annual final
electricity consumption to total GDP) for Haiti in year 2000 is, according to
MAED study, of 256 MWh / 1000 US$ (762 GWh / 2970 million US$), which is
equivalent to about ,900 US$/MWh − The selected value of unserved energy for
WASP calculations is of  US$/kWh, which is equivalent to 1000 US$/MWh and
represents an intermediate penalty, ten times higher than the current marginal
electricity supply option (100 US$/MWh) and 39 times lower than the equivalent
(,900 US$/MWh) of the average final electricity intensity at the country level
Sensitivity studies will be necessary to see how robust is the least cost
expansion programme to the variation of the above economic parameters In
determining the least cost expansion programme for the Haitian electricity
generation system,  difficult decision has to be taken for the very next years
() when some of the considered system development options: combustion turbines
(simple cycle), combustion turbines (combined cycle), steam power plant, hydro
power plant are not available for operation because their respective
construction time and other practical reasons In fact, for the very near future
only the following electricity supply options are available: installation of
small diesel engines ( MW) in some isolated regional networks and additional
purchase of electricity by EDH from private companies, which can be applied from
2007 and installation of diesel engines (12 MW) and/or wind farms, which could
be operational from After the consideration of all the above electricity supply
options, with their respective constraints, the reference least cost programme
of electricity generation system expansion and operation determined with WASP
model is the following: Wind farms Combustion turbines (simple cycle) 30 MW - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - Combustion turbines (combined cycle) 60 MW - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - Lignite- fired steam plant 30 MW Hydro power plant 30 MW Year
Electricity purchase Diesel engines (GWh)  MW        10      18 32 12 MW - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - 10x 1MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 20 MW - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - 60 MW - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 120 MW - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - 30 MW - - - -  -     -    11 166 212 378 266 - - - 266 - - - - - - 644
2007 2008 Subtotal 2009 2010 2011 2012 Subtotal 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Subtotal Total - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  - -   The
following comments can be made in relation with the above least cost programme
of electricity generation system expansion and operation: − the installation
programme for the small diesel engines ( MW) in isolated regional networks has
been decided exogenously from WASP optimisation according to the increase in
electricity demand in those regions; 43 - the WASP optimisation doesn’ confirm
the provisions of the ICF plan related to the addition of  diesel units of 12 MW
at Carrefour power station in 2007, one new power station of 120 MW (  20 MW) in
2012 and some units out of Port-au-Prince (combined cycle, if possible); the
diesel engines of 12 MW are not chosen in competition with the electricity
purchase in period 2007- 2009 and with installation of combustion turbines
(combined cycle), 30 MW, in period  because of their high overnight pure capital
investment cost (950 US$/kW) and of their low efficiency (%); the wind farms of
10   MW are not selected in competition with the electricity purchase in period
2007- 2009 and with installation of combustion turbines (combined cycle), 30 MW,
in period  because of their high overnight pure capital investment cost (1500
US$/kW) and low capacity factor of 30% (reflected in WASP calculations through
the forced outage rate parameter); the combustion turbines (simple cycle), in
all size options, are not selected in competition with the electricity purchase
in year 2009 and with installation of combustion turbines (combined cycle), 30
MW, in period  because of their lower efficiency (%); the combustion turbines
(combined cycle) of 30 MW are preferred to all other expansion options, starting
with their first year of availability for operation (2008), because of their
higher efficiency (%); this technology can have  even higher efficiency but
conservative figures have been selected purposely in this study; the size of 30
MW for the combined cycle units is preferred to the other two sizes (60 MW and
120 MW) for the same technology, in spite of its higher specific investment
cost, because of its better fit with the low annual increase of the electricity
demand; the lignite-fired steam power plant, 30 MW, is not selected in
competition with combustion turbines (combined cycle), 30 MW, because of its
higher overnight pure capital investment cost (2300 US$/kW) and of its lower
efficiency (%); the hydro power plant Artibonite 4C is selected for installation
in 2014, one year after its availability for operation in year − − − − − − − The
capital cash flow for electricity generation system expansion and operation for
the above least cost expansion programme is as follows: Capital cash flow for
electricity generation system expansion and operation, by year and by period
(million US$) New capacity construction (including IDC1) Electricity purchase
Fuel cost Year & cost Total    2007 2008 Subtotal 91 13 2009 2010 2011 2012 - -
- - - - - -  Subtotal 127 2013 2015 2016 2017 2018 Subtotal Grand total  IDC -
Interest during construction Note: 44 45 It should be mentioned that the cost of
new capacity construction are not specified for the commissioning year of the
unit but for its construction years, according to the “ curve” of capital
expenditure The average cost of the sent out electricity from the power plants,
calculated as the ratio of the “discounted total expansion and operation cost”
and “discounted electricity demand” is of US$/MWh (79 US¢/kWh) if calculated for
the period , and US$/MWh (47 US¢/kWh) if calculated for the period 2005- The
average cost is lower when calculated for the period  because between  many
existing generating units with low efficiency are retired and replaced with
combined cycle units with higher efficiency The total costs for electricity
generation system expansion and operation will represent between % (in 2007) and
% (in 2009) of the total GDP of Haiti, out of which the expansion costs will be
between % (in 2007) and % (in 2009) of total GDP As it can be noticed, the year
2009 will be the year with the highest financial effort both for the operation
of the electricity generation system and for its expansion (in this year several
combined cycle units, 30 MW, and two diesel units,  MW, will be in different
construction stages The above least cost expansion programme is valid for the
following intervals of variation of the main economic parameters: • • • discount
rate: %; cost of unserved energy: - US$/kWh; cost of additional electricity
purchases from private companies: inferior or equal to 126 US$/MWh For the
discount rate of 13%, the hydro power plant Artibonite 4C is advanced by one
year, in 2014 instead of For the discount rate of 12%, the hydro power plant
Artibonite 4C is also advanced in 2014 but, in addition, one wind farm is
included as part of the least cost expansion programme in year 2008 and some
combined cycle units, 30 MW, are postponed with one year, the total number in
years 2017 and 2022 remaining the same For the discount rate of 20%, the hydro
power plant Artibonite 4C is not selected anymore as part of the least cost
expansion programme and, on the other hand, some combined cycle units, 30 MW,
are advanced by one year, 12 units being asked until 2017, instead of 11 units
in the reference expansion programme For the cost of unserved energy of
US$/kWh, only 10 combined cycle units, 30 MW, are asked until 2017, instead of
11 units in the reference least cost expansion programme and three wind farms
are selected in years 2008, 2012 and For the cost of unserved energy of
US$/kWh, some combined cycle units, 30 MW, are advanced by one year but the
total number of asked units until 2017 remain the same (11 units) For the cost
of additional electricity purchases from private companies equal or superior to
127 US$/MWh the installation of  wind farm in year 2008 become more attractive
than the electricity purchase The annual amounts of additional electricity
purchases by EDH from local private companies or from Dominican Republic (if
possible) are quite large: 166 GWh in 2007 (% of the estimated annual
electricity demand), 212 GWh in 2008 (%) and 266 GWh in 2007 (%) If they are not
available at  cost inferior or equal to 126 US$/MWh or they are not entirely
available, than the only possible alternative options are: • unserved
electricity in years , before the commissioning of the five combined cycle
units, 30 MW, in 2010, with the inherent damages caused to consumers (see the
rationale for the cost of unserved energy); installation of five diesel units,
12 MW, and of four wind farms, 10   MW, in year 2008 (alternative expansion
programme) • 46 This alternative expansion programme will result in additional
total costs of million US$, as shown in the next table Difference in costs
between the reference expansion programme (with additional electricity purchase)
and alternative expansion programme (without additional electricity purchase)
(million US$) New capacity construction cost (including IDC) Expansion programme
Electricity purchase Fuel cost & cost Total Reference Alternative  Alternative -
Reference -The construction costs of the new capacities are higher in the case
of Haitian electricity generation system because of its small size, asking for
small unit sizes with higher specific investment cost than the larger similar
units From this point of view,  deeper integration of the electric systems of
Haiti and Dominican Republic would be beneficial to both countries, but
especially to the lower system, for several reasons: - Scale effect: larger
interconnected system would allow for higher unit sizes with smaller specific
investments; - Peak load of interconnected system lower than the sum of the
respective peak loads at isolated operation and, therefore, lower necessary peak
capacities; - Mutual assistance in case of unit outages and, consequently, lower
necessary reserve capacities; - Coordination of unit scheduled maintenance
Appendix 12 Improvement of electricity tariff system MTPTC and the future
regulatory entity should consider the improvement of the current electricity
tariff system As  general rule, energy prices in  country should reflect the
economic cost of products If subsidies are to be provided, they must be only on
direct bases (for example, for  limited monthly electricity consumption by poor
consumers – “life line tariff”) If not targeted correctly,  only for really
poor, the subsidised tariff of electricity will benefit primarily to welfare
consumers which will be invited to waste energy, and thus to tie up the scarce
governmental resources Energy prices have to provide correct signals to
producers and consumers, to encourage energy efficiency and energy conservation
Correct pricing of commercial energy and efficient billing, accounting and
collection systems are important elements in  sustainable energy system, as low
energy prices or “free” (stolen) energy result in inefficient energy use and
economically unsustainable energy supply companies The electricity rate setting
should reflect the following principles: Rates should reflect full costs of
generation, transmission, distribution and selling The shift from the current
rates to tentative ones can be done gradually but the ultimate objective must be
followed unconditionally; Tariffs should be structured according to long run
marginal cost (LRMC) principles: different tariff components for maximum power
required (kW) and for energy consumption (kWh), different tariff by voltage
level (higher tariff for lower voltage level) and for peak and off peak
consumption (higher tariff for peak); 47 Tariffs should be differentiated by
categories of consumers according to their energetic behaviour but not to the
nature of their activity; allow consumers to choose the favourable type of
tariff between the available ones;  form of indexing should be carried out
according to the fuel cost and inflation fluctuation 48