1A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% -
2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; % ,xld %cd;dka;%sl iudcjd§ ckrcfha eiÜ ;% ; úfYI The
Gazette of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka EXTRAORDINARY wxl
2135$61 - 2019 wfdaia;= ui 09 jeks isl=rdod - 2019'08'09 No 2135 - FRIDAY,
AUGUST 09, 2019 (Published by Authority) PART  : SECTION () — GENERAL Government
Notifications MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT National Energy
Policy and Strategies of Sri Lanka , Ravi Karunanayake as the Minister of Power,
Energy and Business Development do hereby publish the National Energy Policy &
Strategies of Sri Lanka referred to in the following Schedule, prepared after
reviewing and revising the National Energy Policy and Strategies of Sri Lanka
published in the Gazette Extraordinary No 1553 of 2008 as approved by the
Government for the information of the general public RAVI KARUNANAYAKE, Minister
of Power, Energy and Business Development 08th August, NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
AND STRATEGIES OF SRI LANKA MINISTRY OF POWER, ENERGY AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT -
GOVERNMENT OF SRI LANKA Sri Lanka has achieved several goals set in the National
Energy Policy and Strategies (2008) in complete electrification and renewable
energy development The main objective of the National Energy Policy and
Strategies declared here is to ensure convenient and affordable energy services
are available for equitable development of Sri Lanka using clean, safe, 1A
30708— 67 (08) This Gazette Extraordinary can be downloaded from   fldgi ( ^&
fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 2A PART
: SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI
LANKA 2019 sustainable, reliable and economically feasible energy supply This
Policy is formulated in alignment with the future goals of Sri Lanka, current
global trends in energy and the Goal  of the Sustainable Development Goals of
the United Nations This policy will impact the vast realm of social, economic
and environmental spheres and pave the way to realize the vision of Sri Lanka in
achieving carbon neutrality and complete transition of all the energy value
chains by This document also contains  Results Delivery Framework assigning
responsibilities of meeting the stated policy goals to relevant institutions
draft of this National Energy Policy and Strategies was amended after being
subjected to public scrutiny and  review by  committee of experts related to the
energy sector before publication Implementaion of this policy will be monitored
and its impacts will be evaluated by  National Steering Committee appointed by
me, comprising of Chairpersons, General Managers and Director Generals of key
energy sector agencies and will also include representatives from such affiliate
sectors as transport and environment The Committee will be required to meet at
quarterly intervals and report implementation progress to the Cabinet of
Ministers and is empowered to co-opt any new members as deemed necessary to
represent any relevant sector, This Committee will be chaired by the Secretary
to the Ministry responsible for the subjects of power and energy The National
Streering Committee will be assisted by  Technical Working Group in convening
meetings and collation of action plans, progress information and other
correspondence with agencies responsible as identified in the Results Delivery
Framework The Committee appointed by the Secretary, Ministry of Power & Energy
for the purpose of formulation of National Energy Policy & Strategies will
function as the Technical Working Group The Policy superseeds all previous
policies, strategies, plans and guidelines published from time to time This
National energy policy and implementing strategies will be in effect until it is
reviewed in consideration of any major changes in the external environment Such
policy reviews will be conducted at least once in six years The Results Delivery
Framework, alingned with the policy and strategies will be revised in two-year
intervals NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY AND STRATEGIES OF SRI LANKA August 2019
Preamble Numerous are the achievements of the energy sector over the past few
decades and numerous are the impending challenges on the energy sector of Sri
Lanka Our nation has achieved complete electrification and fulfilled many other
policy goals and milestones set in the National Energy Policy & Strategies of
Sri Lanka (2008) Sri Lanka is ranked high among the countries with  large share
of renewable energy, with  strong commitment to retain this vital attribute of
the nation’ economic resilience in  world of diminishing energy security This
policy statement is meant to chart the future course of the energy sector of the
country, which in turn will contribute towards  stable economy Emerging from
decades of internal strife, the whole country has been provided with
uninterrupted electricity supply Large and small enterprises across the country
are looking ahead for better and productive use of material and human resources
with the availability of electricity Other forms of energy such as liquid and
gaseous petroleum fuels too are delivered to the whole country, realizing the
dream of providing access to modern forms of energy to all citizens 3A PART  :
SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka; The evolving structure of the economy suggests that Sri Lanka will
continue its journey along the energy frugal economic development path, with
strong services sector accounting for more than 60% of the GDP Nevertheless,
great strides are being made to steer the economy towards  knowledge fuelled
economy, which too will assist to keep the energy intensity of economy at
current healthy levels This policy will pave the way for Sri Lanka to emerge as
strong economy with lesser dependence on energy, in  world constricted by
frequent energy crises This policy will proactively transform the energy
industry from  subsidy-burdened, survival-focused state to an innovation driven
catalyser of the national economy, preparing the country for the global energy
transition The newfound economic freedom of citizens will create  conducive
environment to improve the quality of energy services to  level where cost
reflectivity of prices paid by the citizens will be accepted without any
hesitation This policy will also nurture the energy sector by strengthening the
capability of sector professionals to manage the energy sector efficiently and
effectively to benefit all Sri Lankans in the long term Emerging role of
renewable energy, amidst the ever-evolving technological capabilities and new
levels of integration made possible by information and communications technology
will be recognized as one of the key thrusts to retain the share of renewable
energy in the national energy supply Similarly, energy efficiency across the
entire value chain will be improved to keep the growth of energy demand at
optimum levels This effort assures Sri Lanka’ unreserved commitment to fight the
challenges posed by climate change by integrating efforts of all stakeholders of
the energy industry to  focused, meaningful and  viable response to climate
change  Inroduction Global energy industry has entered  decisive phase of
transition, where an increasing number of supply options, newer energy carriers
and the growing demand, contribute to increase the complexity of the industry
Sri Lanka too, will face this transition during the next few decades, and the
energy industry in transition will fuel the growing economy of the country,
opening many frontiers and opportunities This policy spells out ways and means
of steering the energy sector in transition to power the nation and its social
market economy,aiming at higher levels of stability, security, affordability and
sustainability with the least environmental burden,and provide  fertile ground
for all public and private enterprises, homes and institutions to flourish in
future, where energy will not be  constraint Sri Lanka is ranked in the mid-
range of United Nations Human Development Index, while the annual GDP per capita
too is in the mid-range, at USD ,065 (2017) The government’ drive to reach the
upper middle-income level within this decade intensifies the role of energy in
Sri Lanka’ economyAs  nation embarking on  progressive social market economy
after  three decade-long conflict,  holistic approach to development is
desirable, compared with an incremental approach An energy policy consistent
with social and economic development goals is required owing to significant
impacts of the energy sector on each social and economic activity of the country
Sri Lanka maintains  comparatively lower energy intensity of economy, using 47TJ
of commercial energy to produce onemillion LKR of GDP2 The challenge posed to
Sri Lanka is to maintain the lower energy intensity, while accelerating the
growth of the economy Sri Lanka has reached the important milestone of 100%
electrification, thereby fulfilling the goal of providing modern energy sources
to all the citizens  The World Bank  Lanka  Sri Lanka Energy Balance 2016, Sri
Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ;
úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 4A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 Economic
growth amidst universal access requires the energy supply capacity to be
steadily increased The growth in demand can also be managed by improving the
efficiency of energy conversionContinued efforts to maintain  low energy
intensity status requires to be rewarded with  lower burden on the economy and
the environment Increased efforts on demand management through policy driven
incentives are required to meet this goal amidst high economic growth Upgrading
the transport modes to more efficient systems along with transport
infrastructure development and stimulating the use of other forms of energy
beyond petroleum products through policy interventions would be required to
effectively manage energy use in transport, the largest consuming sector of
commercial energy The relatively high share of renewable energy (RE) in the
country’ primary energy portfolio is bound to progressively reduce because the
major portion of hydropower potential has already been tapped With the shifting
of household energy use toward fossil fuels, the growing demand for all forms of
energy is increasingly being met with fossil fuels Water resources serve
multiple needs, power generation being the third priority after drinking water
and agricultural demand, further complicating issues related to projects such as
the Mahaweli Stage II development  paradigm shift of policy is envisaged to
defend and improve the share of renewables in the primary energy supply from the
level maintained at 55% during the last decade The National Energy Policy and
Strategies present how Sri Lanka plans to meet the challenge of developing and
managing the energy sector to ensure delivery of reliable, cost-effective, and
competitively priced energy services from diverse sources to fuel the social
market economy Sri Lanka weathered many energy crises over the last few decades
due to resilience garnered from many deep roots These roots can be identified as
the impressive use of biomass resources, year-round sunshine and higher
rainfall, combined with frugal lifestyle of her people and the small
geographical expanse of the country Having nourished the national economy from
these deep roots, Sri Lanka was first in the region to bare fruits, in terms of
extending the coverage of the national electricity supply to serve the whole
country with an uninterrupted supply The reliability of energy systems has
attracted services sector to the country, leveraging more economic benefits to
the country with the least possible input of energy This has caused  structural
change in the economy towards services, in sharp contrast to other developing
economies experiencing steep growth in the energy intensity of economy
Reliability and affordability of both indigenous and global energy supplies will
be the most desirable ingredient in this economy in transition The country is
looking into  future where strong emphasis will be on developing the
increasingly competitive newly assessed resources for electricity generation
such as wind and solar Biomass, probably the most important energy resource,
will play an even more valuable role by making  transformation to  convenient
fuel for household use and  dependable resource for industrial thermal energy
supply Sri Lanka desires to be elevated to an ‘energy empowered’ nation by
developing strategies and conversion technologies to use the vast indigenous
resources Whilst continuous efforts will be made to strengthen the petroleum
sector from upstream resource development to downstream diversification,
initiatives will be made to elevate the status of electricity as  major energy
carrier Energy transition in the transport sector, from liquid petroleum
dominance to other energy carriers will be actively pursued Electricity will
take the pride of place in the quest for discovering new energy carriers,
drawing resources from increasing amounts of indigenous resources, whilst
securing supply routes for global resources Whilst securing land resources for
important energy infrastructure elements such as gas terminals, electricity
generation sites and transmission corridors, energy storage will be taken as
prime carrier to transcend the space and time boundaries which constrained the
traditional energy systems Aligning Sri Lanka with Goal  of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) of the UN, this policy would contribute to achieve
universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
by 2020,  decade ahead of theUN target The policy will also contribute to reduce
the dependence of Sri Lanka on fossil fuels to below 50% of the primary energy
supply and to reduce the specific energy use across all end-uses by 20% of 2015
level, by This policy will pave the way to realise the vision of Sri Lanka in
achieving carbon neutrality and complete transition of all the energy value
chains by The policy provides the necessary space for establishing key
manufacturing industries supplying sustainable energy technologies to the local
5A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% -
2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; market and forge alliances with other developing
countries through South-South cooperation by developing knowledge products and
sustainable energy technologies in line with Goal  of the SDGs This policy
document has three sections: TheNational Energy Policy, stating the ten pillars
of the policy framework Implementing Strategies, describing the specific
strategies to implement the policy The Results Delivery Framework, elaborating
the specific actions, milestones and the institutions responsible This policy
supersedes all previous policies, strategies,plans and guidelines published from
time to time This national energy policy and implementing strategies will be in
effect until it is reviewed in consideration of any major changes in the
external environment Such policy reviews will be conducted at least once in six
years The Results Delivery Framework, (separately published) aligned with the
policy and strategies will be revised in two-year intervals  The National Energy
Policy The primary objective of the energy policy is to ensure energy security
through supplies that are cleaner, secure, economical and reliable, to provide
convenient, affordable energy services to support socially equitable development
of Sri Lanka Policy guidelines such as, the ‘General Policy Guidelines on the
Electricity Industry’ as required under Sri Lanka Electricity Act No 20 of 2009
statutorily required to be issued for each sub sector, are expected to be
prepared and issued, based on this national energy policy Working through the
conflicting demands from the security, equity and sustainability dimensions,
known as the energy trilemma, Sri Lanka today is seen to be moving away from the
delicate balance of these three forces The national energy policy is thus
founded on ten pillars, rooted in the broad areas impacting the society, economy
and the environment, in an effort to counter balance the forces through enhanced
equity, security and sustainability, respectively  Assuring Energy Security
Providing Access to Energy Services  Providing Energy Services at the Optimum
Cost to the National Economy  Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Enhancing Self Reliance  Caring for the Environment  Enhancing the Share of
Renewable Energy  Strengthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector  Securing
Land for Future Energy Infrastructure Providing Opportunities for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship This approach is graphically depicted below:   Energy Security
10     Energy Sustainability Energy Equity    fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§
ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 6A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 The ten
pillars are described in greater detail below ) Assuring Energy Security Primary
and secondary energy supplies of the country will be secured to ensure
continuity, adequacy and reliability ) Providing Access to Energy Services
Access to reliable, convenient, affordable, equitable and quality energy
services will be provided to all citizens to improve their living standards and
to engage in gainful economic activities ) Providing Energy Services at the
Optimum Cost to the National Economy Energy services will be provided at the
optimum long-term cost, to lower the burden on the national economy and to
achieve competitiveness of locally produced goods and services in international
markets ) Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation Efficient use of energy
will be promoted in all sectors and across the energy value chain, engaging both
the suppliers and users ) Enhancing Self Reliance Indigenous energy resources
will be developed to the optimum levels to minimise dependence on imported
resources, subject to resolving technical, economic, environmental and social
constraints, with the objective of minimising the vulnerability of energy
supplies to external situations ) Caring for the Environment  meaningful
contribution to climate change will be made by maintaining the low carbon
intensity of the Sri Lankan energy sector Adverse environmental and social
impacts of energy services will be minimised to care for the global and local
environment ) Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy Indigenous renewable
energy resources will be developed to the optimum level to attain sustainability
and  higher degree of resilience in the energy sector ) Strengthening Good
Governance in the Energy Sector Governance of the energy sector to be
strengthened to realise accountability, fairness and transparency to achieve
investor and consumer confidence  stable policy environment will be ensured, and
the regulatory framework will be further strengthened to assure good governance
in the energy sector ) Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure Strategic
locations for establishing energy facilities and corridors which inter connect
such facilities will be earmarked and secured in advance to ensure timely
implementation of such facilities and to minimise adverse social impacts 10)
Providing Opportunities for Innovation and Entrepreneurship Considering the
limitation to the scale of markets available in Sri Lanka to breed technology
intensive local businesses, the relatively large size of the energy sector will
be utilised to nurture local entrepreneurship and innovation 7A PART  : SEC () -
GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019
fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka;  Implementing Strategies The broad strategies to implement the national
energy policy are detailed in this chapter, aligned with the aforementioned ten
pillars:  Assuring Energy Security Primary and secondary energy resources and
supplies used in the country will be secured to maximise the country’ energy
supply reliability, continuity and adequacy, and strategic independence by
employing the strategies:  Diversity in energy resources used in electricity
generation will be ensured subject to economic, environmental, technological and
operational requirements  Considering the recent price profiles, natural gas
would be the next fossil fuel option for the country to broaden diversity
liquefied natural gas(LNG) terminal of optimum size and technology would be
established at the most suitable location Considering the impact to the country’
energy security, operation of the first terminal and LNG procurement shall be
kept under state control  Global diversification of energy sources will be
pursued to safeguard the supply chain against external geo-political
uncertainties  Percentage installed power generation capacity from  single
imported fuel shall not exceed 50% of the total installed firm capacity to
safeguard against geopolitical uncertainties and fuel price shocks  Adequacy and
reliability of transmission and distribution infrastructure in both electricity
and fuel supply networks to meet any future contingencies will be ensured
Regular risk and assessments will be conducted to identify and mitigate possible
internal, external contingencies that could critically affect the performance of
the energy sector  Indigenous petroleum resources will be explored using
geophysical surveys, and the national petroleum data repository will be
strengthened Such resources will be strategically developed to introduce into
all sectors including power generation, transport, household and industry, as
well as to generate futuristic cleaner energy sources such as hydrogen and gas
to liquids (GTL)  National requirements of electricity will be met with proven
generation technologies and fuel sources  Maintenance of strategic fuelreserves
in strategic locations in the country will be made mandatory for all key players
in electricity and petroleum industries 10 Local crude oil refining capacity
will be expanded to optimally satisfy the country’ demand for different
petroleum products 11 Viable cross-border electricity transmission and
cooperation with countries in the region will be pursued on the basis of
multilateral power pool operation  Providing Access to Energy Services Access to
reliable, convenient, affordable, equitable and quality energy services will be
provided to all citizens to enhance their living standards and to engage in
gainful economic activities, by employing the strategies:  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS
% iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 8A PART  : SEC () -
GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019
Access to electricity using either on-grid or off-grid sources and to modern
petroleum products will be ensured to all citizens in the country  Small and
medium enterprises will be supported by socialising part of initial electricity
service connection costs via tariffs  Households which remain unconnected to
national grid due to un-affordability, even after gaining access, will be
connected using innovative financing schemes  New productive uses for
electricity in agriculture, rural and primary industries will be encouraged with
emphasis on empowerment of women and youth  The supply quality of energy
services by electricity, gas and oil utilities will be improved through adoption
of appropriate technical and commercial quality standards  Minimum service
quality standards will be introduced for common utility services Additionally,
premium services will be offered to customers who are willing to pay for such
higher service quality levels  Equipment used in the energy supply chain will be
standardised to ensure compatibility, ease of integration and safety of energy
supply  Considering the superior reliability, increased safety and lower
interference with tree cover, electricity distribution networks will be
gradually placed underground in urban areas and converted to insulated aerial
bundled conductors (ABC) in other areas  Pipeline transport and vehicle-based
transport will be promoted in downstream gas and oil supply sector to improve
access by industries and households to feed appropriate distribution networks at
the user end 10 Smart grid technologies will be introduced, and smart metering
will be deployed for enhanced customer experience, and to automate power system
management, reducing manual intervention where such interventions are
uneconomical 11 Mobile and internet-based services will be introduced to enhance
customer convenience  Providing Energy Services at the Otimum Cost to the
National Economy Energy Service will be provided at the optimum long-term cost,
to lower the burden on the national economy and to achieve competitiveness of
locally produced goods and services in international markets by employing the
strategies  Power plants identified in the Long-Term Generation Expansion Plan
will be implemented as scheduled  Receiving, processing, storage, transport and
distribution capacity requirements of the petroleum sector will be identified in
long term planning and will be developed in time to ensure adequate supply of
petroleum products  Rational energy pricing strategies, based on the principles
of cost reflectivity across the energy value chain will be adopted through
existing and new regulatory mechanisms, to ensure financial health of sector
utilities and to discourage wasteful energy use 9A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^&
fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka;  The
government will identify and provide transparently funded subsidies to target
groups of energy users in household, industrial and commercial sectors,that
deserve special consideration owing to their economic standing and contribution
to national economic development priorities  Improving Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Energy systems will be effectively managed to ensure efficient use
and conservation of energy Efficient use of energy by all concerned, from
utilities to final customers will be pursued employing the strategies:  The
national energy efficiency improvement and conservation programme will be
further strengthened engaging all stakeholders in household, industrial and
commercial sectors  Energy efficiency improvement and conservation will be
promoted through minimum energy performance standards and labelling of
appliances, and by introducing green procurement processes in state and private
sector organisations   home productivity improvement programme, with energy
efficiency and conservation as the central theme will be launched to empower
women  Taxation and other incentives and disincentives to support the market for
efficient technologies will be introduced  Expert energy advisory services will
be offered through state and private sector service providers to promote energy
efficiency, conservation and energy cost reduction across all end use sectors
Water resources will be recognized as  valuable indigenous energy
resourceEfficient use of water by competing users at places where there is  high
opportunity cost to water will be enhanced  Conversion efficiency of power
generation facilities will be enhanced   strategic plan for street lighting will
be formulated to ensure proper management of street lighting that will enhance
the safety of road users, and to contribute to energy conservation with  better
aesthetic sense  Automated demand response technologies will be considered as
main demand-side management strategy 10 Losses in energy delivery networks will
be reduced to optimum levels 11 Losses incurred in petroleum refining will be
reduced by continuous technology infusion with new investments 12 Transport fuel
use in petroleum distribution will be reduced by utilising regional storage
facilities connected with the rail-based supply network 13 Virtual offices and
video/teleconferencing will be promoted by making necessary changes to
organisational working culture as  strategy to minimize physical movement 14
Transport energy use will be reduced by undertaking ‘avoid, shift and improve’
strategies with  strong focus on high quality public transport and intelligent
traffic management solutions 15 Economic activities will be developed in dense
clusters to benefit from lower logistic costs and improved synergies in special
zones identified as smart cities, served by smart grids  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS %
iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 10A PART  : SEC () -
GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 16
Sustainable neighbourhoods will be used as  key design element in urban
development with the objective of reducing energy demand 17 Energy efficiency
will be  primary concern in retrofits, and new building designs will be
evaluated for their energy performance on  mandatory basis 18 Smart
technologies, including smart buildings and complete conversion to smart
metering will be ensured to convey price signals to customers, altering the
demand profile to reduce the overall cost of supply 19 Fuel efficiency of
vehicles would be  key consideration in deciding applicable taxes on vehicles to
encourage  higher efficiency vehicle fleet  Enhancing Self Reliance Indigenous
energy resources will be developed to optimum levels to minimise dependence on
imported resources, subject to resolving technical, economic, environmental and
social constraints, with the objective of minimising the vulnerability of energy
supplies to external situations and to attain  higher degree of resilience in
the energy sector, employing the strategies:  Oil and natural gas resources of
the country will be explored Commercial scale exploitation will be strategically
phased, giving due consideration to higher future value and possible use in the
future as  locally available fuel source to derive cleaner futuristic energy
sources such as hydrogen  Indigenous mineral resources such as Thorianite and
other similar nuclear fuels with commercial resource potential will be explored,
assessed and kept ready for development at the appropriate time when conversion
technologies are available  Renewable energy resources will be exploited based
on  priority order arrived at, considering economics, technology and quality of
each resource  Availability of biomass will be enhanced by establishing
dedicated energy plantations or plantations with residue as  potential fuel, in
prescribed biomass energy development areas Commercial availability of biomass
and biomass-based fuel products will be encouraged for utilisation in industrial
thermal applications and household use Processed biomass as  fuel source will be
facilitated through efficient collection of existing resources, processing,
value addition, storage and distribution, and nurturing biomass supply chains
Improved biomass conversion devices such as cook stoves that are free from the
general inconvenience associated with traditional biomass-based cooking and
offer an experience similar to commercial fuel-based cooking devices, will be
introduced and promoted for household use This strategy will help to retain the
share of biomass as  fuel used for cooking applications and to discourage
migration to petroleum fuels owing to convenience  Gradual diversification of
transport energy in both rail and road transport from present oil dominance to
electricity will be encouraged to increase overall conversion efficiency and to
relieve the dependence on liquid petroleum fuels as the sole transport fuel
Further, appropriate time of use tariffs will be offered to attract additional
demand from electric vehicle charging to periods of lower demand, and additional
demand so added will be strategically used to enhance the integration of
indigenous sources such as solar and wind 11A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^&
fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka;   sizable
fund will be channelled to the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Fund operated by the
SEA by evoking provisions in the SEA Act for charging  cess on fossil fuel
imports and  resource royalty from renewable resourcesPurposes of Sri Lanka
Sustainable Energy Fund will be broadened to meet the requirements of
sustainable energy, electricity and petroleum sectors  Contribution of the
rubber plantation industry as the major fuel wood supplier for thermal
applications will be duly recognised and suitable incentives will be provided to
enhance the expanse of rubber plantations  Caring for the Environment Natural
environment of the country will be preserved, and  meaningful contribution will
be made to address climate change, by adopting appropriate low emission
processes and mitigation measures employing the strategies:  Environmental
impacts of energy facilities will be minimised and mitigated using counter
balancing interventions such as carbon sequestration plantations Existing
hydropower catchments and land earmarked for future energy infrastructure too
will be considered as potential land for such plantations  Impacts to the
environment in the context of climate change due to the construction and
operation of energy sector facilities will be minimised  Energy supply from
cleaner sources and technologies will be encouraged to minimise harm to the
local and global environment, while taking into consideration both the impacts
on the national economy and the long-term environmental benefits  Indigenous
petroleum and nuclear energy resources will be developed to the optimum level
with sufficient environmental safeguards,by encouraging market demand for such
resources  National level plans will be implemented to utilise by-products from
power generation with  commercial value, such as fly ash and waste heat
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to global emission reduction goals
will be made to meet the national emission reduction obligations as agreed
Social and environmental externalities in the local context pertaining to the
energy sector will be studied and factored into decision making  Opportunities
available under carbon trading mechanisms will be exploited and  proper
mechanism will be implemented to make use of the potential  Waste to energy
projects will be favourably considered owing to the positive contributions such
projects make to dispose municipal solid waste, and any cost above the avoided
cost of electricity will be paid by the government/local authorities directly to
the developer so as not to burden energy utilities 10 Necessary Health, Safety
and Environmental (HSE) standards will be introduced and relevant regulations
enforced, making it an offence for  person to operate any energy related
infrastructure without complying with the prescribed HSE standards  fldgi ( ^&
fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 12A PART
: SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI
LANKA 2019  Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy Energy supply from renewable
energy resources in the country’ energy mix will be increased to reduce pressure
on foreign exchange, as  means of engaging the local community in the energy
industry, attain sustainability and to promote the use of environmentally
friendly energy sources employing the strategies:  Long delays encountered in
renewable energy development will be reduced through  centrally coordinated
project approval process  Renewable energy investments for electricity
generation will be realised through  competitive scheme to reduce the costs and
to facilitate wider investor participation  Transmission infrastructure will be
strengthened to improve the absorption of electricity generation from renewable
sources  Distribution infrastructure will be upgraded with smart grid
technologies to facilitate renewable energy-based distributed generation
Research will be conducted to overcome adverse impacts of renewable energy
absorption to the power system from intermittent sources such as wind and solar
energy  Effective forecasting technologies for wind, solar and rainfall will be
introduced so that optimum use of renewable resources could be realised  Energy
storage solutions will be encouraged for firming intermittent renewable sources,
voltage and frequency regulation, local grid support, peak shaving and improving
grid resilience  Innovative financing schemes and financial instruments
involving both public and private enterprises will be introduced to encourage
renewable energy development  Strengthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector
Good governance in all aspects of the energy sector shall be the guiding
principle, and good governance in the energy sector will be strengthened to
realise accountability, fairness and transparency to achieve investor and
consumer confidence  stable policy environment and regulatory frameworks will be
established and further strengthened to assure good governance in the energy
sector, employing the strategies:  All sub sectors in the energy industry will
be brought under respective regulatory framework  Procurement of plant,
equipment, crude oil and other fuels, as well as power purchase agreements and
similar concessions, will be made through  streamlined competitive bidding
scheme ensuring transparency,accountability and avoiding long term delays
Capability of the energy sector professionals to meet challenges in the emerging
competitive environment will be enhanced by facilitating exchange programmes
between similar entities in foreign countries and cross posting within Sri
Lankan sector entities  Digitalisation of the energy sector entities using an
enterprise resource planning platform will be taken as  priority, spanning the
whole length of the value chain from smart meters, addressable appliances and
smart grids that allows further adoption of new technologies such as artificial
intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT) and distributed ledgers to drive
efficiency, transparency and optimisation of asset utilisation 13A PART  : SEC
() - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka;   guideline on management of digital information to ensure security of
digital information, covering the aspects of storing, use and management will be
introduced  Digitalisation of utility transactions will be used to secure and
store data in cloud based central databases and the data, information and
knowledge thus assimilated in the energy sector will be indexed, catalogued and
securely stored for future use and will be treated as knowledge assets
conducive environment shall be created for independent decision making in
transparent and accountable manner, supported by the analyses performed using
real time insights produced by digitalisation  Energy sector transactions will
be reported by relevant entities to the SEA on  fixed annual schedule, through
working group of officials from key sector institutions to ensure timely
publication of the Sri Lanka Energy Balance  Indices which can assist the
understanding of energy sector trends will be identified and included in
national statistics to help evidence-based decision making 10 Active engagement
of citizens in the energy sector will be promoted using web portals linked to
applications for mobile phones, leading to awareness creation, grievance
handling and education, targeting the closure of trust deficit, greater
acceptance of energy sector projects, user safety and improved end-user
behaviour of energy services  Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure
Considering limitation to land with specific attributes that are required to
develop certain technologies and considering the extensive financial losses
incurred in the past owing to shifting of sites to locate power plants,
strategic locations to establish future energy infrastructure will be earmarked
and secured in advance to ensure timely implementation of such facilities and to
minimise adverse social impacts, employing the strategies:  Suitable sites to
locate future energy infrastructure such as coal, natural gas and nuclear power
plants, refineries and terminals will be strategically earmarked in advance
following preliminary feasibility studies, so that the public can avoid using
such sites, resulting in minimal relocation and social impacts at the time of
actual development  Best sites to locate large scale renewable energy
infrastructure such as wind and solar farms would be identified in advance and
marked on  master plan so that they can be developed as large concentrated
facilities in phases  Corridors for petroleum and gas pipe transport and for
backbone electricity transmission would be identified, giving priority to shared
corridors for the benefit of national infrastructure planning Identified routes
would be published for the purpose of giving advance information to the public
Available corridors will be used to lay multiple pipelines and power
transmission lines wherever possible  All existing and future underground
utility infrastructure including electricity, water, communication, town gas and
petroleum would be made available in  common mandatory geographic information
system (GIS) to facilitate optimal location of future underground cable routes
and pipe transport traces  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;%
- 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 14A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  Roadside utility infrastructure
corridors including electricity distribution, sewer, water, communication and
gas supply shall be coordinated with transport infrastructure, in such  manner
that clear demarcation of ownership, flexibility of maintenance, and room for
expansion would be ensured 10 Providing Opportunities for Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Considering the limitation to the scale of markets available in
Sri Lanka to breed technology intensive local businesses, the relative vastness
of the energy sector will be utilised to nurture local entrepreneurship and
innovation by actively engaging the strategies: Electricity will be recognised
as the dominant energy carrier of the future, and strategic ventures to utilise
local resources in energy conversion and storage equipment will be nurtured as
an industrialisation thrust Development of novel information and communications
technology (ICT) applications such asforpower system automation, remote control,
distributed real time event and data acquisition systems, and smart metering
will be encouraged Sri Lankan enterprises will be encouraged to engage in energy
sector infrastructure development Research and development on introducing,
adopting and implementing new and emerging renewable fuel sources,efficient
energy conversion and end use technologies will be promoted Innovation will be
facilitated by providing protection to intellectual property, safeguarding the
same until commercialisation and by nurturing nascent technologies through
financial incentives and tax benefits Indigenous knowledge and capacities
required for energy sector development will be realised Potential offered by
vehicle energy storage systems (ESS) will be studied considering ESS as  local
standby energy storage device, deploying those as an automated demand response
(ADR) option and  load profile management too Small scale on-grid distributed
and off-grid stand-alone applications using renewable energy with local value
addition will be encouraged as an economic development thrust 15A PART  : SEC ()
- GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019
fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka;  Results Delivery Framework This chapter describes the targets and
likely timeframes associated with expected policy intents and the assignment of
responsibilities of realisation of policy intentsThey are to be reviewed in two-
year intervals and re-stated for the period ahead  Assuring Energy Security
Responsibility To execute strategies identified to realise energy security, the
following targets and milestones will be met by the institutions to which
responsibilities are assigned 1a Feasibility of cross border electricity
transfer with countries in the region will be MoPE studied and documented by end
1b Feasibility of the Sapugaskanda oil refinery expansion project will be
evaluated by end-2020undertaking  study to determine the optimum capacity, and
preliminary investigation on establishing  second refinery will be undertaken by
mid-2021 by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation CPC 1c Every player in the
petroleum subsector and all grid connected thermal power plants shall jointly
maintain  strategic fuel reserve equivalent to  minimum 30 days’ consumption at
any given time The Petroleum Corporation and the CEB shall be jointly
responsible to agree on targets for local storage capacity to be developed and
maintained by either party All future power plant specifications must contain
appropriate storage capacities to be maintained locally CPC/CEB 1d  high-level
standing committee to be titled as ‘Energy Sector Risk Assessment Panel’to be
established with sufficient representation from key sectors by end- 2019to
assess possible internal and external contingencies that could critically affect
the performance of the energy sector Members of this committee must also include
co-opted specialists on the subject of risk assessment and be given the required
training on how to identify such risksThis panel must meet periodically and
identify such contingencies based on probability-impact analysis and advise
sector agencies to prepare plans to mitigate impacts of the same Secretary of
the Ministry in charge of the subject of electricity shall be responsible to
appoint and convene this panel MoPE 1e An inventory of indigenous energy
resources, both renewable and non- renewable,will be developed and published by
SEA and PRDS by end-Air borne gravity/magnetic data will be acquired and
processed by end 2019 and 2D/ 3D seismic data in selected locations in Mannar
and Cauvery Basins will be completed by SEA/PRDS  Providing Access to Energy
Services Responsibility To ensure access to reliable, convenient, affordable,
equitable and quality energy services to all citizens to enhance their living
standards and to engage in gainful economic activities, the following targets
and milestones will be met by institutions to which responsibilities are
assigned; 2a To encourage prospective small and medium scale industries and
businesses, the initial cost of obtaining an electricity connection, which may
be considerable at present compared with the capital cost of the business, will
be reduced by offering  special concessionary package under which the entire
cost of the transformer for contract demands up to 100kVA will be waived-off and
be socialised through CEB/LECO  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI
eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 16A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 distribution tariffs This
should be fully implemented from January-2021by CEB/ LECO, accompanied with an
appropriate campaign giving wide publicity through media 2b The initial cost in
providing  new connection to recover infrastructure cost by electricity
distribution utilities will be completely phased out by end-2022, to all
categories of customersSuch costs will be socialised through distribution
tariffs, aiming at improving the country’ rank below 50, in ‘ease of doing
business’ index CEB/LECO 2c Optional ‘same day’ service connections to
households and other retail customers to be provided on the payment of  premium
fee for any prospective customer by mid-Similarly,  portfolio of other cost
recovery services shall be offered at  premium for customers who are in need for
expeditious service delivery Timeline for regular service will be subject to
codes on commercial quality specified by PUCSL CEB/LECO SEA 2d Commercial supply
of biomass and biomass-based fuel products will be doubled to reach one million
tonne per year for using industrial thermal applications and households through
the establishment of 20,000 hectares of biomass plantations within the period
2020-2023as an initiative of SEAGovernment land, soft financing and other fiscal
incentives will be offered to businesses that provide fuel wood including
dedicated energy plantations and other commercial plantations 2e To encourage
improved, convenient, commercial biomass fuel products and conversion
technologies for household use, SEA shall ensure that fiscal incentives are
provided to entrepreneurs who are engaged in the manufacture and distribution of
equipment using such technologies ( improved cook stoves and mini- gasifiers)by
end-SEA shall ensure  minimum % penetration of improved stoves using
commercialised biomass fuels by SEA PUCSL 2f Supply quality standards of fuels
supplied by petroleum utilities will be determined and enforced on  voluntary
basis by mid-2020 and on mandatory basis by end 2021 by PUCSL, and quality test
reports will be published 2g Supply and service quality standards of energy
services by the utilities will be determined and enforced on voluntary basis by
end 2020 and on mandatory basis from end 2021 by PUCSL PUCSL 2h All new low
voltage distribution networks will use all-insulated ABC with immediate effect
Low voltage overhead electricity distribution networks outside urban areas will
be completely converted to all-insulated ABC by Distribution networks in urban
areas will be converted to an underground network by CEB/LECO 2i  technical
audit covering the whole value chain of the utilities will be carried out
Specifications, status and standards of key equipment will be recorded, and
standardisation programme will be launched within 2020 by the CEB and the LECO
CEB/LECO 2j Feasibility of extending and introducing new pipeline transport
facilities for both liquid and gaseous fuels to serve dense clusters of
industrial and residential users will be studied by CPC/PRDS CEB/LECO 2k Five
pilot projects, covering the five distribution licensees will be launched by the
CEB and the LECO within 2020 to identify smart grid and smart metering
technologies which can deliver value to the country 17A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^&
fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 2l Smart
meters and pre-paid meters shall be offered on-demand to any customer CEB/LECO
by mid-2m At least 50% of all standard services offered by the CEB and the LECO
to be made optionally available through mobile and internet platforms too,
including payments and tracking of progress, by mid-2020 so that customers are
not required to visit utility offices to initiate such services By end-2021, all
standard services to be offered optionally via mobile and internet CEB/LECO
Providing Energy Supply Services at the Optimum Cost to the National Economy
Responsibility To ensure that energy services are provided at the optimum long-
term cost to lower the burden on the national economy, the following targets and
milestones will have to be met by the institutions to which responsibilities are
assigned; 3a  transparent pricing methodology for electricity and fossil fuel
products will be developed and implemented by mid-2020 by the CEB, the CPC and
other sector players through  regulatory mechanism established by the PUCSL
CEB/CPC/ PUCSL 3b The life-line electricity tariff will be limited only to low-
user household customers using less than 30kWh per month  study will be
conducted by MoPE in 2020 to decide other target groups of energy users that
deserve special consideration, the subsidy amount and the source of funds MoPE
3c  short-term and medium-term planning mechanism, and  continuous planning
procedure will be established for the petroleum sector, including both liquid
and gaseous fuels by end First plan to be issued in MoPRD  Improving Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Responsibility Energy systems will be efficiently
managed and operated while ensuring efficient utilisation and conservation of
energy The following targets and milestones will have to be met by the
institutions to which responsibilities are assigned SEA 4a Specific energy use
in end-user activities will be reduced by 10% of 2015 level by 2023as part of
the national energy efficiency improvement and conservation programme, saving
,243GWh of grid electricity generation by 4b Minimum energy performance
standards for LEDs and energy labelling for air- conditioners, personal
computers, refrigerators, ceiling fans, linear fluorescent lamps/ballasts and
induction motors will be enforced by mid-SEA 4c Penetration of efficient, low
smoke, low soot biomass cook stoves will be increased to 10% of households by
Processed, commercialized biomass- based fuels used in such stoves will be made
widely available across the retail market by creating an enabling environment
SEA 4d ‘Energy Manager’ scheme will be implemented on  mandatory basis by end
2019to designated users and extended to the remaining institutional users by SEA
4e Reduced duty and taxation of efficient equipment supported by an accelerated
depreciation scheme will be offered to building renovation and retrofitting
industry to improve the energy efficiency of the existing building stock by SEA
fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka; 18A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 SEA 4f  differential taxation scheme for commercial
buildings will be introduced, based on  simplified energy utilisation index by
end similar scheme to support the market for efficient technologies will be
introduced by end-2020, through  green procurement process led by the state
sector CEB 4g Power generation facilities will be subjected to  thorough energy
audit to evaluate generator efficiencies and efficiency of auxiliary systems,
and  sector-wide efficiency improvement programme will be launched in 4h
lighting standard for street lighting, to cater to rural, urban and major road
illumination including other public space lighting requirements will be
introduced and implemented on  mandatory basis within MoPE 4i  pilot scale
automated demand response project will be implemented by mid- 2021, and the
techno-economic viability of the intervention will be documented for scaling up
as appropriate LECO CEB/LECO 4j Overall system losses in the electricity grid
will be reduced to % of net generation by 4k Reactive power management will be
further intensified by introducing  scheme to discourage demand for reactive
energy by end users through an appropriate volume-based fee CEB/LECO 4l Modal
share of mass transport will be enhanced by  margin of 10%compared to the 2016
share by 2023 by adopting avoid, shift and improve strategies and intelligent
multimodal transport management solutions for major cities in the country, by
Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation MoT&CA 4m At least 30% of all
government institutional head offices and regional head offices to have
teleconferencing facilities to hold tele-meetings by All main government offices
must have teleconferencing facilities by The participation of officers, who
require more than one hour of travel time to participate at meetings must be
discouraged from attending physically and be connected via teleconferencing
facilities established at all ministries from end MoPA& 4n All routine services
offered at government agencies that do not require physical presence must be
made available via internet or mobile phone to minimize transport energy use
from MoPE 4o  performance-based energy efficiency building code for commercial
buildings will be made mandatory by end 2019and  voluntary scheme for domestic
sector will be introduced by end SEA 4p Incorporation of building management
systems with  focus on energy management and future opportunities in smart grid
driven automated demand response will be made  mandatory planning criterion for
all commercial developments by 2020by the UDA MoM&WD and UDA 19A PART  : SEC ()
- GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019
fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld
%cd;dka;  Enhancing Self Reliance Responsibility Indigenous energy resources
will be developed to the optimum levels to minimise dependence on imported
resources and to attain  higher degree of resilience in the energy sector The
following targets and milestones will have to be met by the institutions to
which responsibilities are assigned 5a Feasibility studies on the use of natural
gas/renewable energy-based hydrogen SEA/PRDS and GTL in transport and other
sectors will be carried out by 5b Renewable energy resources will be exploited
based on  priority order arrived at, considering economics, technology and
quality of resource Wind is identified as the second most promising renewable
energy resource after hydropower and highest priority is given to develop wind
to realize  minimum 20% share of electricity generated from renewable energy
sources excluding major hydro, by 2022by the SEA in association with relevant
public and private sector players SEA 5c At least 10,000 hectare of unproductive
land will be prescribed as biomass energy development areas, and leased to
developers by the SEA starting from 2020 over  period of  years to develop as
commercial timber cum fuel wood plantations SEA 5d Biomass supply chains in five
regions will be supported through improved collection of biomass residue, mixed
cropping and certification of sustainable extraction for  three-year duration
until they reach commercialisation through  pilot project by 2020 by the SEA SEA
5e The most widely used suburban rail corridors between Colombo and the Airport,
Avissawella, Negombo, Panadura and Veyangodawill be upgraded and electrified by
mid-2023, and other viable railways in provincial city suburbs will be upgraded
and electrified by MoT&CA 5f At least 20% of all new light vehicle registrations
shall be electric vehicles in At least 25 new public electric vehicle charging
stations with DC rapid charging capability will be established at strategic
locations by the CEB/LECO by SEA will encourage the private sector to set up
their own charging stations to complement the CEB/LECO efforts, by securing
fiscal incentives to the industry CEB/LECO/ SEA Responsibility  Caring for the
Environment  meaningful contribution to climate change will be made by
maintaining the low carbon intensity of Sri Lankan energy sector Adverse
environmental and social impacts of energy services will be minimized to care
for the global and local environment by achieving the following targets and
milestones by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned; 6a The
CEB is to reduce incremental carbon footprint of electricity due to future coal
power plant additions by reducing GHG emission levels using carbon sequestration
plantations  feasibility study will be done by the CEB in 2020, outlining
possible sequestration plantation options, land availability and financial
analysis CEB  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09
% ,xld %cd;dka; 20A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 MoMD& 6b Stack emissions of energy sector
facilities will be constantly monitored and reported in the public domain by
2020, to manage and reduce emission burden from the energy sector 6c  closed
loop storage and distribution system will be established gradually by the CPC
starting from 2020 for lighter fuels with high potential for vaporisation
CPC/LIOC 6d HSE standards for all energy sector utilities will be introduced
MoPE/ MoPRD by 2020 and fully implemented by  Enhancing the Share of Renewable
Energy Responsibility Renewable energy resources in the country’ energy mix will
be increased, meeting the targets and milestones; 7a An advisory committee
comprising ministry officials in-charge of different line agencies/custodians of
land resources will be appointed to coordinate the approval of renewable energy
projects and acquisition of land resources for such projects by end MoPE 7b
After careful analysis of the network constraints, dispatch options and resource
characteristics,  comprehensive renewable energy grid integration plan will be
published by the CEB from 2020 and periodically updated CEB 7c  fully-fledged
competitive bidding scheme for renewable energyinvestments will be implemented
through  resource development programme to realise  pipeline of ‘ready to
invest’ projects by mid-2020 by the SEA, realising 20% of generation witha
cumulative renewable energy generation capacity of ,600 MW by SEA/CEB 7d
Applications received by the SEA when feed-in tariffs were on offer, but held up
due to the termination to feed in tariffs, which are at various stages of the
approval process will be channeled to  competitive bidding model by using
suitable interim approaches such as offering project proponents preferential
treatments when for they were competition considering the maturity of  project,
investments made, etc  list of such alternate options will be jointly developed
by the CEB and the SEAby mid 2020for different technologies, considering their
inherent attributes so that all such projects in abeyance could be expeditiously
developed within  competitive bidding framework by end SEA/CEB opened up 7e
Advanced forecasting systems for hydro, solar and wind energy will be
established by the CEB along with other relevant line agencies by end-CEB/SEA
21A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% -
2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; CEB/LECO 7f  premium green tariff/green energy
certification package will be offered to all interested electricity customer
segments as an optional tariff and  portion of incremental proceeds will be used
for renewable energydevelopment by crediting to the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy
Fund  Strenthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector Responsibility  stable
policy environment will be established and regulatory frameworks will be further
strengthened to assure good governance in the energy sector by achieving the
following targets and milestones by the institutions to which responsibilities
are assigned 8a Ministry in charge of the function of petroleum resource
development shall ensure that necessary legislation for upstream petroleum
development are enacted by mid-2020, including necessary legislation to
establish an upstream petroleum development regulatory mechanism MoPRD 8b
Establish  regulatory framework and empower an independent regulatory
institution by enacting the necessary legislation to regulate downstream
petroleum industry, by end-MoPRD 8c Functional units of CEB to adopt independent
financial reporting from financial MoPE year 2019, in accordance with the
Electricity Act 8d Digitalisation of the electricity utility sector will be
launched by 2020, and completed through  phased approach by 2022, covering the
whole value chain from the optimal operation of core assets to managing customer
relationships CEB/LECO 8e  data governance policy for ensuring the proper
management of digital information of energy sector utilities will be introduced
to ensure security, data quality and privacy by mid-MoPE/ MoPRD 8f Reporting of
energy sector transactions by key sector entities will be regularised by
appointing  working group under the leadership of the SEA by end 2019, and the
Sri Lanka Energy Balance for each year will be published by the SEA within the
first six months after the end of each calendar year, commencing with that of
year MoPE 8g All energy sector projects and investment opportunities will be
identified and documented in self-standing project concept formats from 2020 by
each agency for easy take-up by investors and development partners on
competitive basis MoPRD/ MoPE 8h Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) aligned with
economic goals will be introduced for energy utilities by end-2019, monitored
and published by the respective Ministries from MoPE MoPRD 8i Establish clear
guidelines to implement public-private partnership in developing MoPE MoPRD
energy infrastructure, by mid-8j Study and report the potential benefits and
pre-requisites, and an action plan to establish  wholesale market for
electricity and to allow power wheeling in the transmission and distribution
network, by end-MoPE  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% -
2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 22A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 SEA 8k An application will be
developed for mobile phone access by 2020, to engage the end users to increase
awareness on best energy options, record grievances, price trends and energy
efficiency improvement by extending the online energy database already operated
by the SEA  Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure Responsibility
Strategic locations to establish future energy infrastructure will be earmarked
and secured in advance to ensure timely implementation of such facilities and to
minimise adverse social impacts by achieving the following targets and
milestones by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned 9a
strategic facilities layout map, identifying suitable sites to locate future
energy infrastructure such as coal, natural gas and nuclear plants, refineries
and terminals will be prepared by 2020 in consultation with the National
Physical Planning Department by  joint committee appointed for the purpose MoPE
9b  master plan identifying the best sites to locate large scale renewable
infrastructure such as wind and solar farms would be formulated and published by
end 2019with  development time horizon 2020-SEA 9c Petroleum, gas pipe transport
and backbone electricity transmission line corridors that are to be developed
during 2020 - 2030 will be identified and published as  map by  joint committee
by CEB/CPC 9d Based on already available GIS elements,  national GIS database
depicting existing and future underground utility infrastructure including
electrical, water, communication and petroleum will be established by 2020 by
the CEB CEB 9e An inter-agency utility corridor coordination authority to
resolve MoPE conflicts will be established by2020 10 Providing Opportunities for
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Responsibility Considering the vastness of the
sector, opportunities available for research and development, and local value
addition in the energy sector which can improve sector productivity will be
actively pursued to engage the Sri Lankan innovators and entrepreneurs 10a  25%
local preference will be granted to Sri Lankan enterprises and joint ventures
led by such enterprises to encourage such enterprises to engage in energy sector
infrastructure development,from2019 MoPE 10b  coordinated research and
development network involving all research and development organisations will be
established by the SEA, assembling both industry and academia in  grand SEA LECO
23A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC
OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% -
2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; alliance by mid-2020, and ten pilot projects on home
grown renewable energy conversion technologies and ten energy efficiency
improvement technologies will be introduced by the SEA by mid-2021, protecting
intellectual properties amassed until commercialisation 10c Smart grid pilot
projects will be deployed in five identified locations to demonstrate the
possibilities of better management of generation, transmission and distribution
assets, to allow new and present customers to use electricity in the most
efficient manner and to allow large scale/deep penetrated deployment of
dispersed renewable energy generators using advanced ICT in measurement, control
and management of electrical grids by end 2020 bythe CEB/LECO CEB/LECO 10d An
automated demand response pilot project will be implemented, and impacts
documented to allow economic evaluation of the same as  future generation option
by end 2021,by the CEB/LECO CEB/LECO 10e Digitised data accumulated from the
advent of digital technologies in utility CEB/LECO operations will be retained,
processed and used as  knowledge asset 10f Indigenous knowledge and capacities
required for energy sector development will be nurtured by introducing
contribution-based reward scheme to encourage individual efforts by sector
professionals and pooling of knowledge resources across the energy sector by SEA
GLOSSARY advisory committee  statutory committee comprising of experts on
particular subject area appointed to provide advice to the board of management
of the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority automated demand response
automatic control systems that respond to supply conditions or contingencies and
act to alter the customer demand to reduce overall cost of supply building
management systems  control system in  building that manages the energy
converting equipment with an objective of improved energy efficiency and demand
management carbon neutrality condition of balancing the carbon emissions
released to the atmosphere by human activities and absorbed from the atmosphere
carbon sequestration natural process by which atmospheric carbon dioxide is
absorbed by plants through photosynthesis and held in  solid form for long
durations demand side management managing the demand for electricity in
electricity systems by interventions in the end user facilities  fldgi ( ^& fPoh
- YS % iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 24A PART  :
SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
2019 dispatch system operators or ‘dispatchers’ control the output of grid
connected generating units to meet system demand This process of controlling is
called generator dispatch If controlling is by way of an instruction, it is
termed  ‘dispatch instruction’ dispatchable dispatchable generation refers to
sources of electricity that can be started/stopped and the power output adjusted
as and when requested by system operators distribution infrastructure
electricity network operating under 33kV connecting customer loads to the
national grid downstream segment of the petroleum fuel supply chain which
distribute refined products to customers electrification providing access to
electricity distribution lines Sri Lanka provided access to all potential
customers, of which about % have an active electricity connection energy carrier
substance or phenomenon that contain energy in different forms which can be
converted into  usable energy form to deliver an energy service when required or
stored for later use energy crises shortage of supply or conversion capacity,
quantities or finances to serve the customer demand for energy energy intensity
of economy quantity of energy required to produce one unit of value addition to
the economy energy services functions performed using any form of energy which
are means to obtain or facilitate the delivery of work,  desired service or
state energy transition the trend of lessening dependence on finite energy
resources and making efforts to increase the use of renewable energy firm (power
generating) capacity Power generation capacity that can be guaranteed to be
available for dispatch by system operators Sources such as mini hydro, solar PV
and wind do not fall under this definition as their capacity is determined by
the availability of the respective resource at the time ‘Run of the river’
hydropower plants having sufficient storage at their regulating head ponds to
operate for at least  few hours are considered as firm capacity as the system
operators can plan the times they are to be dispatched fly ash lighter ash from
combustion process, typically trapped by an emission control system fossil fuels
energy resources that do not undergo cyclic replenishment within  human time
scale green energy certification certification of buildings or energy converting
systems that meet certain specified standards of efficiency or contributions to
pre-defined sustainability indices 25A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF
THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS %
iudcjd§ ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; green procurement
processes procurement processes in which credit is given to the degree of
contribution to sustainable conversion and use of energy and other resources
green tariff  pricing structure for electricity that includes  premium to meet
incremental costs of using emerging technologies that have lower irreversible
impacts on society and the environment than others hydropower catchments surface
of earth which receives rainwater and feed the water into  reservoir or  river,
to feed one or several hydropower plants Indigenous energy renewable and non-
renewable energy resources that are found within the territory or the exclusive
economic zone of Sri Lanka installed power generation capacity rated capacity of
output of  power plant intermittence inherent nature of variation of the supply
of energy sources with time liquefied natural gas liquefied form of natural gas,
typically stored in insulated vessels cooled down to minus (-) 160 degrees
Celsius load profile the pattern of using electricity, by  customer or  region
or  country local preference  percentage limit up to by which  priced bid from
local bidder is accepted, in preference to  bid from an international bidder low
carbon intensity low use of fossil fuels to supply an energy service low voltage
400 volt three-phase or 230 volt single-phase Long Term Generation Expansion
Plan  long-term plan showing details of the power plants to be made available
for future use, complied and published by the Ceylon Electricity Board natural
gas gas produced from oil fields or gas fields, contains mostly methane system
(network) losses energy losses incurred in the supply of electricity in
transmission and distribution through the national electricity grid off-grid
users and electricity generating systems serving such users without being
connected to the national electricity grid  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§
ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; 26A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE
EXTRAORDINARY OF THE DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019 on-grid
electricity generating systems or users connected to the national electricity
grid power pool operation  system in which generators pledge capacity available
for  period ahead, to which buyers (typically distribution companies or
customers) bid to purchase electricity primary energy energy as it occurs in its
natural form, includes both renewable and non-renewable forms proven generation
technologies electricity generation technologies that have been developed to
level of wide commercial use renewable energy energy resources that undergo
cyclic replenishment within  human time scale secondary energy energy available
in  form different to its origin as  result of some energy conversion process
smart grid  group of technologies deployed to increase responsiveness of power
grids to better manage its generation, transmission and distribution assets, to
allow new and present customers to use electricity in the most efficient manner
and to allow large scale / deep penetrated deployment of dispersed NRE
generators using advanced ICT in measurement, control and management of
electrical grids to reduce overall cost of electricity and environmental burden
of electricity systems on the long run by differing investments and reducing
operational costs social and environmental externalities social and
environmental impacts and costs resulting from any economic or commercial
activity social market economy  socioeconomic model combining  free market
capitalist economic system alongside social policies that establish both fair
competition within the market and special treatment to vulnerable sections of
the society socialized through distribution tariffs costs not charged to
individual customers but included in utility assets, for which cost are allowed
to be averaged across all customers Sri Lanka Energy Balance annual compilation
of energy sector statistics published by Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Authority
strategic fuel reserves quantities of fuel stored for later use, in anticipation
of breakdown of regular supplies to  particular energy facility, location or
region sub sector  segment within  sector which can be described based on
certain common attributes supply chain entities, facilities, processes,
information, and resources involved in delivering  product or service from
point of occurrence to an end user Sustainable Development Goals  universal call
to action to achieve seventeen global goals to end poverty, protect the planet
and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity by the United Nations
general assembly in 2015 27A PART  : SEC () - GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY OF THE
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA 2019  fldgi ( ^& fPoh - YS % iudcjd§
ckrcfha ; úfYI eiÜ ;% - 2019'08'09 % ,xld %cd;dka; transmission infrastructure
electricity network operating above 33kV connecting generation facilities to the
distribution grid universal access access to modern energy sources, usually
means that an electricity distribution line is available within 100m of the
potential customer premises upper middle-income The World bank defines an upper
middle-income country to be where the gross national income is between USD3,896
to USD12,055 per person upstream segment of the petroleum fuel supply chain
which involves exploration of resource sites, mining and delivery of extracted
resources to refining facilities variability change of quantity of energy with
time from  particular energy resource, attributed to  natural phenomenon waste
heat thermal energy intentionally or inadvertently lost from  combustion process
08 - 865 PRINTED AT THE DEPARTMENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, SRI LANKA