Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/KAZ/  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework  Kazakhstan is an upper-middle-income country which, after two decades
of growth and steady socioeconomic progress, has reached  critical juncture To
meet its ambitious goal of becoming one of the 30 most developed nations in the
world by 2050, Kazakhstan seeks to further modernize its institutions and
reformulate policies to rebuild trust with citizens, address social
vulnerabilities, diversify the economy and develop low-carbon alternatives for
its growth pathway While Kazakhstan has achieved  very high Human Development
Index value of 8172 and has significantly reduced poverty levels, inequalities
persist as  result of unbalanced development across regions and social groups,
especially pronounced in the country’ cities and remote rural areas  The
country’ economy is driven by exploitation of natural resources and is based
mostly on industry and services Agriculture contributed only  per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) in series of economic shocks in the last decade has
revealed structural vulnerabilities – social, economic and environmental – that
threaten sustainability and inclusive growth Integration within the regional and
global economies is limited by trade barriers and distance to global markets The
dominance of state-owned enterprises further hinders economic diversification
and weakens incentives for private investment Foreign direct investment is
growing, but with periodic slowdowns Plummeting oil prices and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) crisis in early 2020 have exposed and deepened these
vulnerabilities As  result, the economy is expected to contract by  per cent in
20207 and the dual crises could impact the vulnerable even more  The Government
has increasingly emphasized the need for  knowledge-based and low- carbon
development pathway to alleviate the economy’ dependence on extractive and
carbon-intense industries This requires  transformational change, by aligning
education and industry to respond to the needs of the future of work with the
appropriate human capital and productive capacities, supported by technology,
innovation, research and development  As Kazakhstan seeks  sustainable recovery
pathway, clear strategies on low-carbon development and climate change
adaptation are not yet in place Its ambitious vision to promote renewable energy
is hampered by various barriers related to markets, financing and technical
capacity Meanwhile, climate change is taking its toll on the agricultural
sector, water resources, grazing lands and forests More than 50 per cent of the
current glacier mass is expected to be lost by 2100, and climate-related
disasters such as mudflows, floods and droughts have increased in frequency and
scale,  trend expected to continue in the next decade Climate change is
projected to cause  steep decrease of water resources (up to 22 per cent) by
2100, leading to water stress in all of the country’ eight basins Kazakhstan is
major supplier of wheat, but yields are expected to decrease by between 13 and
49 per cent by 2050, with  total annual economic loss in this sector estimated
at $700 million  Beyond these socioeconomic and environmental challenges, low
levels of accountability contribute to mistrust between citizens and
institutions Despite recent improvements, Kazakhstan ranks 113 of 180 countries
in the Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index The country has
undertaken important institutional reforms, but despite          Ibid  Foreign
direct investment dropped in  (as  percentage of GDP)         DP/DCP/KAZ/
visible progress, investments in -government have not yet yielded the desired
effects The COVID-19 pandemic gives new impetus to the need for  more
comprehensive public sector transformation, to one that is people-centred,
service-oriented and accessible, especially by the most vulnerable It also calls
for building resilience to disruptions that could be ensured by disaster and
pandemic preparedness, response and recovery capabilities  Kazakhstan steadily
reduced its Gender Inequality Index value from 405 in 2000 to 202 in 2015,
bringing it below the regional average10 However, rankings on other indices for
political representation, labour force participation,11 gender-related biases
and wage differences indicate  need to further reduce gender gaps12 and unlock
the potential of women Currently, only 22 per cent of parliamentary seats are
held by women Gender-based violence remains prevalent13 Although Kazakhstan
keeps  steady record and compares well with other countries, the gaps between
male and female labour force participation and wages are not narrowing14  These
challenges are particularly acute for the nation’ most vulnerable population
groups, as revealed during the COVID-19 outbreak The Government categorizes,
among others, people with disabilities, large families, youth, women and the
elderly as vulnerable This is determined by such factors as geography, climate,
access to services and discrimination Rural citizens face harsh climate
conditions, are remote from markets and suffer from declining employment in
agriculture These conditions leave youth in remote areas particularly vulnerable
to unemployment People in disaster-prone areas, with high risk of flooding,
remain particularly vulnerable15  Kazakhstan has begun to chart its sustainable
development path within the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
“Kazakhstan 2050” strategy The Government has created  high-level institutional
mechanism to oversee the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and
has taken bold steps towards integrating them in national policies and sectoral
programmes16 However, stronger political will and sustained action are needed to
effectively translate strategies into reality on the ground The country’
sustainable development agenda has informed the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), which identifies Goals , 10, 13, 16
and 17 as focus areas  UNDP has earned  unique position and value as  trusted
long-term partner of the Government in supporting national policymaking,
institutional capacity development and design and implementation of critical
reform efforts, thanks to its convening role among partners, strong global
technical capabilities and local presence The long and successful UNDP track
record facilitates governmental buy-in and commitment, promising to make the
work of UNDP more sustainable and less exposed to shifts in political priorities
UNDP is recognized by evaluations for its neutrality, discipline in utilization
of government funding, effective procurement systems and transparent decision-
making17 It is acknowledged for its ability to mobilize cross-sectoral national
and international expertise, forge strong partnerships within the United Nations
and with other development partners, bring new modalities of implementation and
leverage financing This country programme document (CPD) reflects several novel
aspects that point to the unique role of UNDP in the United Nations system These
aspects will be applied across all six UNSDCF outcomes, especially in the areas
where UNDP has  clear comparative 10  11  12  13 Ibid 14 Ibid 15 Common Country
Analysis, United Nations, 16 Ibid 17 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office,
Independent country programme evaluation: Kazakhstan,   DP/DCP/KAZ/ advantage,
namely in strengthening effectiveness and accountability of institutions;
facilitating citizens’ engagement in decision-making; supporting resilience-
building, green growth and inclusive economic development; and fostering climate
action The first novelty is the four-fold approach of UNDP to catalyse impact
through: () Thought leadership UNDP will apply modern data and analytics, using
its rich global innovative tools to interconnect social, economic and
environmental analysis across multiple Sustainable Development Goals, and apply
new forecasting and visualization instruments to support transformative and
evidence-based approaches to solving complex development problems; () Leveraging
resources and partnerships through platforms UNDP will bring multiple
stakeholders together around targeted national platforms, including by
attracting non- traditional stakeholders such as businesses and foundations to
seek integrated development solutions These platforms will be linked to regional
and global networks to leverage resources from  broad range of partners through
South-South and triangular cooperation Existing platforms on the civil service
and the Sustainable Development Goals will be expanded to include  green finance
accelerator, among others, aiming to leverage resources for investment in green
technology and services through new partnerships with the Government, the
private sector and international financial institutions (IFIs); () Innovation
The UNDP approach to innovation involves sense-making, solution mapping and
experimentation towards institutionalization and scaled-up impact Using the
above-mentioned platform approach, UNDP will apply innovation to test solutions
and support acceleration for transformational change For example, through the
new platform on green finance, UNDP will test new financing solutions to inform
policy and help leverage partnerships and resources for  low-carbon development
pathway UNDP will apply innovation in other areas, including through
facilitating digitalized platforms for efficient and participatory public
service delivery, enhancing citizen engagement18 and community-based police
modernization; () Connecting policy results to solutions of scale All of the
above would catalyse impact by scaling up and feeding into policy and legal
frameworks As  member of the Government’ coordination councils on the green
economy and on the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will continue providing
high-level policy advice connected to scaled-up development actions to reach the
most vulnerable UNDP will support public sector reform, digitalization and
labour market transformation efforts, with special attention to supporting the
United Nations response to post-COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery The second novel
aspect of the country programme is its offer of four integrated solutions: ()
human capital; () quality services; () green economy; and () integrated local
development These will be applied to remove bottlenecks and introduce policy
measures with multiplier effects across all programme areas For example, human
capital development is expected to improve skills and productive capacities for
knowledge-based economic transformation while allowing the country to address
emerging inequalities around access to advanced education and technology
Improved quality of services will contribute to building trust between citizens
and the State, but also helping address the needs of the vulnerable and
preparing institutions to be more resilient to shocks like COVID-sustained focus
on the green economy is expected to generate new jobs and support economic
diversification, in addition to addressing environmental issues Integrated local
development will improve conditions for local businesses and value chains, while
creating space for inclusive governance, fostering productive citizen engagement
and creating opportunities for youth and women 18  -2019   DP/DCP/KAZ/ The third
novel aspect is the strengthened substance of programme interventions through:
() better anchoring in the Sustainable Development Goals framework, with
emphasis on data and knowledge; () expanded focus on governance with emphasis on
local governance, the judiciary and police; () redefining climate resilience
with emphasis on climate finance and the private sector; () renewed focus on
economy, entrepreneurship and skills with emphasis on knowledge and future jobs;
() strengthened focus on women and youth as development partners; and ()
deepening focus on social policy with emphasis on addressing inequalities Across
all areas of work and in support of the UNSDCF, UNDP will promote knowledge
exchange networks and cooperation between Kazakhstan and other countries Through
regional and interregional cooperation, Kazakhstan can raise its profile,
sharing its own experience and learning from best practices Institutionalization
of an official development assistance system is imminent UNDP will support the
evolution of the regional Astana Civil Service Hub into an innovative platform
to accelerate progress in civil service, anti- corruption, gender equality and
integrated local development The Sustainable Development Goals platform will
expand to bring together countries in the region to better anchor policies with
data and exchanges on innovative financing II Programme priorities and
partnerships Guided by the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will support
Kazakhstan to realize national priorities enshrined in Kazakhstan 2050, the 2025
Strategic Development Plan and other key strategies and plans These priorities
include searching for  new model of economic growth and increased productivity;
boosting the business environment and scaling up new technologies across
sectors; improving institutional performance and effectiveness of key state and
sectoral programmes and budgets; modernizing law enforcement and judicial
systems; improving the quality of education and health care; and supporting
regional economic development, especially in remote areas The work of UNDP will
cut across these national priorities, supporting Kazakhstan in sustaining its
growth trajectory by diversifying the economy, modernizing institutions,
reducing inequalities and sustainably managing natural resources The application
of the six UNDP signature solutions will be key to helping the country
accelerate structural transformations and better prepare for future shocks In
particular, UNDP will assist the country in four main areas described below
Addressing social vulnerabilities and inequalities The Government has been
devoting increased attention to social protection and has created new large-
scale initiatives to achieve social protection for all, especially the most
vulnerable UNDP will support testing and scaling-up of new models of social
protection platforms for better targeting, focusing and strengthening service
provider capacities It will continue supporting digital solutions allowing for
tailor-made approach in service delivery at scale to people with disabilities,
the elderly and large families Digitalization of such services will be tested
for emergency situations to ensure uninterrupted delivery to vulnerable groups
The work on vulnerable groups will feed into policy support for developing
national social support systems In the health sector, UNDP will continue to
ensure more efficient procurement of high-quality medicines, while supporting
system-wide resilience of health services to prepare for, respond to and recover
from crises UNDP will have  specific focus on youth Together with other United
Nations agencies, it will expand the regional initiative on preventing violent
extremism conducive to terrorism While enlarging geographical coverage, the work
will reach  wider target age group and experiment models to improve community
resilience This work will contribute to the   DP/DCP/KAZ/ employability of
vulnerable young women and men and, in collaboration with youth resource
centres, will introduce social and green entrepreneurship activities to raise
awareness for sustainable development Rebuilding trust of citizens through more
effective and accountable institutions, free of corruption UNDP will support the
“Listening State”19 concept aimed at regaining citizens’ trust in institutional
reform This will include improving public administration through digitalization,
crises preparedness and resilience Anti-corruption work will include innovative
preventive measures ranging from sectoral risk management and introduction of
behavioural insights to better delivery of -services and citizens’ engagement in
budgetary spending and public procurement National-level work will be
complemented by advancing local self-governance, emphasizing inclusive and
gender-sensitive approaches to planning, budgeting and monitoring, for
meaningful citizen participation to better address inequalities and
discrimination This will include supporting capacities in local authorities
(Akimats) to uphold integrity and engage citizens in local development
Partnership with the Parliament will be re-energized for advancing the 2030
Agenda UNDP will scale up engagement in judiciary and law-enforcement system
reforms prioritized by the country’ leadership UNDP joint work on quality of
justice with the Supreme Court and the High Judicial Council will expand to new
areas including judicial administration UNDP will provide further support to
police modernization and community policing Rule of law will remain  priority
and growing area of engagement, focused on enhancing the National Torture
Prevention Mechanism It will also include assistance to the Government in the
realization of its commitments related to the universal periodic review,
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women and
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and related processes UNDP will
expand its partnerships on the 2030 Agenda, offering  platform-based approach
UNDP will support the Government in mainstreaming Sustainable Development Goal
targets and indicators into national systems of strategic planning and
development financing, working closely with the Government’ Coordination Council
It will help Kazakhstan identify potential additional financing by: () deploying
analytical support through its global policy network; () leveraging development
resources from the public and private sectors and international organizations;
and () supporting policy reforms to diversify and increase financial resources
UNDP will further advocate for  holistic and long-term development finance
strategy UNDP will continue helping Kazakhstan to become  recognized global
player, providing support for  national development cooperation system and
associated initiatives, such as women’ empowerment and civil service excellence
Concerted efforts will be made to raise the international profile of the Astana
Civil Service Hub, support South-South cooperation, develop  regional
Sustainable Development Goal platform and facilitate regional dialogues to share
the experiences of Kazakhstan on the green economy, sustainable energy and other
areas Fostering high-productivity, diversified and knowledge-based economic
growth The Government recognizes the need to develop human capital in pursuit of
new economic growth model and higher productivity Work will focus on
establishing  country platform on  knowledge-based economy, to bridge the gap
between education and employers’ needs by reskilling and upskilling the labour
force, and to foster research and innovation to meet future demand induced by
new technologies In collaboration with technical-vocational and education
institutions, businesses and social incubators, UNDP will 19  -2019
DP/DCP/KAZ/ strengthen the professional and entrepreneurial skills and
employment-related resilience of young women and men UNDP work on modernizing
the labour force and the economy will be linked to broader efforts to enhance
private sector development and market competitiveness UNDP will facilitate the
introduction of new technologies and practices to promote value-chain
enhancement and integration, with due consideration of interrelated
environmental, economic and social effects, starting with the agricultural and
ecotourism sectors To foster the enabling environment for local economic
development, UNDP will support the design and implementation of territorial
development programmes for the most deprived areas of Kazakhstan This work will
also introduce tools to mainstream the Sustainable Development Goals in local
plans and budgets UNDP will collaborate with agencies including the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the International Trade Centre
to improve value chains with trade relations in view of their potential for the
post-COVID-19 economic recovery to support economic diversification through
regional economic cooperation This focus area is closely related to the
workstreams on social vulnerabilities, climate and disaster resilience Preparing
for the economic future includes consideration of new vulnerabilities and
inequalities potentially generated in the absence of appropriate social policies
and with disruptions introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic UNDP will work with
diverse partners to support Kazakhstan in pursuing  holistic approach to
strengthen resilience against possible economic shocks and long-term
transformation in the labour market and business Supporting climate and disaster
resilience and nature-based, low-carbon growth UNDP will help Kazakhstan honour
its Paris Agreement commitments by supporting the expansion of the green economy
to tap into new opportunities for jobs and businesses It will partner with other
United Nations agencies to provide technical expertise to translate strategies
into action, establish  monitoring framework for climate change adaptation and
mitigation, and develop plans for transition to green energy, land management,
biodiversity, reforestation, disaster risk reduction and waste management UNDP
work on climate action will centre on developing and scaling up financing
mechanisms for clean technologies and low-carbon business development, via
green finance accelerator This will build on financing mechanisms for energy
efficiency and renewable energy already piloted with the Damu Entrepreneurship
Development Fund, with  view to expand to other sectors Low-carbon business
development will be promoted through green bonds, renewable energy auctions and
carbon trading, among other innovative mechanisms In continuing its work on
biodiversity, pastoralism and irrigated agriculture, UNDP will introduce and
scale up new solutions and more efficient farming techniques, including for
saving and harvesting water Through private sector engagement, these
technologies are expected to increase agricultural productivity that will
partially offset the decreased yields in drought years As natural hazard risks
increase, UNDP will work with the Emergency Situations Committee to develop
policies, capacities and  natural disaster prevention and response system, while
aiming to generate new jobs UNDP will support gender equality and women’
empowerment across all the above- mentioned areas It will provide assistance to
strengthen the gender machinery, advance implementation of key gender-related
legislation, improve national capacities to address gender-differentiated
impacts of climate change and disasters and support women’ participation in
decision-making in Parliament, business and public administration UNDP will seek
to raise women’ skills and catalyse opportunities in emerging sectors, including
green energy and digital services To help prevent sexual and gender-based
violence, UNDP   DP/DCP/KAZ/ will advance policy dialogue and seek legislative
reform, linked with efforts in police and justice sector capacity development
III Programme and risk management During the  cycle, the national budget was
primary source of co-financing, covering nearly 30 per cent of the total
programme budget Government cost sharing was allocated on an annual and project
basis, without  predictable mechanism The majority of funding came from vertical
trust funds and, for regional projects, directly from donors The shrinking donor
space in Kazakhstan requires UNDP to rethink its financing modality To overcome
the unpredictable, complex and tiered process of government cost-sharing
approval, UNDP and the Government will aim to sign an agreement on predictable
funding, to be reviewed annually for yearly allocation across strategic focus
areas The main decision- making body will be the Strategic Advisory Council,
coordinated by the Ministry of National Economy as national executing agency for
this country programme Economic recession or change in the Government’
development priorities may hamper the country’ ability to allocate resources for
UNDP programmes or office presence UNDP will manage this risk by seeking to
diversify its strategic partnerships, targeting new development financing from
IFIs, business and the non-governmental sector, and applying innovative
programming instruments If funding does not materialize in full, programme
targets and interventions will be revised by UNDP and the Government to meet
resource requirements and manage related risks UNDP will monitor the risks of
crises such as natural disasters and public health emergencies Should these
occur, based on  government request for assistance, operations will be adjusted
in line with the UNDP corporate processes The experience of the unfolding
socioeconomic developments related to the COVID-19 crisis demonstrates the
possibility of nimble and effective responses to emerging development challenges
by leveraging resources from IFIs and global instruments This CPD outlines the
UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach
to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects IV Monitoring and evaluation Mainstreaming of Sustainable Development
Goal targets and indicators into the national system of strategic planning and
the UNSDCF provides an opportunity to measure the effectiveness of joint work
UNDP will utilize national data systems to assess development progress and help
the country strengthen national data quality and availability Through joint work
with the Accounts Committee, National Committee on Statistics, Economic Research
Institute and other relevant institutions and civil society organizations, UNDP
will invest in national monitoring and evaluation (&) capacities to better
capture results of national programmes and lessons learned The new and
innovative methodologies used by UNDP such as sense-making, rapid integrated
assessment and development finance assessment, as well as big data collection
and visualization, will provide instruments and comparative advantage for UNDP
to be  partner of choice for the national monitoring system upgrade
DP/DCP/KAZ/ Internally, UNDP will increase its & capacities Together with its
implementing partners, UNDP will conduct joint reviews of annual progress of
programme implementation & quality control will be ensured through independent
audits and evaluations, to be conducted in line with UNDP policies and
procedures UNDP and partners will implement an evaluation plan, applying new
techniques to ensure cost-effective compilation of appropriate evidence  robust
monitoring plan will be established utilizing the enhanced analytics and
upgraded staff capacities already planned by the country office, with key
associated risks factored in as part of the country programme risk log
DP/DCP/KAZ/ Annex Results and resources framework for Kazakhstan () NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strategy 2050: New principles of social policy - social
guarantees and personal responsibility COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT)
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #:  By 2025, effective, inclusive and accountable
institutions ensure equal access for all people living in Kazakhstan, especially
most vulnerable, to quality and gender sensitive social services according to
the principle of leaving no one behind RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development INDICATIVE
COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines, targets) COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF
DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) (SDG ) Proportion of total government spending on
essential services (education, health and social protection) Baseline: 50%
(2019) Target: 55% (2025) Regular: $258,800 Ministry of Labour Social Protection
(MLSP) Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) Ministry of Health Civil Service
Agency United Nations agencies (IOM, UNODC, UNICEF) NGOs and youth centres
Research institutions Output : Marginalized groups, particularly the poor,
women, people with disabilities and displaced have better access to quality
basic services • National Committee on Statistics (CommStat) (annually) •
Ministry of Finance (MinFin) Other: $10,000,000 • Indicator : % satisfaction of
vulnerable groups for public services supported in seven oblasts and three
cities in Kazakhstan (disaggregated by sex, age, disability, geography)
Baseline: / (2020) Target: 85% (2025) Data source, frequency: national survey by
Civil Service Agency, annually (SDG ) Proportion of government recurrent and
capital spending to sectors that disproportionately benefit women, the poor and
vulnerable groups Baseline: % (2019) Target: 25% (2025) • MLSP • Indicator :
Number of vulnerable people benefiting from procured lifesaving medicines
Baseline: 22,000 (2019) Target: 43,000 (2025) Data source, frequency: project
report, annually Output : Capacities developed for progressive expansion of
inclusive and sustainable social protection systems • Indicator : Instruments
developed for better targeting, 10  DP/DCP/KAZ/ monitoring and evaluation of
social services for the vulnerable Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2025) Data
source, frequency: MLSP, annually • Indicator : Number of sectoral gender-
sensitive social policies designed and implemented Baseline:  (2019) Target:
(2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Strategic Plan 2025: Reform   rule of law state, without corruption COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #:  By 2025, state institutions
at all levels effectively design and implement gender-sensitive, human rights
and evidence-based public policies and provide quality services in an inclusive,
transparent and accountable manner RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Perception of the level
of corruption by the population (link to  ()) Baseline: Score 34 (2019) Target:
Score 38 (2025) Output : Systems and capacities to implement the 2030 Agenda
through participatory and inclusive budgeting are enhanced Regular: $313,200 -
MIA - President’ • Transparency International (annually) Other: $18,500,000
Administration planning and - Prime Minister’ Office - MNE - Economic Research •
Anticorruption agency • Ministry of National Economy (MNE) Proportion of
businesses that had at least one contact with  public official and that paid
bribe to  public official, or were asked for  bribe by those public officials
during the previous 12 months ( ()) • Indicator : Share of districts that
adopted structured approaches to participatory planning and budgeting Baseline:
(2020) Target: 20% (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually Institute -
Civil Service Agency - Parliament - High Judicial Council - SDG Council -
Anticorruption Agency - Resident Coordinator’ (annually) Baseline: % (2019)
Target: % (2025) Office and United Nations agencies - Asian Development Output :
Institutions and systems enabled to develop and implement institutional reforms
towards more effective, transparent and inclusive governance and service
provision at the national and local levels Bank • CommStat (annually)  ()
Proportion of population satisfied with their last experience of public services
Baseline: % (2019) Target: 78% - European Union • Indicator : Number of
effective measures adopted to 11  DP/DCP/KAZ/ () Mechanisms in place to enhance
policy coherence of sustainable development Baseline: Coordinating Council for
the Promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals created under the Government
of the Republic of Kazakhstan comprised of representatives of Government, civil
society and international organizations (2018) Target: The SDG Council enabled
the full-scale integration of SDGs into the National Strategic Planning and
Budgeting system Baseline: 80% (Rapid Integrated Assessment 2019) Target: 100%
(2030) assess, mitigate and remedy corruption risks (at national, subnational or
sectoral level) Baseline:  (2019) Target:  (2025) Data source, frequency: Civil
Service Agency, annually • Indicator : Proportion of supported CSOs delivering
innovative solutions to social service needs Baseline: 20 (2019) Target: 50
(2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually • Indicator : Number of digital
and big data technologies introduced by public services with UNDP support
Baseline:  (2019) Target:  (2025) Data source, frequency: Civil Service Agency,
annually  () Proportion of seats held by women in () national parliaments and ()
local governments Baseline: ()% (2018) Target: 50% (2030) Baseline: () % (2018)
Target: 50% (2030) Output : Capacities, functions and financing of rule of law
and national human rights institutions and systems strengthened to expand access
to justice and combat discrimination, with  focus on women and marginalized
groups Proportion of digitalized public services (link to ): Baseline: 74%
(2019) Target: 98% (2025) • Indicator : Number of districts with  functional
community police system in place Baseline:  (2019) Target: 30 (2025) Data
source, frequency: UNDP, annually 12  DP/DCP/KAZ/ • Indicator : Proportion of
population satisfied with judicial services provided Baseline: 72% (2015)
Target: 85% (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually • Indicator : (SDG )
Reductions in reported incidents of domestic violence against women Baseline: %
(2018) Target: 30% (2023) Data source, frequency: CommStat, annually Output :
Triangular development initiatives are in place to support the positioning of
Kazakhstan, with  focus on empowerment of women • Indicator : Number of
Kazakhstan-led international and regional cooperation initiatives supported by
UNDP Baseline:  (of which focused on gender equality: ) (2020) Target: 10 (of
which focused on gender equality: ) (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP,
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA), annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Kazakhstan 2050:  diversified knowledge-based economy in which competitive
entrepreneurs make effective and sustainable use of the country’ natural
resources COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #:  By
2025, all people in Kazakhstan, especially the most vulnerable, benefit from
inclusive, resilient, and sustainable economic development with improved
productive capacities, skills and equal opportunities for sustainable and decent
jobs, livelihoods, and businesses RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Output : Skills
development opportunities, policies and platforms facilitated to strengthen
labour force resilience Regular: $174,500 Proportion of youth (aged 15– 24
years) not in education, employment or training (link to ()) Baseline: % (2018)
- Ministry of Trade - MNE - MLSP - Customs • CommStat (annually) Other:
$21,500,000 13  DP/DCP/KAZ/ Target: % (2030) - Education institutions •
Indicator : Number of NEET youth engaged in community resilience programmes,
benefiting from engagement platform (disaggregated by age and gender) Baseline:
,400 (2019) Target: 40,000, (of which ,000 girls) (2025) Data source, frequency:
UNDP, annually Kazakhstan rank in the Global Labour Resilience Index Baseline:
60 (2020) Target: 50 (2025) - United Nations agencies (ILO, UNCTAD)
International Finance Corporation - Start-up, social Kazakhstan rank in the
Global Knowledge Index Baseline: 64 (2019) Target: 59 (2025) incubators MinFin -
Ministry of Output  Policies and partnerships in place to support economic
diversification and transition to knowledge-based economy  () Energy intensity
measured in terms of primary energy and GDP Baseline:  (2018) Target: 39 (2025)
Digitalization - Government of Japan • Indicator : Number of new cross-sectoral
cooperation and knowledge-sharing initiatives Baseline:  (2020) Target: 10
(2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually Output : Local economic
development enhanced through value chain integration and facilitation of
regional development programmes • Indicator : Number of businesses
supported/green jobs created in biodiversity, agriculture and ecotourism
Baseline:  (2020) Target: 100 businesses (30% led by women) (2025) Baseline:
(2020) Target: 100 green jobs created Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually 14
DP/DCP/KAZ/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strategic Plan 2025: Reform  Green
economy and environment COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP #: By 2025, all people in Kazakhstan, in particular most vulnerable,
benefit from increased climate resilience, sustainable management of environment
and clean energy, and sustainable rural and urban development RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development Official development assistance (ODA) and public expenditure on
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and ecosystems Regular:
$125,500 Output : Solutions developed, and resources mobilized for more
sustainable use of ecosystems for the improvement of the well-being of local
communities and nature - Ministry of • CommStat (annually) • MFA Ecology,
Geology and Natural Resources (MEGNR) Other: $29,800,000 () ODA to Kazakhstan
Baseline: $01 million (2017) Target: $23 million (2030) - Ministry of Energy
(MinEnergy) • Indicator : Proportion of specially protected natural areas with
added value as  local livelihoods resource Baseline: % of country land area
(2018) Target: % (2023) Baseline: 221,600 beneficiaries (2019) Target: 397,000
beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender) (2023) - Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
() Public expenditure on specially protected natural areas ( ) Baseline:
,million tenge (2018) Target: 13,million tenge (2025) - MNE - Committee of
Emergency Situations • MinFin (annually) - Damu Entrepreneurship Development
Fund - Astana International Financial Centre - International Green Technology
Center Data source, frequency: CommStat, annually • Indicator : State spending
for maintenance of specially protected natural territories Baseline: million
tenge (2018) Target: 13,million tenge (2025) Data source, frequency: CommStat,
annually - IFIs - European Union - United Nations agencies • Indicator :
Proportion of arable area with increased productivity benefiting rural
communities Baseline: Degraded land with low productivity (% on average of soil
humus content) in pilot areas with farmers bearing economic losses (2020)
Target: At least % of pilot degraded land rehabilitated with 15  DP/DCP/KAZ/
productivity increased (10 % of soil humus), benefiting at least % of farmers
and empowering women of pilot regions (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, MOA,
annually Output : Solutions developed, financed and applied at scale for
structural transformation of energy sector and improved public health Renewable
energy share in the total final energy generation Baseline  (2018) Target: %
(2020), % (2025), and 10% (2030) • Indicator : Volume of CO2 emissions and
polluting substances avoided through the introduction of new energy- efficient
and renewable energy supply solutions Baseline:  tons (2020) Target:  million
tons million kilograms per ton (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP/ MinEnergy,
annually • Indicator : Installed new capacity from wind and solar power
(megawatts) and Renewable energy production (megawatt hours) increased Capacity
Baseline:  megawatts (2020) Target:  megawatts (2025) Generation baseline:
megawatt hours (2020) Target: gigawatt hours (2025) Data source, frequency:
UNDP/MinEnergy, annually  () Industrial waste recycling and disposal to their
generation ratio Baseline:% (2018) Target: 38% (2021) Output : Environmentally
sound chemicals and waste management system aligned with international standards
and obligations  () Solid waste recycling and disposal to their generation ratio
Baseline:% (2018) Target: 40% (2030) • Indicator : System of sustainable waste
management in place 16  DP/DCP/KAZ/ The establishment of an integrated
policy/strategy/plan providing adaptation to the adverse impacts of climate
change, and foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions
development in  manner that does not threaten food production Baseline:  (2020)
Target: One national adaptation plan and nationally determined contribution
implementation plan addressing gender dimensions are in place (2030) Baseline:
strategic documents (2020) Target:  (2023) Baseline:  chemicals recycling
systems (2020) Target:  (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP/ MEGNR, annually
Output : Climate change measures integrated into national policies, strategies
and planning • Indicator : Low emission and climate resilient objectives
incorporated in national, sub- national and sectoral development plans and
policies to promote economic diversification and green growth Baseline:  (2020)
Target: > (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually • Indicator :
Public/private investments for the transition to  sustainable, low-carbon,
climate and disaster-resilient economy budgeted/leveraged Baseline:  (2020)
Target: $100 million (70%/30%) (2025) Data source, frequency: UNDP, annually 17