United Nations DP/FPA/DCP/PRK/ Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund Distr: General  April 2010
Original: English Annual session 2010 21 June to  July 2010, Geneva Item 16 of
the provisional agenda UNFPA – Country programmes and related matters UNITED
NATIONS POPULATION FUND Draft country programme document for the Democratic
People’ Republic of Korea $ million: $ million from regular resources and $
million from co-financing modalities and/or other, including regular, resources
Proposed indicative UNFPA assistance: Programme period: Five years () Cycle of
assistance: Fifth Category per decision 2007:  Proposed indicative assistance by
core programme area (in millions of $): Regular resources     Other     Total
Reproductive health and rights Population and development Programme coordination
and assistance Total  () 290410 *1030982* DP/FPA/DCP/PRK/ Currently, HIV/AIDS
there are no official statistics on  Situation analysis  The population of the
Democratic People’ Republic of Korea was 24 million in In the 1990s, economic
difficulties and  series of natural disasters that reversed the economic and
social progress made in earlier decades Life expectancy fell, and maternal and
in 2007 increased the vulnerability of women and children, in particular   2008
study on cervical cancer supported by UNFPA, with the International Planned
Parenthood Federation and the University of Queensland, Australia, suggests that
cervical cancer is the second most common cancer among women and the most common
cause of cancer deaths in women, over 300 per year technical assistance from the
country experienced infant mortality rose Flooding  The Democratic People’
Republic of Korea the is  State party Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women and has endorsed the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development The family law and the public health
law help to ensure equality and equity for women Despite commitment at level,
comprehensive gender assessment has not yet been conducted to the Convention on
In 2008, the life expectancy of women was  years, down from years in Health
indicators also deteriorated The maternal mortality ratio increased from 50
deaths per 100,000 live births in the 1990s to 77 deaths per 100,000 live births
in The infant mortality rate also increased, from deaths per ,000 live births in
1993 to deaths per ,000 live births in the policy rate total fertility in 2008
was  The approximately two children per woman The annual population growth rate
was estimated at 86 per cent during the last 14 years More than 60 per cent of
the population resides in urban areas II Past cooperation and lessons learned
UNFPA assistance to the Democratic People’ Republic of Korea began in Since
then, UNFPA has supported four country programmes and () The programmes focused
on maternal and neonatal health, family planning, and population and development
annual programmes  The sex ratio at birth ranges from 104 boys per 100 girls to
106 boys per 100 girls People over 65 years old account for  per cent of the
population, an increase of  per cent since The ageing of the population is due
to the decline in fertility and the high mortality rate among young children the
United Nations Strategic Guided by Framework, national reproductive health
strategy, , the fourth UNFPA country programme, , helped to: () develop national
emergency obstetric and neonatal care training manuals for pre-service and in-
service training; () support emergency obstetric and neonatal care services
(including essential medical supplies and training) in four provinces, covering
11 county hospitals and 273 village clinics; () ensure an uninterrupted,
nationwide supply of two essential reproductive health drugs to reduce maternal
mortality; () strengthen the the national national logistics capacity, using
logistics management system established in the central medical warehouse and in
three provincial medical warehouses; () support studies on reproductive tract
infections and cervical cancer; () strengthen the capacity of the Central Bureau
of Statistics to conduct surveys and the 2008 population and housing census; and
the and ,  According to the 2006 reproductive health survey supported by UNFPA
and the United Nations Children’ the contraceptive prevalence rate was per cent
for modern methods, of which 82 per cent were intrauterine devices The unmet
need for family planning was  per cent, and the abortion rate among married
couples was 121 abortions per ,000 the 2004 reproductive health survey, 85 per
cent of induced abortions could have been avoided if adequate resources for
family planning had been available Fund (UNICEF), live births According to
information  The Democratic People’ Republic of Korea reported  reduction in
reproductive tract infections among married women from per cent of 100 women in
1997 to per cent of 100 women in 2006,  percentage which is still considered
high  DP/FPA/DCP/PRK/ () provide emergency reproductive health services in 250
village clinics and 10 county hospitals in response to the 2007 floods The 2006
programme supported  reproductive health survey to establish  baseline for the
subsequent country programme UNFPA will conduct an end-line reproductive health
survey in roots level, the programme will seek to enhance the quality of
reproductive health services and to respond emergency reproductive health
situations in programme areas to The programme includes two components: () and
health () population and development Gender issues will be mainstreamed in both
programme components The reproductive health and rights component will focus on
the quality of reproductive health services The population and development
component will support the utilization of gender-disaggregated data and research
on population and development and rights; reproductive Lessons learned during
the previous country programme indicate the need to: () consolidate capacity-
building at the central level while seeking funds to scale up essential
emergency obstetrical and neonatal care services at the subnational levels,
where needs are most pressing; () ensure that quality standards are applied to
reproductive health services, and that adherence to such standards is high-
quality, monitored; comprehensive reproductive health services are replicated;
() promote joint activities and seek opportunities for joint programming with
other United Nations organizations, to avoid duplication of efforts and to
increase impact; () strengthen the capacity of national institutions to analyse
and utilize survey and census results for planning and policy formulation; and
() continue to support the joint contingency plan for natural disasters and to
ensure the availability of emergency reproductive health kits UNFPA and the
Government will collaborate with other United Nations organizations to monitor
the Millennium Development Goals, provide maternal and child health services,
and conduct joint planning and monitoring () ensure that Reproductive health and
rights component This component has one outcome to be achieved by 2015:
increased utilization of essential, high-quality reproductive health information
and services by women and men, as well as neonatal care It contributes to two
priority areas of the United Nations Strategic Framework: social development,
and climate change and environment the Two outputs will be achieved under
reproductive health and rights outcome III Proposed programme The proposed
country programme will support the national goal of restoring the quality of
life of the people to the level achieved before the economic and humanitarian
difficulties of the mid- 1990s The programme contributes the achievement of the
United Nations Strategic Framework, , and its three priority areas: for ()
social development; knowledge and development management; and () climate change
and environment The programme is harmonized with the programme cycles of UNDP
and UNICEF Output : Improved availability of and access to essential, high-
quality reproductive health information, counselling and services, including the
prevention and treatment of reproductive tract infections and screening for
cervical cancer, in programme areas The strategies to achieve this output
include: () advocating the formulation of national reproductive health policies,
guidelines and standards; () strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of
Public Health to implement and monitor these policies, guidelines and standards;
and () enhancing the capacity of service providers in 11 counties assisted in
the previous country programme to provide high-quality, comprehensive
reproductive health services and to ensure the sustainability of these services
to () partnership Building on the results achieved and lessons learned the
programme will be carried out at the national level to: () develop capacity in
the use of population data for national planning; () establish  national policy,
guidelines and standards for reproductive health services; and () scale up
essential and basic reproductive health services through cost-effective
interventions At the grass- in order At the national level, the programme will,
in collaboration with United Nations organizations: () support the
implementation and monitoring of  DP/FPA/DCP/PRK/ the national reproductive
health strategy, 2011- 2015; () ensure that reproductive health indicators are
integrated into the national health management information system; () formulate
national quality standards for antenatal and post-natal care,  national policy
and guidelines on preventing and treating reproductive tract infections, and
national and family () formulate, implement and monitor  national cervical
cancer screening policy commodity management; and () conduct field monitoring
and supervision at hospitals In selected counties, the programme will: to
provide basic () seek additional funding emergency obstetric and neonatal care
supplies to hospitals and clinics; () conduct basic emergency obstetric and and
information, () communication materials on emergency obstetric and neonatal care
training; education and neonatal care eligibility planning criteria; distribute
In 11 county hospitals and 273 village clinics in four provinces, the programme
will: () conduct refresher training for health service providers on emergency
obstetric and neonatal care; () conduct training for service providers, based on
national quality standards for antenatal and post-natal care, national
eligibility criteria for family planning, and the national policy and guidelines
on preventing reproductive tract infections; () update essential reproductive
health equipment and supplies for comprehensive services, including modern
contraceptives and supplies to treat reproductive tract infections; () conduct
training in behavioural change communication for reproductive health, targeting
families and service providers; client-oriented and supervision and monitoring
The programme will continue to support joint United Nations emergency planning
to stock emergency reproductive preparedness health commodities the central
medical in warehouse and in provincial medical warehouses for Population and
development component The outcome of this component is: enhanced utilization of
sex-disaggregated population data and research related to population and
development for planning including monitoring the Millennium Development Goals,
by line ministries and national It contributes to two priority areas of the
United Nations namely: () partnership for knowledge and development management;
and () climate change and environment Two outputs will contribute to the
population and development outcome reproductive health formulation, and policy
institutions Framework, Strategy conduct () to essential Output : Improved
access reproductive health commodities to reduce the maternal mortality ratio in
programme areas The strategies to achieve this output are: () scaling up the
minimum reproductive health service package, focusing on basic emergency
obstetric and neonatal care throughout the country and in programme areas most
in need; and () enhancing the capacity of managers in provincial and county
health bureaux and hospitals to supervise and monitor the use of reproductive
health commodities Output : Strengthened capacity of academic institutions to
teach and to undertake research on linkages between population and social the
development The strategy to achieve this output is to in demography at Kim Il
Sung University to ensure that there will be  sufficient number of graduates in
the field of population who understand the linkages social development
strengthen the academic programme population between and At the national level,
the programme will: () continue to seek additional funding to provide two
essential reproductive health drugs, oxytocin and nationwide; () implement
logistics management information system at the central medical warehouse and at
10 provincial medical warehouses; forecast national needs for essential
reproductive health drugs; () conduct overseas and local training of the health
bureau and hospital managers at provincial and county levels on reproductive
health The programme will: () provide fellowships to university professors to
pursue graduate degrees in demography and population-related fields; () provide
research and teaching tools, particularly academic textbooks, journals and
software to the demography department of to enhance the capacity of academic
personnel and students to undertake research; and () invite as guest
international demographic sulphate, magnesium () the university, experts
DP/FPA/DCP/PRK/ lecturers to provide state-of-the-art knowledge on the linkages
between population, socio-economic development and the environment to university
teachers organizations and the UNFPA country office will monitor activities
through field visits, interviews the use of qualitative and quantitative and
support indicators The reproductive health surveys in 2013 and 2015, which will
serve as inputs for midterm and end-line studies UNFPA will conduct quarterly
and annual programme reviews,  midterm review and, towards the end of the
programme, an independent evaluation programme will Output : Enhanced capacity
of line ministries in evidence-based national planning, policy formulation and
the monitoring of national the Millennium development goals, Development Goals
The strategies to achieve this output among policymakers in line ministries, the
utilization of gender-disaggregated population data for policy formulation; and
() strengthening the national capacity to monitor the Millennium Development
Goals including advocating, include: () In accordance with the approved country
office typology, the UNFPA office in Pyongyang consists of  non-resident UNFPA
country director based in Beijing, China, an international an international
operations manager,  national programme project professional, and support staff
UNFPA will earmark programme funds for two shared support staff posts in the
UNFPA China office to provide logistics and programme support for the country
programme the Democratic People’ Republic of Korea The UNFPA China office and
the UNFPA regional office based in Bangkok, Thailand, will mobilize the
technical support needed for programme implementation and humanitarian
assistance programme coordinator, The programme will: () train policymakers in
key ministries of the Government, including the State Planning Commission, on
integrating population into national plans and programmes; () conduct research
utilizing 2008 population census data and other data needed to formulate
strategies on adapting to climate change; () develop and maintain  spatial
database on population; () support an inter-agency group to evaluate estimates
of Millennium Development Goal indicators; () conduct primary data collection to
address data gaps to monitor and report on progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, specifically Goal  on gender equality and women’ empowerment
and Goal  on improving maternal health; and () support the formulation of the
country report on the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals by
officer, national factors in IV Programme management, monitoring and evaluation
The national coordinating committee for UNFPA will coordinate the proposed
programme UNFPA will in collaboration with the State Planning Commission, the
Ministry of Public Health, other line ministries, national non-governmental
organizations and research institutions the programme implement UNFPA will
monitor and evaluate programme implementation using  results-based approach, in
accordance with established UNFPA guidelines and procedures, within the context
of the United Nations Strategic Framework The national collaborating committee,
coordinating     RESULTS AND RESOURCES FRAMEWORK FOR THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE’
REPUBLIC OF KOREA /       National priority: improve the quality of life of the
population United Nations strategic outcome: () improved access to and
utilization of essential, high-quality health services at the primary and
secondary health-care level by men, women and children; and () improved national
capacity in disaster management and strategies for adapting to and mitigating
climate change Programme component / /    /  Country programme outputs,
indicators, baselines and targets Country programme outcomes, indicators,
baselines and targets Partners Indicative resources by programme component $
million ($ million from regular resources and $ million from other resources)
Reproductive health and rights Outcome: increased utilization of essential,
high-quality reproductive health information and services by women and men, as
well as neonatal care Outcome indicators: • Output : Improved availability of
and access to essential, high- quality reproductive health information,
counselling and services, including the prevention and treatment of reproductive
tract infections and screening for cervical cancer, in programme areas Output
indicators: • Ministry of Public Health Korean Family Planning and Maternal and
Child Health Association National reproductive health strategy is updated and
implemented National policy on cervical cancer is developed and implemented
National policy on reproductive tract infection is developed and implemented
Unmet need for modern contraceptive methods is reduced • Maternal mortality
ratio is further Percentage of ri (village) clinics in programme areas prepared
(with adequate stocks and trained providers) to provide at least two modern
family planning methods Percentage of clients with reproductive tract infections
who are appropriately diagnosed, treated and counselled Percentage of doctors
and midwives in targeted areas providing antenatal care based on national
quality standards Number of county hospitals with the capacity (in terms of
equipment and trained providers) to conduct visual inspections using acetic acid
to detect cervical cancer Percentage of deliveries in county hospitals and
village clinics that manage third-stage labour • • • • • • • reduced Output :
Improved access to essential reproductive health commodities to reduce the
maternal mortality ratio in programme areas Output indicators: • Ministry of
Public Health Central medical warehouse Functioning logistics management
information system in the central medical warehouse and in 10 provincial medical
warehouses Number of county hospitals and village clinics in geographical areas
affected by the 2007 floods that have no stock-outs of emergency obstetric drugs
• National priority: () improve the quality of life of the population; and ()
strengthen knowledge capacity-building for the sustainable development of the
country and the improvement of people’ living standards United Nations strategic
outcome: () strengthened human resource capacity in national institutions for
strategic planning and the management of external assistance; and () improved
national capacity in disaster management and strategies for adapting to and
mitigating climate change Programme component Country programme outputs,
indicators, baselines and targets Partners Country programme outcomes,
indicators, baselines and targets Indicative resources by programme component $
million ($ million from regular resources and $ million from other resources)
Outcome: Enhanced utilization of sex-disaggregated population data and research
related to population and development for planning and policy formulation,
including monitoring the Millennium Development Goals, by line ministries and
national institutions Outcome indicators: • Output : Strengthened capacity of
academic institutions to teach and to undertake research on the linkages between
population and social development Output indicators: • Kim Il Sung University
Population and development Number of students who graduate with  university
degree on population studies Number of trainees with  master’ degree on
population studies • Total for programme coordination and assistance: $ million
from regular resources Central Bureau of Statistics; Ministry of Public Health;
Population Centre; State Planning Commission National plans and policies that
include population dynamics, reproductive health and gender equality Resources
mobilized for population activities Output : Enhanced capacity of line
ministries in evidence-based national planning, policy formulation and the
monitoring of national development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals Output indicators: • • Number of studies on the relationships between
population, the environment and climate change Annual report from the national
surveillance system on maternal and infant mortality • • Millennium Development
Goal country report published • Spatial database system established and
functional _____________________________   /       / /    /