Contents CHAPTER  Outline of the Energy Master Plan and Assessment of  the First
Energy Master Plan CHAPTER II Background to the Implementation of the Second
Energy Master Plan 15 27 CHAPTER III Basic Direction of the Second Energy Master
Plan 28  Drawbacks of the Current Energy Policy 30  Basic Direction of the
Second Energy Master Plan 31  Policy Objectives and Major Tasks 35 CHAPTER IV
Establishment Process for the Second Energy Master Plan 41 CHAPTER IV Energy
Demand Forecast, Targets, and the Energy Mix 55 CHAPTER  Six Major Tasks -
Transition to Demand Management Policies 56  Adjustment of Relative Energy
Prices 58  Electricity Rate Revision 61  Creation of an Energy Demand Management
Market Based on ICT 66  Measures to Improve Demand Management by Sector 71
Reform of the Energy Information Management System CHAPTER  Six Major Tasks -
Establishment of  Distributed Generation System 73  Stabilization of the Power
Grid through Distributed Plant Locations 74  Promotion of Distributed Generation
76  Efficient Planning and Operation of the Transmission Network 79 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN CHAPTER  Six Major Tasks -  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy
Policy 83 84  Response to Climate Change 89  Reform of the Nuclear Industry and
Safety Enhancement 95  Foundation for Nuclear Decommissioning and Waste Disposal
97  Enhancement of Safety Management of Energy Facilities 100  Competitiveness
of Future Energy Technology CHAPTER  Six Major Tasks -  Enhancement of Energy
Security 109  Reinforcement of Overseas Resource Development to Strengthen
Resource Development Capability 110 116  Further Deployment of Renewable Energy
123  Enhancement of the Global Energy Cooperative System CHAPTER  Six Major
Tasks -  Establishment of  Stable Source-by-Source Supply System 129 130  Oil
133  Gas 138  Power 139  Integrated Energy CHAPTER  Six Major Tasks -  Energy
Policy Reflecting Public Opinion 143 144  Reform of the Energy Welfare System
148  Expansion of Local Government Participation 153  Proactive Response to
Energy Related Conflicts CHAPTER VI Future Plans 155 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER  Outline of the Energy Master Plan and Assessment of the First Energy
Master Plan  Outline of the Energy Master Plan  Legal Basis ◎ Article 41 of the
Basic Law on Low Carbon Green Growth and Clause  of Article 10 of the Energy Law
Period and Cycle ◎ Revised and re-implemented every five years over  period of
twenty years The First Energy Master Plan was introduced in  Procedure for
Establishment ◎ Reviewed and approved by three separate entities in  three-step
process: • National Energy Committee → Presidential Committee on Green Growth →
State Council  Key Features (Under Clause  of Article 41 of the Basic Law on Low
Carbon Green Growth)  Matters concerning trends and prospects of domestic and
overseas demand and supply of energy  Matters concerning measures for stable
import, supply, and management of energy  Matters concerning the targets for
demand of energy, the composition of energy source, the saving of energy, and
the improvement of efficiency in the use of energy  Matters concerning the
supply and use of environmentally friendly energy, such as new and renewable
energy  Matters concerning measures for the safety control of energy; and
Matters concerning the development and diffusion of technology related to
energy, the training of professional human resources, international cooperation,
the development and use of natural resources of energy, and welfare in energy
KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Related Plans ◎ Supply side plans: power, gas,
renewable energy, integrated energy, etc         ◎ Demand management and other
low carbon-related plans: rational use of energy, energy technology development,
climate change response, etc  Purpose and Features of the Energy Master Plan
Scope and Purpose ◎ The Energy Master Plan is  comprehensive plan that covers
all energy sectors, and systematically links and coordinates energy related
plans from  macro perspective         * As an overarching plan, it presents
principles and directions for energy-related plans source-by-source and sector-
by-sector ◎ The main purpose of the plan is to provide  fundamental philosophy
and vision for mid- to long- term energy policy while suggesting major targets
to help realize these ends          Relation to Sub-Plans ◎ As  master plan, it
contains  long-term perspective rather than detailed objectives It is also
scheduled to apply for  relatively long period of time (five years), and hence
it cannot easily be adjusted in response to changes in the policy environment •
As  result, excessive restrictions on sub-plans could worsen distortions caused
by energy         policies ◎ Sub-plans will therefore be independently designed
to reflect changing conditions and the particular needs and objectives of each
plan while complying with the Master Plan’ fundamental philosophy and principles
◎ Additionally, compatibility will be ensured as much as possible both between
individual sub-         plans and between sub-plans and the Master Plan  OUTLINE
OF THE ENERGY MASTER PLAN AND ASSESSMENT OF THE FIRST ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Process for Establishment ◎ Due to the increasing complexity of energy policies
and growing conflicts among stakeholders, it is essential to actively involve
the private sector in the establishment of the Master Plan ◎  channel is needed
for civic groups and experts to participate from the initial stage The plan must
be confirmed by the National Energy Committee and Committee on Green Growth,
which are composed of the public and private sector  Changing Direction of
Energy Policy Until the 1990s ◎ The major policy objective was to secure  stable
and affordable supply of energy needed for economic growth, daily life, and
industrial production • The energy sector was dominated by public monopolies,
and energy prices* were directly regulated by the government, with  priority on
achieving rapid economic growth * In the case of petroleum products, oil prices
were liberalized in However, prices continued to be regulated for electricity,
gas, heat, etc In the Early 2000s ◎ The government promoted competition in the
energy industry through measures such as structural reform of the power industry
• The government allowed the market to decide energy supply and demand and
energy prices, with  focus on keeping both government intervention and market
failures to  minimum Until the First Energy Master Plan (2008) ◎ The main
objective of mid- to long-term energy policy was to achieve sustainable
development, simultaneously considering energy security, economic growth, and
environmental impact * " Es" of Energy Policy: Energy Security, Efficiency, and
Environment • Amid world-wide efforts to respond to climate change, greenhouse
gas emissions reduction emerged as  major issue for energy policy  KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Assessment of the First Energy Master Plan (2008)          Five
Visions Vision Indicator 2007 2030 % 40% Self-development rate Realizing an
energy self-sufficient society Renewable energy deployment rate         % 11%
Share of nuclear installed capacity 27% 41% Moving toward  non-oil-based society
% 33% Oil dependence Moving toward  low energy consumption society 347 185
Energy intensity         60% of developed nations Creating new growth engines
and job opportunities through green energy and green technology World leader
Energy technology level Realizing  socie ty of shared energy prosperity % %
Energy poverty rate          Overall Assessment ◎ The core policy objective in
the First Energy Master Plan was “Low-Carbon Green Growth" • The plan was aimed
at maximizing the use of nuclear and renewable energy and dramatically reducing
energy intensity by curbing demand, while at the same time creating  new growth
engine by developing green technologies         • The First Energy Master Plan
has provided the basis for  variety of measures aimed at achieving green growth
since 2008, including enacting basic laws, establishing committees, and setting
national greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction target* * GHG reduction target of 30%
from business-as-usual (BAU) by 2020         ◎ Previous energy policies focused
on one primary purpose, the affordable and stable supply of power, to support
economic growth and industrialization • The First Energy Master Plan pursued
sustainability in the energy industry and presented  new and advanced paradigm
for creating  new growth engine through green technologies  OUTLINE OF THE
ENERGY MASTER PLAN AND ASSESSMENT OF THE FIRST ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Significant
growth in the size of the renewable and nuclear industries brought about  green
industry renaissance * For renewables, between 2007 and 2011, the number of
enterprises in the market increased two times, the number of employees four
times, the volume of sales eight times, and the volume of exports and amount of
private investment seven times ◎ In 2012, the final energy consumption growth
rate surpassed the projection of the First Energy Master Plan by % (If the trend
continues, the gap between the actual growth rate and the projection will reach
% by ) ◎ The electrification of energy consumption, in which demand is focused
on electricity due to low electricity rates, destabilized the power supply-
demand balance • More and more generation facilities have been constructed to
meet growing demand, but this resulted in negative effects, such as increased
GHG emissions, an overloaded transmission network and opposition from local
residents ◎ Overseas resources development, which was led mainly by public
enterprises with  narrow focus on quantitative growth, resulted in increased
debt without sufficiently improving development capability * " Es" of Energy
Policy: Energy Security, Efficiency, and Environment  Assessment of Main Tasks
Energy Mix ◎ Key points: Maximize* the use of nuclear energy, which has both
environmental benefits, such as CO2 reduction, and economic benefits * Targeting
41% of total installed capacity and 59% of total power generation by • Expand
renewable energy to 11% of primary energy consumption by 2030 through various
measures, including the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) and the One Million
Green Home project ◎ Areas for improvement: The energy mix proposed in the plan
emphasized both GHG reduction and economic efficiency However, it was
insufficiently comprehensive in terms of considering such factors as
feasibility*, public acceptance, power grid conditions, and safety * Renewable
energy: potential after considering geographical/technological conditions,
environmental regulations, etc; nuclear energy: load-following capacity, etc 10
KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN Demand Management ◎ Key points: Reduce energy intensity
by 46% by 2030         * Energy intensity (TOE/,000$): 347 in 2006 → 233 in 2020
→ 185 in 2030 ◎ Forecast vs actual consumption: Total energy consumption in
Korea has increased faster than forecasted in the First Energy Master Plan for
last five years (2007~2012) ◎ Energy consumption in the industrial sector has
been increasing faster than forecasted, while the trend is less pronounced in
the transportation, household and commercial sectors         * Whereas the First
Energy Master Plan forecasted that energy consumption in the industrial sector
would decrease from % of final energy consumption in 2007 to % in 2012, actual
consumption increased to % [ Forecast vs Actual Consumption ]         2012
Forecast vs Actual Margin of Error(%) Annual Growth Rate (2007~2012, %) Category
Forecast 268,190  Total energy consumption (,000 toe)  Actual 277,621  Forecast
199,607          Final energy consumption (,000 toe) Energy Consumption  Actual
207,262  Forecast 222 -  Energy Intensity (TOE/ mil won) 13 Actual 251 -
Forecast 112,015  Industry Actual 127,213  Forecast 40,473  Transportation
Actual 37,176  Sector Forecast 42,458  Household & Commerce -  Actual 38,084
Forecast ,663  Public & Others  Actual ,790  11 OUTLINE OF THE ENERGY MASTER
PLAN AND ASSESSMENT OF THE FIRST ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Areas for improvement:
Precise demand forecasting, effective demand management, and policies for
pricing and technology development/deployment are needed Power Supply and Demand
◎ Key points: Reduce electricity demand by % by 2020 and % by ◎ Forecast vs
actual consumption: Electricity demand as of 2012 was over % higher than
forecasted, accounting for almost 20% of final energy consumption * Share of
electricity in final energy consumption: % in 2007 → % in 2012 • Low electricity
prices resulted in increased consumption as people switched to electricity from
other energy sources * Following price liberalization, the price of petroleum
products soared due to high oil prices However, the increase in electricity
rates was kept to  minimum out of consideration for consumer prices [ Forecast
vs Actual Consumption ] 140 175 Consumption trend (2005=100) Price trend
(2005=100) Electricity City gas 107 160 City gas Kerosene 133 56 100 Electricity
Kerosene 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
2011 2012 ◎ Areas for improvement: Rational reform of the energy pricing
mechanism is needed in order to fundamentally reduce electricity demand and peak
load Overseas Resource Development ◎ Key points: In view of Korea' high
dependence on energy imports (96%), innovative efforts are needed to raise the
self-development rate for overseas resources * Target: 40% by 12 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN previously secured newly secured 262 mil/         162 mil/ 208 mil/
46 mil/ 46 mil/ 2007 2030 2012 self-developed resource 208 mil/ 470 mil/ 46 mil/
% 40% % self-development rate ◎ Areas for improvement: The focus should be
shifted from quantitative growth to qualitative growth, such as securing
exploration and operation rights, and inclusive growth should be sought through
public-private coordination * Projects with operation rights: 77 out of 205 (%),
Korea National Oil Corporation %, Korea Gas         Corporation 14%, private
companies % Energy Welfare ◎ Key points : Eradicate energy poverty affecting
million households by 2016 (phase ); reduce energy costs for near-poverty group
by 2030 (phase )         zero energy poverty & energy welfare program extended
to near-poverty group welfare support to make energy cost less than 10% of house
hold income share of heating & lighting cost by income level energy Poverty
group (%)  monthly income, 10,000 won when energy cost(lighting & heating)
exceeds 10% of house hold income % of total house holds( million)          50
100 200 300 400 500 600 ◎ Areas for improvement: The support system needs to be
fundamentally improved to help the energy poor, who continue to suffer as energy
rates rise due to high oil prices while receiving only short-term and sporadic
support from the current system         13 OUTLINE OF THE ENERGY MASTER PLAN AND
ASSESSMENT OF THE FIRST ENERGY MASTER PLAN KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN CHAPTER II
Background to the Implementation of the Second Energy Master Plan  Current
Energy Consumption  Consumption by Sector ◎ The average annual growth rate
(AAGR) of final energy consumption from 2000 to 2012 was % * The AAGR, which was
% in the 1990s, slowed considerably after the Asian financial crisis ◎ The share
of energy consumed in the industrial sector has been steadily increasing and
currently exceeds 60% of final energy consumption * The shares of the household,
commercial, public and transportation sectors have steadily decreased ◎
Feedstock, such as naphtha and coking coal, accounts for more than half of
energy consumption in the industrial sector and more than 35% of total final
energy consumption * If consumption of feedstock is excluded, the AAGR of final
energy consumption decreases by % percentage points to % Energy used as
feedstock was the largest contributor to the increase in energy consumption
Industrial energy consumption soared throughout the recovery from the 2010
financial crisis [ Energy Consumption Trend by Sector (Unit: million TOE) ]
Sector 2000 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 AAGR (%) Industry (excluding feedstock) ()
() () () () ()  () Transportation  Household/ Commerce  Public/Others
Total  ◎ The energy intensity (energy used per unit of GDP) of the Korean
economy is relatively high due to  large proportion of energy-intensive
industries compared to other countries * Share of energy consumed in the
industrial sector (2011): Korea 53%, Japan 37%, US 25%, OECD 30% 16 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN [ Per Capita Energy Consumption (TOE/person) (Source: IEA, 2011) ]
Korea France GermanyJapan UK Korea France GermanyJapan UK Korea France
GermanyJapan UK USA OECD USA OECD USA OECD Industry Transportation Households /
Commerce/Manufacturing  Consumption by Energy Source         [ Final Energy
Consumption Trend By Source ] unit (%) 100         90     80             70
60     50 40     30     20 10          2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2010 2011 2012 2000 2001 coal electricity heat/others city gas oil ◎ Oil: The
share of oil in final energy consumption reached  record high of % in 1994
before steadily decreasing to % in * AAGR: Reached % in the 1990s before
decreasing to % from 2000         - By oil product: gasoline %, diesel for
transportation %, kerosene/light oil -%, heavy oil -%, naphtha % * Share by
sector: Industry %, transportation %, household/commerce % - Excluding
feedstock: Industry %, transportation %, household/commerce % 17 BACKGROUND TO
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Electricity: The share of
electricity increased from % in 1990 to % in 2012, and electricity consumption
increased rapidly at an AAGR of % from • Low electricity prices compared to
other energy sources, along with convenience of use, accelerated the
electrification of energy consumption ◎ City Gas: Consumption of city gas
increased very rapidly at an AAGR of % in the 1990s, but this increase slowed to
an AAGR of % after 2000 due to saturation of infrastructure * AAGR by sector
(from 2000): industry %, household/commerce % ◎ Coal: The share of coal remained
in the 13% range in the 2000s before increasing to % in 2012 due to recent rise
in industrial consumption * The share of bituminous coal in total coal
consumption, which was % in 1990, increased sharply to % in 2012 due to
decrease in anthracite coal consumption and an increase in the use of bituminous
coal for power generation  Global Conditions  Global Energy Demand Forecast ◎
Global energy demand is forecasted to increase by % between 2010 and 2035 on the
back of economic and population growth in developing countries, and GHG
emissions are expected to increase by % • Total energy demand will increase by %
annually on average in OECD countries and % in non-OECD countries ◎ By energy
source, nuclear and renewable energy will experience the fastest growth with an
AAGR of % * Among fossil fuels, natural gas will see the largest increase as
result of the distribution and expanded production of shale gas 18 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN [ Demand Forecast by Region & Energy Source 2010~2030 (Unit: 1000
Trillion Btu) ] By Region / By Source CAGR (10~35) 2010 2015 2020 2035
OECD Oil - % Natural Gas % Coal - % Nuclear % Renewable & Others % Subtotal Non-
OECD %         Oil % Natural Gas % Coal % Nuclear   % Renewable & Others %
Subtotal %         World Oil % Natural Gas % Coal % Nuclear % Renewable & Others
% Total %         ■Non-OECD countries will lead the growth in global energy
demand The share of fossil fuels in energy demand will decrease from 84% in 2010
to 79% in 2035 despite increased use of unconventional resources, such as shale
gas          Continued High Oil Prices ◎ Global oil prices, which averaged
$/bbl* in 2008, fell in 2009 following the financial crisis before rebounding to
record high of $124/bbl in * Dubai crude oil ◎ Oil prices are expected to remain
high, reaching $140/bbl by 2035 according to the IEA (WEO         2012) * EIA'
projection: $145/bbl by 2035 19 BACKGROUND TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECOND
ENERGY MASTER PLAN Past New Era of High Oil Prices · Supply-side instability in
the Middle East and other regions · Demand growth from emerging countries ·
Increasing marginal cost of production Cause Price Recovery · Prices return to
previous levels when conditions normalize · Oil prices remain high ■ steady
increase in fossil fuel prices will have  large negative impact on the entire
Korean economy, which is highly dependent on imports ■However, continued high
oil prices will accelerate the development of alternative energy and
improvements in energy efficiency  Expanded Development of Unconventional Energy
Sources ◎ The development of unconventional energy sources, such as shale gas
and tight oil, will change the landscape of the energy market * Unconventional
gas will account for 48% of the growth in gas production by The US, which
currently imports 20% of its energy, will achieve energy self-sufficiency by
■Regions with shale gas resources, such as China, Europe, and the US, will
replace the Middle East and Russia, which are the largest exporters of
traditional gas, as the dominant players in the natural gas market ■The markets
for natural gas substitutes, such as coal and oil, are also highly likely to be
affected 400 global coal price ($/ton) 350 global natural gas price ($/cubic
meter) 300 average global oil price ($/Bbl) 250 200 150 100 50    -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -       -
-       -       -       -       -       -       -       -     20 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Changes in Nuclear Energy Policy After the Fukushima Nuclear
Accident ◎ In the aftermath of the Fukushima nuclear accident on March 11, 2011,
several countries, including Germany and Switzerland, announced plans to shut
down their nuclear power plants in operation         ◎ Japan decided to phase
out nuclear energy by 2030 after soliciting public comments on three scenarios
for nuclear energy use * The decision was later put on hold in the face of
opposition from the industry and allies, such as the         US, and it was
effectively reversed after the new government took office ◎ Some countries are
turning back to nuclear energy, including the UK, which announced plans to
construct  new nuclear power plant for the first time in 20 years • The Nuclear
Regulatory Authority of Japan announced new safety regulations on July , 2013,
and plans to restart the operation of nuclear power plants after confirming
their safety under the new regulations         * Hokkaido Electric Power Co,
Kansai Electric Power Co, Shikoku Electric Power Co, and Kyushu Electric Power
Co applied for safety tests on twelve reactors in five nuclear power plants ◎
Many countries have not significantly changed their positions on nuclear energy
and are maintaining their previous nuclear energy policies with the addition of
new measures, such as stronger safety standards         [ World-wide Nuclear
Power Plants Before and After the Fukushima Accident (Source: World Nuclear
Association) ] In Operation (capacity) Under Construction (capacity) Total
(capacity) Period Planned (capacity) 437 (373,966 MW) 60 (61,759 MW) 158
(176,773 MW) 655 (981,643 MW)         Before Accident After Accident (as of July
, 2013) 432 (371,870 MW) 68 (71,226 MW) 162 (183,025 MW) 662 (984,87 1MW) -
(-,096 MW) + (,467 MW) + (,252 MW) + (,228 MW) Difference         ■Although some
countries have announced plans to shut down nuclear power plants, world-wide
reliance on nuclear energy has not changed significantly since the Fukushima
accident 21 BACKGROUND TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Negotiations on New Post-2020 Climate Regime ◎ The Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Durban Platform for Advanced Action (ADP) aims to conclude negotiations on  new
post-2020 global climate framework that is applicable to all nations by the end
of * Whereas the Kyoto Protocol of 2008 to 2020 called for mandatory GHG
reduction by developed nations and voluntary GHG reduction efforts by developing
nations, the new post-2020 climate regime will be  single climate regime
applicable to all participating nations ◎ The recent 19th session of the
Conference of Parties (COP 19) developed  concrete work plan for conducting
negotiations on the new post-2020 climate regime through the end of • The
parties agreed to come forward with their intended national contributions to
post-2020 global GHG emissions reduction by ■Persistent disagreements between
developed and developing countries as well as global economic uncertainty have
weakened the momentum for negotiations compared to the period of the First
Energy Master Plan ■The establishment of  new post-2020 climate regime
applicable to both developed and developing nations is likely to put increased
pressure on Korea  Restructuring of the Renewable Energy Industry ◎ The
renewable energy industry is going through  period of rapid restructuring due to
sluggish global economy and an overabundance of solar PV and wind power
manufacturers * Reduction of the number of solar PV companies and production
capacity between 2011 and 2013: Europe (25 companies, ,400 MW), US (15
companies, ,200 MW), Korea & China (200 companies, ,200 MW) ◎ Accelerated
technology development has continually driven down the generation costs of
renewable energy * Unit costs of generation: (wind power) $200/MWh in 2010 →
$100/MWh by the end of 2012; (solar PV) $315/MWh in 2010 → $166/MWh by the end
of 2012 ■Although the renewable energy industry is going through period of
stagnation and restructuring in the short-term, technology competition is likely
to lead to considerable growth in the mid- to long- term 22 KOREA ENERGY MASTER
PLAN Energy Mix Forecast for Major Countries (Source: IEA) ◎ Current status by
country         [ Energy Mix in Major Countries (%, 2011) ] Coal  Oil     Gas
Nuclear   Hydro     Renewable     Total US Germany France Japan China         •
US: Coal is the largest source of power generation in the US (%), followed by
gas (%) and nuclear energy (%) • Germany: Germany' energy mix is similar to that
of the US, except for  higher share of renewable energy         • France: France
is highly dependent on nuclear power, which supplies % of its electricity •
Japan: Following the shutdown of nuclear power plants, fossil fuels increased
from % of Japan' energy mix in 2010 to % in The share of gas (%) was especially
high • China: Coal currently accounts for 79% of power generation in China
However, the government plans to expand nuclear power capacity to 80 GW by 2020,
which will supply % of China' power         ◎ Energy mix forecast • The shares
of coal and oil in the energy mix of major countries will decrease, while those
of gas, nuclear and renewable energy will increase         [ Primary Energy
Consumption Forecast in Major Countries (%) ] US Japan China OECD Europe 2011
2035 2011 2035 2011 2035 2011 2035 22 18 23 22 68 53 18 10 Coal 36 27 45 30 16
18 33 25 Oil 26 29 22 23  11 24 29 Gas         10 11  10   13 12 Nuclear
Hydro  13  13  10  21 Renewable 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 Total 23
BACKGROUND TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Domestic
Conditions  Deteriorating Conditions for Power Supply & Demand ◎ Low electricity
prices have led to  sharp increase in the electricity demand of the industrial
sector and in demand for cooling and heating * From 2008 to 2012, electricity
consumption in the industrial sector grew by % annually on average, making it
the largest contributor to the increase in total electricity consumption Due to
decrease in the relative price of electricity, electricity used for heating
accounted for 25% of peak demand [ Shares of Electricity Used for Heating During
Peak Demand (%) ] ‘05~’06 ‘06~’07 ‘07~’08 ‘08~’09 ‘09~’10 ‘10~’11 ◎ The issue of
electricity demand and supply should be addressed by controlling industrial
demand, spreading an energy saving culture, and using decentralized generation
Growing Demand for Nuclear Safety ◎ The Fukushima nuclear accident has
heightened public concerns about nuclear safety • Despite moves to strengthen
nuclear safety standards, including the establishment of  Nuclear Safety and
Security Commission, corruption scandals involving suppliers have led to
increased calls for reform of the safety management and overall culture of the
nuclear industry ◎ Plans for the construction of new nuclear power plants were
put on hold in the 6th Basic Plan for Long-term Electricity Supply and Demand
Deteriorating Power Transmission Conditions ◎ Although the transmission network
was expanded to prepare for the construction of new power plants, the difference
between the location of generation sites and areas of high demand has caused
transmission lines to the Seoul metropolitan area to be become overloaded 24
KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ The centralized power system is facing limitations
due to local opposition to the construction of ultra-high-voltage transmission
lines          Emergence of Various Controversial Issues ◎ Various controversies
have arisen surrounding energy policy, including nuclear energy policy, spent
nuclear fuel issues, and the construction of transmission lines         ◎
Unilateral policy making by the central government has  limited capacity to
effectively address such issues  Changing Conditions for GHG Emission Reduction
◎ Since the establishment of the First Energy Master Plan, policy efforts to
reduce CO2         emissions have been strengthened • In 2009, the government
set  national GHG emissions reduction target of 30% below BAU levels by * An
emissions trading system (ETS) will be introduced as part of efforts to achieve
the GHG emissions reduction target         ◎ However, conditions have become
less favorable for GHG emissions reduction policies * Supply: Limitations to
renewable energy deployment, increased use of coal-fired power plants, etc *
Demand: Increased production in energy-intensive industries, including steel and
petrochemicals                 25 BACKGROUND TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SECOND
ENERGY MASTER PLAN KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN CHAPTER III Basic Direction of the
Second Energy Master Plan  Drawbacks of the Current Energy Policy  Inefficient
Resource Distribution ◎  low-price policy motivated by social and economic
concerns has reinforced energy overconsumption patterns and accelerated the
trend toward disproportionate use of certain types of energy, such as
electricity [ Change in Energy Mix (2000 → 2012) ] renewable & ect % renewable &
ect % city gas % city gas 12% coal 13% coal 16% 2000 2012 Oil 63% Oil 49%
electricity 14% electricity 19% • In particular, the electrification of energy
consumption is causing serious problems ■Significant energy loss (63%) takes
place during the production process (generation, transmission, etc) * 74 TOE of
energy input is needed to produce  TOE of electricity ■While  stable supply of
other energy sources can be maintained by stockpiling and imports,  sudden
increase in demand for electricity may result in  supply-demand imbalance if the
supply infrastructure is insufficient ■An expansion of generation facilities
could cause environmental degradation, overload the transmission network, and
provoke  backlash from local residents • Low electricity prices are also
significant obstacle to the creation of new markets in less economical areas,
such as renewable energy and smart grid ◎ The current energy mix is based on
economic feasibility without giving sufficient consideration to external effects
28 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • There should be  reassessment of external effects,
such as environmental pollution caused by nuclear and coal-fired plants, public
safety concerns, opposition from local residents, etc          Policies Centered
on Supply and Quantitative Growth ◎ In place of aggressive measures to curb
demand, large-scale, centralized supply infrastructure (the unified power grid)
was expanded to meet growing demand • An expanded power grid, larger power
generating complexes, and supply-demand imbalance in the Seoul metropolitan area
have led to deteriorating operating conditions in the power grid and
transmission network         ◎  narrow focus on efficiency during the rapid
growth of the nuclear industry had unintended consequences: • The goal of
achieving rapid “nuclear self-sufficiency*” resulted in decreased transparency
within the industry, while little attention was given to investment in safety
and improving the safety regulation system**         * (1978) Kori # → (1999)
Uljin #· (OPR1000) → (2014) Shin Kori #· (APR1400) ** The Ministry of Education
and Science and Technology was previously in charge of nuclear safety regulation
An independent regulatory body, the Nuclear Safety and Security Committee, was
established in October 2011 following the Fukushima accident          Result-
Oriented Policy Goals ◎ New power plant construction was kept to  minimum while
ambitious demand management targets were set to achieve the policy goal of
sustainable development * The 3rd Basic Plan for Long-term Electricity Supply
and Demand attracted criticism about over- investment in generation facilities
due to the high power reserve ratio (% in 2003)         ◎ Overseas resources
development, which was led mainly by public enterprises with  narrow focus on
quantitative growth, resulted in increased debt without sufficiently improving
development capability ◎ As the current deployment rate of renewable energy is
mere 75% (85% of the target of the first plan), reconsideration of the
deployment target and detailed measures to achieve the target are needed
* It has been pointed out that the First Energy Master Plan did not include
practical measures, such as funding mechanisms, to achieve the deployment target
of 11% 29 BASIC DIRECTION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Basic Direction of
the Second Energy Master Plan Six Major Tasks  Transition to energy policies
focused on demand management ◎ Objective: Reduce electricity demand by 15% by
2035 ◎ Main tasks: Adjust energy tax rates, improve the electricity rate system,
establish  demand management system based on ICT, etc  Build  distributed
generation system ◎ Objective: Supply more than 15% of power from distributed
generation by 2035 ◎ Main tasks: Detect transmission constraints in advance,
expand distributed generation, etc  Strike  balance with environmental and
safety concerns ◎ Objective: Apply the latest GHG reduction technology to new
power plants ◎ Main tasks: Strengthen climate change response, enhance nuclear
safety, etc  Enhance energy security and energy supply stability ◎ Objective:
Build overseas resource development capacity and achieve  renewable energy
deployment rate of 11% ◎ Main tasks: Reinforce public resource development
enterprises, expand renewable energy deployment, enhance international
cooperation, etc  Establish  stable supply system for each energy source ◎
Objective: Secure  stable supply of conventional energy sources, such as oil and
gas ◎ Main tasks: Diversify supply routes, expand domestic stockpiling capacity,
etc  Shape energy policy to reflect public opinion ◎ Objective: Introduce an
“Energy Voucher System” in 2015 ◎ Main tasks: Improve energy welfare, respond
pro-actively to energy- related controversies, etc 30 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Policy Objectives and Major Tasks          Transition to Energy Policies Focused
on Demand Management ◎ Policy objectives: 13% reduction in energy demand and 15%
reduction in electricity demand by 2035 ◎ Tax reform: Adjust energy tax rates to
reduce the imbalance between the consumption of electricity and other energy
sources (Impose  tax on bituminous coal used for generation, offer tax
incentives for LNG, etc)         ◎ Rate revision: Revise the rate system to
reflect environmental and social costs (, refurbishment of nuclear facilities
and the transmission network), apply different pricing for different types of
use (, progressive rate relief, pricing based on voltage), expand critical-peak
pricing, etc         ◎ ICT-based demand management: Deploy smart grid
(incentives for ESS installation, etc) and energy management systems (revising
standards for building design, etc), invigorate the demand management market,
etc ◎ Reinforcement of systems for each sector: Improve average car mileage to
the level of developed nations by 2020, zero-energy for new buildings by 2025,
eliminate low-efficiency products from the market, etc          Build
Distributed Generation System ◎ Construct power plants in areas with sufficient
transmission capacity: Provide information on available sites for new plants in
advance to minimize construction of ultra-high voltage transmission lines
◎ Expand distributed generation: Supply more than 15% of power from distributed
sources, such as integrated energy systems, renewable energy, and in-house
generators by 2035 (current contribution rate: %) ◎ Operate transmission network
operation: Develop integrated plans for generation and transmission, raise
public acceptance through  review of ultra-high-voltage transmission lines, and
establish an independent body* to manage and supervise the power grid         *
Responsible for monitoring and analyzing power grid operation, applying
reliability standards, investigating and managing grid malfunctions, etc 31
BASIC DIRECTION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Enhance Sustainability
(Environmental Protection, Improved Safety, and Technology Development) ◎
Strengthen climate change response: Apply GHG reduction technologies, such as
USC and CCS, to thermal power plants as soon as they are available * Applying
USC to an aged power plant decreases GHG emissions by approximately 10% and
raises efficiency approximately  percentage points ◎ Improve safety: Prioritize
safety in the operation of nuclear power plants by expanding investment,
improving management of aged plants, and fostering planned and preventive
inspections to enhance nuclear safety on  large scale * Continuous development
of nuclear safety technologies to improve nuclear safety, stress tests for
plants with extended lives, proactive maintenance of equipment in use for long
periods of time, and extension of preventive inspection periods and its
application ◎ Promote innovation in the nuclear industry: Revise relevant
systems and consolidate operational systems to introduce observation,
monitoring, openness, and competition into the value chain of the nuclear
industry * Enact laws on nuclear regulation and supervision and form  government
panel for the integrated administration of public nuclear facilities ◎ Develop
energy technology: Promote the development of key technologies to support
stronger demand management, the expansion of distributed generation, etc
Enhance Energy Security to Escape From Energy Isolation ◎ Build capacity for
overseas resource development: Reorient public enterprises toward high- risk
areas and long-term investment, while private enterprises focus on areas with
high market potential * Shift the focus of public enterprises from &As and share
purchases to exploration and development activities and operating rights, expand
support to encourage private investment and entrance into related industries,
such as plant construction ◎ Renewable energy deployment: Raise the renewable
energy deployment rate to 11% by 2035 by extending deployment policies currently
applied to electricity* to heat and transportation and by implementing  private
sector-driven deployment system** * The RHO and the RFS systems, which are
similar to the RPS in the electricity sector, will be introduced in the heat and
transportation sectors respectively ** Introduce  photovoltaic rental business;
provide incentives for projects invested in by local residents and with benefit-
sharing mechanisms; etc 32 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Establish  Stable Supply
System for Each Energy Source ◎ Oil: Reduce dependence on certain oil exporting
countries by diversifying oil import routes         and improve the industrial
structure by establishing  Northeast Asia oil hub ◎ Gas: Respond aggressively to
changes in the global market, such as the emergence of shale gas, and expand the
supply infrastructure for domestic stockpiling ◎ Integrated energy: Expand
facilities and improve relevant systems to expand the role of integrated energy
as distributed power and make an effort to convert to  low-cost structure
◎ Electricity: Construct of power plants in  timely manner, maximize the use of
available generation resources to secure  stable supply capacity at times of
supply-demand imbalance, etc          Shape Energy Policy to Reflect Public
Opinion ◎ Respond proactively to energy-related conflicts: Improve transparency
throughout the process of establishing and implementing policies on the
transmission network, spent fuel management, nuclear energy, etc ◎ Improve
energy welfare: Introduce an energy voucher system in 2015, expand energy
efficiency projects for vulnerable households, and eradicate welfare blind spots
by expanding infrastructure, such as system revision         ◎ Strengthen
cooperation with local governments: Conduct an assessment of the "Regional
Energy Plan” for distributed generation and energy saving and incorporate the
plan into the budget * Consolidate the institutional base: Improve the
establishment process for regional energy plans; enact ordinances related to
regional energy policy; establish local government energy commissions; etc
33 BASIC DIRECTION OF THE SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER IV Establishment Process for the Second Energy Master Plan  Public-
Private Working Groups  Background ◎ During the drafting of the First Energy
Master Plan, the National Energy Committee was formed as  deliberative and
decision-making body by representatives of the public and private sectors The
opinions of interested parties were collected through public hearings and
discussions * National Energy Committee: ( members including the president, the
prime minister, and heads of related institutions) + (11 members including
industrial, academic and research professionals), ( members recommended by civic
groups) - total 24 members ◎ Since that time, increasing energy-related
controversies have made it all the more crucial to reach reasonable and amicable
agreement during the establishment and implementation of energy policies ◎
Therefore, whereas the collection of public opinion on the First Energy Master
Plan took place in the final stages of planning as  matter of formality, the
Second Energy Master Plan was designed to reflect the views of the public from
the very beginning through the formation of public-private working groups • Five
working groups were formed from the draft plan stage by 60 interested
participants from industry, academia and civic groups [ Main Discussion Topics
of Working Groups ] • Direction and coordination of four working groups on
demand/electricity/nuclear energy/ Coordinating WG renewable energy; setting the
basic direction for the Energy Master Plan and reviewing the energy mix • Demand
forecast; target demand based on demand management effects; energy pricing
Demand WG policy; etc • Review of constraints on transmission; measures to
promote distributed generation and Electricity WG reduce GHG emissions; etc •
Analysis of economic feasibility of nuclear power plants; review of nuclear
scenarios; Nuclear WG mid- to long-term nuclear policies, including
strengthening nuclear safety • Setting mid- to long-term deployment targets for
renewable energy; Renewable WG improving deployment policy; etc 36 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Discussion Process ◎ In-depth discussions on various energy policy
issues have taken place at more than 50         meetings since May ◎ Seven major
tasks for the Second Energy Master Plan were introduced in August The Master
Plan was written based on reports prepared by the five working groups Seven
Major Tasks          Energy pricing system revision: Correct imbalance in the
consumption of electricity and other energy sources  Sustainable energy mix:
Give comprehensive consideration to economic feasibility, public acceptance, the
environment, grid conditions, etc  Distributed generation system: Expand
distributed generation, rationalize the transmission network          Stronger
demand management: Manage demand in  forward-looking manner using pricing
schemes, technology and policies  Balance with environmental policies:
Strengthen GHG reduction efforts in each sector  Improved transparency and
acceptability in the energy industry: Improve the industrial ecosystem, respond
actively to energy related conflicts  Creation of new growth engine: Promote new
businesses in areas such as renewable         energy and smart grid ◎ In October
2013, the public-private working groups announced their recommendations for the
Second Energy Master Plan based on the seven major tasks and discussions
Key Recommendations ■ The Second Energy Master Plan should establish  consensus
on the energy mix, including the share of nuclear energy, and present future
policy directions on restoring the market function of energy prices, improving
power grid stability, and other areas • Nuclear energy share:  share of 22%~29%
for nuclear energy was recommended in         view of changed conditions since
the First Energy Master Plan • Renewable energy share:  share of 11% for
renewable energy was recommended after considering analysis of the deployment
potential of each energy source 37 ESTABLISHMENT PROCESS FOR THE SECOND ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Process and Results of Gathering and Considering Opinions on the
Working Group Recommendations  National Assembly Hearing Summary and Assessment
◎ Summary: On November , 2013, the Trade, Industry & Energy Committee hosted
public hearing on the recommendations of the working groups ◎ Assessment: The
policy recommendations, including transitioning to demand management and
facilitating distributed generation, were reflected in the Energy Master Plan •
The open discussion process was considered an improvement, while opinions
differed about the items below Following Consideration of the Recommendations ◎
Energy demand forecast: Lively discussion took place on the soaring demand for
electricity (cid:9183) Action: Detailed documents will be submitted to the
National Assembly with additional information on electricity demand ◎
Conventional energy sources: In view of the high share of electricity, more
consideration should be given to alternative energy sources, such as oil, gas,
and heat (cid:9183) Action: Plans for each energy source will be included in the
report ◎ Energy mix: Different opinions were raised about nuclear and renewable
energy targets (cid:9183) Action: The nuclear and renewable energy targets must
be adequately explained ◎ Demand management: More concrete and practical plans
were requested (cid:9183) Action: Detailed demand management plans for each
sector, including building and transportation, are to be included  Discussion
With Industry Summary and Assessment ◎ Summary: From October to November,
discussions were held with energy suppliers 38 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN (public
enterprises, oil/gas/renewable energy companies), large energy consumers (steel/
petrochemical/electronics companies), and economic research institutes         ◎
Assessment: Compared to the discussions for the First Energy Master Plan, the
discussions for the present plan were positively received as they suggested
practical policy directions, including  revision of the energy pricing system
and an expansion of distributed generation • Energy-intensive companies and
economic research institutes expressed concern about the declining
competitiveness of the nuclear industry due to the decreased share of nuclear
energy (41% → 22%~29%)         • Suggestions varied according to positions of
the different industries * Some of the participants requested that the plan
include detailed policy proposals in addition to mid- to long-term policy
directions Following Consideration of the Recommendations         ◎ Energy tax
reform: The LPG tax rate should be lowered to ensure the fair treatment of
resources (cid:9183) Action: Tax rates for LNG, kerosene, and propane gas are to
be lowered to correct the imbalance in the consumption of electricity and other
sources ◎ Oil and gas: The role of oil and gas as bridging energy sources paving
the way for the expanded use of future energy sources, such as renewable energy,
should be emphasized         (cid:9183) Action: The plan will include  role for
conventional energy sources such as oil and gas ◎ &: Government-led technology
development and governmental support are important for the promotion of demand
management, distributed generation, and GHG reduction (cid:9183) Action: Energy
& strategies will be included in the plan          Discussion Among Relevant
Ministries ◎ Energy demand forecast: Joint working groups formed by specialized
bodies under relevant ministries held discussions in order to maintain the
coherence of the national energy plans and objectivity and transparency in the
demand forecast         * Greenhouse Gas Inventory and Research Center of Korea
(controlling role), Korea Energy Economics Institute (responsible for energy
transition · the energy industry), Korea Transport Institute (responsible for
transportation), etc • The joint working groups discussed and reviewed the
coherence of the demand forecast 39 ESTABLISHMENT PROCESS FOR THE SECOND ENERGY
MASTER PLAN model created by KEEI as well as key preconditions and active
variables for each sector • KEEI produced  forecast for energy demand on the
basis of these discussions, which the working groups then discussed and reviewed
• Relevant entities, including Office for Government Policy Coordination,
discussed and reviewed the coherence of the demand forecast models and
preconditions ◎ Main topics of discussion: In-depth discussions were held on GHG
reduction measures and the appropriateness of demand management policy and the
shares of nuclear and renewable energy in the energy mix 40 KOREA ENERGY MASTER
PLAN CHAPTER IV Energy Demand Forecast, Targets, and the Energy Mix  Main
Factors in the 2035 Forecast  Economic Growth Rate ◎ Figure: The economy is
expected to grow by % annually on average from 2011 to * * Annual average growth
rate: % from 1990 to 2000, % from 2000 to 2011 ◎ Method: The Korea Development
Institute (KDI) produced the long-term economic forecast using the production
function approach* * To calculate projected GDP growth, past GDP growth is
divided into contributions from production factors, including labor, capital and
total factor productivity Forecasts for each factor are then added up to predict
future economic growth  Population and Households ◎ Figure: The population will
grow by 17% annually on average from 2011 to 2035 and is likely to decrease
after The number of households will increase by 96% annually on average during
the same period due to  larger share of single-person households • Increasing
energy consumption in the residential sector is partly attributable to the
rising number of single-person households * Single-person households: % in 2011
→ % in 2020 → % in 2030 → % in 2035 ◎ Method: Statistics Korea (KOSTAT)
forecasted growth in population and households on the basis of the results of
its population and household forecasts, which reflect the 2010 Population and
Housing Census  Global Oil Prices ◎ Figure: The price of Dubai crude oil will
rise by % annually on average from 2011 to 2035, reaching $140/bbl by ◎ Method:
The International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasted the oil price growth rate using
the average growth rate of imported oil prices as published in its World Energy
Outlook 42 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN [ Key Conditions ] Average Annual Growth
Rate (%) 00         ’90~’11 ’11~’35 98 Items 2011 2035 00 00 34 00 GDP (Trillion
won) ,082 ,101 80 00  00 Population (Million) 00 17 16         71 00 17 00
Population Average annual growth rate GDP Oil Oil Price (Dubai, $/bbl) 16
Industrial Structure ◎ Figure: As the growth of energy-intensive sectors slows,
it is likely that economic growth will be led by assembly and metal businesses
(general machine/automobile/shipbuilding/ communications devices/semi-conductor,
etc) * (Unit : trillion won, 2005 constant prices)         Average Annual Growth
Rate (%) Sector 2011 2025 2030 2035 Agriculture, forestry & fishing, mining &
quarrying -27 Manufacturing 28 - Petrochemical, Non-metallic mineral, Iron and
steel 30         - Fabricated metal products 25 SOC (construction, etc) 56
Service* ,,79 * The service industry is composed of wholesale/retail,
restaurants/accommodations, transport/storage, communications, financial
intermediation, real estate/business services, education, health/social work,
and other service activities         ◎ Method: The Korea Institute for
Industrial Economics & Trade (KIET) forecasted value added of each type of
business as well as industrial structure on the basis of national accounts of
the Bank of Korea and the “KIET-DIMM12" model developed by the KIET 43 ENERGY
DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX  2035 Energy Demand Forecast (BAU)
Key Indicators ◎ Total primary energy demand: Total primary energy demand will
increase by % annually on average from 2011 to ◎ Final energy consumption: Final
energy consumption will increase by % from 2011 to 2035 due to slowing economic
and population growth ◎ Energy intensity: Energy intensity will improve 30% from
255 (toe/million won) in 2011 to 180 (toe/million won) in 2035 (% annually on
average) Average Annual Growth Rate (%) Item 2011 2025 2030 2035 Total Primary
Energy Demand (million TOE) 32 Final Energy (million TOE) 88 Energy Intensity
(TOE/million won) 255 211 195 180 -44  Forecast By Source: Total Primary Energy
Demand * (Unit: million toe) Average Annual Growth Rate (%) Source 2011 2025
2030 2035 Coal (share %) 24 () () () () Oil - 15 () () () () Natural Gas 93 ()
() () ()     Hydro 70 () () () () Nuclear 28 () () () ()  Renewable & Others 44
() () () () Total 32 () () () () 44 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Forecast By
Source: Final Energy Consumption * (Unit: million toe)         Average Annual
Growth Rate (%) Source 2011 2025 2030 2035 Coal (share %) 58 () () () () Oil -11
() () () ()         City Gas 68 () () () () Electricity 47 () () () ()     Heat
energy 82 () () () ()     Renewable (non-electricity)         01 () () () ()
Total 88 () () () ()  Forecast By Sector         * (Unit: million toe) Average
Annual Growth Rate (%) Sector 2011 2025 2030 2035 Industry (share %) 66 () () ()
() 97 Transport () () () () 59 Residential () () () () 39 Commercial () () () ()
Public Service & Others 31         () () () () 88 Total () () () () 45 ENERGY
DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX  2035 Electricity Demand Forecast
(BAU)  Comparison With the First Energy Master Plan 2006 2010 2020 2030 2035
First Plan (TWh) 349 404 510 585 - Second Plan (TWh) 349 434 610 762 816
Factors in the Increase in the Demand Forecast ◎ Electricity consumption has
increased more sharply in recent years than forecasted in the First Energy
Master Plan ◎ Electricity consumption stood at 465 TWh in 2012, which is %
higher than the 428 TWh demand forecast in the First Plan [ Actual Consumption
vs Demand Forecast in the First Plan ] 500,000 actual consumption demand outlook
in the 1st plan 450,000 400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,000 2002 2003 2004
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2001 • Electricity demand growth is
mainly attributable to increased investment in infrastructure as well as
increased production by iron and steel manufacturers, petrochemical businesses,
and fabricated metal product businesses whose global competitiveness increased
during the recovery from the international financial crisis • Low electricity
prices have encouraged fuel switching from energy sources, such as oil and gas,
to electricity 46 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN Actual Consumption and Demand
Forecasting (BAU)         ■ How is the business-as-usual (BAU) demand forecast
calculated? • The BAU demand forecast is based on the assumption that government
policy and the energy consumption trends of economic players will remain
constant at current economic growth rates • In other words, BAU outlook is the
forecast with the highest probability, based on assumption that the current
policy conditions and consumption pattern will be maintained This process is
applied to all countries         ■ Should demand-management effects be reflected
in the demand outlook? • Any expected effect from normalized electricity rates
and improved demand management will be reflected in the target demand, not the
BAU demand         • [ (BAU demand: 816 TWh)-(Demand reduction target:
15%)=(Target demand: 696 TWh) ]  Comparison With Other Countries ◎ According to
the IEA' forecast, the share of electricity in Korea' final energy consumption
will be lower than that of Japan and similar to that of the US in [ 2035 Share
of Electricity in Final Energy Consumption (%) ] OECD Average US Japan Korea * *
IEA, World Energy Outlook 2012 (November 2012) The demand forecast for Korea is
from the Second Energy Master Plan ◎ The BAU projection for electricity demand
in 2035 is 816 TWh After taking into account the target demand reduction of 15%,
electricity demand falls to 696 TWh, with  GDP elasticity of only          * The
economy is expected to grow by % annually on average until 2035, and target
electricity demand is predicted to increase by % annually on average 47 ENERGY
DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX • The electricity consumption of
major countries has historically risen in proportion to economic growth When per
capita income is less than $30,000, the GDP elasticity of electricity demand is
higher than  [ GDP Elasticity in Per Capita Income Bracket of $20,000~$30,000 ]
US Japan Germany France GDP (%)     Electricity Demand (%)     GDP Elasticity
2035 Demand Target ■(Improved demand management) + (Price/tax adjustment) + (&
expansion) = 13% reduction in energy consumption by 2035  Final Energy
Consumption ◎ Final energy consumption and electricity demand will be reduced by
13% and 15% respectively relative to the BAU scenario by Average Annual Growth
Rate Items 2011 2025 2030 2035 BAU demand (million toe) 88% Target demand
(million toe) 29% - - -% -% -% Reduction rate Final Energy Consumption Average
Annual Growth Rate 2011 2025 2030 2035 () () () ()  ()  () () () ()  ()  () ()
() ()  ()  () () () ()  ()  Coal (Share %) 10% - 99% Oil 50% City gas 79%
Electricity 72% Heat energy Renewable energy (non-electricity) 71% () () () ()
48 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Reduction Targets By Sector ◎ Industry will account
for 47% of total demand reduction, followed by transportation at 36%         and
commerce at % (unit mil toe) BAU Industry % %         household % commerce %
public sector % transportation % reduction target 2010 2035          Share of
Nuclear Energy in 2035          Working Group Recommendations ◎ After
considering changes in electricity demand, transmission network conditions and
public acceptance since the First Energy Master Plan, the working group
recommended that nuclear energy represent 22% to 29% of the energy mix in
Considerations When Deciding the Share of Nuclear Energy Energy Security ◎ Given
Korea' extremely high energy import dependence (%),  balanced energy mix is
needed to replace the excessive use of thermal power and other forms of energy
◎ The decreased use of nuclear energy and the rising share of coal and LNG in
the energy mix could bring  risk of greater exposure to global fuel price
fluctuations 49 ENERGY DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX Examples of
the Importance of Energy Security ■ CaseⅠ: At the time of the second oil crisis
in 1979, 71% of generation facilities used oil as fuel As oil import prices
tripled, electricity rates also rose more than three times from 22 won/kWh to 70
won/kWh ■ CaseⅡ: Following the shutdown of nuclear power plants in Japan, Japan'
LNG imports sharply increased, turning  trade balance into  trade deficit (
trillion yen in 2010 → - trillion yen in 2013) Economic Feasibility ◎ High
prices of oil and other fossil fuels place  heavy burden on the entire economy
The generation cost of nuclear energy is lower than other energy sources because
it is relatively unaffected by oil prices [ Generation Cost by Source (2012) ]
Nuclear Coal LNG won/kWh 25 * The Working Group on Nuclear Energy concluded that
nuclear energy has high economic feasibility even after taking into account
decommissioning costs, response costs for potential accidents, policy costs, etc
Examples of the Importance of Energy Security ■ Nuclear generation cost in the
6th Basic Plan for Long-term Electricity Supply and Demand Utilization Rate (%)
Nuclear Energy  GW Nuclear Energy  GW 60 81 26 70 50 03 80 51 86 90 08 06 50
KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ■ Including decommissioning costs         Utilization
Rate (%) Nuclear Energy  GW Nuclear Energy  GW 60 81 26 70 50 03 80 51 86 90 08
06         ■ Decommissioning costs + response costs for potential accidents +
policy costs + etc Utilization Rate (%) Nuclear Energy  GW Nuclear Energy  GW 60
43 (+62) 69 (+43) 70 88 (+38) 26 (+23) 80 72 (+21) 93 (+07) 90 15 (+08) 02 (+95)
■ Conclusions • The economic feasibility of nuclear energy is maintained with
utilization rate of 80% * The economic feasibility of nuclear energy further
increases after taking into account the extra costs of coal and gas and other
resources, such as GHG reduction         GHG Reduction ◎ The use of low carbon
energy, such as nuclear energy and renewable energy, should be expanded to
reduce GHG emissions         [ GHG Emission Factor in Power Generation (Unit:
kg-CO2e/kWh) ] Nuclear Renewable LNG Oil Coal   (IGCC except fuel cells) 3625
7018 8230  Global Supply and Demand Conditions         ◎ As an energy-poor
country with insufficient natural resources, Korea has an energy import
dependency ratio of 96% while ranking 10th in the world in energy consumption 51
ENERGY DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX • Consumption of oil, gas,
and coal ranks 9th, 16th and 13th in the world respectively, and imports of oil,
gas, and coal rank 5th, 6th and 3rd ◎ Among the ten largest energy-consuming
nations in the world, China, the US, India, and Russia (the top  energy
consumers) have abundant natural resources by comparison • Japan, Germany,
France, and Korea are categorized as energy poor countries [ Fossil Fuel Self-
sufficiency Rates of the World’ Ten Largest Energy Consumers (2011) ] Ranking
Country Oil Gas Coal  China 46 78 98   46 93 12  India 26 76 77  Russia 25 41 55
Japan 00 03 00  Germany 03 16 60  France 01 01 01  Canada 12 58 72  Brazil 03 62
14 10 Korea 01 01 01 ◎  high share of nuclear energy is  common feature of
energy-poor countries • Before the Fukushima accident, France supplied % of its
electricity from nuclear energy, while Japan supplied 29%, Germany 29%, and
Korea 34% ◎ There are clear differences between the situation of Korea and that
other energy-poor countries • In the case of Japan, Germany and France, the need
for massive infrastructure investment is lower than Korea as their energy
consumption is decreasing or not significantly increasing - Policy change on the
energy mix is relatively easier in Japan and Germany since their energy
consumption has been steadily decreasing with their reserve ratios reaching %
and % respectively as of 52 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN [ Energy Consumption Trend
of Major Countries (Unit: million TOE) ] Average Annual Growth Rate (%)
1980~2000 37 1980 1990 2000 2011         2000~2011 03 France -30 -69 Germany 07
-06 Japan 89 00 Korea ,,,,33 02 OECD         ◎ With connected power grids,
northern European countries, including France, Germany, the Czech Republic and
Austria, are able to secure additional supply capacity by importing and
exporting electricity ◎ Germany, France, and some other countries have high
potential for renewable energy deployment, and, as of 2011, the share of
renewable energy in their final energy consumption is higher than Korea' 2020
target         Current Rate 2020 Target France % 27% Germany % 20% Korea % %
Conclusions on the Share of Nuclear Energy ■ The First Energy Master Plan
suggested that nuclear power plants should supply energy up to the minimum load
point in order to maximize the use of low-carbon nuclear energy (41% of total
installed capacity)         ■ The Working Group on Nuclear Energy recommended
downward revision of the nuclear energy share from 41% in the First Plan to
22%~29% in view of changed conditions in electricity demand, public acceptance
and grid stability ■ At the moment, however, there are no energy sources that
can replace the role of nuclear energy in terms of energy security, industrial
competitiveness and GHG reduction, especially since Korea imports nearly all of
its energy         ■ As  drastic reduction in the use of nuclear energy is not
desirable at this point,  share of 29% was chosen on the basis of the working
group’ recommendations 53 ENERGY DEMAND FORECAST, TARGETS, AND THE ENERGY MIX
Nuclear Power Plants ■  total of 43 GW of installed capacity is required to
raise the share of nuclear energy to 29% by • As the 6th Basic Plan for Long-
term Electricity Supply and Demand already confirmed the construction and
operation of nuclear power plants with  total capacity of 36 GW by 2024,
additional facilities with  capacity of  GW should be constructed 147,259MW
installed capacity 129,077MW 78,483MW nuclear nuclear nuclear % 35,916MW % 29%
42,705MW 20,716MW 2012 2024 2035 ■ The number of new nuclear power plants will
be decided after consideration of electricity demand, license extensions for
retired plants, and construction and operation conditions It will be disclosed
in the Basic Plan for Long-term Electricity Supply and Demand 54 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN CHAPTER  - Six Major Tasks -  Transition to Demand Management
Policies  Adjustment of Relative Energy Prices ■Adjust energy tax rates to
prevent an imbalance between electricity consumption and non-electric energy
consumption  Current Status and Issues ◎ Since price liberalization, the price
of electricity has consistently been lower than the price of oil, which is taxed
at  rate of up to 50%, worsening distortions in energy consumption [ Cost
Recovery Ratio (2012) ] 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 [ International
Prices for Heavy Oil, LNG, and Electricity (IEA, USD/TOE) ] 1800 1600 1400 1200
1000 heavy Oil 800 LNG 600 electricity 400 200  Mexico OECD average Japan USA
Canada UK Germany Finland Korea ■Korea is the only country where heavy oil
(blue) is more expensive than electricity (green) ◎ Another source of distortion
in energy consumption is that electricity rates do not sufficiently reflect the
environmental and social costs of power generation 56 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN •
For example, even though bituminous coal used for power generation emits more
GHG and pollutants than LNG, LNG is taxed at  rate of 16%, while bituminous coal
is not taxed         • Other costs related to issues such as extra-high voltage
transmission lines for large-scale base load power plants and the social
controversy surrounding them are also not fully reflected in the price of
electricity  Direction         ■Adjust both energy taxes and electricity rates
to encourage more rational consumption of energy and electricity ■Gradually make
energy prices reflect social costs, such as nuclear plant safety, transmission
line maintenance, and GHG emissions reduction         ◎ Taxation adjustment:
Impose  consumption tax on bituminous coal* used in power generation, and lower
the tax on LNG, which is an alternative to electricity * Industrial uses, such
as steel making and cement production, will be exempted from the tax to avoid
hampering industrial competitiveness • Lower the tax rate for kerosene and
propane to ease the burden on low-income families and         adjust the
relative prices of energy sources ◎ Electricity rate adjustment: Adjust energy
rates to reflect the various social costs of producing, transporting, and
distributing power • Costs related to nuclear power plants: Reassess the costs
of nuclear decommissioning and waste disposal through an objective process Other
costs, including increased investment in safety-related facilities and the costs
of responding to accidents, will be rationally calculated         • Transmission
costs: Improve power lines, including HVDC, and offer realistic compensation to
minimize the impact on local communities • Conversion to clean fuel: Take into
account the costs of achieving renewable energy deployment and the national GHG
emissions reduction target         ◎ Complementary policy to support the
underprivileged: Minimize the impact of the energy price adjustment on the
vulnerable by offering energy vouchers and increasing investment in energy
efficiency 57 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management Policies
Electricity Rate Revision ■Encourage rational use of electricity by moving away
from the existing low price policy Existing Policy Paradigm New Policy Paradigm
· Minimize rate increases (minimize possible impacts on consumer price and
businesses) Policy Objective · Encourage rational use of electricity · Take into
account cost-changing factors in  timely manner · Incorporate environmental and
social costs Rate Rationalization · Rate rationalization is overdue · Simplify
rate structure for each use · Adjust progressive electricity rates for household
use · Expand the ‘opt-in' rate system Rate Structure · Differentiate prices for
industrial/ general/household use  Background ◎ Rate rationalization: Continuous
efforts have been made to set electricity rates at realistic levels,
particularly for industrial power use as the industrial sector consumes large
amounts of power at prices well below production costs [ Electricity Rate
Adjustment Ratio ] [ Cost Recovery Ratio ] average industrial use average
industrial use     (%) (%)
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 58 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎
Rate reform: The Time of Use (TOU) pricing scheme, which reflects hour-to-hour
changes in power generation costs, has been expanded* to encourage rational use
of electricity         * Coverage of TOU: January 2012 - general use of more
than 300 kW, educational use of more than ,000 kW May 2013 - all high voltage
for general and industrial use  Main Tasks          Rationalization of
Electricity Rates ◎ Set electricity rates at realistic levels to encourage
reasonable electricity use • Maintain realistic rates by being more flexible in
incorporating cost-changing factors, such as fuel price changes  Improvement of
Progressive Scheme for Household         ◎ Gradually improve the progressive
scheme for households to reflect changes in household power consumption patterns
• Household consumption has increased due to the spread of home appliances,
abnormal weather conditions, such as heat and cold waves, etc * Households using
more than 300 kWh per month (%): (2002) , (2008) , (2012) ◎ Changes in household
composition, such as  growing number of one- and two- member families, have
reduced the value of the progressive scheme for benefiting energy poor * Energy
use is related not only to income level but also to household size ◎ Consider
the introduction of Time-of-Use pricing for households on an optional basis
following the deployment of smart meters, which enable tiered pricing by hour
Expansion of Demand Side Management and Opt-In Pricing ◎ Expand
seasonally/hourly tiered pricing to all types of power use, including optional
coverage for low-voltage power, to accompany the expanded deployment of smart
meters         ◎ Develop and apply various opt-in pricing schemes to promote
reasonable power consumption and reflect power supply and demand, individual
consumption patterns, etc • Develop  variety of hourly-tiered pricing schemes to
encourage users to invest in demand side management for peak reduction using
private generators, ESS, etc 59 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management
Policies • Instead of forced power savings, apply incentive pricing to add
surcharges at certain peak hours in summer and winter and to lower prices at
other times ◎ In the mid- to long-term, review  variety of opt-in pricing
schemes, including contract pricing between consumers and operators* and tiered
pricing based on power supply quality** *  Adopt  pricing system based on the
introduction of advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), and provide various
value-added services such as electricity use tracking, device control, etc **
Premium (high price) rates guarantee minimal blackout hours, high-quality
voltage, and compensation for damage cause by blackouts  Improvement of Use-
Based Pricing Scheme ◎ Simplify the use-based pricing scheme to minimize pricing
differences between different types of use * Power for homes, street lights, and
night-time use has different load characteristics and so should continue to be
priced separately • Phase in tiered pricing by voltage to reflect different
production costs, while using seasonally/ hourly tiered tariffs, opt-in tariffs,
and others to appropriately reflect differences in load factor (, average load
divided by peak load), load patterns, etc [ Cost Recovery Ratio by Use (2012) ]
Average Household General Industrial Educational Agricultural Cost of sale
(won/kWh) Total cost (won/kWh) Cost recovery ratio (%) 60 KOREA ENERGY MASTER
PLAN  Creation of  Demand Management Market Based on ICT         ■Systematize
energy conservation and develop  demand management market based on ICT
infrastructure, such as the internet and smart phones Existing Policy Paradigm
New Policy Paradigm Policy Objective · Focus on supply side management ·
Prioritize demand side management         · Reduce the burden of securing supply
through reasonable demand side management · Reactive demand side management to
cope with supply shortages Direction · Sporadic load management such as public
campaigns, promotion, indoor temperature limits · Systematic demand side
management using ICT         Project Type · Government support oriented · Market
oriented  Current Status and Issues         ◎ The soaring social costs of energy
supply are making it difficult to meet the rapidly increasing energy demand •
There is  need for conversion from supply side management, in which supply is
increased to meet growing demand, to demand side management, in which demand is
reduced in advance in  reasonable manner         ◎ Although Korea has world-
class ICT infrastructure*, it has not made the most of its ICT infrastructure to
improve energy efficiency * Ranked 1st in the world: ICT development index (IDC)
for  consecutive years (ITU), households with an internet connection, smart
phone penetration, market share for display, etc • ICT has not been fully
applied to the energy sector because energy prices have remained low         and
the efficiency and demand management markets are not fully developed * Energy
service companies are actively operating in major countries, such as the US and
the EU, where load and efficiency management markets are well-developed 61 SIX
MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management Policies Case of technology
diffusion in the US ■ The US has applied the Energy Efficiency Resource Standard
(EERS) to energy suppliers since the 1990s when it hit the limit in expanding
supply facilities ■ Energy suppliers have worked with demand management
companies to identify demand management resources, resulting in the formation of
an ICT-based technology market ◎ Priority has been placed on load management
projects aimed at shifting the time of energy use to off-peak hours in times of
supply shortage rather than improving energy efficiency by fundamentally
reducing energy demand [ Size of Korea' Demand Management Market (2013, hundred
million won) ] Load Management Efficiency Gain Total ,535 800 ,335  Direction ◎
Transition to fundamental and systematic demand side management using ICT,
science, and technology rather than temporary consumption regulations, such as
indoor temperature limits • Deploy demand management as  new growth industry by
removing regulations and improving systems to enhance the added value of
applying ICT, such as ESS and EMS • Employ integrated resource planning that
reflects not only supply resources but also demand management resources when
devising supply and demand plans for each energy source ◎ Create  demand
management market so that demand side management can be measured and understood
as  resource and therefore treated in the same way as supply resources in the
energy market • Improve current systems to allow  choice between demand
resources and supply resources based on comparison of their economic values *
US: demand management (7cents/kWh) 〈 supply cost (10cents/kWh), Demand
management outweighs supply cost 62 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Encourage the
entrance of various demand management businesses* to the market * Not only
conventional energy companies but also electronic, communications, secondary
battery, software companies and others should be nurtured as demand management
business          Plan  Energy Storage System (ESS)         ◎ Initial market
formation: Strengthen the leading role of plant operators and renewable energy
businesses • Use ESS to fulfill the frequency reserve function currently
provided by thermal power generators * Promote early development of the core
technologies for frequency regulation, such as ESS, control systems, and grid
control algorithms, and the establishment of operation standards and settlement
rules to ensure an initial installation of 200,000~300,000 kW by • To control
the power quality of renewable energy, treat renewable energy facilities
equipped and operated with ESSs as having additional capacity ◎ Investment
promotion: Encourage heavy energy consumers and public organizations to make
large investment in ESSs by revising electricity rates and related systems
• Advise heavy consumers with  certain amount of contract demand to install ESSs
* Select heavy power consumers and public buildings as the first targets for the
installation of ESSs → Expand opt-in tiered pricing and provide incentives for
ESS installation, such as tax credits for investment • • Use smart ESSs as an
emergency power supply in accordance with relevant regulations * *  Fire safety
standards for high-rise buildings, equipment standards for buildings, inspection
standards for elevators, etc • Regularly monitor ESS performance after
installation and, if found to be insufficient, review measures to mandate the
phase-in ESS installation  Energy Management System (EMS) ◎ Market expansion:
Recommend the introduction of EMSs to large new buildings as well as
existing buildings and factories which consume large amounts of energy *
Increase allotted credits for the Energy Performance Index in the Energy
Conservation Design Standards for Buildings and revise Energy Management
Standards to reflect EMS recommendations 63 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to
Demand Management Policies ◎ Incentive: Increase installation cost support and
loans* for small and medium-sized companies * Give additional credits when
assessing the eligibility of EMS-based energy conservation projects for
financial support • Provide tax credits for investment in installing EMS and
lengthen the diagnosis interval when those subject to the Energy Diagnosis adopt
EMS (- years → 10 years maximum, revision of the Energy Use Rationalization Act)
◎ Business support: Develop energy service companies (ESCOs) with EMS
technologies as demand side management businesses/aggregators Moreover, give
such companies opportunities to participate in the power market * Profits can be
generated by selling EMS-based demand management resources in the power market,
or placing tenders for efficiency improvement performance records in the energy
efficiency market  ICT-based High-Efficiency Devices ◎ LED: Replace lights in
subway stations, tunnels, terminals and other places with large-scale LED
lighting using ESCO funds and PF * 36 million lights in subway stations,
tunnels, airports, railway stations and highway tunnels will be replaced first •
Replace all lights used in public buildings with LED by 2020 and obligate the
use of LED for mostly-on lights used in private buildings, such as underground
parking lot lighting • Give subsidies for installation to low-income families,
welfare facilities, poultry farms, etc * In line with phasing out incandescent
light bulbs starting in January 2014, jointly conduct the replacement program
with local governments ◎ Inverter: Encourage the use of high-efficiency
inverters for three-phase induction motors * Inverters control the motors of
production facilities and home appliances, saving energy by up to 30% ◎ Smart
plugs: Add smart functions to the criteria for energy efficiency ratings and
efficiently manage the energy consumption of home appliances * Provide  service
which help consumers track the amount of electricity consumed by each product
and control power use through  smart phone application • Promote the mid- to
long-term distribution of smart home appliances equipped with intelligent DR
functions, such as smart plugs 64 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Investment by Energy
Suppliers in Efficiency Improvement ◎ Increased investment by KEPCO in
efficiency improvement: Reinforce KEPCO' efficiency         improvement projects
starting from 2014 • Set and gradually expand an investment goal for efficiency
improvement project compared to total sales ◎ Expanded targets: Expand targets
of energy efficiency improvement to gas and district heating operators based on
the progress made by KEPCO         ◎ System improvement: Based on the outcome of
pilot projects, change the efficiency investment target to the ratio of energy
savings to total annual energy sales as is the case in major countries * The US
has set its savings target at % of annual average consumption • Seek measures to
minimize the link between sales and profits (decoupling) from investment
of energy suppliers in efficiency improvement  Promotion of the Demand
Management Market ◎ Demand resources market: Create  demand management resources
market to allow demand reduction resources (negawatts) gained from ESS and EMS
to be traded the same way as supply generation resources (megawatts)         •
Promote profit generation and commercialization for  variety of business models
using ESS, EMS, EHP and other demand management resources ◎ Creation of an
energy efficiency market: Revise relevant regulations to allow energy saved
during peak hours as  result of efficiency projects to be traded in the power
market • Revise regulations to allow energy saved through efficiency
improvements to be traded in the power market, taking into consideration the
progress in demand-side bidding and the growth of demand management businesses,
such as ESCO                 65 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management
Policies  Measures to Improve Demand Management by Sector ■Shift to  less
energy-intensive economy by strengthening energy efficiency standards for
transportation, buildings, appliances and other sectors up to the levels of
advanced countries 2012 2017 2035 Average fuel efficiency for vehicles (km/)
advanced countries: (US) , (Japan) , (EU) Insulation standards for new building
(reduction rate compared to 2009) 30% 60% (2025) 100% ■Reinforce efficiency
management for electricity to curb rapidly rising power consumption and
encourage the expanded use of other energy sources, such as gas and thermal
Progress ◎ Inter-ministry measures for demand management have brought continuous
improvements in energy efficiency • Transportation: Average fuel efficiency for
passenger cars has been improved by 32% since 2006 when fuel efficiency
standards for passenger cars were introduced * Fuel efficiency standards for
passenger cars (km/): (2006) 76 → (2008) 47 → (2010) 87 → (2012) 16 • Buildings:
Targets for energy conservation design standards for buildings,* including
insulation standards and window/door seal performance grades, have been expanded
(2013) * Health care and lodging facilities bigger than ,000 m2, offices and
shops bigger than ,000 m2 → all buildings bigger than 500 m2 • Appliances:
million TOE (equivalent to  trillion won of imports) has been saved annually by
enforcing an energy efficiency labeling program for major home appliances,
system for saving stand-by electric power, etc [ Increased Efficiency of Major
Home Appliances (2012 figure compared to 2008) ] Refrigerator Washing Machine /
% 11% 25% 66 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Limitations ◎ Transportation: The average
fuel efficiency of domestic passenger cars is slightly higher than         in
the US, but 15~20% lower than in Japan and the EU * Average fuel efficiency:
(US) 3km/, (Japan, 2010) 6km/, (EU) 4km/ ◎ Building: There is an urgent need to
improve the energy efficiency of pre-existing buildings, which account for 97%
of total buildings, as most efficiency measures for buildings have been focused
on newly-built buildings, public buildings and big buildings         •
Residences, which account for 53% of all building energy consumption, face many
barriers to implementing regulations or incentives related to residential energy
efficiency • While energy saving for buildings had been carried out on the basis
of appliances and equipment, energy consumption management has not been carried
out systematically and comprehensively for entire facilities         * Replacing
existing facilities with high-efficiency ones is  main business area for ESCO ◎
Appliance: As home appliances are integrated with ICT and become smarter, bigger
and more connected, their electricity use has increased despite improvements in
energy efficiency • For windows and built-in devices, which determine  building'
insulation performance, low- efficiency and low-price products, which consume
large amounts of stand-by power, have been installed         * Construction
companies supply low-efficiency built-in products to consumers because they do
not bear the cost of electricity  Main Tasks          Transportation ◎ Fuel
efficiency standards for cars: Design new fuel efficiency standards for 2016 to
2020 so that average fuel efficiency can reach the level of advanced countries
by 2020 (Japan: 3km/ , EU: 5km/) • Expand the scope of fuel efficiency standards
from passenger cars to small commercial         vehicles * Fuel efficiency
regulations in the US and Europe have already been expanded to cover small
commercial vehicles 67 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management Policies
◎ Energy conservation target for freight: Require large shippers, such as
manufacturers and distributors, with  freight amount above  certain level to
report their energy consumption and comply with energy savings targets ◎ Eco-
friendly cars: Distribute hybrid cars and clean diesel cars, which require less
new infrastructure by 2020 and lay  foundation for distributing electric cars
and hydrogen fuel cars • Build charging stations in accordance with the green
car distribution rate and pursue the establishment of appropriate standards,
revision of safety regulations and improvement of certification schemes •
Develop business models, such as car sharing and long-term lease services, and
begin the formation of  new market through purchase subsidies for different
vehicle types and other measures * Consider the introduction of sunrise and
sunset systems for subsidies and tax credits based on vehicle age and type
Building ◎ Newly-built buildings: Gradually strengthen the Energy Conservation
Design Standards for Buildings to achieve the goal of zero energy for all newly-
built buildings by 2025 * Insulation standard based on 2009 figures: (2017) 60%
reduction → (2025) 100% reduction • Strengthen the consultation system for
energy use plans and recommend the efficient use of integrated energy and the
active utilization of renewable energy when developing cities or industrial
clusters * Improve the energy efficiency of heating in large-scale residential
complexes through small-scale CHP plants and the expansion of the integrated
energy supply ◎ Existing buildings: Expand the scope of the certification scheme
for energy efficiency performance, which currently covers only new buildings (,
office and apartment buildings), to include existing buildings • Expand the
scope of the energy performance certification scheme*, which requires the
issuance and submission of  certificate containing the energy consumption
information of  building in the event of  property transaction * (2013)
Apartment buildings in Seoul with more than 500 units, offices of ,000m2 or
larger → (2016) All buildings across the country • Train professionals,
including building energy performance assessors, to prepare for the possible
increase in demand for the certification 68 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎
Distribution of district cooling and gas cooling: Promote the distribution of
devices using non- electric energy sources         • To ease the burden of
initial investment costs, provide more subsidies for district cooling and gas
cooling installation and promote the distribution of desiccant cooling systems*
to provide district cooling for apartment buildings * Desiccant cooling:  new
technology which uses existing heating pipelines of apartment complexes to
remove humidity from indoor air and uses the evaporation heat of water for
refrigeration • Expand the installation of cooling facilities for power load
management (, gas cooling, ice thermal storage) to all buildings above  certain
size and treat district cooling as power load management equipment
Improvement of Appliance Efficiency ◎ Expansion of the energy efficiency
management scheme: Expand the scope of the energy efficiency management scheme,
which now applies to energy-using machinery, to cover energy-related products
(ErP)* including construction materials (2014)         * Products that do not
directly use energy but have  direct or indirect impact on energy consumption,
such as insulation products and glass • Establish energy efficiency management
standards for built-in energy-using machinery/ products* that construction
companies install and provide to residents * Efficiency of built-in
refrigerators ( estimates): (grade ) %, (grade ) %, (grade )         %, (grade )
%, (grade ) % ◎ Enhancement of energy efficiency standards: Improve energy
consumption efficiency by banning the production and sale of incandescent light
bulbs, expanding the distribution LED lights, and distributing premium motors •
Maintain the ratio of first grade products below 20% by strengthening minimum
energy performance standards for cooling and heating devices, home appliances
and motors         * Closely regulate the standby power of set-top boxes and
other devices which are on standby for 24 hours and gradually tighten the
standard for standby power of electronics (current 1W → 5W 2015) ◎ Creation of
road-map: Draft and present  road map for energy efficiency management programs,
including energy efficiency labeling on products, to reduce market uncertainty *
mid- to long-term time-line to improve efficiency should be outlined, including
-year (to 2017)         regulatory directions • Introduce  sunset system for
energy efficiency management; periodically monitor the operation, maintenance
and termination of efficiency standards; and systematize the operation of energy
efficiency programs 69 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Transition to Demand Management Policies
Industry ◎ Energy-intensive businesses: Reduce energy consumption through the
target management scheme and other measures in accordance with the 2020
greenhouse gas emissions reduction target (% reduction compared to BAU) ◎ Small
and medium sized companies (SMEs): Encourage voluntary energy conservation by
providing additional support and incentives * Target SMEs which are not subject
to the target management scheme and the emissions trading scheme * Promote
factory energy management systems (FEMS), provide conservation consulting
services, facilitate financial and technological cooperation between big and
small companies (green credits), and offer policy support, such as financial and
tax incentives ◎ Promotion of energy management systems (EnMS): Promote systems
to systematically plan and implement energy demand management and energy
efficiency activities in industry * Develop manpower and educational programs,
bolster international certification and cooperation for measuring and verifying
efficiency performance Response measures for different industries and sectors •
Steel: Develop technologies* for CO2-free steelmaking and promote ICT-based
energy management systems * The replacement of coal with hydrogen in the
steelmaking process is expected to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30% -
Operate in-house commercial power generators, improve the use of thermal energy
through waste heat and by-product gas recovery and promote distributed
generation * POSCO operates in-house generators with capacity of 88 GW,
equivalent to  reactors • Petrochemicals: Invest in equipment for better heat
recovery (larger heat exchangers), improve processes to minimize standby power,
install waste vapor reuse facilities (MVR), etc • Vehicles: Facilitate & and
early commercialization of environmentally friendly vehicles; remove energy-
intensive stages, improve the manufacturing process by constructing resource-
recycling plants,) etc; and diversify the energy mix2) to protect the
environment 70 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN * ) Abolish the heat treatment stage,
which consumes the largest amount of energy, and construct resource-recycling
plants where captured CO2 can be used as  resource         * ) Introduce
photovoltaics, fuel cells and other renewable energy sources for vehicles and
processes, adopt VOC recovery systems, etc • Others: Increase the use of
emergency generators and replace low-power facilities (, semi conductors),
install wind power facilities (ship building), use lighter materials to improve
transport efficiency (, textiles), etc          Reform of the Energy Information
Management System         ■Systematically manage and share information on energy
supply, demand and reduction technology to improve the effectiveness of energy
policy ◎ Demand management: Create  virtuous cycle of policy implementation,
analysis/ assessment, and policy improvement         • Cooperation of consumers:
Obtain from consumers consumption information and patterns regarding
transportation (region, type of car, engine displacement), homes and buildings
(location, type of use, size), factories (type of business, location, size), etc
* Consumers who volunteer to provide the information may receive incentives,
while heavy consumers may be required to submit the information • Analysis of
policy effectiveness: Analyze energy consumption patterns and other information
to assess the effectiveness of each policy, including pricing policy and
reduction of energy consumption for each sector, and make policy measures more
precise and efficient         ◎ Demand outlook: Use Energy information service
systems to provide timely and appropriate information for policy makers and
energy consumers through  reliable energy forecasting system         • Open and
integrated systems: Establish  system for cooperation on statistics and policy
and conduct joint forecasting between energy suppliers and related organizations
Additionally, seek cooperation with outside professional agencies 71 SIX MAJOR
TASKS  Transition to Demand Management Policies • Improvement of forecasting
methods: Continuously improve forecasting models and tools and make regular and
official announcements of demand forecasts to increase their reliability and
authority ◎ Future technology: Develop technology portfolios, including the best
available technology* that can be applied in advance, by reviewing and analyzing
demand management technologies and policy trends at home and abroad *  Ultra
Super Critical (USC), carbon capture storage, and other energy conversion
technology for reduction ◎ Establishment of infrastructure: Establish  system to
collect end user energy consumption data and set up  legal and institutional
framework to expand related infrastructure 72 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN CHAPTER
- Six Major Tasks -  Establishment of  Distributed Generation System
Stabilization of the Power Grid Through Distributed Plant Locations ■Shift away
from the current practice of constructing transmission and transformation
facilities as  subsidiary part of power plant construction plans toward securing
power plant locations in advance based on consideration of grid restraints
Existing Policy Paradigm New Policy Paradigm · First develop power generation
plan → then plan transmission accordingly · Consider grid restraints in advance
before building generation facilities Planning · Utilize existing lines as much
as possible + Develop small energy sources near end- users · Large power
facilities + Extra-high voltage transmission lines Construction  Progress ◎
Stable power supply: Industrial competitiveness has been improved by producing
stable and affordable supply of energy through large-scale power plants
(nuclear, coal, etc) • Korea has grown to have the world' 13th highest installed
capacity with  total installed capacity of GW as of the end of ◎ High quality
power:  stable supply of high quality power with the world’ highest level of
voltage stability has been produced on  mass scale voltage retention rate
frequency retention rate unit(%) unit(%)
Japan Japan USA Finland USA Finland Korea Korea blackout time
transmission/distribution loss rate unit(%) unit(%)                      Japan
Japan USA Finland USA Finland Korea Korea 74 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Limitations ◎ Power generating conditions: Current power policies are now facing
limitations because of opposition from local residents and environmental
concerns despite the continued expansion of the power supply led mainly by large
plants         • Opposition from local residents and environmental advocacy
groups has often resulted in hold-ups or cancellations of plant construction,
causing disruptions in the power supply ◎ Power transmission conditions: The
transmission lines which deliver electricity northward to the Seoul metropolitan
area have reached full capacity due to the disparity between areas of high power
consumption and plant locations         [ 2013 Electricity Supply Conditions by
Area (10,000 kW, %) ] Seoul Metropolitan Area South & West Coastal Area Yeongnam
Area Gangwon Area Honam Area         Electricity Demand ,100 (41) 200 () ,200
(16) 700 (10) ,300 (30) Installed Capacity ,900 (23) 900 (11) ,700 (21) ,100
(14) ,500 (31)         ◎ The density of transmission lines in Korea is extremely
high compared to the rest of the world It is difficult to construct additional
large-scale transmission lines due to the small land mass of Korea and
opposition from some local residents [ Power Facility Density by Country ] US
(Northeast)         Korea Japan France Site Area (㎢) 100,210 377,915 554,250
643,801 Power facility density of major countries generation transmission
203,970 Generation Capacity (㎿) 79,300 185,600 117,628
Transmission Lines (㎞) 31,353 101,390 104,600 105,228
Generation 36 61  55 Japan US(NE) France Korea Compared to US Transmission 66 42
87 75 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Distributed Generation System
Direction ◎ Minimize the construction of new extra-high voltage lines and
construct such lines only when unavoidable, such as when expanding nuclear and
other power plants for policy reasons and improving the public grid  Plan ◎ Give
priority consideration to grid constrains when formulating the Basic Plan for
Long-term Electricity Supply and Demand • Avoid the past approach of formulating
transmission plans only after planning plant construction • In the future,
integrate both plant construction plans and transmission installation plans into
single package ◎ Provide location guidelines/grid maps to utility operators in
advance • Encourage operators to choose locations where no additional grid
construction is needed by offering them location guidelines before conducting
intent surveys ◎ In the mid- to long-term, consider applying differential
transmission fees according to plant locations, with lower fees for the plants
near  demand site * Currently, plants do not bear transmission fees  Promotion
of Distributed Generation ■Supply more than 15% of electricity from small-scale,
distributed sources by 2035 (currently %) ■Finalize detailed measures in the
Distributed Power Sources Promotion Plan (expected to be available in 2014)
Current status ◎ Distributed sources account for 12% of Korea' power grid in
terms of installed capacity, but only % in terms of actual generation and
contribution to the power grid 76 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN Type Note Integrated
Energy (83GW)         Co-generation of heat and electricity, sold exclusively to
consumers in certain areas In-house/ private Generator (88kW) Generating power
internally to meet  portion of general power needs Renewable Energy (08kW) solar
PV, wind, geothermal, fuel cells, ESS, etc          Obstacles ◎ Current policy
has limited the rise in electricity rates, while prices of LNG and other fuels
have increased, making in-house/private generators and integrated energy less
economically viable         2005 2012 rate of increase 27%↑ electricity price 74
won/kWh 94 won/kWh 453 won/㎥ 884 won/㎥ 95%↑ gas price         * Japan: The price
of industrial-use electricity in Japan is more than double that in Korea As
result, distributed generation facilities account for almost 23% of total
installed capacity (price as of 2012 ($/ MWh): Japan 194, Korea 82) ◎ Need to
improve the inconsistent power quality of renewable energy by developing
advanced technologies, including microgrid          Implementation measures
Promotion of In-house/Private Power Generators ◎ Encourage energy intensive
companies and industrial clusters larger than  certain size to meet some of
their demand by in-house/private generation         • Revise electricity tariffs
(stricter peak pricing) and offer incentives for power conservation, such as
energy use rationalization funds and tax benefits 77 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Establishment of  Distributed Generation System ◎ Share best practices and study
measures such as technology support and grant support aimed at improving the
economic feasibility of generators by recycling waste heat and by- product gas
Best practices of POSCO ■ 70% of POSCO' power consumption needs are met by in-
house/private generation (90 GW, equivalent to  nuclear reactors) ■ POSCO uses
waste heat and by-product gas as  main fuel Additionally, it has adopted high-
efficiency LNG combined generation using by-product gas and other fuels in
addition to LNG since Promotion of Integrated Energy ◎ Review possible reforms
of energy pricing, taxation and subsidies with  view to improving the
profitability of integrated energy supply and the fair treatment of energy
sources ◎ When granting permits, give preference to larger-scale projects
involving more than 50,000~100,000 households and more than 100MW in order to
achieve economies of scale • Strengthen evaluation of measures to diversify
business, such as ensuring low price heat sources, developing district cooling
supply plans and cooperating with local operators ◎ To improve economic
feasibility during summer, commercialize desiccant cooling, which is suited to
apartment complexes, and expand the number of buildings targeted for the
adoption of district cooling ( larger than ,000㎡→ larger than ,000㎡)  Promotion
of distributed renewable energy ◎ Promote projects for small-scale energy
distribution to meet the daily energy demand of homes, villages, schools and
others with renewable energy • Introduce  photovoltaic rental business to
provide one-stop service to help anyone easily install and maintain such devices
* Existing government-led initiative: Consumers pay for the 50% of the initial
investment, and  subsidized -year warranty is provided over the 20-year product
life • Create  renewable energy complex by designating certain areas to receive
support for  total package of solar PV, wind power and ESSs (Currently, support
is provided for individual energy sources) 78 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • Revise
distribution projects to focus on local residents and projects with benefit
sharing mechanisms*, and promote private investment, including investment in the
financial sector         * Benefit Sharing: In Germany, citizens' generators
that are invested in and owned by residents are becoming more common ◎ Build
power supply systems for specific sites (islands, buildings, etc) with  focus on
distributed generation through development and demonstration of microgrids * For
islands, demonstrations have been underway at three sites, including Jeju island
(Gapa island), by local governments and KEPCO with total funds of billion won
For buildings, an industrial complex has been created in GuroGValley as part of
the -MEG project          Plan ◎ Confirm details in the Distributed Generation
Promotion Plan (2014) and the 7th Basic Plan for Long-term Electricity Supply
and Demand          Efficient Planning and Operation of the Transmission Network
■Change the process of planning and constructing transmission lines in such  way
as to improve the stability of power grid and the level of social acceptance
Grid conditions         ◎ There is an increased possibility of massive blackouts
in the event of transmission line malfunction because of increased installed
capacity at four major power generation sites, concentrated demand in the
metropolitan area, etc ◎ Because KEPCO, the Korea Power Exchange and plant
operators share responsibility for grid operation, it is unclear who is
responsible for what, and this lack of clarity is  limitation when preventing
and responding to accidents         * There is no impartial supervisory body
Every party involved takes the role of player and judge at the same time and
focuses more on profits than grid safety 79 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of
Distributed Generation System  Main Tasks  Enhancement of Acceptance When
Constructing New Transmission Lines ◎ When the construction of extra high
voltage transmission lines is unavoidable, carry out complementary measures,
such as burying HVDC lines underground * HVDC lines are more socially acceptable
as they have no distance restrictions, deliver power over long distances with
underground cables, and emit few electromagnetic waves However, Korea lacks
practical experience in this area • Establish grid control and operation
strategies that are appropriate for the features of HVDC and achieving self-
reliance in HVDC technology ◎ Commence the construction of transmission lines
only after giving full consideration to the opinions of local residents at every
stage, from selecting routes to finalizing construction plans  Stable Operation
of Transmission Lines in the Metropolitan Area ◎ There has been  gradual rise in
grid instability, including an increased possibility of fault currents, as the
power load is concentrated in the Seoul metropolitan area, which has  loop- type
transmission grid ◎ Continuously retrofit the grid to ensure the stable
operation of transmission lines Additionally, in the mid- to long-term, consider
reconfiguring the loop-type grid, introducing  load-dispersing pricing scheme,
etc • For the short-term, take measures to retrofit facilities, such as
installing reactors and increasing breaker capacity, to reduce faults • For the
mid- to long-term, review the possibility of dividing the Seoul metropolitan
area into small, alternate current network areas and to link with BTB HVDC •
Review possible pricing schemes to disperse the demand in the metropolitan area
and others for the mid- to long- term  Improvement of the grid reliability
management structure ◎ Establish  specialized body dedicated to impartially
managing and supervising the national grid along the lines of the US NERC 80
KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • The body will be responsible for supervising and
analyzing power grid operation, ensuring compliance with reliability standards,
investigating and resolving grid malfunction, etc         ◎ Create "Power grid
reliability standards*" to improve grid reliability to the level of advanced
countries and to establish clear-cut lines of authority and responsibility among
related organizations * 10 tasks in  categories are to be carried out, including
emergency measures and supply and demand based on systematic analysis,
transmission plan, operation and maintenance, protective control, cyber
protection, etc         ◎ Introduce  certification program to ensure that
personnel working in the power grid sector have the necessary skills and
qualifications * Eligible for certification: Power grid operators in the Korea
Power Exchange, transmission and substation operators in KEPCO, and generator
operators in power plants                                 81 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Establishment of  Distributed Generation System SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER  - Six Major Tasks -  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy
(Environmental Protection, Safety Enhancement, Energy Technology, etc)  Response
to Climate Change ■Shift the policy paradigm from regulation-driven reduction to
fundamental, creative reduction and market promotion using cutting-edge
technology In the Past New Policy Paradigm Design cost-effective measures to
achieve targets and strengthen industrial competitiveness Set GHG reduction
targets Regulation-oriented GHG reduction Technology and market-oriented GHG
reduction  Progress ◎ Introduction of regulations: The institutional basis has
been laid for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by establishing the Greenhouse
Gas and Energy Target Scheme (implemented in 2012) and Emissions Trading Scheme
(enacted in 2012) * The national emissions reduction target was announced in
November 2009: 30% below the BAU level by ◎ Creation of  carbon market:
voluntary carbon market (Korea Voluntary Emission Reduction Program (KVER)) has
been operated since Korea will also launch  national emissions trading market
(allocation market), the 4th of its kind in the world, in * KVER: The government
pays for greenhouse gas emissions reduction achieved by companies participating
in the target scheme without reduction obligations **  EU (2005),  New Zealand
(2008),  Australia (2015, considering an early launch in 2014)  Limitations ◎
Increase in GHG emissions: Despite reduction efforts, greenhouse gas emissions
have been steadily rising due to the prevalence of energy-intensive companies,
the export-oriented industrial structure, etc * Greenhouse gas emissions in 2010
increased by % compared to the previous year Energy consumption from 2010 to
2012 was also greater than initially forecasted, and greenhouse gas emissions
continue to rise * GHG Intensity (tCO2/million won): (2007)617 → (2010)641 →
(2011)643 84 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Impact on businesses: There is  need to
prepare sufficient counter-measures as the introduction of the emissions trading
scheme and other measures may undermine business competitiveness         *
Business competitiveness may be weakened as the GHG emission permits to be
allocated from 2015 may lead to increase in production costs, reduction in
sales, etc • While the target scheme has come into effect, most businesses have
not yet taken action and are lacking in reduction capacity         ■ survey
released in January 2012 showed that more than 80% of companies lacked methods
to reduce emissions sufficiently ■Methods for achieving emissions targets are
mostly aimed at improving the efficiency of processes and facilities, doing
little to reduce emissions in the long term (2012: 71%, 2013: 73%) [ Reduction
Methods Indicated in the Reduction Plans of Companies with Reduction Obligations
(Unit: ,000tCO2) ]         Efficiency Improvement Fuel Conversion Waste Heat
Recovery Building/Lighting /Air-conditioning Year Renewable 2012 ,600 (71%) ,146
(15%) 642 (%) 208 (%) 159 (%) 2013 ,767 (73%) ,298 (12%) ,074 (10%) 351 (%) 135
(%)          Main Tasks          Creative Response Using Technology and the
Market ◎ New strategies for climate change in the creative economy: Design
national policies to create  new market and industry in response to climate
change based on science, technology and ICT (2014) ■Present new policy
directions to improve energy efficiency using ICT, increase & investment
in key clean technology for the future, create  new market and industry in
climate, etc ■Develop measures to combat climate change for coal-fired plants
and energy-intensive industries, which are the main sources of greenhouse gas
emissions 85 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy ◎
Creation of  virtuous cycle with economic growth: Review  variety of potential
measures to ease the concerns of businesses about  loss of competitiveness and
carbon leakage as  result of the introduction of the Emissions Trading Scheme
■Energy-intensive and export-oriented industries (, carbon-leakage industries)
need to take measures to prevent carbon emissions and job leakage ■ETS
compensation program: Review measures to help carbon-intensive industries avoid
loss of competitiveness, such as carbon leakage ◎ Promotion of an offset market:
Design offset programs to help industry achieve cost-effective reduction of GHG
emissions in the ETS ■Review the use of green credits in the domestic offset
market, which can be earned from the Korea Voluntary Emission Reduction Program,
renewable and energy efficiency projects and other projects ■Encourage small-
scale emitters, such as companies with reduction obligations, to implement
offset projects ◎ International response: Actively participate in international
efforts to address climate change using technology and the market ■Take
appropriate measures in response to the technology-driven climate change
initiatives led by the US (, exporting efficiency technology, employing
environmental strategies that can be used as an advantage in trade such as
stricter standards and certification, etc) ※ Negotiation on the post-climate
change system (to be completed in 2015): Breaking from the Kyoto Protocol, which
focuses on reduction obligations for advanced countries and voluntary reduction
for developing countries,  single framework that will bind all countries is
being negotiated  GHG Emissions Reduction in the Power Generation Sector ◎
Adoption of reduction technology: Apply the best available technology to new
plants, taking into account the technology' commercialization timing, and
evaluate the reduction efforts of such plants 86 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ■
Commercial CCS systems greater than 100 MW are being built in the US and Canada
• 75 projects are underway, including large-scale projects in planning CCS
■ CCS pilot plants with capacities greater than 10 MW are in operation in major
countries (about 10 countries) · Increasingly adopted by new plants efficiency
upgrade(%) 375 26 70 EU development target         280 76 70 JP development
target 280 76 76 USC 280 20 240 EU, JP 09 Base 167 current mature technology 44
korea current level/ Yennaheuna level mature technology ultra-supercritical
super critical subcritical / 50  60  70  80  90  00  10          ◎ Demand
management: Promote an ICT-applied demand management market to create  level
playing field for demand resources to compete with supply resources • When the
power supply is stabilized, integrate and operate existing similar demand
management systems as reliability demand response and economic demand response *
Reliability demand response: Reduce and shift load away from peak hours to
stabilize power supply and demand Economic demand response: Reduce power supply
costs through bidding and competition among power generation resources in the
power market ◎ Fuel conversion: Increase the operation rate of LNG plants to
promote distributed generation,         reduce greenhouse gas emissions, etc
Enhancement of Businesses' Capability to Address Climate Change ◎ Support for
vulnerable sectors: Increase support for sectors of high vulnerability to
address difficulties arising from GHG reduction compliance and help improve
competitiveness         ■Take inventory of SMEs, develop reduction technology,
offer financial support and tax credits for industries concerned about  loss of
competitiveness, etc 87 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of
Energy Policy ◎ Promotion of joint emissions reduction: Transition from the
current reduction system, which is focused on large emitters and individual
companies, toward  system which encourages cooperation between businesses,
including large companies, SMEs, and industrial complexes ■Green Credits: Review
the possibility of recognizing emissions reduction achieved with capital and
technology investment of large companies in SMEs as external reduction
performance (offsets) under the target scheme and emissions trading scheme
■Industrial cluster: Switch to low-carbon industrial clusters by establishing
integrated energy monitoring systems and joint power generation using waste heat
◎ Professionals: Identify promising job opportunities and systematize current
manpower training programs based on the analysis of the supply and demand
dynamics of human resources needed in Korea' climate change sector ◎ Specialized
companies: Systematically nurture specialized service companies, including IT
specialized ESCO companies connected to power and carbon markets and
conservation (DR) consulting firms ■Design measures to promote service companies
specialized in energy demand management and greenhouse gas emissions reduction
(2014) ◎ Global green market: Establish comprehensive support mechanisms,
supporting all stages of  project from selection and planning to financing and
implementation, to help domestic businesses enter foreign markets ■Benchmark
again the Green Initiative implemented in 2010 by the Japan Bank for
International Cooperation Under this Initiative, green projects selected by the
government are financed by public funding and private investment 88 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Reform of the Nuclear Industry and Safety Enhancement
■Continuously strengthen the stability of nuclear power through nuclear industry
reforms, such as introducing an open and check system and improving the
management and supervision systems of nuclear operators ■Aim to become  Nuclear
Power Plant (NPP) export powerhouse by 2020         In the Past New Policy
Paradigm · Emphasize efficiency and economic feasibility of NPP construction and
operation · Prioritize safety to assure public acceptance Industrial Reform for
Safety Reinforcement · Introduce  system of checks/ · Achieve self-reliance in
NPP surveillance + openness/competition technologies within  short period of
time → “Choose and Focus strategy” · Strengthen management and supervision to
prevent corruption and reinforce safety         · In general, give operators
autonomy in business management · Concentrate on profitable projects · Establish
bridgehead to export Promotion of Nuclear Industry as Export Industry for the
national economy NPPs · Export both nuclear parts and · Prioritize the export of
NPP systems equipment          Progress ◎ Electricity supply: The foundation for
stable electricity supply was maintained by constructing NPPs as scheduled,
securing new sites and efficiently operating NPPs         • Three NPP units have
already been constructed*, and candidates for new NPP sites (Yeongdeok/Samcheok)
have also been officially announced * Shin-kori Unit  (February 2011), Shin-kori
Unit  (July 2012), Shin-wolseong Unit  (July 2012) ◎ NPP exports: Korea is the
6th country in the world to export nuclear power plants ( units of APR1400 to
the UAE in September 2012)         • The industrial foundation has been laid for
creating  high-added value chain through self-reliance in three core
technologies, including Reactor Coolant Pumps, Man-Machine Interface Systems and
design code 89 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy
◎ Safety enhancement: In the wake of the Fukushima accident, measures have been
taken to improve facility integrity (,  trillion won) and nuclear power plant
operations (59 tasks)  Limitations ◎ There have been limitations in creating
sound foundation for the industry in the process of the rapid growth of the NPP
industry over  short period of time • As Korea has pushed for 'NPP self-
reliance*' in  short span of time,  few institutions and companies with
competitive edge have inevitably played  leading role in the formation of the
industrial ecosystem * (1978) Kori unit  → (1999) Uljin unit  and  (standard
reactor (OPR1000)) → (2014) Shin-kori unit · (new pressurized light water
reactor, APR1400) • As  result of the nuclear industry' focus on  high level of
technical expertise and specialization, it generally lacks competition, openness
and supervision, leading to corruption and cronyism • The management system has
been relatively lacking in safety and transparency, as the nuclear industry has
overemphasized efficiency-oriented NPP construction and operation, and
performance, focusing on increasing capacity factors, shortening construction
periods, etc ◎ There is  growing need to bolster the systematic management and
supervision over state- owned NPP companies • The management activities of
state-owned NPP companies are subject to virtually no government management and
supervision, unlike government-led activities regarding technical safety and
electricity supply and demand management • The lack of  self-regulating and
monitoring structure in the market as well as the insular structure of the
industry have resulted in persistent problems, such as certificate forgery and
corruption scandals ◎ Since Korea won  contract to build NPPs in the UAE, global
competition in the NPP market has become fiercer, while Korea has not taken
sufficient measures to secure the foundation for NPP exports • Korea is less
experienced in project financing and lacks large-scale government funding
compared to rival countries, such as Japan and Russia, where  large amount of
government funding is available 90 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • The focus on
training experts for long-term domestic projects and developing  supply chain
has led to  weakened capacity to respond to global changes          Main Tasks
Safety-First Nuclear Policy ◎ Safety investment: Increase investment in safety
to significantly enhance nuclear safety in Korea         • In the wake of the
Fukushima accident, there has been increased investment in nuclear safety to
prepare for natural disasters and other risks, and more focus has been put on
the development of safety technologies * Enlarging coastal barrier, securing
vehicles with portable generators, building hydrogen gas removal systems not
dependent on electricity, etc (2011~2015,  trillion won)         * Share of
nuclear & dedicated to safety: 2012: 100 billion won (23%) → 2017: 40% → 2035:
60% ◎ NPP operation: Shift to  safety-first NPP operation system • To improve
planned preventive maintenance, conduct sufficient safety monitoring and
maintenance by expanding the list of items monitored and maintenance periods,
and minimize outages during operation         * Main items monitored: 50 items →
100 items Standard maintenance period: 30 days → 35 days or longer • To enhance
the management of aged plants, conduct stress tests on plants whose operation
licenses have been extended, preemptively replace equipment older than 20 years,
etc • Switch to  safety-first management system by shifting from efficiency-
focused management assessment of nuclear operators to safety-oriented assessment
◎ NPP construction: Construct nuclear power plants with the world' highest level
of safety • Thoroughly carry out quality tests and verification* of construction
materials and nuclear parts regardless of construction deadlines * The originals
of test result sheets should be verified, and witness tests should be conducted
by the Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Corporation Additionally, third-party
organizations should verify quality         • Construct new reactors (APR1400)*,
which have  much improved safety record compared to the existing standard
reactor OPR1000, and develop  next generation reactor (APR+)** 91 SIX MAJOR
TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy * Used first in Shin-kori
and  under construction (10 times safer than OPR1000 in case of severe
accidents) ** Aiming at completing technology development by 2015 (100 times
safer than OPR1000 in case of severe accidents)  Reform of Nuclear Industry ◎
Develop short and mid- to long-term anti-corruption measures by identifying
structural problems in the nuclear industry, including the non-transparent
procurement system, and gradually enforce such measures ■Short term: Immediately
implement improvement measures and periodically carry out follow- up management
in accordance with the government' comprehensive plan (June 2013)  Eradication
of collusive ties: Prohibit retirees of state-owned NPP companies from
employment in cooperating companies, restricting bidding by companies hiring
such retirees, etc  Improvement of procurement: Minimize direct contracting
without bidding, introduce pre- qualification, disclose procurement plans in
advance, etc  Enhancement of quality: Examine documents related to the quality
of NPP parts to determine whether such documents are forged by third party
independent organizations ■Mid - to Long-term: Seek fundamental measures to
foster competition in the industry and enhance the transparency of the value
chain  Encourage competition/expand supply networks in the nuclear market *
Standardizing parts by opening markets dominated by certain companies to
competition, easing bidding requirements by lowering entry barriers (delivery
performance requirements) for newcomers, and creating  localized road-map by
eliminating demand for certain companies  Improve procurement procedures/ reform
procurement management system * Establish  price system based on original cost
to prevent below-cost competition that could cause quality degradation and to
guarantee appropriate prices; implement  Multiple Award Schedule to make insular
procurement practices more transparent; develop an Integrated Management System
to systematize complicated management systems; and strengthen the contractor
management process to weed out substandard contractors  Enhance quality self-
assessment of the nuclear industry * Making it clear where responsibility lies
within the nuclear industry to prevent forgery of test results 92 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN ◎ Establish  surveillance and control system for stated-owned NPP
organizations to enhance transparency and safety         • Enact an Act on
Management and Surveillance of Nuclear Operators to serve as an overarching law
to manage and supervise the four stated-owned NPP organizations, which have
related functions * Share safety-driven management goals among the Korea Hydro &
Nuclear Power Corporation, KEPCO &, KEPCO NF and KEPCO KPS, build inter-
organizational cooperation and coordination mechanisms, and monitor and assess
activities to enhance safety and prevent corruption         • Establish  nuclear
industry policy council* to coordinate the distributed management and
supervision roles of stated-owned NPP organizations and facilitate  speedy
decision- making process * Participants: Office for Government Policy
Coordination (Chair), Ministry of Strategy and Finance, Ministry of Science, ICT
and Future Planning, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, etc * Discussion
topics: Supervision to promote safety-driven management, measures to build
public trust in nuclear safety, etc         ◎ Greatly enhance the safety
management capabilities of the government and nuclear industry • The regulator,
the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission, should tighten safety regulations*
and expand enforcement manpower, while related ministries, including the
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy, focus their support on safety equipment
investment and technology development         * Introduce an inspection system
for parts suppliers, designate  specialized certification organization for
testing and inspection agencies, etc • Secure  sufficient number of safety
management personnel before establishing  system for supplying manpower
optimized to ensure safety * Secure necessary manpower by downsizing
headquarters and increasing staff quotas and assign the manpower to equipment
maintenance and repair units         * Implement  system for securing sufficient
human resources in advance ( years ahead of the actual placement) to provide
skilled professionals on site in  timely manner Additionally, establish standard
job classifications for each type of nuclear reactor • To strengthen the
comprehensive and continuous capacity of the Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power
Corporation in terms of safety assurance, undertake extensive and voluntary
reform in three areas: organization, human resources and corporate culture
■Organization: Strengthen the expertise and role of the procurement team, create
new team dedicated to engineering, reinforce the function of the audit team, etc
93 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy ■Human
Resource: Drastically increase recruitment of external staff, designate
responsible senior executives for each NPP site, stipulate primary HR policies
as company regulations, etc ■Corporate culture: Make safety and integrity as
core company values, benchmark against domestic and international best practices
for safety, etc  Promotion of NPP Exports ◎ Select projects that are profitable
to the national economy • Select target export countries and strive to win
contracts after reviewing financing capacity, policy credibility, electricity
supply and demand outlook, etc • Decide whether to participate in  project based
on  thorough review of project feasibility by  public-private consultative group
• Establish export strategies tailored to promising projects/countries and carry
out inter- ministry efforts to win contracts ◎ Develop professional manpower for
NPP exports by providing systematic training, increasing staff quotas in  timely
manner, etc • To ensure  sufficient number of professional personnel for the
construction and maintenance of the UAE NPPs, adjust staff quotas of state-owned
companies to sufficient levels in  timely manner in consideration of training
periods * Train overseas projects specialists by providing systematic training
programs specially devised for the design of reactors for export (APR1400) •
Systematize the process for state-owned companies to secure manpower needed for
overseas NPP contracts ◎ Plan and implement strategies to export parts and
equipment along with NPPs • Build  high-added value NPP supply chain through
technology development, package development and other measures and provide
support to ensure  stable procurement route in the international nuclear market
* Provide support at every stage, from & for essential equipment to
commercialization, domestic sale, and export 94 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Enhancement of Public Communication and Community Involvement ◎ Improvement of
transparency: Enhance the transparency and credibility of NPP polices by
regularly disclosing information on NPP operations and constantly communicating
with local residents         • Promote activities of environmental watchdog
groups, which help residents directly participate in monitoring and overseeing
the environment and safety of NPP areas • Expand and conduct safety monitoring
with the participation of local residents, and designate  spokesperson to
deliver regular monthly briefings on overall NPP operations for each NPP site
◎ Community benefits: Revise community support projects to ensure that
government and operator funds are used effectively for purposes such as
increasing incomes for the community * Revise support projects to effectively
bring mutual benefits to nuclear energy and the community (,         task force
teams consisting of community, operator and government) * SOC-oriented projects
→ community assistance focused on income generation and direct support for
residents          Foundation for Nuclear Decommissioning and Waste Disposal
■Establish and implement  plan to manage spent fuel in  timely manner following
public discussion and consensus building         2013 2014 post 2015 Public
Engagement commission on spent Nuclear Fuel (PECOS) private Establish and
ececute detailed impleme ntation plan based on public opinion Nuclear power
promotion committee [basic plan] govemment         95 SIX MAJOR TASKSS
Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy  Progress and Limitations ◎
Establishment of foundation: The Korea Radioactive Waste Agency, which was set
up in January 2009 to manage radioactive waste disposal in Korea, is
constructing  waste disposal facility in Gyeongju* * As of July 2013, % of the
first phase construction is completed Preliminary design and other activities
are underway for the second phase ◎ Basis for public involvement: The Public
Engagement Commission on Spent Nuclear Fuel* was launched and has began to build
consensus for the management of spent fuel * Established in October 2013, the
commission consists of representatives from the liberal arts and social studies,
technology and engineering, civil environmental groups, NPP-located communities,
etc ◎ Delay in implementation: The scheduled construction completion date was
postponed twice*, first due to issues regarding the first phase construction of
low and intermediate level radioactive waste disposal facilities and second due
to reinforcement work to ensure safety * The construction completion date for
the first-phase facility: (originally) December 2008 (cid:31) (extended to)
December 2012 → (extended twice to) January 2014 ◎ Lack of decommissioning
technology: Technologies for decommissioning have not been commercialized at the
industry level as Korea lacks experience decommissioning commercial NPPs as well
as the necessary engineering technology and experts * Korea has 17 core
technologies among 38 decommissioning technologies, which is about 70% of the
international level  Direction  Promotion of Public Involvement in Spent Fuel ◎
Start establishing management measures from 2015 based on the results of public
discussion by the Public Engagement Commission on Spent Nuclear Fuel created in
October 2013 • The Commission will supervise the general discussion processes,
including discussion on ground rules and topics, and will convey the results of
the discussion to the government by the end of • Form an inter-ministry
consultative group led by the Office for Government Policy Coordination to
bolster communication and cooperation between the Commission and relevant
ministries 96 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Timely Construction of  LILW Disposal
Facilities ◎ Complete the construction of low and intermediate level radioactive
waste (LILW) disposal         facilities in 2014 in  timely manner on the
principle of safety-first • Complete the first phase construction in  timely
manner Beginning with the designing stage in the second phase, thoroughly
conduct* safety inspections * Carry out technology consultations with overseas
experts (ANDRA in France, etc) and geographic investigation of fault lines and
other factors during preliminary designing          Commercialization of nuclear
decommissioning technology ◎ Secure in advance industrial capacity to
commercialize technologies that can be directly applied to decommissioning
nuclear facilities • Identify categories of technology for commercialization,
factoring in applicability and marketability, and seek to achieve technology
demonstration and manpower development through customized demonstration
projects*         * (,) Large waste disposal technology → decommissioning pilot
projects for aging NPP parts, such as steam generators  Enhancement of Safety
Management of Energy Facilities         ■Moving away from the ‘supply first,
safety later’ approach for industrial development, move toward an energy safety
regime of prevention and systematic management to protect the safety of the
public • While strictly managing safety issues that directly affect public
safety, continuously enhance         other safety regulations regarding private
participation and business activities Current Safety Management New Safety
Management Policy Objective Ensure the safety of energy facilities to guarantee
public safety Build energy facilities to develop industry Take short-run,
accident-oriented measures Establish  management system focused on prevention
Direction Subject and Method Expand self-management in the private sector along
with safety technology development Led by government regulations 97 SIX MAJOR
TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy  Progress ◎ Expansion of
the foundation: The government has strengthened its regulatory capability and
expanded its organization and human resources for energy safety • Established an
energy safety experts committee and an energy safety division under the Ministry
of Trade, Industry and Energy (MOTIE) and an safety management committee for
energy public enterprises •  system has been established to respond to energy-
related cyber issues with the launch of the National Cyber Security Center in
2008 ◎ Spread of safety-first culture:  safety-first culture has been fostered
in state-owned energy companies, from the CEO level to workers in the field, and
private companies have  greater awareness of the importance of safety assurance
• Safety assurance is now stipulated in management contracts with CEOs and
safety commitment conferences and safety education sessions are held on  regular
basis  Limitations ◎ Safety regulation system: There have been difficulties in
effectively implementing safety policies due to the absence of safety governance
involving both MOTIE and public energy enterprises and the low participation of
the private sector ◎ Safety service promotion: There have not been sufficient
development of and support for safety services using experience and technology,
including safety diagnosis for gas and electricity facilities and workplace
safety assurance ◎ Cooperation for safety: The current response capability to
new energy safety issues arising in areas such as industrial complexes and
cyberspace remains insufficient  Main Tasks  Expansion of safety systems and
development of safety technology ◎ Public safety: Thoroughly regulate safety
issues related to LPG, city gas and other sectors directly related to people'
lives 98 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN * Design measures to eradicate the
distribution of substandard LPG cylinders for household and commercial use,
prohibit smoking in LPG stations by law, mandate the in-line inspection of city
gas pipelines in urban areas, etc         ◎ Improvement of regulations:
Continuously identify and improve safety regulations that hamper the business
activities of SMEs * Relax the period for the re-inspection of unused high-
pressure gas products, support the tracking of LPG cylinders using electronic
tag, etc ◎ Safety &: Improve the safety performance of companies/the private
sector by expanding         & support for energy safety technology * Lay out
guidelines to support safety technology & by companies/the private sector and
establish and implement  road-map for gas safety technology ◎ Export of safety
services: Provide support for safety certification, diagnosis and consulting for
Korean plant companies operating in South East Asia, Iraq and other regions
through cooperation between the Korea Gas Safety Corporation and the Korea
Electrical Safety Corporation         * Introduce Korea' safety regulations and
infrastructure to trade partner nations to support the export of equipment by
Korean companies  Response to Emerging Safety Issues         ◎ Safety of
industrial complexes: Conduct precise safety diagnosis of aged complexes,
renovate old facilities, and establish six joint disaster prevention centers
jointly operated by the Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Employment and
Labor, the National Emergency Management Agency and other parties • The joint
centers will play an integral role in disaster prevention, preparation, response
and recovery by sharing information, providing joint guidance and oversight on
business, etc         ◎ Cyber security: Establish  system to respond to cyber
terror by enacting management regulations customized to individual
organizations, developing  security index, creating an information protection
system, etc • Launch  three-tiered security control system for public energy
enterprises, MOTIE, and the nation As part of this system, establish internal
security control centers in major energy- related organizations         99 SIX
MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy  Reinforcement of
the Energy Safety Regulation System ◎ Safety system: Regularly conduct
"planning, enforcement, and assessment" safety management under the direction of
the energy safety experts committee of MOTIE and the safety control committees
of public enterprises • The activities of the safety control committees of
public enterprises will be regularly reported to the energy safety experts
committee, which will then evaluate the activities and ensure systematic safety
management Establish and review safety policies Energy safety experts committee
Safety control committees of energy public enterprises Implement safety control
Safety control meeting and evaluation of administrative tasks Share results and
give feedback ◎ Development of  safety index: Develop  safety index that takes
into account the special characteristics of different public enterprises in
order to compare and assess the safety management capability of public
enterprises (2014, research task) ◎ Contractor management: To ensure
transparency in transactions between public enterprises and contractors and
enhance awareness of safety management, create and share  database of the
employment statuses of retirees, accident cases, etc  Competitiveness of Future
Energy Technology ■Aim to achieve 15% global market share and 15% efficiency
upgrade by 2035 ■Strive to develop core technologies, such as demand management
and distributed power generation 100 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN Present Direction
for Technology Development         Demand Management Renewable Energy
Electricity/ Nuclear · & for efficiency improvement of · & for creating business
opportunities unit devices · & for core technologies for high · & for grid
parity demonstration efficiency · & for distributed generation and energy · &
for stable supply technology safety · & for convergence of three major · & for
convergence of ICT, defense, agriculture and industrial technology Convergence
energy sources          Progress ◎ Increased investment: The amount of energy &
investment reached  trillion won in 2013,         continuing  trend that began
in • In 2011, government & investment ranked the 8th in the world (9th as
percentage of GDP) * Government energy & investment (2011, in 100 million
dollars): US , Japan , Germany , Korea  ◎ Securing core technology: Core
technologies for the energy industry have been developed         and achieved
profitable results • Important technologies for the renewable energy sector,
such as solar PV, wind and fuel cells, have been developed * Development and
international certification of  MW offshore wind power system, development of
technology for polycrystalline silicon mass production, etc         • The
foundation for commercialization of smart grid was laid through the
establishment of  Jeju Smart Grid Test Bed * Development of Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI), Energy Management System (EMS), Energy Storage System
(ESS) and other key technologies ◎ NPP exports: Korea has become the 6th country
in the world to export nuclear power plants (UAE: APR1400  units, December 2009)
• The foundation has been laid for high value-added industrial development by
achieving self- reliance in three core technologies: reactor core design code,
reactor coolant pumps, and man-machine interface systems 101 SIX MAJOR TASKSS
Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy  Limitations ◎ Korea lacks world-
class technologies needed to increase its global market share • Despite
increased investment in energy &, Korea' technology level* and industrial
competitiveness** have remained below those of major countries * US % > EU % >
Japan % > Korea % > China % (as of 2010, NTIS) ** Global market share for green
energy in 2010 (Source: Roland Berger, 2012): China (%, 1st), US (%, 2nd),
Germany (%, 3rd), Japan (%, 4th), Brazil (%, 5th), Korea (%, 9th) • The
industrial benefits of energy & investment have been lessened by the
insufficient size of markets for new energy technologies, such as smart grid,
high efficient buildings and energy storage * Only 29% of the government' energy
& projects have been commercialized (2013 research outcome utilization survey) ◎
Sufficient preparations have not been made for the transition to  future-
oriented energy system • There is  need to focus on innovative &, demonstration,
and deployment to support commercialization in order to prepare for the
transition to an innovative energy system based on distributed generation and
ICT * To switch to  system that uses the latest energy technologies, such as
smart grid, ESS, -MEG and CCS, efforts should be made to facilitate the
demonstration and deployment processes, where technologies are actually applied
to the energy network ◎ Insufficient efforts have been made to resolve social
controversies, including concerns about energy safety • Technology should be
developed to prevent energy-related accidents,* which have become more frequent
in recent years * Yeosu Industrial Complex outage (January 2011, damage 70
billion won), hydrofluoric acid leak in the Gumi Industrial Complex (September
2012), etc  Main Tasks  Expanding & on Core Technology for the Future Energy
System ◎ Develop technologies for distributed power generation based on ICT •
Virtual power generation: Develop and demonstrate technologies for the
realization of virtual power plants 102 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN *  technology
that can create  virtual network of various distributed power generators, which
can then be operated and controlled like  single large-scale power plant
• Vehicle to Grid (V2G): Develop V2G,  technology that utilizes vehicle
batteries as  virtual power supply, to secure an added source of power
generation * When electric vehicles are utilized as devices for storing
distributed energy power storages (V2G), the estimated peak load is reduced by
19% compared to the baseline (IEA, 2011) • Smart grid: Increase investment in
common platform technologies for standardization, testing, and certification,
and develop commercial technologies in connection with the Jeju Smart Grid Test
Bed         ◎ Realize energy-saving by applying demand management ICT technology
• Smart buildings: Increase investment in the development of passive building
techniques and building energy management systems* (BEMS), such as exterior
insulation systems and vacuum heat insulating materials         - Establish
building management systems linked with an energy distribution plan to achieve
20% reduction in energy building use; and lay  foundation for the expanded
distribution of -MEG *  service technology that monitors the energy consumption
of  building through sensors and networks, and automatically optimizes energy
use • Smart industry complexes: Develop technology for high-efficiency processes
in energy intensive industries, such as steelmaking and chemicals, and increase
investment in & for motors, boilers, driers and other devices         * Goal:
reduce the energy use of smart industry completes by 30% ◎ Develop technology to
prepare for the wide availability of energy storage systems (ESS)         •
Technology development: Lower the cost of ESSs by half by 2020 through expanded
investment in & to develop core technologies and accelerate their
commercialization - Develop technologies that will lead to the early
commercialization of storage systems other than lithium batteries, such as Redox
Flow Battery and NaS, before 2020 • Demonstration studies: Demonstrate medium-
to large-sized  MW ESSs * Demonstrate  100 MW compressed air energy storage
system, operate lithium batteries of 50 MW         that harnesses wind power,
etc ◎ Remove technological barriers that impede the expansion of the renewable
energy supply 103 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy
Policy • Removal of barriers: Increase investment in developing new materials
and new processing technologies to resolve the problems of low efficiency and
high generation costs, which hinder market growth * By 2022, solar PV generation
is expected to achieve  generation cost of $112/kWh and improve the efficiency
of cells and modules by 25% and 23% respectively (vision road map, 2013) •
Demonstration model development: Promote & to nurture the renewable industry
into an export industry and develop  model to expand the scope of application to
include BIPV, large-scale wind farms, etc * Establish solar PV generation
clusters and large-scale wind farms, expand solar panel installations in large
buildings, etc ◎ Expand the development of innovative energy technology for the
future • Investment expansion: Invest four trillion won by 2035 in developing
technologies, such as distributed generation and demand management technologies
Moreover, expand investment in developing core technologies to more than three
times the current level by 2022 (From annual investment of billion won as of
2013 to annual investment of 50 billion won by 2022) - Develop innovative and
cutting-edge technologies to keep up with megatrends and make breakthroughs in
enhancing performance, saving costs, shortening the time interval from
development to commercialization, etc * Using the Step and Gate approach at each
stage from development to commercialization • Focus on core sectors: Identify
core technologies that can replace existing technologies, dramatically reduce
costs, and enhance efficiency, and provide necessary support for such
technologies from the & stage to commercialization * Magnesium batteries, metal-
air batteries, highly efficient solar cells that harness quantum dots, floating
wind turbines, etc  Securing Core Technologies for  Sustainable Energy Society ◎
Expand investment in & aimed at making fossil-fuel based conventional energy
sources cleaner • Thermal power generation: Develop highly efficient and
environmentally friendly thermal power generation systems and seek technologies
to increase the use of domestic parts and materials in power plants * Use
domestically developed high-efficiency gas turbines, develop key components for
gas turbines and operation systems, etc 104 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • Clean
fuel: Expand investment aimed at making the use of coal cleaner, such as  1000
barrels/day coal-to-liquid plant demonstration and  300 MW integrated
gasification combined cycle demonstration         • Greenhouse gas reduction:
Promote the commercialization of carbon capture and storage technologies through
100 MW carbon capture and CO2 storage demonstration ◎ Ensure the safety of
nuclear power plants from development and operation to decommissioning         •
Short term: Develop technologies to improve the safety of nuclear power plants
currently in operation * Prevention, mitigation and clean-up technologies in
case of natural disasters and complex accidents, technologies to ensure safety
in case of black-outs, etc • Mid- to long-term: Solidify the foundation for mid-
to long-term power generation by developing new reactor models with guaranteed
safety, next generation nuclear reactors and nuclear decommissioning technology
* (Mid term) Development of passive restraint technology to maintain safety in
the event of black-outs, etc (Long term) Joint development of fourth generation
nuclear reactors, radioactive waste disposal technologies, including
decontamination and decommissioning technologies, etc ◎ Reinforce technology
development to ensure energy safety • Supply chain safety: Together with & on
the safety of gas, electricity and electric installations, develop  safety
management system* that applies information technology and  monitoring system
for testing, diagnosis, etc         * Including toxic gas safety regulations,
high compression gas regulations and petrochemical safety regulations - Develop
public monitoring system that reflects Korea’ unique characteristics to promote
culture of safety and security among nuclear organizations and their employees
Creating Future Growth Engines to Promote the Mutual Growth of SMEs and Large
Businesses ◎ Undertake public-private joint investment of  trillion won in win-
win commercialization projects that will create future growth engines for both
SMEs and large companies by 2035         • Carry out Medium and large
commercialization projects to secure new technologies and develop demonstration
models through joint & investments by SMEs and large companies 105 SIX MAJOR
TASKSS  Improvement of Sustainability of Energy Policy * In mutual growth &,
large companies will focus on the management of overall systems while SMEs will
put  greater emphasis on developing components and materials [ Examples of Win-
Win Commercialization Projects ] Classification Top 10 Projects Demonstrating
100 MW compressed air energy storage system Operating 50 MW lithium-ion battery
that harnesses wind power Distributed power generation applying ICT Establishing
sustainable zero energy smart system Establishing and demonstrating  virtual
power plant operation model Demonstrating built-in solar panels for the
buildings Expanded use of renewable energy Integrating operation and control
systems for large-scale renewable energy complex Demonstrating hybrid power
generation systems that can be exported Demonstrating 100 MW carbon capture and
storage GHG emissions reduction and energy efficiency improvement Developing an
Auto-DR system and technologies that reinforce energy efficiency in industry
Demonstrating  clean coal plant ◎ Expand the support ratio for SMEs in the
government’ energy & budget •  share of the government’ energy budget for SMEs:
(2012) 23% → (2015) 35% → (2020) more than 50% • Ensure that SMEs are always
included in & consortiums for & assignments that require an annual budget of
more than  billion won • Establish  support system to reinforce the
technological capacity of SMEs by introducing an energy & mentor system*,
establishing  government-funded SME support center, etc *  researcher or retiree
of  government-funded research institute will be designated as  mentor for
company doing business in his or her professional area Mentors will provide
assistance and advice in planning & assignments and throughout the assignment
process 106 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Establishing  Strategic Energy &
Investment System ◎ Formulate mid- to long-term investment strategies/portfolios
to determine technology         development priorities • Establish investment
strategies by conducting quantitative analysis of energy security, greenhouse
gas reduction targets, job creation, economic benefits, etc • Strengthen the
information side of energy technology by establishing and operating statistics
databases, conducting surveys and analysis, and sharing information in order to
make portfolio analysis as accurate as possible         * 200 employees (10%) at
the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in the US are deployed to the Strategic
Energy Analysis Center to perform functions such as technology and market
analysis, forecasting and modeling, and policy impact studies ◎ Link energy &
investment strategies of the government and public institutions • Establish an
energy & council to coordinate yearly public sector & investment plans         *
In 2013, the projected & investment of  state-owned energy companies, including
KEPCO and KOGAS, is 970 billion won ◎ Design  mid- to long-term & strategy road
map • Develop  systematic national, mid- to long-term energy action plan by
preparing an & road map that reflects national energy policies and industry
demand         * The roadmap will present  comprehensive plan that integrates &
warehouses, vision road maps and strategy road maps ◎ Expand international joint
research funding and establish  joint research network with advanced countries •
Increase funding for international joint & more than two-fold by 2020         *
As  share of energy &: % (20 billion won) in 2013 → around % (50 billion won) in
2020 • Use associations of Korean scientists and technology experts living
abroad, such as the UKC, CKC, and EKC, as  platform to promote technology
exchange with partner nations         107 SIX MAJOR TASKSS  Improvement of
Sustainability of Energy Policy SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN CHAPTER  - Six Major
Tasks -  Enhancement of Energy Security  Reinforcement of Overseas Resource
Development to Strengthen Resource Development Capability ■Shift the policy
focus from enlarging public enterprises and achieving quantitative growth to
enhancing industrial competitiveness in the mid- to long-term ■Public
enterprises will take the lead in high-risk sectors requiring long-term
investment, while the private sector will play the main role in sectors with
high market potential Current Policy Paradigm New Policy Paradigm Improve the
government' capability to develop resources (Strengthening industrial
competitiveness and creating jobs) Secure larger amounts of overseas resources
(enlargement of public enterprises) Policy Target Key Player Public enterprises
Public and private enterprises Financed mainly by public enterprises &, buying
shares in production fields Funding Financed mainly by the private sector
Securing operating licenses in exploration fields Method  Progress ◎
Quantitative growth: The amount of oil and mineral resources successfully
secured increased over  short period of time [ Self-sufficiency rate in oil and
gas (%) ] [ Self-sufficiency rate in major mineral resources (%) ]
05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 110 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎
Enlargement of public enterprises: The Korea National Oil Corporation (KNOC) has
secured the minimum amount of oil (200,000 /) required to invest in high-quality
and valuable fields, and the Korea Resources Corporation (KORES) has grown into
one of the world’ top 80 mining companies          (KNOC) 50,000 / → 241,000 /,
World' top 90 → World' top 70  (KORES) Annual production of $300 million → $
billion, World' top 100 → World' top 80         ◎ Advancement into key markets:
Regional hubs have been secured and inroads have been made into new markets in
the UAE, Iraq and other countries in the Middle East, which has the world’
highest oil reserves • Supply and demand hubs of major minerals, including
bituminous coal, copper and steel, have been established in Central and South
America, Australia, Indonesia, and other regions, and the efforts to develop
rare earth metals in emerging, untapped regions, such as Africa, has been
expanded          Limitations ◎ Excessive emphasis on quantitative growth:
Public enterprises have focused narrowly on short-term gains because they used
the self-sufficiency rate as  rigid, short-term indicator of success         •
Insufficient technology and experience developing and operating mines has been
gained given that projects related to operating rights for oil fields and mines
accounted for % of all projects, and the share of KNOC’ investment in
exploration projects was  mere 10% from 2008 to * Proportion of operating rights
projects: 77 out of 205 projects (%), KNOC %, KOGAS 14%, the         private
sector % ◎ Weakened investment efficiency: The debt ratio of public enterprises
has soared, and it is now agreed that past resource development was focused
excessively on external growth through &As and equity investment • The debt
ratios of public enterprises, including KNOC and KORES, have more than doubled
over the past five years, increasing to the point that the level of debt
threatens their financial soundness         * State companies’ debt value
(2007→2012, trillion won): (KNOC)  → 18, (KOGAS)  → , (KORES)  →  111 SIX MAJOR
TASKS  Enhancement of Energy Security * State companies’ debt ratio (2007→2012,
%): (KNOC) 64 → 168, (KOGAS) 227→ 385, (KORES) 103 → 177 ◎ Insufficient
infrastructure for growth: Not enough has been done to establish infrastructure,
such as human resources, &, and government support systems, necessary to take
the overseas resource development industry to the next level * Human resource:
Mismatch between supply (mainly university graduates with bachelor’ degree) and
demand (for graduates with master’ or doctoral degrees) Technology level: Korea’
technology level is 47% of that of advanced countries Moreover, research has
largely been conducted in laboratories, and as  result it has failed to reflect
reality in the field ■Although the quantitative growth strategy, including the
enlargement of public enterprises, could be considered successful in so far as
it was necessary to secure the mid- to long-term growth of the overseas resource
development industry ■there have been negative effects, such as the weakened
financial soundness of public enterprises and insufficient efforts to improve
quality  Main Tasks  Enhancing Capabilities for Long-term Energy Security Using
new indicators and terminology for resource development ◎ The “self-sufficiency
rate/self-development rate” should be renamed the “resource development rate,”
because the word “self” leads the public to mistakenly believe that the “self-
sufficiency rate/self-development rate” is equivalent to the amount of resources
flowing into Korea • The resource development rate should be calculated by year
(annual production/annual imports), instead of by the actual number of days of
operation (daily resource development/ daily imports) ◎ Use the resource
development rate as  long-term policy indicator, rather than as  short- term,
rigid performance indicator which have undermined investment efficiency • In
order to ensure that the growth of public energy enterprises is centered on
exploration, adopt the management efficiency indicators (, securing new
reserves) of global exploration and production companies as performance
indicators of public enterprises 112 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN Strengthening
emergency response capability         ◎ Encourage the introduction of foreign
resources for which domestic companies hold exploitation rights • Amend existing
mining rights contracts to bring minerals to Korea in case of emergency
Moreover, provide larger loans for projects that can be implemented in Korea
under the success-repayable loan program1)         ◎ Enhance oil stockpiling
capacity to better respond to instability of short-term supply and demand For
example, jointly stockpile oil with global & companies and public oil
enterprises of oil-producing countries • Stockpile rare metals, such as chrome
and molybdenum, that are essential for domestic industrial production, as
planned          Strengthening the Foundation of Public Energy Enterprises ◎
Focus on exploration: Decrease investment in the form of simply buying shares
and enhance mid- to long-term resource development capability by putting
greater emphasis on operating licenses, exploration and development • Korea
National Oil Cooperation: Increase the average proportion of investment in
mining exploration to over 20% of total investment between 2013 and 2017 from
current 10%, and enhance the success rate of exploration by concentrating
scattered exploration capabilities         • Korea Gas Corporation: Take
advantage of KOGAS’ strong LNG purchasing power to pursue vertically integrated
projects related to introduction through joint development in North America and
other regions in cooperation with global & companies • Korea Resources
Cooperation: Make large investments in operating rights projects rather than
diversified portfolio of small projects, and pool the capacities of domestic
enterprises* to jointly enter new markets         * (KORES) Technological
prowess and global trustworthiness + (End user company) Purchasing power +
(Trading company) Marketing + (Mine Reclamation Corporation) Mine reclamation +
others         )In Korea,  government loan system to support overseas resources
development projects was established in 1984 in order to initiate the
development activities of private/public companies According to this system,
Resource developing companies are obliged to pay back the principal and the
interest when they succeed in their resource business 113 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Enhancement of Energy Security ◎ Enhancing capability: Establish  foundation for
further progress by making efforts to enhance capability, including streamlining
the investment process and public enterprise governance, improving human
resources and technological prowess, etc • Korea National Oil Cooperation: Build
key capabilities by increasing exchange in technology, information and human
resources as well as joint exploration projects with leading global companies •
Korea Gas Corporation: To pursue vertically integrated LNG projects, secure key
technologies and operational capacity needed at every stage of the process, from
development and liquefaction and transport • Korea Resources Cooperation: Focus
on initiating new investment projects and increasing the production of existing
investment projects In addition, expand the company’ mid- to long-term profit
base and accumulate technology and know-how in mine operations ◎ Financial
soundness: Improve the debt ratios of public enterprises to the level of global
companies by selling distressed assets, securitizing assets, attracting
financial investors, etc • Conduct asset sales from  long-term perspective that
considers various factors, such as business feasibility and market conditions,
rather than carelessly selling assets in  short period of time  Promoting
Private Sector Investment in Overseas Resource Development Attracting more
financial investors ◎ Promote private sector investment by expanding the
investment guarantee scheme for the Resource Development Fund from the current
trillion won to  trillion won by 2017, and by enhancing principal protection for
investors in the fund • Enhance training programs, such as courses to train
experts in managing financial assets related to resource development, to
strengthen the capabilities of financial investors in the field of resource
development ◎ Securitize sound assets with stable cash flows to provide
investors with more opportunities for participation, and increase the investment
capability of resource development companies Expanding and reorganizing support
for the private sector ◎ Expand the budget for success-repayable loan programs
and revise the loan system to select and focus on promising projects, such as
operating rights projects 114 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Encourage the launch of
private-public consortiums in which public enterprises take the lead in the
high-risk exploration stage while the private sector takes the lead in the low-
risk stages of development and production         Entering related industries ◎
Create systems to enable cooperation, such as information sharing, between
domestic resource exploration companies and businesses in related industries,
such as plant construction and ship building         • Provide incentives based
on the level of participation of related domestic industries in the development
stage Such incentives may include preference for resource development companies
when applying for loan programs  Strengthening Industrial Infrastructure by
Training High-quality Workers and         Conducting Practical & Training high-
quality workers with the skills businesses need ◎ Revise the basic curricula of
universities specializing in resource development to produce high-quality
workers through professional training with  focus on practical skills         •
Form consortiums among universities to encourage each university group to be
specialized in  different area and to be involved in exchange with universities
overseas to strengthen global competence ◎ Train high-quality workers skilled in
specialized technologies* through cooperation between businesses and
universities/graduate schools, and launch training programs in skills ranging
from law and contracts to accounting         * To develop  high-tech workforce,
encourage research focusing on geophysical oil exploration, unconventional
resource development, including shale gas and oil sand, and mining development ◎
Form partnerships between universities and companies with overseas locations so
that workers can gain field experience through on-the-job training programs in
businesses overseas         Promoting practical & ◎ Shift from small-scale,
laboratory-centered research driven mainly by academia and 115 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Enhancement of Energy Security research institutes toward large-scale, business-
centered research with practical results that can be more readily applied in the
field • Promote & on core technologies for developing resources such as shale
gas, and encourage active participation by businesses to secure sites for
demonstration * Conduct & projects whose results can be demonstrated in shale
gas fields in North America (, 10 billion won annually) * Under success-
repayable loan programs, give preference to private enterprises which provide
sites needed to conduct & ◎ Actively promote industry-university-institute
cooperative projects, and encourage businesses to conduct research projects with
leading universities/graduate schools which have specialized technologies •
Companies should provide field data for research purposes and carry out joint
research with universities and research centers on core technologies needed for
enhancing operational capabilities, such as increasing production  Further
Deployment of Renewable Energy ■ Achieve renewable energy deployment rate of 11%
by 2035 ■ Develop the domestic renewable energy industry into one of the world'
top five by 2035  Current Status ◎ Deployment: As of 2012, 18% of the total
primary energy supply was produced from renewable energy Waste-to-energy, bio
and hydro energy accounted for 92% of total renewable supply * Compound Annual
Growth Rate (, %): Solar PV (41), Wind (20), Fuel Cell (109), Geothermal (43),
and Bio (33) • Renewable power accounted for % of total power generation, and
waste-to-energy and hydro power made up 80% of total renewable energy generation
◎ Industry: The renewable energy industry has shown strong growth with exports
increasing  times and private investment increasing  times over the previous
four years 116 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN [ Indicators for the Renewable Energy
Industry (2008~2011) ] Indicator 2008 2009 2010 2011 CAGR         No of
companies 136 193 212 224 % No of employees ,700 10,395 13,651 14,563 % Sales
(billion won) ,370 ,749 ,078 ,854 % Exports (million dollar) ,957 ,424 ,536 ,105
%         Exports / Sales % % % % Investment (billion won) ,955 ,993 ,549 ,674 %
* The numbers of companies and employees are the figures at the time of the
survey Sales, exports and investments are the net figures of each year         ◎
&: In the five years from 2008 to 2012, annual average & investment was about
400 billion won, representing 89% of planned & investment in this field • More
than 70% of total funding was allocated to three main energy sources, solar PV
(%), fuel cell (%), and wind power (%)          Evaluation ◎ Deployment: The
share of the total primary energy supply from renewable energy reached 75% in
2011, which is 85% of the target (24%) However, the gap between the actual and
target numbers has been rising * Actual deployment against the target: 94%
(2008) →92% (2009) →88% (2010) →85% (2011)         [ Evaluation of Domestic
Conditions for Renewable Energy Deployment ] Wind ·Installation is difficult
because of environmental and location regulations and other factors Offshore
·Tidal power and tidal current power may have an impact on mudflats and fishing
· The construction of large-scale dams faces difficulties due to environmental
concerns and opposition Hydro from local residents, and the amount of power
generated is decreasing Bio · high import dependence and low prices due to
fierce competition are limiting deployment in Korea 117 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Enhancement of Energy Security ◎ Industry: It is difficult for renewable energy
to compete in the market due to low price competitiveness and technological
limitations • External factors: Oversupply in the global market, intensified
competition due to falling prices, as well as  low distribution rate • Internal
factors: Location regulations and low public acceptance have resulted in  low
deployment rate, limiting the size of the domestic market ◎ &: The localization
of core technologies in Korea has been low Moreover, the link between technology
commercialization and investment is weak due to the absence of technology
commercialization programs * The average import rate of main parts, materials
and equipment (2011): Solar PV 79%, wind power 85%, and fuel cells 91% •
Inefficiencies, such as  disconnect from mid- to long-term investment, have
arisen due to  lack of consideration for technology commercialization and
separate budget allocation for different programs and energy sources ◎ Policy
environment: The policy environment is unfavorable due to low electricity rates,
insufficient financial support, etc • Electricity rates are consistently low
compared to generation costs, leading to increased consumption of fossil fuels
and undermining the deployment of renewable energy ◎ Low public acceptance:
Although the necessity of renewable energy is widely recognized, opposition to
high electricity rates, poor follow-up management of facilities, complaints from
residents, and insufficient promotion efforts have led to low public acceptance
Mid- to Long-term (2035) Renewable Energy Deployment Targets ◎ Deployment
targets are based on supply potential, which is estimated through consideration
of various factors, including economic feasibility, location regulations, and
deployment conditions Estimating the potential supply of renewable energy
Upgrade the existing resource map by improving accuracy and reliability
Estimates are based on the following steps, using the resource map: ()
theoretical potential → () geographical potential → () technological potential
118 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN () The total amount of energy resources in the
country (, insolation in the case of solar energy)         () The amount in
consideration of geographical conditions for locating facilities (, not
including railways, roads) () The energy generation amount at the current
technological level (, solar PV efficiency of 16%)  Estimate supply potential by
adjusting technological potential to take account of location regulations and
economic feasibility         ◎ Despite relatively poor conditions for renewable
energy deployment, the 2035 deployment rate target has been set at 11% in the
interest of energy security, greenhouse gas reduction, and other considerations
[ Deployment Target for Renewable Energy as  Share of Primary Energy (%) ] Year
2020 2025 2035 Proportion % % 11%         • While the shares of waste-to-energy
and bioenergy are expected to fall, solar PV and wind power are anticipated to
offset this fall * Energy source shares in 2035: Waste-to-energy (%) → wind
power (%) → bioenergy (%) → solar PV (%) [ Deployment Target as  Share of
Primary Energy by Source (%) ]         Waste- to- energy Geo- thermal Energy
source Solar PV Solar Wind Bio Hydro Offshore 2020     2025             2035
119 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Enhancement of Energy Security  Deployment and
Commercialization Plans  Creating New Markets and Converging Related Systems ◎
Renewable Heat Obligation (RHO): Adopt the RHO, which requires new buildings to
use  certain share of heat energy from renewable sources • First, require new
buildings with more than 10,000㎡ in total floor space, except for residential
and public buildings, to meet 10% of their heat energy demand with renewable
sources ◎ Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS): Introduce the RFS, which requires
transportation fuel to contain  minimum volume of renewable fuel • Initially,
the RFS will be applied to biodiesel Subsequently,  decision on whether to apply
the RFS to bioethanol and biogas will be made in consideration of various
factors, such as domestic supply and demand of raw materials, technology, and
infrastructure ◎ Recommendation to heavy power consumers: Advise heavy power
consumers to install their own renewable energy generators  decision on whether
to make such installation mandatory will be based on the results of such
installations • Review targets for the recommendation as well as required
installed capacities of renewable energy by business type and size Additionally,
create incentive programs, such as  program linked to the GHG emission reduction
◎ Establishment of an integrated market: Integrate the renewable energy
certificates (REC) markets for power, heat energy and transportation fuel to
provide obligated entities with flexibility in terms of implementation and to
expand the size of market • Link not only to renewable energy related programs,
such as RPS (power), RHO (heat energy) and RFS (transportation fuel), but also
to other energy programs, including the Greenhouse Gas and Energy Target Scheme
and the Emissions Trading Scheme  Improving Existing Systems for Further
Deployment and Enhancement Reorganizing the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) ◎
Integration of the solar PV and non-solar PV markets: Integrate the solar PV
market into the broader market from 2016 in order to give more options to power
generators, increase flexibility, etc * An independent market for solar PV has
been created for the first four years () out of concern that deployment will be
slow due to low economic feasibility However, this has led to limited investment
in solar PV 120 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Inclusion of new renewable energy
sources in the RPS: Calculate the weight of the Renewable Energy Certificate for
bioenergy, waste-to-energy, geothermal energy, and other energy sources to
include additional types of energy source to the RPS         ◎ Promotion of
distributed power generation: Allow private power generators (, solar PV power
generator rental), energy donations (to social welfare centers) and other
relevant activities to be counted as implementation of renewable energy
Improving deployment projects and loan programs         ◎ Convergence: Revise
deployment projects to take into account the entire local community, instead of
single home or building ◎ Focus on performance: Adopt  system that provides
incentives later in proportion to the amount of energy actually generated,
instead of one that only provides subsidies for the initial investment stage of
the project         ◎ Expansion of the rental business: Introduce  new business
model in which customers pay rental fees and private power generators cover all
costs, from the installation of generation facilities to customer service,
without government subsidies * This business model will gradually be applied to
other energy sources, such as fuel cells         ◎ Reform of loan programs:
Create loan programs for technology commercialization and decrease the size of
loans for energy sources with economic feasibility  Support for Strategic
Deployment and Export Competitiveness Improving the strategic use of renewable
energy         ◎ Support for areas with high potential for use: Expand renewable
energy deployment to isolated islands heavily reliant on expensive fossil fuels,
particularly diesel generators • In order to improve public acceptance, provide
incentives for plant construction projects with local participation in regions
where opposition from local residents is likely         ◎ Convergence of new
technologies: Adjust the weight of the Renewable Energy Certificate upward when
an ESS is established alongside wind power facilities This may also be applied
to other energy sources in the future 121 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Enhancement of Energy
Security • Allow ESSs installed in renewable energy facilities to be counted as
renewable energy auxiliary facilities and provide incentives, such as subsidies,
financial support, and tax credits, accordingly Increased support for exports ◎
Support for overseas projects: Provide package support for overseas projects,
from the initial stage to installation, in order to encourage domestic companies
to enter overseas markets ◎ Strategic entrance into foreign markets: Pursue
package-type export strategy that, for example, links renewable energy exports
to overseas resource development rights, as well as participating in renewable
energy projects when winning contracts for fossil fuel power plant * Korea will
participate in projects launched by developing countries seeking to introduce
renewable energy systems Possible projects include resource exploration,
designing laws and institutions, and constructing infrastructure (standards and
verification) ◎ Establishment of international standards: Establish the existing
five domestic standards as international standards by 2014, and propose another
five new standards by the end of 2014  Promotion of Strategic Technology
Development  Strengthening Strategic & and Shifting to  Performance-centered
Paradigm ◎ Expansion of & and creation of portfolios: Focus investment on
renewable energy & until Investment should grow more than % annually • Produce
mid- to long-term investment strategy, including investment size and technology
development priorities, in consideration of deployment targets, the mid- to
long-term renewable energy mix, economic effects, etc ◎ Market-leading program:
Strategically reorganize the ongoing  programs into  pilot programs, including
applied strategy and market-leading, to commercialize technologies and cut
generation costs • Establish four & strategies - low cost, technology
commercialization, future technology, and testing - in order to quickly achieve
grid parity and enhance technological competitiveness 122 KOREA ENERGY MASTER
PLAN  Establishing an & System Focused on Market and Deployment Outcomes ◎ & for
deployment and better business planning: Create  virtuous cycle of & and
deployment, in which & projects suitable for the deployment policy are
discovered and pursued         • Identify more commercial & projects that have
high potential for commercialization and develop & projects that go beyond
convergence of different energy sources to include different fields         ◎
Launch of new programs: Launch new & programs aimed at reducing generation costs
in order to secure competitiveness In addition, diversify energy sources, such
as geothermal, solar, and offshore energies, through technology development •
Invest in future technologies to secure core technologies with the target of
commercialization within 10 years          Enhancement of the Global Energy
Cooperative System ■Faced with an extremely high energy import dependence, Korea
should pursue strategic multilateral energy cooperation in order to enhance
security by securing stable energy sources, etc          Need for International
Cooperation ◎ Global interdependence: Global issues have arisen that no single
country can solve, such as         price volatility, the development of
unconventional energy sources and climate change ◎ Energy security: Korea
imports 96% of the energy it consumes Northeast Asia can be called an “energy
island” because of its geographical isolation ◎ Enhancement of international
status: Korea should exercise leadership in the international community as
country which has achieved rapid economic growth and built infrastructure for
this growth through the “efficient economic growth model”         123 SIX MAJOR
TASKS  Enhancement of Energy Security  Direction for Implementation by Region ◎
North America: Expand trade with North America, which is expected to lead
changes in the global energy market because of its increased production of
unconventional resources • Secure advanced technology by conducting human
exchange programs and joint research on future convergence technology, such as
energy efficiency and smart grid Key Facts about the -Korea Clean Energy
Technology Partnership • Signing parties: (Korea) Ministry of Trade, Industry
and Energy - (US) Department of Energy (concluded in October 2011) •
Collaboration format: Bilateral joint & and demonstration projects, human
exchange programs, equipment exchange, etc • Research areas: Energy storage,
smart grid, green transportation, carbon capture and storage (CCS), energy
efficiency, renewable energy, etc ◎ Asia: Establish  consultative body to
discuss possible cooperation on various issues, including power grid
interconnection, expansion of the gas trade, removal of the Asian premium on
LNG, and the establishment of an oil hub * Five-country Energy Ministerial
Meetings – Korea, China, Japan, the , and India - have been temporarily
suspended since • Pursue  project connecting the grids of South Korea, North
Korea and Russia,  project linking Korean railway with the trans-Siberian
railway, and other cooperative projects in order to prepare for changes in
inter-Korean relations Plan for East Asia Power Grid Interconnection ■ Overview:
Transmit power generated at low cost with Russia’ abundant resources to South
Korea by way of  transmission line to be built in North Korea Country Conditions
for Implementation Determined to boost the economy of the Far East and to
increase its national influence through hydropower development and electricity
export Russia North Korea Willing to provide labor for the large-scale
transmission line construction project in return for transit fees South Korea
Interested in making efficient use of power generating facilities and an
opportunity to improve inter-Korean relations 124 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ■
Direction: Carry out joint study led by the Korean and Russian private sectors
on the feasibility of the project, including the technological and economic
feasibility         • If the joint research concludes that the project will
profitable and overall conditions for the project, including inter-Korean
relations, improve, the project should be considered as  prospective mid- to
long-term governmental project [ South Korea-North Korea-Russia Grid
Interconnection Plan ]         ▶ Plan : South Korea-North Korea-Russia single
HVDC link • Construction of - GW HVDC overhead transmission line • Construction
of  ,000 km long transmission line and two Vladivostok converter stations Plan
Plan  ▶ Plan : South Korea-North Korea-Russia HVDC and North Northern Gyeonggido
Province Korean power supply • - GW HVDC and power grid within North Korea •
Construction of  ,200 km long transmission line and four         converter
stations ◎ Europe: Collaborate on clean energy technology, including energy
efficiency improvement, share policy information, and discover opportunities to
gain an early foothold in the market created by the expansion of renewable
energy         * The  has announced plans to create 45 GW offshore wind farms by
2020 and become  European offshore wind power hub that supplies 25% of the power
it generates to European countries (Currently, 11 farms generate  GW) • Share
policies on managing energy demand and deploying low-carbon power sources, such
as the Emissions Trading Scheme, carbon tax and energy tax systems, and green-
pricing ◎ Africa/Latin America: Pursue comprehensive economic and energy
cooperation which meets         the demand for economic growth and improves the
national image through ODA • Encourage active investment in emerging economies
amid rising uncertainty surrounding resource development, such as intensifying
resource nationalism and increased environmental regulations • Establish
bilateral or multilateral channels for regular consultation, and promote
technology transfer and training in the energy industry and demand management
sector, which drive economic growth         ◎ North Korea: Lay  foundation for
energy cooperation to prepare for changes in inter-Korean relations in the mid-
to long-term 125 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Enhancement of Energy Security • If North-
South relations improve, review the potential formation of  coal development
complex* in Nampo and the designation of  special zone for resource development
in Dancheon to take advantage of North Korea’ rich coal and mineral deposits *
Northern Pyeongan Coalfield will be developed to secure generation fuel, and the
power grid will be designed in tandem with the North-South economic cooperation
project under contemplation  Establishment of Governance for Energy Cooperation
in Northeast Asia ◎ Necessity: Establish  cooperative system for the mutual
benefit of Northeast Asia to respond to rapidly-changing global market
conditions ◎ Major issues: Discuss cooperation on nuclear safety, the resolution
of the Asian premium issue for oil and gas, the interconnection of Northeast
Asian energy transmission networks, the commercial use of the Arctic Sea Route,
etc ◎ Channel to discuss energy cooperation: Create  system for energy
cooperation in Northeast Asia with the participation of six ministers from South
Korea, North Korea, China, Japan, Russia and Mongolia • Reorganize the current
“Intergovernmental Collaborative Mechanism on Energy Cooperation in Northeast
Asia” (Korea, Russia and Mongolia, director-general level) to play  larger role,
or build  new channel for this purpose Intergovernmental Collaborative Mechanism
on Energy Cooperation in Northeast Asia (Since 2005) • Members: Four members:
South Korea, Russia, Mongolia and North Korea, which stopped attending after
China and Japan are observers, and the UN ESCAP is temporarily serving as an
interim secretariat • Function: To discuss energy cooperative projects in
Northeast Asia and build an information network * Information exchange: Public-
private policy dialogue, workshops between the following parties: Korea-
Mongolia, Korea-Russia, and Korea-China research institutes Joint research:
National Report (2007), Mid- to Long-term Energy Demand Forecast (2007), Five-
Year Development Strategy (2009) Training: Training programs to raise the energy
policy capability of developing countries (2006 and 2007) 126 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN ◎ Funding: Funds are needed to conduct joint research on new
projects and organize meetings (, the launch of foundations and collection of
contributions)         •  comprehensive fund, such as the Northeast Asian
Development Bank currently under discussion, may be used, or the establishment
of  fund dedicated to energy cooperation may be considered
127 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Enhancement of Energy Security SECOND ENERGY MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER  - Six Major Tasks -  Establishment of  Stable Source-by- Source Supply
System  Oil  Supply and Demand Forecast ◎ Global supply and demand forecast:
Short-term supply and demand is expected to improve, and mid- to long-term
supply and demand is expected to remain stable • In the short term, global
economic growth will slow, while supply and demand will be in balance due to
increased production by non-OECD countries - The increase in non-OECD countries’
supply will be led by the production of unconventional oil in North America,
including the  and Canada • In the mid- to long-term, global oil demand is
estimated to grow by approximately %  year, reaching million / by 2035 (assuming
an average annual economic growth rate of %) - The production capacity of OPEC
members and the supply of unconventional oil, such as oil sand, from non-OPEC
members are expected to increase, providing enough supply to consistently meet
demand ◎ Forecast for domestic supply and demand: The supply-demand balance is
expected to remain stable in the mid- to long-term • In the short-term, an
increase in the use of feedstock, such as naptha, for industrial purposes and an
increase in demand from the transportation sector will result in modest growth
of about % in 2014 despite the downward trend in demand for oil for heating and
power generation - Global oil prices and domestic demand will increase slowly,
making it possible to secure  stable supply • In the mid- to long-term, due to
continuous decrease in demand from non-transport sectors, total demand is
estimated to fall from 2020 at an average annual rate of 15% to approximately
million barrels by * Oil dependency: % (2000) → % (2011) → % (2020) → % (2035) -
Thanks to active overseas resource development and an increased rate of refinery
upgrading, the capacity to supply oil products will improve in the long-term
However, decreased demand is expected to result in oversupply 130 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Direction  Stable Supply         Stable supply of oil ◎ Diversify
import sources to reduce dependence on Middle Eastern oil, reduce premiums and
other disadvantages, and contribute to supply stability         Enhancement of
crisis management capability ◎ Enhance capability to flexibly respond to shifts
in the oil stockpiling paradigm • Draft  new Oil Stockpiling Plan that reflects
the increasing risk of oil price surges due to supply instability in the global
oil market * Oil Stockpiling Plan: The 1st Plan (), 2nd Plan (), and 3rd Plan ()
have         been completed The 4th Plan is currently being prepared ◎ Continue
to pursue an international joint stockpiling project with governments of oil
producing countries, international traders, etc • Conduct an indirect
stockpiling project, in which KNOC’ oil storage facilities are leased to oil
producing nations and others, in order to store crude oil and oil products in
Korea (Secure priority to purchase stored oil in case of emergency, etc)
Stronger international cooperation ◎ Expand cooperation with major oil-producing
countries to secure stable oil import channels • Form an international
cooperative system to conduct national projects, such as an
international joint stockpiling project and an oil hub construction project *
Seek to host the World Petroleum Congress organized by the World Petroleum
Council and IEF Ministerial Meetings  Improving the Industrial structure
Establishment of  Northeast Asian oil hub ◎ Establish  Northeast Asian oil hub
to integrate the energy industry with service industries, such as logistics,
processing, finance, and trading 131 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Stable
Source-by-Source Supply System • Construct infrastructure for oil logistics,
provide incentives to encourage trading, and establish financial infrastructure
Promotion of competition in the oil distribution market ◎ Promote competition
using market forces by invigorating the spot market for oil (-commerce) through
successful oil distribution policies • Secure an adequate supply for the spot
market through supply by non-refineries, such as import and -commerce involving
four major oil refineries, etc; formulate measures to meet demand for oil
through economical gas stations2), the sale of mixed oil, etc • Once competition
in the market is sufficiently stimulated, help level the playing field by
encouraging the development of  system of free competition among market players
Improvement of oil quality management ◎ Establishment of  crackdown system: Form
system to conduct regular joint crackdowns and monitoring by relevant agencies
until the sale of adulterated gasoline is eliminated * Crackdown on the illegal
distribution of solvents, from the supply stage to the end-user purchase stage,
to prevent such solvents from being used as ingredients in adulterated gasoline
◎ Computerized system for reporting supply and demand: Computerize the system
for reporting supply and demand and trading conditions for oil products in order
to catch signs of illegal distribution at an early stage )  type of gas station
where consumers can buy oil at  cheaper price KNOC supplies oil to these gas
stations by purchasing oil in large quantities 132 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Gas
Supply and Demand Forecast ◎ Global supply and demand: The Asian market is
expected to lead the increase in demand for natural gas, and the supply of
natural gas is expected to grow as the development of unconventional gas in
North America picks up pace         • From 2010 to 2035, global demand for
natural gas will show the largest increase among primary energy sources backed
by rising demand from emerging economies, such as China, India, and Brazil *
Forecast for global demand for natural gas (billion tons, IEA):  (in 2011) →
(in 2020) →  (in 2035) - China (million tons): 105 (in 2011) → 245 (in 2020) →
422 (in 2035) (Annual growth rate of %) - India (million tons): 49 (in 2011) →
69 (in 2020) → 137 (in 2035) (Annual growth rate of %) - Brazil (million tons):
22 (in 2011) → 36 (in 2020) → 72 (in 2035)         (Annual growth rate of %) •
The increase in the unconventional gas supply from North America will lead to an
increased supply of natural gas in the global market, contributing to
diversifying the global supply, which has been disproportionately concentrated
in the Middle East and Russia, and alleviating the price gap between regions *
Global natural gas production (billion tons) (the proportion of unconventional
gas): (2011)  (17%)→         (2020)  (21%)→ (2035)  (27%) • Global demand for
LPG will grow gradually, driven especially by LPG for petrochemical feedstock
and domestic and commercial LPG * Global LPG demand forecast (mb/, IEA):  (2012)
→  (2020) →  (2035) (Annual growth rate of %)         ◎ Domestic supply and
demand: Domestic demand for natural gas has steadily increased at an annual rate
of % over the past 10 years due to expanded deployment of city gas and increased
demand for generation and industrial use * Domestic natural gas demand (million
tons): 45 (2003) → 50 (2006) → 64 (2009) → 55 (2012) • In the mid- to long-term,
the industrial and transport sectors will drive the increase in demand, while
demand from the power generation sector will depend on GHG emission reduction
targets, base load power reserve ratios, etc         • The reserve ratio
(storage capacity/annual demand), which is around 11% on average, must be
continually increased to ensure  stable supply of natural gas in the domestic
market 133 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Stable Source-by-Source Supply
System * As of 2012, the top-down ratio (largest monthly usage / smallest
monthly usage) is , indicating  significant seasonal demand gap  Direction
Stable Supply Stable supply of oil ◎ In response to changes in the global gas
market, such as the expansion of shale gas development, diversify natural gas
and LPG import sources, and secure  stable and sufficient supply of gas * Shale-
based LNG from North America is planned to be imported to Korea from 2017 and
LNG from ◎ Alleviate price risks related to oil price changes and enhance
capability to develop and supply energy independently by linking gas field
development, the construction and operation of liquefaction plants, and market
deployment * As of December 2013, KOGAS was involved in  LNG projects, including
LNG Canada ◎ Enhance the foundation for international cooperation by
strengthening cooperation between large gas importers in Asia, establishing
consultative mechanisms with major energy producing countries, etc * Asia:
Regularly hold Korea-Japan and Korea-China Gas Dialogues to enable collective
action in response to major issues North America: Expand cooperation in the
unconventional gas sector through the Canada-Korea Natural Gas Forum, Korea-
workshops, etc ◎ Diversify city gas supplies by establishing an institutional
foundation to produce and deploy city gas other than biogas and other non-
natural gases Timely expansion of supply infrastructure ◎ Expand LNG storage
facilities in  timely manner in order to better respond to the high winter/low
summer consumption pattern and ensure stable supply and demand in the mid- to
long-term * Secure an additional storage capacity of 21 million ㎘ (or 46 million
tons) by 2018, backed by the completion of the Samcheok plant (2014), the
construction of additional facilities in District  of the Incheon plant (2018),
etc 134 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • Lower the financial burden on the public
sector through private sector investment in storage facilities, etc         *
Encourage private sector investment in storage facilities (ton, as of Dec 2012):
230,000 (2013) → 500,000 (2017) (in total) ◎ Build additional main gas
pipelines, along with new LNG plants, by 2017 to secure  timely supply of gas In
addition, construct gasification and transmission facilities and other supply
infrastructure * Main natural gas pipelines: ,558km (2012) → ,928km (2027)
* Supply capacity of gasification and transmission facilities: ,770 ton/hour
(2012) → 14,099 ton/hour (2027) Ensuring stable supply and demand management ◎
Enhance the supply and demand management system and secure  sufficient supply of
natural gas in advance in order to ensure  stable supply in the winter season
when demand peaks         • Launch  task force* to manage natural gas supply and
demand in the winter season every year and respond quickly** at each stage of an
emergency (attention-caution-warning- critical) * The Ministry of Trade,
Industry and Energy, KOGAS, Korea Power Exchange, Korea City Gas
Association, etc ** Manage supply and demand, operate heavy oil or diesel
standby generators, modify preventive maintenance plans, etc ◎ Expand deployment
of natural gas air conditioning, which is effective for load management and for
addressing the high winter/low summer consumption pattern of natural gas; and
develop technology that improves the efficiency of natural gas air conditioning
• Improve the economic feasibility of and create new demand for natural gas air
conditioning by providing support for installation, lowering import tariffs on
natural gas*, requiring installation in large buildings, etc *  full refund for
tariffs imposed on imported natural gas (24,242 won/ton) will be offered for
years from 2014 to * From 2014, develop technology to improve the efficiency of
GHP engines and triple-effect absorption         chillers ◎ Implement
stockpiling system from August 2016 to stabilize the supply and demand of
natural gas 135 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Stable Source-by-Source
Supply System • Pursue strategic stockpiling to prepare for potential
disruptions of the gas supply from demand surges caused by abnormal cold waves,
conflicts in gas-producing countries, etc * The size of the strategic stockpile
should be determined based on analysis by research institutes of examples abroad
* Examples of the strategic stockpiling abroad: (Spain) Equal to 20 days of
winter season demand, (Poland) Equal to 30 days of imports Expanded deployment
of city gas ◎ Strengthen the foundation of the city gas supply by expanding the
main city gas pipeline, and promote the deployment of city gas through policy
loans and other measures • Increase the number of local governments providing
city gas to 214 by 2017, and expand loan programs for projects to build
pipelines in rural areas * Number of local governments with city gas (out of
total of 230 local governments in Korea): 186 (2012) → 207 (2015) → 214 (2017) ◎
Address the problem of  city gas blind spot in some regions by installing small
LPG storage tanks and pipelines for people in energy poverty within those
regions * Eligibility for support: (Social welfare centers) 360 centers (2013) →
720 centers (2014) (all) (Rural areas)  areas will receive support under the
pilot program in 2014, and the program will be extended to more areas in the
future Improvement of price transparency and support for low income families ◎
Implement  pricing mechanism which links commodity prices to gas rates,
reflecting factors that change the cost of gas ingredients In addition, enhance
the transparency and appropriateness of the pricing mechanism* * Improve
existing measures to strengthen the cost verification system For example, design
criteria to classify regulatory and non-regulatory projects and create an
obligation to prepare financial statements for pricing purposes Additionally,
revise the criteria for calculating the supply price of natural gas ◎ Realize
inclusive welfare by maintaining the city gas tariffs discount program for
beneficiaries of the Basic Livelihood Program*, the disabled, etc * As of
December 2013, beneficiaries receive  discount of 12,400 won monthly, which is
about 20% of their average monthly electricity costs 136 KOREA ENERGY MASTER
PLAN ◎ For customs and individual consumption taxes, maintain low tax rates on
LPG in order to reverse the regressive effect of LPG-related taxes since LPG is
the primary fuel of low- income families for cooking, heating, and
transportation          Improvement of the Industrial Structure Rationalizing
direct import regulations         ◎ Rationalize regulations on direct import by
the private sector in order to contain potential inefficiency** caused by the
natural gas monopoly system* and decrease the LNG import unit price * Korea is
the only OECD member which maintains  monopoly system in the natural gas sector
** In November 2012, the International Energy Agency recommended that Korea
introduce competition into the wholesale gas market for the benefit of consumers
and the overall Korean economy         • Revise the Urban Gas Business Act to
relax regulations on the sale and exchange of imports* to enable private-sector
direct importers to manage supply and demand more efficiently * Under current
law, direct importers are allowed to sell directly-imported gas only to gas
wholesalers or to exchange such gas with other direct importers or gas
wholesalers Laying an institutional framework for the LNG trading business
◎ Given the high potential of the Northeast Asian LNG market* and the expected
expansion of the shale gas supply**, an institutional framework should be laid
for the private sector to enter the LNG trading business * Northeast Asia is the
largest LNG market in the world, importing 60% of the world’ LNG The market is
expected to enjoy continuous growth due to economic growth in China and
increased gas generation in Japan         ** The full scale development and
export of North American shale gas will bring an increased supply of LNG that is
relatively cheap and has no restrictions on destination, thus making it easier
to trade • Introduce an LNG import and export business system in which an LNG
trading business makes use of LNG storage facilities within bonded areas in
Korea (revision of the Urban Gas Business Act) * Expected benefits include
increased private sector investment in LNG terminals and job creation, increased
tax revenue collected from profits generated in the trading business, and  large
volume of gas imports in  short period of time         137 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Establishment of  Stable Source-by-Source Supply System  Power  Stable Supply ◎
Enhancing the timely construction of power plants: Encourage the timely
completion of power plants under construction and enhance the follow-up measures
of power plant construction plans • Encourage the completion of power plant
construction on schedule with periodic process control and streamlined licensing
procedures ◎ Building  system to regularize supply and demand: Minimize public
inconvenience by expanding supply capacity as much as possible and taking
systematic measures to reduce demand when unexpected supply disruptions occur •
In case of emergency, make full use of available generating resources to supply
power, including power from private sector generators, standby generators of
public agencies, and test-runs of generators in not-yet-completed power plants •
Transition from demand management that places direct restrictions on power
consumption through regulations toward systematic, continuous demand management
◎ Reinforcing  vulnerable power grid: Reinforce the power grid to contain damage
in case of transmission line failure in regions where power plants are
concentrated, such as the Seoul metropolitan area, and the western, southern,
and eastern coastal areas • Increase the number of outgoing transmission lines
for generated power, establish  plan to reinforce the back-up power system, and
encourage the early completion of construction in order to improve the stability
of the power grid  Improvement of the Industrial Structure Direction ◎ Target
both stability and efficiency of power supply and demand, and maintain and
enhance the power industry’ role as  public utility in such aspects as network
neutrality and protection of marginalized people in society * The current power
industry uses  cost-based pool system in which regulations and competition exist
side-by-side 138 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN ◎ Create  new, ICT-based power service
market to realize the creative economy, and shift the focus in power supply and
demand system from supply management to demand management         Plan ◎
Establish  Korean-style business model appropriate to the current status of the
Korean power industry that gives comprehensive consideration to important
changes in the power industry*         * The Fukushima accident, climate change,
decreased public acceptance of nuclear power and transmission and distribution
facilities, etc • Find fundamental solutions through precise analysis and
evaluation of the structure of the power industry, thorough discussion among
industry experts, and  process to reach public consensus         ◎ Enable demand
reduction resources to be traded on the market by establishing an institutional
framework, creating  variety of business models, and laying  foundation for
commercialization • Allow “smart-demand” resources to be traded on the market;
provide ways for demand management companies in fields such as smart grid and
ESS to participate in the power market, etc         ◎ Undertake fundamental,
systematic reform to stabilize the price of power and avoid excessive price
increases in the case of major supply disruptions • Introduce vesting contracts
to build  foundation for securing  stable electricity supply and stable
electricity prices, and enhance the legal basis for Soft Cap Price
Integrated Energy  Current Status ◎ Necessity of diffusion: Integrated energy is
key to achieving green growth at home and         abroad as it contributes
greatly to efficient energy use and reducing GHG emissions * Energy efficiency
of 26% and CO2 emission reduction of % annually on average as  share of
production of heat and electricity 139 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Stable
Source-by-Source Supply System * At the G8 summit in 2007,  declaration was
adopted on significantly increasing the proportion of combined heat and power
plants ◎ Domestic market conditions: Despite favorable conditions for the
integrated energy business*, the deployment rate of district heating is expected
to remain low due to the poor development of residential land and other reasons
* Korea has even better conditions for introducing an integrated energy supply
system than many advanced European countries, including an appropriate number of
heating degree days (annual heating hours) and  high heat density ( high
concentration of multi-family residential buildings) ◎ Changes in surrounding
conditions: The importance of combined heat and power (CHP) plants as  tool to
expand distributed power generation is rising as transmission lines become
saturated due to high electricity demand from the metropolitan area * Generation
capacity shortage of approximately ,000 MW for Seoul and 11,700 MW for Gyeonggi
province * Electricity shortage (consumption – production): Seoul (44,269 MWh),
Gyeonggi province (71,923 MWh)  Direction  Enhancing Distributed Power
Generation ◎ Expanding CHP in the Seoul metropolitan area: Encourage the
replacement of aged CHP* facilities and the construction of large-scale
facilities in suburbs of the capital • CHP plants with  capacity of ,435 MW will
be built in the metropolitan area by * Chuncheon POSCO & 422MW, Korea District
Heating Corporation Hwaseong and DongtanⅡ 840MW CHP plant construction ◎
Encouraging the construction of large-scale plants: Give priority to large areas
with heat loads of at least 100 Gcal/ (or 100 MW) when selecting locations for
new plants • Increase the weight of financial and technological capabilities in
the new plant selection process, as these are good indicators of business
sustainability • Reduce regulations on the ratio of heat to power and introduce
efficiency standards when granting permission to build CHP plants * The
construction of large-scale CHP plants should be promoted by easing the ratio of
heat to power 140 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Supporting Market Transparency ◎
Reducing cost burdens, such as fuel prices: Make wholesale gas prices for CHP
consistent         with prices for power generation and grant exemptions from
oil import tariffs • Since an integrated energy company is classified as
electricity generation company according to Article  of the Electric Utility
Act, the wholesale price of gas should be the same for CHP and for power
generation • To promote distributed power generation, offer   year () refund of
import tariffs (39won/m3) imposed on integrated energy supply, including
community electricity         ◎ Increasing the transparency of heating prices:
Establish standards for accounting and calculating prices as well as  heating
price verification system • Establish by law accounting and cost calculating
standards applicable to all market players and subject to external verification
by  qualified institution • Promote the development of affordable heat sources,
energy conservation, and renewable energy investment by reforming the pricing
system to provide incentives for demand side management, such as authorizing
different levels of return on investment          Establishing  Basis for
Sustainable Development ◎ Expanded deployment of district cooling: Improve the
profit structure of district cooling by providing more subsidies for deployment,
enhancing user convenience, promoting development of technology for district
cooling devices, etc         • As  follow-up to the & and demonstration project
on desiccant cooling for multi-family residential buildings that was completed
in October 2013, supply district cooling on  trial basis to new homes planned to
be sold ◎ Enhancing the use of surplus heat and waste heat: Promote  shift to
low-cost structure by         making better use of affordable heat, such as
waste heat from industrial complexes • Provide affordable heat to customers by
improving the cost competitiveness of existing market players through the
establishment of  heat network and comprehensive operation center for the Seoul
metropolitan area  Protecting Consumer Rights         ◎ Introduction of an
alternative heat supply system: Introduce an alternative heat supply system to
prevent companies from becoming insolvent, carry out response measures and
minimize user inconvenience 141 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Establishment of  Stable
Source-by-Source Supply System • The financial status of companies will be
thoroughly examined in advance, and the alternative heat supply system will come
into effect if  financially unstable company becomes insolvent and stops
supplying gas • Regulations for heat suppliers will be revised and MOUs will be
concluded between companies on  voluntary basis to strengthen the responsibility
of companies and rights of consumers in case of heat supply failures ◎
Implementation of an integrated welfare system: Consider measures to integrate
the different welfare systems of companies and revise heat prices to reflect
welfare costs ◎ Encouragement of public involvement: Encourage public
participation by making it mandatory to collect opinions of residents when
considering  permit for  heat source that exceeds the predetermined level •
Mandate that companies hold public hearings and information sessions when
soliciting the opinions of local governments 142 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER  - Six Major Tasks -  Energy Policy Reﬂ ecting Public Opinion  Reform of
the Energy Welfare System ■Address blind spots of the energy welfare system and
shift towards  welfare system customized to fit the needs and consumption
patterns of recipients  Current Status ◎ In 2005,  middle school student whose
family’ power had been cut died in  fire started by  candle Following her death,
the Korea Energy Foundation was launched in 2006, and the government began full
scale efforts to create  legal basis for energy welfare, including the Energy
Act in • The First Energy Master Plan set  goal of reducing the number of energy
poor to zero by ◎ An annual average of  million households received energy
support totaling  trillion won during the last  years from 2008 to • More funds
were made available for energy welfare by increasing the budget of the Energy
Efficiency Improvement Project and beginning the heating oil provision program
in Moreover, the electricity tariff system was revised from  fixed rate system
to  flat rate system in order to better serve low-income families  Facilities
and products: Distribute renewable energy and improve efficiency by replacing
obsolete boilers, installing insulation in homes, renovating doors and windows,
etc * Energy Efficiency Improvement Project: billion won in 2011 → billion won
in 2012 (to be confirmed)  Heating bills: Provide heating oil (18,000
households, kerosene 200 ) and coal briquette coupons (83,000 households,
169,000 won)  Discounts on utilities: Provide discounts on electricity (,000
won), gas (won/㎥) and heating costs (exemption from basic charges)  Grace
period: Postpone service cuts in case of overdue electricity and gas bills
Energy safety: Provide emergency measures for the marginalized in case of power
failure, improve the safety of gas facilities, etc 144 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
◎ Continued high oil prices have driven up overall energy prices, resulting in
an increased number of energy poor*         * The term “energy poor” refers to
households that spend more than 10% of their income on lighting and heating The
number of energy poor households has risen from  million in 2008 to 78 million
in 2011 (estimated)  Problems         Blind spots in energy welfare support ◎
Low-income families that are not eligible for the Basic Livelihood Program,
including those in the second lowest income bracket*, face difficulties similar
to those of the Basic Livelihood Program beneficiaries, such as limited access
to electricity and heating However, they receive relatively inadequate support
*  family whose income is under 120% of the minimum cost of living and is
ineligible for the program Uniform method of calculating heating and lighting
expenditures ◎ During the winter, average energy spending more than doubles, and
the proportion of families living in energy poverty rises significantly (% in
November → 26% in February)         [ Monthly Fuel Costs of Families in the
Bottom Income Decile (ten thousand won) ] [ Share of Energy Poor by Month % ] 30
25  20    15          10                             10 11 12         10 11 12
Unbalanced welfare support across energy sources ◎ Although expensive energy
sources, such as kerosene and LPG, make up  large share* of the energy use of
low income families, such families are often ineligible for discount programs
* The primary heating fuel of the energy poor: gas (45%), kerosene (36%),
central heating (%), etc 145 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Energy Policy Reflecting Public
Opinion [ Share of Low-Income Households That Have Received  Discount on
Electricity and City Gas Bills ] Excluded From Discounts Electricity Only Gas
Only Both (Total) % % % % % ◎ Because the support system is centered around
network energy sources, such as gas and electricity, it has brought more
benefits to homes with higher heating efficiency  Direction Vision ■ Establish
tailored welfare system which links together the Energy Voucher Program, energy
bill discount programs and energy efficiency programs Policy objective Introduce
an integrated, tailored welfare system Expand welfare infrastructure Reduce
energy costs Survey the living conditions of the energy poor / Create  database
and enhance promotion activities Introduce an Energy Voucher Program Expand the
Energy Efficiency Improvement Project 2014 2015 2016 2017 Number of energy poor
(unit: ten thousand households) 85 50 40 40 Support for efficiency improvement
(unit: ten thousand households, cumulative) 34 41 48 55 Increased welfare budget
(unit: hundred million won) ,361 ,382 ,450 ,520 146 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN
Introduction of an Energy Voucher Program         ◎ Direction: Devise and
support an integrated payment method for energy purchases by integrating various
sporadic energy assistance programs • Practical support: Provide practical
subsidies in consideration of actual energy consumption patterns * Take into
account various factors, including seasonal needs and the presence of
disadvantaged family members         • Consideration of seasonal factors:
Subsidize the energy spending of low-income families during times of cold
weather • Minimization of blind spots: Strengthen support for low-income
families ineligible for the Basic Livelihood Program, including those in the
second lowest income bracket ◎ Support plan: Introduce an Energy Voucher
Program, which enables the purchase of various types of energy, including
electricity, gas and kerosene, in order to ease the energy burden on low-income
families during the winter season         * Eligibility will include all Basic
Livelihood Program beneficiaries as well as the disabled, the elderly and
families with young children in the second lowest income bracket Revision of the
Energy Efficiency Improvement Project         ◎ Energy welfare analysis project:
Launch an energy welfare analysis project using expert analysis based on on-site
inspection of the status of households or agencies currently receiving energy
assistance * An analysis team will be formed under the Korea Energy Foundation
to provide advice on aspects that need improvement and design support plans
◎ Support for improving efficiency: Based on the results of consultations,
produce an optimal mix of energy infrastructure for each household and provide
support packages for replacing lighting, insulation, boilers, etc * Under the
present system, support for improving lighting, insulation, and boilers is
provided separately by different agencies         Expansion of energy welfare
infrastructure ◎ Creating an energy welfare database: Collect district-by-
district information from welfare recipients on energy sources in use, usage
amount, and dwelling type, and establish  147 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Energy Policy
Reflecting Public Opinion management system linked to the Social Welfare
Information System on the basis of this information * An integrated database
which provides comprehensive data and analysis of each agency’ recipient
information will be established ◎ Establishing an agency dedicated to energy
welfare: Provide  legal basis for an agency dedicated to energy welfare * New
provisions recognizing energy welfare as  basic human right should be added to
relevant laws when they are revised ◎ Promoting public participation: Build
stronger foundation for energy welfare and expand social monitoring of project
implementation through energy welfare projects in which the general public* can
participate *  program which links energy conservation to the welfare system
should be implemented Under this program,  person who has surplus energy from
reducing energy consumption will be able to select eligible entities (households
or facilities) to which he/she may donate, and he/she will be able to follow how
the donated energy is being used  Expansion of Local Government Participation
■Improve the efficiency of policy implementation by establishing regional energy
governance in which local governments, which have direct contact with the public
and businesses, play  leading role ■Delegate the planning and implementation of
energy projects to local governments in order to reflect local needs and
conditions  Progress ◎ Regional energy projects have been implemented since the
mid-1990s The deployment of renewable energy has been carried out on the supply
side, while energy-efficient device deployment projects have been carried out on
the demand side • Supply: The regional energy self-sufficiency rate has been
improved through renewable energy deployment projects * Financial support: The
total amount of support increased from 120 million won in 1996 to billion won in
148 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN • Demand management: Deployment of LED lighting and
other energy-efficient products was mainly led by public agencies By late 2012,
the deployment rate of LED in the public sector was estimated to be
approximately %         * Financial support: The total amount of financial
support for demand management increased from 880 million won in 1996 to billion
won in  Limitations         ◎ Governance: There is insufficient organization,
manpower, legal institutions and other infrastructure needed for policy
implementation • Only approximately 10% of local governments have  well-
established implementation system, such as the Basic Energy Ordinance (28 out of
230 local governments) • The implementation of energy policies is assigned to
number of different teams, including construction, industry, transportation,
climate change and environment teams Moreover, the role of the private-public
National Energy Committee* is limited         * The National Energy Committee
consists of and is run by local governments, local assemblies, research
institutes, civil groups, and other participants to advise, deliberate on and
coordinate energy policy in accordance with the Basic Energy Ordinance ◎ Policy
Design: Local governments have not been able to fully participate in the central
government’ policy-making process, meaning that the division of roles between
the central and local governments and coordination across policies have been
insufficient*         * The Regional Energy Plan and the Energy Master Plan,
which are required by law, are not coordinated with each other In addition,
since most of the authority for carrying out the plans belongs to the central
government, local governments lack policy tools • Although local governments are
obliged to annually set out Action Plans for Energy Use Rationalization, such
Action Plans are rarely implemented and are carried out only at the public
agency level         ◎ Project implementation: For energy conservation projects,
high reliance on central government subsidies has resulted in decreased project
development efforts as the share of government support fell from % to 50% * The
amount of subsidies applied for by local governments (in billion won): (2011) →
(2012)         → (2013) → (2014) • Policies and programs planned by local
governments are too few and tend to be short-term, yearly plans whose purpose
and size change every year 149 SIX MAJOR TASKS  Energy Policy Reflecting Public
Opinion • For renewable energy deployment projects, insufficient consideration
has been given to the different characteristics of each region and energy source
As  result, the majority of such projects have been concentrated in solar PV,
which is easy to install * Solar PV projects received % of regional renewable
energy deployment program funds  Main Tasks  Establishment of Regional Energy
Governance ◎ Enhancing the legal basis: Encourage lower-level local governments
to establish their own Regional Energy Ordinances and promote the implementation
of policies which can improve the effectiveness of such Ordinances • Upper-level
local governments should hold regular Energy Committee meetings, and lower-
level local governments should create Committees on Energy Conservation
Practices and focus on specific demand management efforts ■Energy Committee:
Responsible for the development and evaluation of basic energy management
policies, deliberation on Regional Energy Plans, preparation of private-public
cooperation measures, deliberation on restrictions imposed on the energy
consumption of facilities and individuals, etc ■Committee on Energy Conservation
Practices: Responsible for discussion of measures to promote energy conservation
practices, evaluation of energy conservation policies and performance,
development and assessment of alternative energy projects, including solar PV
and geothermal, etc ◎ Strengthening the role of policy: Design Regional Energy
Plans which reflect regional conditions and priorities • Guarantee the autonomy
of local governments by replacing the existing approach, in which individual
energy projects are assigned to local governments, with  new approach, in which
each local government forms its own energy project portfolio 150 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN [ Existing Approach ] [ New Approach ] Local government
Project  Local government  Project  Local government  Project  Local government
Project   Local government  Project  Local government  Project  Local government
Project           Project  Local government  Project  Local government  Local
government  Project  Local government  Project           • Set policy objectives
for each project and thoroughly evaluate policy outcomes so that the results can
be reflected in the following year’ budget Deployment of distributed generation
Demand management Energy welfare         • Deployment targets for • Targets for
energy demand and • Target for reducing the number renewable energy, integrated
energy, ESS, etc GHG emission reduction of energy poor • Sectoral targets for
the         • Energy self-sufficiency targets deployment of environmentally-
friendly vehicles, LEDs, etc (cid:8835)         The central government advises
and coordinates the regional energy project plans of each local government, and
the Energy Committee confirms the Regional Energy plans 151 SIX MAJOR TASKS
Energy Policy Reflecting Public Opinion  Improvement of the Effectiveness of
Regional Energy Projects ◎ Energy Efficiency Improvement Project: Shift
eligibility for support from facility replacement projects to systematic
projects* in order to improve the effectiveness of regional energy conservation
projects * Priority will be placed on supporting generation and heat supply
facilities using waste heat from incinerators, cooling and heating systems using
treated wastewater or sea water, EMSs of buildings and factories, etc • Local
governments should implement projects to replace high-energy-consuming products
with energy-efficient products that have high economic feasibility using ESCO,
project financing, and policy loans ◎ Renewable energy: Create local government-
led Renewable Energy Towns in consortium with local governments, citizens,
research institutes, etc * Consortium: Project plan design, installation, and
maintenance Government: Project selection, monitoring, etc  Establishment of
Foundation for Regional Energy Policy ◎ Infrastructure: Create  system that
supports energy statistics and demand management programs* of local governments
*  support system includes the following: analysis and projection of changes in
energy consumption patterns, energy conservation effects of each demand
management program, economic feasibility assessments, monitoring of policy
impacts, etc ◎ Promotion of public participation: Use private-public
partnerships to establish  governance structure focused on sector-specific
demand management ranging from households to buildings and transportation • Set
energy reduction targets based on detailed data at the local government and
community levels, assign roles to major players, and develop programs Examples
of regional energy project implementation that involves the public ■ Establish
energy conservation targets and detailed plans for implementation based on
apartment building-specific surveys of power usage, number of households, and
number of residents per household ■ In carrying out the Energy Efficiency
Improvement Project for residential buildings, establish  governance system for
each topic and issue For example, forge  partnership that consists of residents,
construction companies, assessment companies, and civic groups 152 KOREA ENERGY
MASTER PLAN  Proactive Response to Energy Related Conflicts         ■Shift
priority from reacting to conflicts, including settlement and mediation, to
proactive response, such as prevention  Direction         Establishment of
conflict control principles ◎ Analyze cases which occur repeatedly and devise
response measures in consideration of stakeholders, factors causing conflicts,
past solutions, etc         ◎ Find optimal solutions by referring to overseas
examples and the results of conflict resolution measures taken by conflict
management experts, governments, public energy enterprises, etc • Address the
root causes of conflicts by improving laws and institutions Proactive response
◎ Identify factors that can trigger conflicts in advance and monitor such
factors consistently, considering capital investment plans of public
enterprises, past conflicts, values of residents, etc • Conduct impact analysis
in advance for conflicts with potential to spread and, if necessary, introduce
such conflicts to Conflict Management Committees as priority agenda         ◎
For priority agenda items, set future plans based on the Conflict Management
Manual and periodically examine and manage such plans • Before implementing
policies, minimize factors that can trigger conflicts by providing stakeholders,
in particular, with opportunities to be involved in the policy-making process *
An impartial conflict mediation council consisting of equal numbers of
companies, people who filed         civil complaints, and professional mediators
will be launched • Develop compensation and support policies giving
consideration to  variety of factors, including national financial conditions,
general public acceptance, and damage caused to the region in question 153 SIX
MAJOR TASKS  Energy Policy Reflecting Public Opinion  Examples of Planned
Responses to Major Issues Construction of transmission lines ◎ Maximize the use
of existing transmission lines and, in cases where building high-voltage
transmission lines is unavoidable, take various measures to improve public
acceptance • Conduct conflict assessment for areas where construction is planned
in order to develop measures for minimizing conflict with local residents in
advance * Conflict assessment will be conducted for the Saemangeum transmission
line construction project • Plan and carry out measures to provide reasonable
compensation for falling property values near planned transmission lines Nuclear
energy policy ◎ Organize  Steering Committee for each regional headquarters to
decide issues related to local residents, such as regional support * Example:
Heads of nuclear power plant headquarters, heads of Guns (or counties), Chairs
of Gun assemblies, environmental watch groups, regional organizations, non-
governmental experts, etc ◎ When  major issue arises relating to nuclear power
plants, hold  briefing session about the issue and facilitate information
exchange with citizens with the help of non-governmental environmental watch
groups Moreover, promote resident participation in inspection and monitoring *
Information reported to regulatory authorities, information on planned
preventive maintenance and failure/shutdown, relevant briefing sessions,
frequent information sharing on nuclear power plant operations, etc ◎ Promote
resident participation in decisions on support projects in  nuclear plant area
and shift to projects which provide high satisfaction to residents * Enhance the
resident participation process when making decisions on electricity subsidies,
medical services, training programs, etc 154 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN CHAPTER Vl
Future Plans  Short-term Measures  Enhancement of energy demand management ◎
Adjustment of relative energy price: Revise statues under the Individual
Consumption Tax Act (first half of 2014) ◎ Electricity bill: Review proposals
for revising various demand-management-type tariff systems (second half of 2014)
◎ Use of ICT: Create  new business model for the demand management industry
using ICT, and provide  comprehensive support system for each industry, size and
other standards (first quarter of 2014)  Implementation of energy mix follow-up
measures ◎ Nuclear plant: Make necessary preparations to achieve  nuclear power
installed capacity of around 43 GW, including securing land for plant
construction ◎ Renewable energy: Gather and review opinions on the introduction
of RFS and RHO, and form  task force for discussing methods to advise heavy
energy consumers to install renewable energy facilities (first quarter of 2014)
Distributed power generation system ◎ Deployment plan: Lay out detailed
deployment plans, including deployment methods and improvement of related
institutions (second half of 2014) ◎ Construction of transmission lines: Promote
the enactment of statutes under the Act on Supporting Areas Close to
Transmission and Distribution Lines to provide reasonable compensation and
support for areas adjacent to transmission lines (first half of 2014)  Other
issues ◎ Northeast Asian oil hub: Conduct  preliminary feasibility study for the
port project and prepare  roadmap (second half of 2014) ◎ Spent nuclear fuel:
Collect public opinions and submit results to the Public Opinion Solicitation
Committee (second half of 2014) 156 KOREA ENERGY MASTER PLAN  Short-term
Measures         ◎ After the Second Energy Master Plan has been finalized,
detailed measures will be devised and implemented in the form of 10 sub-plans
related to energy supply and demand Time (TBD) Plan Main content         Energy
Use Rationalization Plan · Sectoral policies for energy efficiency improvement,
measures to develop 2014 related technologies, and measures to reduce GHG
emissions · Outlook for renewable energy deployment and measures to improve
Renewable Energy Basic Plan 2014 institutions, develop technology, and train
talented workers for further deployment Basic Plan for Electricity Supply and
Demand · Long-term outlook for power demand, measures to manage demand, and
2014 plans for power facilities Plan for Long-term Natural Gas Supply and Demand
· Long-term outlook for natural gas demand and measures related to 2014 supply
and demand Basic Plan for Integrated Energy Supply · Mid- to long-term supply
plan, suggestions on targets and criteria for 2014         supply, and energy
consumption and pollutant reduction targets · Outlook for regional energy supply
and demand, measures to manage Regional Energy Plan 2014 demand and to promote
distributed power generation, and supply plans for each region · Oil stockpiling
target, suggestions on the type and quantity of oil to be Oil Stockpiling Plan
2014 stockpiled, and stockpiling facilities plans         · Suggestions on
resource development targets, measures to improve the Basic Plan for Overseas
Resource Development effectiveness of public enterprises and promote private
sector investment, and measures to facilitate &, human resource development, and
international cooperation 2014 · Measures to facilitate the development of
technologies related to efficiency improvement, clean energy and demand
management, support for human resources and facilities, and commercialization of
technology Energy Technology Development Plan 2014         · Long-term supply
and demand outlook, measures to develop the coal Long-term Plan for the Coal
Industry 2015 industry and related technology, and measures to promote the
safety of mines, mine reclamation, and local economies near mining areas 157
FUTURE PLANS This document comes under the jurisdiction of Energy and Resources
Policy Division, Ofﬁ ce of Energy and Resources Ministry of Trade, Industry and
Energy    : +   -   -    -     FAX : +   -   -    -     Contact number