Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and
evaluation…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/CRI/  UNDP within the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  This country
programme document describes how UNDP will contribute to achieving the results
agreed on in the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNSDCF) for Costa Rica, 2023-The country programme and UNSDCF were developed
through  participatory process aligned with national priorities More than 30
dialogues, forums and technical consultations were held and included national
and local governments, international financial institutions, civil society
organizations, the private sector, women’ groups, and groups of interest such as
indigenous groups, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual
and other sexual and gender diversities  The UNSDCF, , will work level of
socioeconomic inequalities in Costa Rica , enhancing the country’ resilience and
capacity to respond to  crisis, promoting economic activities compatible with
sustainable development, and reducing levels of unemployment and labour
informality, particularly, outside of the Great Metropolitan Region The UNSDCF
will prioritize improving the lives of women, indigenous peoples, afro-
descendant, migrants, lesbians, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex,
asexual, and others (LGBTQIA+) persons, older persons, and people with
disabilities, specifically those living in rural, co astal and transboundary
territories which have been left out The UNSDCF envisions the United Nations
system working at the intersection of inclusion, economic empowerment ,
resilience and human rights for  middle-income country belonging to the
Organisation for Economic Co- operation and Development Working with the United
Nations country team, UNDP will support the integration of the Sustainable
Development Goals (the Goals, hereafter) into public policies and programming
related to inclusion, gender equality,  transition towards  green, blue and
purple economy, and preparedness for recovery and response to multiple risks and
crises the high towards reversing  Despite  longstanding tradition as  peaceful
country, with high social investment,  high human development index of 810
(2020), ranking of 62 out of 189, and decades of uninterrupted democracy, Costa
Rica faces increasing income inequality; its Gini index went from 507 in 2010 to
524 in By 2021, per cent of households were multidimensionally poor2, and income
poverty affected 26 per cent of households, four percentage points more than in
Low growth,  high level of labour informality (45 per cent), and the country’
economic model together disproportionately affect women and marginalized groups
negatively – particularly those living in rural, coastal and transboundary
territories – as well as vulnerable groups, such as indigenous peoples and afro-
descendants Women have been particularly impacted by the economic and social
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has widened economic gender gaps and
brought high levels of domestic abuse; an average of 133 protection measures
against domestic violence are taken daily  The crime rate in Costa Rica has
increased significantly in the last two decades According to the Judicial
Investigation Agency, the homicide rate went from  in 2000 to in 2021, mainly
affecting young males Violence has increased due to the penetration of organized
crime at various levels and territories, generating consequences in the
political, social, economic and environmental spheres The incidence of femicide
(approximately two per month) and other kinds of violence against women is also
critical, affecting their physical, economic and political autonomy  UNDP, Human
Development Report Global multidimensional poverty index /17  DP/DCP/CRI/  State
institutions face significant challenges in ensuring access to opportunities for
the entire population This leads to some mistrust in institutions and the risk
of insolvency of public finances Public social spending as  percentage of gross
domestic product (GDP) in 2020 was 75 per cent for education and 38 per cent for
health; although these figures have been consistent throughout the last decade,
education and health outcomes do not reflect such  level of investment In
addition to this problem, the Government of Costa Rica faces severe corruption
cases  The country’ tax system is regressive and dependent on carbon consumption
According to 2018 data, 21 per cent of total government income derives from
fossil fuel consumption Currently, the single tax on fuels in Costa Rica
represents 10 per cent of the tax revenue collected by the Government, and
property tax on conventional fossil- consuming vehicles represents 78 per cent
of property taxes The study, “ green Costa Rican COVID-19 recovery: aligning
Costa Rica´ decarbonization investments with economic recovery”, concluded that
decarbonization-related capital investments may significantly facilitate
economic recovery and lead to higher employment and value added by Employment
could be  per cent higher by 2025 and value added could be slightly higher as
well, by  per cent   significant proportion of economic activities generate
environmental externalities that further erode fiscal finances The agricultural
sector produces  per cent of GDP It positions the country as  leader in
commodities exports, making it one of the world’ highest per hectare and capita
consumers of agrochemicals Additionally, the manufacturing sector, which
represents per cent of the country’ GDP, lacks good practices regarding waste
treatment and the use of chemicals that generate high pollution On the other
hand, it is estimated that less than half of the water consumed in industrial
activities is treated adequately Moreover, uncontrolled housing development in
the coastal areas negatively affects their biodiversity and hurts the ecosystems
Costa Rica ranks 12th on the world risk index due to high exposure to natural
hazards According to estimates by the National Commission for Risk Prevention
and Emergency Attention, from 2016 to 2020, the country spent more than $820
million on replacing elements affected by different types of disasters, while it
only spent $308 million during 2011-This vulnerability to natural hazards is
exacerbated by its proximity to politically unstable and highly impoverished
countries, which increases the pressure of migrants and refugees on government
and interagency services As of November 2020, there are an estimated 100,600
persons of concern to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
including refugees, asylum seekers, stateless persons and others of interest, of
which the vast majority are from Nicaragua Costa Rica is used as  transit route
by migrants toward the United States, increasing the pressure on local resources
These are the development challenges that UNDP will address in the new programme
cycle To face these challenges and multiple crises, UNDP will leverage its
experience and presence in communities, enhanced by the accumulated knowledge
and lessons learned in identifying social and environmental issues at all
levels; understanding gender equality as  point of convergence and articulator
of UNDP actions; developing data, analysis and knowledge products to support the
design and implementation of public policies related to the Goals, including on
the environment, employment, social protection, citizen security, risk
management, among others; and promoting innovation capacities in all sectors to
generate development solutions /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ UNDP has  unique role due to its
experience con vening multi-stakeholder and interinstitutional democratic
dialogue processes to reach an agreement and foster collaboration for systemic
change UNDP is experienced in managing digital platforms, generation of
information, and data relevant to policy decision-making UNDP mobilised
resources from emission reductions into the country to fund the payment of
ecosystem services, particularly benefiting indigenous territories and rural
communities UNDP supported development initiatives to improve the resilience of
communities to water stress and generate employment opportunities in the coastal
pacific and Caribbean regions and peripheral urban areas, placing women in all
their diversity at the centre of these interventions The decentralized country
programme evaluation conducted in 2021 found that UNDP had high effectiveness in
achieving most output targets, generating results of strategic importance In
complex context, UNDP was able to carry out  process of strengthening
counterparts for sustainable development, such as the National Institute for
Women (INAMU) and the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MINAE) Other issues
highlighted by the evaluation crucial for the new country programme’ success
are: () UNDP staff capacity and quality; () key successes such as the first-ever
transfer of emission reduction payments into  government trust fund; ()
achieving the highest ever delivery rates while operating under the COVID-19
business continuity plan; and () the ability to mainstream the intersectional
gender approach in all aspects of programme implementation As  country office
certified with the gold seal for gender equality, UNDP has worked continuously
on mainstreaming intersectional gender equality, women’ empowerment and new
masculinities within its programme and projects Efforts to mainstream gender in
programming have improved gender markers in the portfolio and , more
significantly, in developing gender equality strategies in seven government
institutions UNDP led  joint programme on social protection and has supported
the community of practice of 135 private sector companies accelerating their
certification process for the seal of gender equality UNDP has helped mitigate
the COVID-19 pandemic’ socioeconomic effects, facilitating the implementation of
three financial instruments targeting women The country programme evaluation
also noted areas for further development that UNDP addresses in this new
programme UNDP, as provider-of-integrated-solutions, ensures  more coherent
United Nations system UNDP has demonstrated this through its leadership of the
gender and environment interagency groups, facilitating consultations, and
drafting the environment and governance chapters of the common country analysis
and UNSDCF formulation As provider-of-integrated solutions for the Goals, UNDP
has also been fostered by engaging political parties contesting the 2022
election to improv  awareness of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
among candidates for the legislative assembly UNDP will continue to foster
South-South and triangular cooperation with countries interested in replicating
the country’ successful payment-for-ecosystem services and land- use change
monitoring experiences The country programme will expand on the sharing of
lessons learned, consolidating exchanges with African countries, particularly in
the Congo River basin II Programme priorities and partnerships The country
programme vision is to help the citizens of Costa Rica transform their
development model to eliminate economic, social and political inequalities that
have /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ affected the country for  long time Interventions will be
aligned with: () the decentralization priorities of the Government; () more
efficient State institutions; () sustainable economic activities that generate
employment and benefits to traditionally marginalized regions; and () response
to multiple threats, all in compliance with the constitution, democratic
governance, an intersectional gender approach , and respect for human rights The
programme will focus on three UNSDCF outcomes and is aligned with the UNDP
strategic plan, , its signature solutions approach, and the regional strategy to
strengthen effective governance through productivity, inclusion and resilience
The theory of change, which is anchored in the national development plan, long-
term policies and the National Pa ct for the achievement of the Goals, considers
the following assumptions: if more robust, evidence-based public policies –
which are inclusive and consider local, national and transboundary levels – are
implemented, in particular with regard to intersectional gender perspectives and
inequalities stemming from  centralised and carbonised development model that
further marginalises women and vulnerable groups, such as indigenous people,
afro-descendants, migrants and peripheral territories; if the promotion of
structural transformation strengthens green, blue and purple economies; and if
strengthening the capacity of public, private and civil society sectors improves
the response to different types of crises and helps the country to adapt to
climate change impacts; then Costa Rica will advance to  new human development
stage that is more comprehensive, resilient and leaves no one behind People-
centred governance The UNDP theory of change in this area is: if UNDP provides
strategic innovation and digitalisation for the design, implementation and
evaluation of evidence-based public policies, then these policies will be better
suited to take advantage of technology, be more effective, and data will be more
cyber secure and transparent Interventions will therefore generate evidence for
decision-making, enhance information analysis, and foster digital participatory
approaches, allowing for more voices of municipalities, women, LGBTQIA+,
indigenous peoples, afro-descendants, migrants, older people, and people with
disabilities to provide inputs into the design and implementation of policies
UNDP will upgrade the technologies and digital tools of the National Institute
of Statistics and Censuses (INEC), the National Geographic Institute, state
universities, the Mixed Institute of Social Assistance (IMAS), the Ministry of
National Planning and Political Economy (MIDEPLAN), INAMU, and the Ministry of
Finance ( OH) for enhanced data generation and disaggregated information
analysis to leave no one behind from State services The focus will be on social
protection systems, eliminating environmental and social externalities resulting
from economic activity in rural and coastal regions, and  more effective and
prompt response to disasters Partnerships will include the Oxford Poverty and
Human Development Initiative, the Human Development Report Office in UNDP, the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNFPA, the United Nations Children’
Fund (UNICEF), the International Labour Organization (ILO), and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN- Women) The
institutional transformation will require improved capacities to construct and
implement intersectoral, territorial and multi-level agreements UNDP will
facilitate democratic dialogue interventions that are gender transformative and
culturally sensitive to complement data analysis and ensure society-wide
agreements on complex institutional transformation /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ These
efforts will be supported by digital and information technology solutions
developed in the previous programme cycle, such as digital land-use change
monitoring, technology solutions for better targeting of people living in
poverty, or applications to scale up actions for forest restoration, water and
waste management The expected impact is the transformation of institutions into
modern, effective means to improve the livelihood of all Costa Ricans, as
described in outcome  of the UNSDCF Share prosperity The UNDP theory of change
in this area is: if UNDP fosters economy-wide agreements for the consolidation
of inclusive and resilient green, blue, purple and circular approaches with
territorial approach, then this will contribute to the emergence of decent work
and entrepreneurship opportunities outside of the Great Metropolitan area, in
compliance with government priorities UNDP will leverage its experience
promoting upcycling, circular economy, sustainable fishery and green commodity
approaches to support State institutions in enabling environments the private
sector needs to create formal employment opportunities For this purpose, UNDP
will coordinate with the Presidency, MIDEPLAN, MOH, MINAE and the National
Institute for Housing and Urbanism (INVU) as  central element of the transition
to  green economy that entails green urban renovation Blue economy interventions
will entail identifying and conducting feasibility studies to promote
opportunities that foster employment in coastal areas, such as marine spatial
planning, management of harmful substances, and development of environmental
service provisions for fishing communities by collecting plastics or processing
sargassum, among others This will entail close liaison with the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the National Institute of Fishing and
Aquaculture of Costa Rica (INCOPESCA), the Central American Integration System
(SICA), the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), and the MINAE UNDP
will draw expertise from the United the United Nations Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), UNEP, Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO), ILO, as well as key international partners such as the
German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ), the Interamerican Development
Bank (IADB), the World Bank and the Central American Bank for Economic
Integration (CABEI) UNDP will continue to expand partnerships with civil society
coalitions, youth -led organisations and volunteer networks, their grassroots
experien ce in environmental and climate action to support the transition to
green and circular economy leveraging UNDP will contribute to generating
legislation and policies to reduce fiscal dependence on income derived from
hydrocarbon consumption It will also collaborate in developing financial
solutions that form part of  Government-led integrated national financing
framework in coordination with other United Nations organisations, international
financial institutions, and the national banking system Interventions will
strengthen municipal and national institutions’ capacities to promote  green,
blue, purple and circular economy through the design of tax and tariff reforms
Interventions will develop skills for high-value jobs in the framework of the
fourth industrial revolution to promote formal employment of women and
vulnerable populations territories with  high multidimensional poverty index
ranking Interventions will contribute to aligning private finance and investment
with the Goals All these partnerships and interventions will contribute toward
the UNSDCF outcome , related to the full participation of women and vulnerable
populations in an inclusive and innovative economy in /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ Resilient
to adversity The UNDP theory of change in this area is: if UNDP works with
different stakeholders on disaster risk management, resilient and inclusive
recovery strategies, with an intersectional gender perspective, through
interventions throughout the country, then the capacity of national and local
public sectors, civil society, and the private sectors to address the driving
forces generating risks (under  prospective approach) to reduce the existing
risks (through corrective measures) and to respond and prepare for multiple
crises and threats will be strengthened This will entail incorporating
incorporate ‘build back better’ and ‘polluter pays’ principles in policies, and
prioritizing recovery strategies that have not yet been sufficiently developed,
such as risk transfer mechanisms, early warning systems, and other financial
solutions to build resilience Emphasis will be given to ecosystem and community
-based adaptation strategies within the water, waste and sanitation sectors in
complement and in line with nationally determined contributions and the national
decarbonization plan UNDP will mobilize resources from vertical funds and carbon
markets to enhance conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity; obtain
integral transboundary water management resources; promote sustainable
consumption and production; foster greener, more energy -efficient technologies;
increase hectares of forest cover or under restoration (as nature-based
solutions provide  low-cost way to prepare for different threats and crises) –
all with an intersectional gender perspective By investing in water harvesting
knowledge and expertise by State institutions and rural aqueduct associations,
UNDP will improve community-based adaptation measures in areas with water stress
All these interventions entail partnerships with the National Commission for
Risk Prevention and Emergency Response (CNE), the Costa Rican Institute for
Water and Sanitation (AyA), the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction (UNDRR ), UNFPA, UNICEF, and financial institutions such as the IADB,
the World Bank and CABEI The programme will foster collaborative action for
systems change using multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approaches and
transboundary perspective to achieve these results with key partners UNDP will
build on  solid history of collaboration and existing projects with over 50
local governments and 30 national government institutions, such as the Ministry
of Economy, Industry and Commerce (MEIC), the Ministry of Labour and Social
Security (MTSS), the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship and
Telecommunications (MICITT), the Ministry of Security (MSP), the Ministry of
Justice (MJP), the Ministry of Culture and Youth (MCJ), the Judicial Branch, the
Legislative Branch, and the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSE) UNDP will work with
academia and think tanks to advocate for evidence-based research on gender
equality Innovation, Science, Technology the Ministry (MRE), for This strategy
will contribute toward the efficient use of ecosystem resources for the
protection of the planet and adaptation to climate change, in alignment with
outcome  of the UNSDCF III Programme and risk management This country programme
document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at the country level The accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels, with respect to
country programmes, is prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and internal control framework /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ The
programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response
to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used
in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage
financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects The MRE and
MIDEPLAN will oversee this programme The UNSDCF steering committee will provide
strategic orientation Risks that may affect the implementation of this programme
are political, economic, institutional, financial, environmental and
socioenvironmental The new administration in Costa Rica emphasizes deregulation
to facilitate ease of doing business, employment generation, and cost-of-living
reduction The resulting expedited business development could generate associated
environmental and social protection risks; UNDP will generate data and
information and advocate and invest in policy communications to make the
business case so that deregulation policies continue to advance the historical
environmental and social wins of previous policies and to mainstream recovery
and response mechanisms to multiple threats and crises Slow economic recovery
after the COVID-19 pandemic, combined with the economic impacts of the war in
Ukraine, could lead to increased levels of poverty, reduced attraction to
foreign investment, and reduced earnings from tourism and commodities exports
This would not only slow down the proposed transition towards green, blue and
purple economic models but could also increase social mistrust in institutions,
increase social conflict, and weaken overall democracy UNDP will strengthen
spaces and participatory mechanisms for democratic dialogue and conflict
management and promote transparency and accountability to avoid and alleviate
any negative impacts The country’ high vulnerability to multiple threats and
natural hazards could trigger an emergency that surpasses institutional response
capacity Starting with pilots, UNDP will invest in disaster risk prevention,
early warning, and preparedness in all interventions, ensuring central and local
governments can improve internal and transboundary coordination and put risk
transfer mechanisms in place to build back better Ensuring international
coordination with United Nations specialised agencies and strengthening the
inter-agency emergency response mechanisms from the start of the programme cycle
will be crucial for the quick deployment of resources in times of crisis and
early recovery The UNDP accountability framework underscores its commitment to
results and risk- based performance management, as well as shared values and
culture of accountability and transparency, following the UNDP enterprise risk
management policy The UNDP social and environmental standards and accountability
mechanism will be applied to all programme interventions, including  stakeholder
response mechanism To update and manage grievance mechanisms, UNDP will
continuously update stakeholder mapping to identify stakeholders who do not
benefit from interventions or conflict with programming This will create
measures for conflict resolution and ensure no one is left behind This will be
particularly important for programmes related to indigenous peoples and pa yment
for ecosystem services, which UNDP recognizes will require information and
timely, inclusive participation in consultations and decision-making processes
that may affect beneficiaries’ livelihoods or the ecosystems on which they
depend The UNDP oversight policy includes the organization of independent
internal and external oversight to provide assurances that functional systems of
internal controls are in /17  DP/DCP/CRI/ place, including evaluation of the
policy framework, efficient utilisation of resources, and adherence to
professional and ethical standards in UNDP This is particularly important in
managing environmental vertical funds, especially with regard to separating
functions between oversight and execution roles of associated projects, as UNDP
employs more implementation partners in the new programming cycle IV Monitoring
and evaluation In coordination with MRE and MIDEPLAN, UNDP will effectively
follow up on the commitments of this programme For that purpose, the monitoring,
evaluation and learning plan will be closely aligned with all programmatic
interventions ensuring that oversight is provided on time and compliant with all
quality assurance procedures Furthermore, UNDP will incorporate the role of
monitoring and evaluation officer into the office structure to ensure early
identification of delays in achieving results and to support the collection and
dissemination of lessons learned To cover monitoring, evaluation and
communication expenses, UNDP will allocate at least  per cent of the programme
budget, proportionately charged to projects UNDP will strengthen collaboration
with data and information -generation entities, in particular INEC, the National
Geo-environmental Information Centre, state universities, and the statistics and
information focal points from the Ministry of Health, MIDEPLAN, the Central Bank
(BCCR), MOH, the Ministry of Culture and Youth, and IMAS UNDP will support the
strengthening and updating of digital tools employed by information systems,
which are key to monitoring the advancement of the Goals, such as the National
Information System and Unique Registry of Beneficiaries, the National System for
Integrated Water Resource Management, and the System for Monitoring Land Use
Change Within Production Systems The programme will emphasize indicators with
disaggregated data in areas that have lagged behind in national and
institutional statistics, such as women, LGBTQIA+, indigenous peoples, afro-
descendants, migrants, older persons and people with disabilities The UNDP
gender marker will track gender gaps and ensure that at least 70 per cent of
total programme expenditures are in accordance with the gender equality strategy
Regarding regula  resources, at least 15 per cent will be allocated to gender
equality and women’ empowerment The UNDP gender strategy will contribute to
integrating gender indicators into the monitoring action plan To improve
evidence-based competencies, data collection and analysis capacities will be
enhanced through training and new analytical tools in collaboration with
domestic and international academic institutions and the UNDP regional hub UNDP
will strengthen the liaison between communication, knowledge management and
statistics teams to increase the impact of communication pieces in national
decision -making balanced evaluation plan will be implemented to ensure learning
and accountability, in agreement with the Government, following the UNDP
evaluation policy and United Nations Evaluation Group guidelines This plan
complements UNSDCF, outcome, thematic and project evaluations, as required /17
DP/DCP/CRI/ Annex Results and resources framework for Costa Rica () NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthened capacities for provision of quality and
accessible services for all Sustainable Development Goals , , , , 11, 12, 16,
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF outcome  By 2027,
institutions are transformed and modernised to provide people- centred,
inclusive, innovative, effective, efficient, timely and flexible, gender-
transforming quality services, articulated with other institutions and with
strong territorial approach, allowing municipalities to become the main agents
of change in local development, especially in territories with  lower
development index RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : No one left behind,
centring on equitable access to opportunities and  rights-based approach to
human agency and human development ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME (United States
dollars) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA
SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) MAJOR PARTNERS /
PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS Indicator  Percentage of people living in poor
households determined by multidimensional poverty method, by sex, zone INEC,
Judicial Branch Annual Judiciary MAG MCJ MIDEPLAN MINAE Ministry of Health MJP
MTSS MSP INAMU INVU IMAS INCOPESCA AyA BCCR Costa Rican Institute of Pacific
Ports (INCOP) Indigenous territories Private sector Donors: Global Environment
Facility (GEF), Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Fund, Government of Costa Rica
Output  Public institutions have strengthened capacities for designing,
implementing and evaluating public policies to achieve 2030 goals, based on the
generation of evidence data, digitalization and information analysis and
participatory approaches Regular $287,100 Other $10,985,000 Baseline (2020):
Total: % Male: % Female: % Urban: % Rural: % Indicator  Number of public
policies that have improved in their design, implementation and evaluation of
evidence-based and participatory approaches with an intersectional gender
perspective, built with the support of UNDP [IRRF] Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027):  Frequency: annual Source: UNDP Target (2027) Total: % Male: % Female:
14% Urban: % Rural: % Indicator  Percentage of people living in dwellings with
optimal basic services, by sex, zone Indicator  Number of digital platforms and
applications developed with support from UNDP that accelerate digitalization,
and facilitate Baseline (2020): Total:% Male: % Female: % 10  DP/DCP/CRI/
decision-making in the public and private sectors, with an intersectional gender
perspective for Sustainable Development [IRRF] Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):
Frequency: annual Source: UNDP Urban; % Rural: % Target (2027) Total:% Male: %
Female: % Urban; % Rural: % Output  Public and private sectors, civil society
organizations, youth groups and volunteer networks have improved capacities for
constructing and implementing intersectoral, territorial and multilevel
agreements based on democratic dialogue, which is gender-transformative,
culturally sensitive and contribute to the advancement of the 2030 Agenda
Indicator  Percentage of informal employment in non- agricultural employment by
sex Baseline (2020): Total:% Male: % Female: % Target (2027): Total:% Male: %
Female: % Indicator  Number of agreements drafted that facilitate the transition
to  green, blue, circular, resilient and inclusive with an intersectional gender
perspective, guided by the NDC and NDP [IRRF SP ] Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027):  Frequency: Annual Source: UNDP Indicator  Intentional homicide rate by
sex (per 100 inhabitants) Baseline (2020): Total:11, Male: Female:  Target
(2027) Total:  Male: Female:  Indicator  Number of tools that promote the
prevention and attention to violence, especially violence against women of all
ages and in their diversity [IRRF ] Baseline:  Target:  11  DP/DCP/CRI/
Frequency: Annual Source: National Plan for the Care and Prevention of Domestic
Violence, United Nations country team, UNDP Output  National and local public
institutions have strengthened their capacities to manage, inform and supervise
substances harmful to the environment, as well as to substitute and eliminate
them Indicator  Metric tons of CO2e avoided due to management of chemicals,
refrigerants imported, and actions to promote sustainable mobility and carbon
sequestration as  result of forest restoration activities [IRRF SP ] Baseline
(2022): MT Target (2027): 26 MT Frequency: Annual Source: Environmental Quality
Management Department (DIGECA), MINAE Baseline (2022):  MT Target (2027): 10 MT
Frequency: Annual Source: DIGECA, MINAE Indicator  Number of initiatives drafted
with support from UNDP demonstrate progress in promoting solutions to plastics
pollution with an intersectional gender perspective Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027):  Frequency: Annual Source: UNDP 12  DP/DCP/CRI/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR
GOAL:  strengthened and inclusive economic model which generates opportunities
of formal employment of quality and entrepreneurship in all territories
Sustainable Development Goals , , , , , , , 10, 11, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF outcome  By 2027, women in their diversity and
vulnerable populations participate in and benefit from an innovative, inclusive
economy that enhances their opportunities for decent work and entrepreneurship,
with better conditions to access financing mechanisms RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome : Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green,
inclusive, and digital transitions; Indicator  Unemployment rate, by sex INEC,
Annual Regular $382,800 Presidency Legislative Assembly MAG MCJ MEIC MICITT
MIDEPLAN MINAE Ministry of Heath MOH MTSS IMAS BCCR INCOPESCA INAMU INCOP Rural
Development Institute (INDER) Indigenous Roundtable Chambers of Commerce and
Exporters Private sector Donors: GEF, GCF, Global Fund, Adaptation Fund,
Government of Costa Rica Output  State institutions create conditions to
overcome multidimensional poverty by facilitating formal employment
opportunities based on green, blue, circular and purple enterprises with an
intersectional gender perspective, prioritizing populations in conditions of
vulnerability such as people with disabilities, migrants, indigenous peoples,
and Afro-descendant population Other $22,660,000 Baseline (2020): Total: % Male:
% Female: % Target (2027): Total: % Male: % Female: 10% Indicator  Number of
initiatives implemented with support from UNDP that promote formal employment
among women and vulnerable populations through developing skills for high-value
jobs in the framework of the fourth industrial revolution under  model of
sustainable development and with an intersectional gender perspective [IRRF ]
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Frequency: Annual Data source: Legislative
Assembly MINAE, National System of Conservation Areas, protected areas map
Indicator  Number of people (disaggregated by sex), who benefit directly from
initiatives facilitated by UNDP, related with employment opportunities in 13
DP/DCP/CRI/ territories with  high multidimensional poverty index and among
priority interest groups most vulnerable [IRRF ] Baseline (2022): 30,000 Target
(2022): 40,000 Frequency: Annual Data source: IMAS, INEC Output  National and
local public sectors have strengthened capacities for the promotion of  green,
blue, purple and circular economy and the strengthening of climate action
Indicator  Number of bills, drafted with the support of UNDP, being analysed in
the legislative assembly to reduce fiscal dependence on income derived from
hydrocarbon consumption and mitigate the cost to the State of the environmental
and social impacts of unsustainable economic activity, guided by the NDC and NDP
[IRRF ] Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Frequency: Annual Data source:
Legislative Assembly Indicator  Number of public policies or technical standards
drafted with support from UNDP, that contribute to promoting sustainable
production, biodiversity, circular economy, and climate action at the national
and municipal level, guided by the NDC and NDP [IRRF EA] Baseline (2022):
Target (2022):  Frequency: Annual 14  DP/DCP/CRI/ Data source: UNDP, MEIC
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Strengthened national and subnational, public and
private capacities for prevention, preparation, reaction and response to crises
Sustainable Development Goals , , , , 11, 13, 14, 15, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF outcome  By 2027, people, communities and
institutions mitigate and adapt to climate change and  sustainable and efficient
use of ecosystem resources that conserve and prevent the degradation of nature,
stop pollution and protect the planet RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome :
Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk Indicator  Number
of people directly affected as  result of disasters per 100,000 inhabitants CNE
Annual Regular $287,100 MAG MCJ MICITT MIDEPLAN MINAE Ministry of Heath Ministry
of Public Works and Transport MSP MTSS Legislative Assembly AyA BCCR CCSS CNE
ICE ICT IMAS INAMU INCOP INDER INEC INVU Municipalities Indigenous Territories
Output  Central and local public institutions, indigenous territories, and local
organisations have strengthened capacities for disaster risk management,
including resilient and inclusive recovery strategies, with an intersectional
gender perspective, based on  correct assessment of loss and damage Baseline
(2020): ,224 Target (2027): ,102 Indicator  Percentage of local governments
adopting and implementing disaster risk reduction strategies at the local level
Indicator  Number of initiatives with UNDP support that strengthen capacities
for prevention, early warning, management of multiple threats, and disaster
recovery with an intersectional gender perspective transformation [IRRF SP ]
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 14 Frequency: Annual Data source: UNDP, CNE
Baseline (2020): % Target (2027): 100% Indicator  Number of institutions at
national and local levels with strengthened capacities for comprehensive risk
management, including integrated water resources management with  gender
perspective Baseline (2022): 206 Target (2027): 400 Donors: GEF, GCF, Global
Fund, Government of Costa Rica 15  DP/DCP/CRI/ Frequency: Annual Data source:
UNDP, municipalities, AyA Output  Central and local government institutions,
civil society and the private sector increased support for ecosystems-based
adaptation strategies with  gender perspective and consolidated social inclusion
Indicator  Funds mobilised, with support from UNDP, from public and private
sectors to support the mitigation and conservation efforts and sustainable use
of biodiversity and forests with  gender perspective and social inclusion as
adaptation measures [IRRF SP ] Baseline (2022): $10 million Target (2027): $30
million Frequency: Annual Data source: UNDP Indicator  Area of hectares (Ha) of
increased forest cover or restoration that contribute to ecosystem-based
adaptation, with support from UNDP [IRRF ] Baseline (2022): 1000 Ha Target
(2027): 2000 Ha Frequency: Annual Data source: National Geo- environmental
Information Centre, MINAE, National Forest Financing Fund Output  State
institutions and rural aqueduct associations have improved water resource
management through 16  DP/DCP/CRI/ community-based adaptation measures and
managing multiple risks Indicator  Number of interventions by UNDP that improve
water resources management and sanitation Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):
Frequency: annual Data source: AyA, municipalities 17