URBAN ENERGY TRANSITION FOR SECTOR COUPLING THE GREATER METROPOLITAN AREA OF IN
FACILITATING INTEGRATION THE CENTRAL VALLEY OF COSTA RICA OF VARIABLE RENEWABLE
ENERGY IN CITIES Supported by © IRENA 2022 Unless otherwise stated, material in
this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or
stored, provided that appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the
source and copyright holder Material in this publication that is attributed to
third parties may be subject to separate terms of use and restrictions, and
appropriate permissions from these third parties may need to be secured before
any use of such material ISBN: -- IRENA (2022), Urban energy transition for the
Greater Metropolitan Area of the Central Valley of Costa Rica, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi About IRENA The International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA) serves as the principal platform for international co-
operation,  centre of excellence,  repository of policy, technology, resource
and financial knowledge, and  driver of action on the ground to advance the
transformation of the global energy system An intergovernmental organisation
established in 2011, IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use
of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower,
ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy
access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity
Acknowledgements IRENA would like to express sincere appreciation to the experts
who reviewed the report and provided invaluable inputs, insightful comments and
constructive suggestions Special thanks to Silvia Valentinuzzi Nuñez (Ministry
of Housing and Human Settlements of Costa Rica – MIVAH), Guido Godínez Zamora
(Compañía Nacional de Fuerza  Luz – CNFL), Victor Bazan and Laura Lizano
(Secretariat of Planning of the Energy Subsector – SEPSE), Direccion Cambio
Climatico (Ministry of Environment and Energy – MINAE), Jairo Quirós Tortós
(University of Costa Rica – UCR) and Mónica Rodríguez (Central Bank of Costa
Rica – BCCR) Thanks also to IRENA colleagues Elizabeth Press, Fabian Barrera,
Sebastian Hendrik Sterl, Rodrigo Leme and Maria Vicente Garcia for their
contributions, advice and feedback through reviewing and discussions Special
thanks go to Paul Komor who provided helpful feedback and suggestions IRENA is
grateful for the support of Germany’ IKI project in producing this publication
IKI support This report forms part of the Energy Solutions for Cities of the
Future project, which is supported by the International Climate Initiative (IKI)
The German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear
Safety (BMU) supports this initiative on the basis of  decision adopted by the
German Bundestag Contributing authors This report was prepared, under the
guidance of Dolf Gielen, by the sustainable urban energy team at IRENA’
Innovation and Technology Centre (IITC) It was co-authored by Julien Marquant
(former IRENA colleague), Jessica Roccard, and Fabia Miorelli (former IRENA
colleague), with additional support from Yong Chen (IRENA), and Juan Ignacio
Alfaro Corrales Disclaimer This publication and the material herein are provided
“as is” All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the
reliability of the material in this publication However, neither IRENA nor any
of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content providers provides
warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, and they accept no
responsibility or liability for any consequence of use of the publication or
material herein The information contained herein does not necessarily represent
the views of all Members of IRENA The mention of specific companies or certain
projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by
IRENA in preference to others of  similar nature that are not mentioned The
designations employed, and the presentation of material herein, do not imply the
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of
any region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries  TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABBREVIATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY    INTRODUCTION  National context    National
Decarbonisation Plan and the role of cities 12  Methodology and approach 13  THE
URBAN ENERGY CONTEXT AND REPRESENTATIVE DISTRICTS OF THE GREATER METROPOLITAN
AREA  Characterisation of districts in the Greater Metropolitan Area 16 17
Local renewable energy options 18  Energy demand 21  Estimation of roof areas in
buildings 23  Creation of representative districts 23  DECARBONISING THE ENERGY
SECTORS AT THE MUNICIPAL LEVEL 26 27  Medium- and long-term perspectives
Evaluation of municipal-level roadmaps 31  Alternative scenarios 38
Implications for the national grid infrastructure 40  Extrapolation to the CNFL
area 41  Key challenges and proposed actions 44  CONCLUSIONS 46 REFERENCES 48
Figures FIGURE : Map of Costa Rica by province, municipality and district FIGURE
: Costa Rica’ GDP by sector, 2012 to 2021 FIGURE :  10 () Electricity generation
by source (2019), () Energy consumption by source (2018), () Oil consumption by
sector (2018) 10 FIGURE : Number of vehicles and fossil fuel consumption by
transport mode, 2007 to 2016 FIGURE : Structure of the power sector in Costa
Rica in 2019 FIGURE : Lines of action in Costa Rica’ National Decarbonisation
Plan, with implications for cities FIGURE : Overview of the methodology
developed for the assessment of urban renewable energy 11 11 12 integration 14
FIGURE : FIGURE : Map of CNFL coverage (in light blue) showing districts of
Costa Rica (left) and IRENA Planning Platform for Urban Renewable Energy
features at  glance 15 the zoomed-in coverage area provided by MIVAH for the
study (right) 17 FIGURE 10: Average monthly renewable energy potential per
square metre by district in 2018 for () solar energy and () wind energy at 10
metres above surface level 18 FIGURE 11: Technologies included in the scope of
this study FIGURE 12: Methodology to produce time-series load profiles of
buildings FIGURE 13: Electricity consumption by end-use sector and electricity
demand for each representative 19 21 district in 2018 23 FIGURE 14: Energy mix
for transport sector over  at the national scale FIGURE 15: Energy mix for
industry sector over  at the national scale FIGURE 16: Share of renewable energy
in total final energy consumption, by district, for the BAU 29 30 scenario and
the low-carbon NDP and NZC scenarios 32 FIGURE 17: Comparison of the BAU
scenario (left) and the low-carbon NDP and NZC scenarios (right), showing
optimisation results for the medium term (2035), with the trade-off between
CO2-equivalent emissions and costs 33 FIGURE 18: Cost breakdown in 2035 for the
two extreme districts FIGURE 19: NDP scenario showing the capacity needed in
2035 for () heating systems in buildings and 34 () electricity generation in
buildings, for the two extreme districts 35 FIGURE 20: NDP scenario showing the
capacity needed in 2035 for () cooling systems in buildings and () energy
storage systems, for the two extreme districts 35 FIGURE 21: CO2-equivalent
emissions and costs in 2050 for the five districts under the () BAU scenario and
() low-carbon NDC and NZC scenarios 36 FIGURE 22: NDP scenario showing the
capacity needed in 2050 for () heating systems in buildings and () electricity
generation in buildings, for the two extreme districts 37 FIGURE 23: NDP
scenario showing the capacity needed in 2050 for () cooling systems in buildings
and () energy storage systems, for the two extreme districts 37 FIGURE 24:
Comparison of urban energy planning strategies for the district of Desamparados
in 2035 and 2050 38 FIGURE 25: Alternative scenarios considering vehicle-to-grid
and hydrogen optimal strategies FIGURE 26: Grid electricity consumption in 2035
and 2050 FIGURE 27: Carbon emissions by sector, , for the CNFL concession area
39 40 43 Tables TABLE : Overview of key technologies facilitating the
integration of renewable energy included in the scenarios 20 TABLE : Details on
the amounts of available monitored profiles TABLE : Defined customer categories
by monthly average electricity consumption TABLE : Customer information and
electricity consumption of the five representative districts in 2018 TABLE :
TABLE : 21 22 22 Selected socio-economic and energy-related variables considered
for the analysis Total per capita CO2 emissions of the energy systems in the
five district clusters for 2035 and 2050 25 42 TABLE : TABLE : Total costs of
the energy system in the five district clusters for 2035 and 2050 42 Total CO2
emissions of the energy system (MtCO2e) in the five district clusters for 2035
and 2050 42  ABBREVIATIONS ARESEP Public Services Regulatory Authority BAU
Business-as-usual BCCR Central Bank of Costa Rica CHP Combined heat and power
CNFL National Company of Light and Power Carbon dioxide CO2 CO2e Carbon dioxide
equivalent GDP Gross domestic product GIS Geographic information system GW
Gigawatt GWh Gigawatt hour ICE Costa Rican Electricity Institute INEC National
Institute of Statistics and Census IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
km2 Square kilometre kW Kilowatt kWh Kilowatt hour LPG Liquefied petroleum gas
MINAE Ministry of Environment and Energy MIVAH Ministry of Housing and Human
Settlements MSW Municipal solid waste Mt Megatonne MW Megawatt NDC Nationally
Determined Contribution NDP National Decarbonisation Plan NZC Net zero carbon PV
Photovoltaic SEPSE Planning Secretariat of the Energy Subsector USD United
States dollar  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY As with other countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean, Costa Rica is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change,
even though it contributed less than 05% of global greenhouse gas emissions in
The country has developed national vision of transforming its economy to net
zero emissions by 2050 and an ambitious decarbonisation plan with sectoral
break- downs including for the transport and buildings sectors To meet Costa
Rica’ decarbonisation target, there is  need for the national government as well
as local municipalities to step up their actions This is because that scaling up
the use of clean energy and improving energy efficiency at both the national and
local levels are key in realising the shared decarbonisation objective This
would particularly require support from local governments in implementation when
it involves urban planning interplaying with energy use at the local levels Over
the past years, municipalities have been undertaking efforts to improve the
sustainability of their jurisdictions, to which decarbonisation actions are well
in aligned with this endeavor Despite that Costa Rica’ central government is in
charge of developing national energy and transport policies and regulations,
there is large technical potential for decarbonisation in cities, given that 75%
of the country’ population lives in urban areas This report explores plausible
technological options in the Greater Metropolitan Area of the Central Valley of
Costa Rica to contribute towards achieving the national decarbonisation goal
IRENA’ urban planning tool was implemented to assess technological pathways that
enable the decarbonisation of cities The analysis focused on cities within the
Greater Metropolitan Area of Costa Rica, analysing in detail five representative
districts Two technological pathways – considering the existing policy measures
in the country – were evaluated for each district, and the respective results
were compared against  business-as-usual (BAU) scenario in which no climate or
energy-related policies are in place The first pathway, the National
Decarbonisation Plan (NDP) scenario, scales the targets set in the country’
National Decarbonisation Plan down to the city level, achieving  significant
reduction in emissions while increasing the penetration of renewable energy
sources and the electrification of economic activities in the transport,
industry, residential and commercial sectors The second pathway, the net zero
carbon (NZC) scenario, reaches the maximum level of decarbonisation by
electrifying all activities to reach  full reduction of carbon emissions in the
energy and transport sectors by mid-century – an ambitious target that is useful
for exploring benefits and costs  The analysis shows that reducing emissions in
cities by around 90% by 2050 compared to BAU is technically possible in the NDP
scenario Crucially, the results demonstrate that it is still possible to reach
100% emission reduction in this same period in the NZC scenario In other words,
there are no technological barriers to meeting high-ambition targets by
Decarbonising cities not only brings reductions in emissions but also results in
savings of energy costs to cities and their inhabitants These savings are
related primarily to lower operational costs linked to renewable energy
technologies and energy efficiency improvements To meet the NZC scenario,  mix
of technologies needs to be deployed, including: solar photovoltaic (PV)
systems, energy storage systems, air-source heat pumps, and electro-mobility for
private, public and freight fleets The results suggest that this scenario
requires higher total costs, including for integrating these technologies, along
with grid infrastructure upgrades necessitated by increased electricity demand
from electric vehicles Results extrapolated to the concession area of the state
power utility CNFL highlight that the overall costs for cities in all scenarios
are similar While the decarbonisation of most cities will bring energy cost
savings of up to 18% compared to the BAU scenario by 2050, cities with low
population density, large geographic area and low solar PV production may
experience relatively higher costs More importantly, the analysis shows that
investments in the NDP and NZC scenarios are mainly in zero-emission
technologies, thereby reducing emissions and leading to co-benefits associated
with health The adoption of public transport promoted in these two
decarbonisation scenarios also brings co-benefits from reduced congestion and
accidents This study recommends key actions needed in cities to enable the
transformational change towards decarbonisation City energy-related goals should
focus on reducing carbon emissions (particularly from transport), improving
energy efficiency across sectors, increasing renewable energy integration, and
increasing cycling and walking as alternative mobility options To enable this
transformation, however, decision makers will have to consider in their urban
planning the need to overcome key challenges, including institutional barriers,
technical aspects, fiscal concerns, tariffs, employment and uncertainty Among
other measures, cities in Costa Rica can adopt good practices, enforcement of
standards, long-term vision, the use of advanced planning tools, involvement in
national planning, and circular economy activities to maximise the benefits of
decarbonising their energy and transport sectors                 /             ©
INTRODUCTION To address the global climate challenge, Costa Rica has committed
to fully decarbonising its economy by 2050 and has developed  corresponding plan
to achieve this target (UNFCCC, 2019; UNFCCC, 2018) As in many countries,
implementing such  comprehensive plan would require efforts at all levels
Although Costa Rica’ central government is in charge of developing national
energy and transport policies and regulations (Presidencia de La República,
2019), there is large potential for decarbonisation in cities, given that 75% of
the country’ population lives in urban areas This report explores plausible
technological options in the Greater Metropolitan Area of the Central Valley of
Costa Rica to contribute towards achieving the national decarbonisation goal
National context Costa Rica has  population of around  million inhabitants
within  total area of 51 060 square kilometres (km2), making it the third
densest country in the Central America region (following El Salvador and
Guatemala) with 98 inhabitants per km2 The territory is structured in
provinces, 82 cantons (municipalities) and 482 districts (Figure ) The rapidly
growing Greater Metropolitan Area, which includes the capital, San José, and the
provinces of Alajuela, Heredia and Cartago, is home to  million inhabitants,
nearly half of the population, distributed within an area of  044 km2 ALAJUELA
HEREDIA LIMÓN CARTAGO GUANACASTE SAN JOSÉ PUNTARENAS 10 100% 70 77 55 35 48 16
60 78 80% 58 75 50 47 ) $     60% 40     % % % % % % % % % %  (    30 40% 20 % %
% % % % 20% % % % % 10 % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % %  2012 2013 2014
2015 2016 2019 2020 2018 2017 2021 Services (%) Industry (%) Agriculture (%)
Others (%) Total (Billion US$) Economic growth in Costa Rica has depended
heavily on the services and industry sectors (Figure ), which have largely
driven the more than 30% increase in the country’ gross domestic product (GDP)
between 2012 and 2019 (Central Bank of Costa Rica, 2020a; IMF, 2020) The economy
has been fuelled primarily by clean electricity generated from renewable energy
sources such as hydropower, geothermal and wind energy, and by petroleum-based
fuels used mainly for transport and industry (Figures ) As shown in Figure (),
the transport sector is the largest consumer of oil, at 83% in 2018, followed
distantly by the industry (12%) and residential (%) sectors Consumption of
petroleum-based transport fuels has increased over the last 13 years alongside
the growth in internal combustion engine vehicles, assuming similar driving
behaviours and fuel economy since 2007 (Figure ) (SEPSE and MINAE, 2018)
Electricity % Biofuels % Oil % Others % Oil % Wind % Transport % Energy
consumption by source (2018) Biomass % Industry % Geothermal % Residential % Oil
consumption by sector (2018) Electricity generation by source (2019) Solar %
Others % Hydro % 11 90  80  70 19%  19%   17% 60       16% )   (  16% 16% 15%
16% 50 16% 17% 15% 15% 17%        15%     18% 40 13% 17% 17% 17%  17% 30     62%
62% 63% 64% 20 64% 64% 64% 64% 64% 66%  10   2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 2015 2016 Light duty vehicles Heavy Freight Motorcycles Taxis Buses Special
transport Petroleum fuel consumption (PJ) Among the nine power suppliers, the
state-run ICE (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad, or Costa Rican Institute
of Electricity) accounts for the bulk of the electricity supply It provides % of
the total installed generation capacity of  500 megawatts (MW) and also
monopolises the national transmission market (Figure ) Two municipally owned
energy utilities, ESPH and JASEC, operate only % of the national total
generation capacity, while co-operatives account for around % Meanwhile,
privately owned energy companies account for 24% of the capacity, with
breakdown of 10% (Law No  200 Cap ) and BOT (Build-Operate-Transfer) 96% (Law No
200 Cap ), which is below the 15% cap capacity stipulated by law Generation
companies cannot engage in the direct sale of electricity However, private co-
operatives can sell the electricity that they generate to one another (Law No
345, art ) and to the transmission grid operator (ICE), which is one of four
concessionary energy providers at the distribution level Generation Transmission
Distribution Coopelesca % Coopesantos % ESPH % Co-operatives Coopeguanacaste %
Conelectricas % ICE 64% CNFL BOT 13% National electricity market Gross energy
production 11 312 GWh CNFL % Regional electricity market ICE Private 11%
Municipal companies () JASEH % 12  National Decarbonisation Plan and the role of
cities Even though Costa Rica contributed less than 05% of global greenhouse gas
emissions in 2019, like other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean it is
highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change Consequently, different
policy actions have been implemented over the past decade to reinforce the
country’ engagement with global targets These actions and intentions are
manifested in Costa Rica’ Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) towards
reducing emissions under the Paris Agreement, which calls for  44% reduction in
the country’ greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 and represents one of the most
ambitious targets in the region (CEPAL, 2018) Cities in Costa Rica are directly
involved in climate change mitigation through the Cantonal Country Programme,
driving change and assuming multiple roles including decision making, planning,
managing assets and operating local energy suppliers, among others In this
context, municipalities are also key actors in the transition towards 2050, in
which new energy technologies in the transport, industry and residential sectors
will be deployed under the guidance of the national government In 2019, Costa
Rica launched  National Decarbonisation Plan (NDP) as an action to combat
climate change (Government of Costa Rica and MINAE, 2019a; UNFCCC et al, 2020)
The NDP presents  decarbonisation pathway towards net zero emissions by It
includes seven lines of action focused specifically on the contribution from
cities, as summarised below and illustrated in Figure  Implementing the NDP
therefore requires collective efforts involving all relevant stakeholders
Citizen and business culture oriented towards less waste generation and
successful waste management, under  circular economy approach Strategy and Plan
for Better Options Technology to reduce methane from organic waste 100% of the
territory adopt solutions for collection, separation, reuse and disposal of
waste  Strategy for integral design of industries and businesses: "cradle-to-
grave“ in  circular economy fashion Industrial sector have changed energy
sources to decouple activity’ growth and emissions  100% of new commercial,
residential and institutional buildings are low emission standards Increase of
10% in the use of wood, bamboo and other local materials in buildings 100% of
all commercial, residential and institutional buildings are low emission
standards  Electrical energy as primary energy source for transportation,
residential and commercial, industrial sectors (in 2019 less than 30% is
electrical) Electricity matrix manages to operate 100% with renewables  • 60% of
the ﬂeet of light vehicles zero emissions • Zero-emission vehicles for 100% of
new light vehicle sales • Public data on carbon emissions of the cargo truck
ﬂeet • Pilots projects for higher efficiency of the trucks: smart logistics
approach  • 25% of the ﬂeet will be electric • New business models for light
vehicle ( autonomous car sharing) • at least  of freight transport highly
efficient, emissions ↘ 20% compared to • Integrated public transport system
Extensive electric recharging network, complementary zero-emission technologies’
infrastructure (: hydrogen stations)  • 100% of the buses and taxis zero
emissions • Increase of at least 10% of non-motorised mode trips • 70% of the
buses and taxis: zero emissions • 100% electrically operated passenger train
2020 2022 2025 2030 2035 2050 13 • Line of action : developing  mobility system
based on safe, efficient, and sustainable public transport and active mobility
schemes • Line of action : transforming the light-duty vehicle fleet to zero
emissions, boosted by renewable energy • Line of action : promoting  freight
transport sector that adopts modalities, technologies and energy sources towards
achieving zero emissions or the lowest emissions possible • Line of action :
updating the electricity system – covering capacity, flexibility and
intelligence – and scaling up the renewable energy supply at  competitive cost
that may be supported by cost-effective investment programmes to ensure
affordability for final energy consumers • Line of action : developing buildings
of different uses (commercial, residential, institutional) based on high
efficiency standards and low-emission processes • Line of action : transforming
the industry sector through processes and technologies that use renewable energy
sources and are sustainable and efficient, with low or zero emissions • Line of
action : embracing the principle of  circular economy, designed to promote the
development of an integrated system with maximum efficiency, low greenhouse gas
emissions and waste management  Methodology and approach This report aims to
improve understanding of the decarbonisation pathways for municipalities in
Costa Rica, with  focus on five representative districts located within the
concession area of the state-owned power utility CNFL (Compañía Nacional de
Fuerza  Luz, or National Company of Power and Light) The collected data were
embedded in  geographic information system (GIS) database that details the
features needed to characterise the districts from an energy planning
perspective In-depth analyses were then executed for these districts, and the
respective results were extrapolated to the utility scale, with the aim of
supporting decision makers at the local and national levels For data that were
not accessible, advanced data mining techniques were employed to identify
typical districts based on demographic, socio-economic and energy- related data
collected at the national, municipal, district and household levels (see the
next section) The overall methodology for the analysis is shown in Figure  The
approach comprises  combination of data mining and optimisation techniques to
generate data-driven knowledge to better estimate the potential for integrating
renewable energy in the urban context of Costa Rica These techniques include: •
Data collection: An exhaustive data collection process at the district or
municipal scale was executed to implement an advanced classification process
facilitating quantification of the potential for renewable energy integration by
district, based on the main drivers and characteristics of districts 14 Database
Measured Data (Power utility database) Clustering Extrapolation BAU & Policy
scenarios Municipality/district level Municipality - San José level Climate Data
Building level Building Proﬁles Weather Files District level Building
information layer Demand Municipality/district level Demand result Building
level RE potential Energy systems and infrastruccture Building type Industry,
services and transportation at district level Building geometry GIS RE-
integration Municipality/district level GIS-Layer integration Transport &
industry layer Macro-economic Characteristics Processing optimal policy / RE
integration District level Mobility shares Industry shares GDP, Population •
GIS-embedded database: Based on the data collected,  GIS-embedded database was
produced to support districts/municipalities in deploying detailed urban energy
planning based on local geospatial constraints and renewable energy integration
potential • Clustering and identification of representative districts:
clustering technique was then applied to identify five representative districts
that are used to study the decarbonisation process of cities District-level
results were extrapolated to the power utility’ concession area to provide
insights for planning the electricity infrastructure • District-level database:
The database produced was adjusted to each of the five representative districts
Each district was characterised by its GDP, population growth and energy
consumption by type of customer (residential, industrial, commercial, transport,
etc) Energy consumption was disaggregated into end uses to study the different
technologies available for decarbonisation of the district Information related
to renewable energy technologies ( rooftop solar PV, horizontal wind turbines)
and energy storage systems ( batteries, hydrogen) was identified to produce
database of low-carbon technologies that can contribute to decarbonising the
energy sectors of these districts • Urban planning scenarios: Three scenarios
were produced, and the benefits and costs of each scenario were compared to
understand the potential of renewable energy in each district: – BAU scenario:
This is the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario that exists in the absence of
decarbonisation strategies It assumes that industries consume energy in  similar
15 manner as currently and that the transport sector continues to use fossil
fuels in  similar distribution – NDP scenario: This scenario scales the actions
of the National Decarbonisation Plan (NDP) down to cities by promoting
efficiency,  switch to renewable energy technologies and the electrification of
energy end uses – NZC scenario: This scenario aims at net zero carbon emissions
by 2050 by enforcing the actions mentioned for the NDP scenario Costa Rica’
current Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) is already compatible with this
scenario • Optimisations and simulations using IRENA’ Planning Platform for
Urban Renewable Energy: The planning tool developed by the International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) was applied within each representative district,
considering the database and locally available technologies to estimate the
costs and environmental impacts of each scenario The tool aims to support the
decision-making process for long-term urban energy planning in cities by
analysing and optimising the technical and financial viability of integrating
renewable energy technologies Considering the renewable energy resource
potential and combining spatial analysis and energy systems modelling across
different sectors, the tool compares different solutions with the objective of
minimising carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from the energy sector and buildings,
as well as the total energy system costs The main features of the tool are
illustrated in Figure  The IRENA Planning Platform for Urban Renewable Energy
aims at offering  wide range of applications for urban renewable energy
integration and optimisation, network design, mapping and visualisation
Renewable Energy Potential Optimisation Demand & Supply Modelling DHC & Grid
Infrastructure Emission Calculation Spatial and Temporal Visualisation Long-Term
Planning Sector-Coupling Options Building Energy Efficiency Push-Pull Mechanism
Database 16                 /             ©  17 THE URBAN ENERGY CONTEXT AND
REPRESENTATIVE DISTRICTS OF THE GREATER METROPOLITAN AREA  Characterisation of
districts in the Greater Metropolitan Area The state-owned power company CNFL
supplies electricity in most districts of the Greater Metropolitan Area, as
shown in light blue in Figure  To characterise these districts in the analysis,
multiple sources of information were collected, combined and represented in GIS
The map (right) was provided by MIVAH (Ministry of Housing and Human
Settlements) in the report review process 18 format The resulting database
comprises key features including the surface area, population density, economic
growth, energy consumption, and number and type of customer (residential,
commercial or industrial), among others For example, high-resolution data were
gathered on monthly energy consumption for each building within the districts
and were used to produce time-series demand profiles In addition, the end uses
for each technological carrier at  building level were identified based on
energy surveys  Local renewable energy options Costa Rica is known for its vast
natural resources, which greatly increase the country’ potential for deploying
renewable energy technologies This study specifically explores the potential of
solar and wind energy resources in districts, with the greatest values found in
the northwest (Figure 10) In terms of technology applications in the built
environment, solar PV systems have increasingly gained attention due largely to
two attributes: ) the installations can be modular, while the system efficiency
is not impacted significantly by the scale of installed capacity; and ) the
levelised cost of electricity at the utility scale has declined substantially in
the past decade and is expected to continue to drop in the coming years, making
solar PV generation cost-competitive with fossil fuel-based power generation in
growing number of regions and contexts including urban settings (IRENA, 2021b;
IRENA, 2020a) Wind turbines, unlike solar PV, are currently less applicable
within urban areas and are increasingly seen in the surrounding areas of cities
as part of distributed energy generation located close to the load Although
urban wind turbine technologies have been progressing, they are still relatively
rare despite pilot projects 19 Biomass resources such as sugar cane, coffee,
pineapple and oil palm, as well as biomass from animal farms and municipal
waste, also offer an opportunity for local renewables, provided that the radius
of collection is cost-effective economically On most occasions, biomass-based
energy applications bring multiple benefits including social, economic and
environmental benefits for local residents The analysis considers  suite of
technologies that can contribute to the decarbonisation of districts (Figure 11)
To assess the role of storage technologies within Costa Rica’ urban context,
flow redox batteries and hydrogen were included in the technology database,
along with lithium-ion batteries Fuel cell and electrolyser technologies have
significant potential as the government has supported their further exploration,
in addition to the ongoing effort to produce hydrogen using the country’
existing renewable sources Table  provides an overview of key technologies
facilitating the integration of renewable energy included in the scenarios The
energy network plays  critical role in accommodating local renewables At
present, utility companies supply electricity to the concession areas through
radial distribution network However, from  technical perspective, cities could
also inject electricity from distributed energy generation into the power grid,
making the transition from passive to active distribution networks (meshed
distribution networks) To enable this, network reinforcements might be required
to cope with the integration of renewable energy technologies Energy carrier
considered (time series) End-use sector demand Technological scope Domestic hot
water, Space heating & heat for industry Solar PV ASHP ST Heater Wind turbine
Battery Wind Space cooling for buildings Boiler AC Biomass CHP Electricity for
buildings, industry and mobility Micro-CHP LPG Elec_import H2 storage
Electrolyser FC H2 network Heat network Grid import/ export and grid upgrade
The study has also recognised the regulatory challenges in the country, which
are beyond the scope of this study 20 TABLE : Overview of key technologies
facilitating the integration of renewable energy included in the scenarios
LIFETIME (YEARS) TECHNOLOGY CARRIERS DEMAND EFFICIENCY Network electricity
import electricity 99 50 Grid electricity import electricity 99 50 Grid upgrade
Energy converter 86 electricity cooling  Air conditioner (grid)  electricity
heat  Heat (grid) Air-source heat pump – heating mode  electricity heat 20 Air-
source heat pump – cooling mode  electricity cooling 20 14 solar electricity 30
Rooftop solar PV Solar thermal – evacuated tube solar collectors 46 solar heat
15 Horizontal-axis wind turbine – onshore wind electricity – 20 Micro combined
heat and power – heating mode LPG electricity; heat ; 519 12 electricity;
cooling Micro combined heat and power – cooling mode LPG ; 615 12 electricity
cooling  20 Heat pump chiller MSW electricity 34 15 Waste boiler Electrolyser
(hydrogen generator) electricity hydrogen  20 hydrogen electricity  20 Fuel cell
Energy storage electricity electricity  -15 Lead-acid battery electricity
electricity 75-  Lithium-ion battery electricity electricity   Flow redox
battery hydrogen hydrogen   Hydrogen storage To account for these upgrades, the
analysis considered the costs of upgrading the current network and increasing
its capacity to host more renewable energy technologies in the shift towards the
decarbonisation of cities Further analysis can be performed to assess factors
such as contingency, voltage drop, and short-circuit fault or line outages, by
exporting the results to network simulation tools for in-depth evaluation of the
technical challenges and benefits of implementing distributed solutions 21
Energy demand Time-series load profiles per customer within each district were
computed to estimate their energy demand at an hourly basis for one year, as
shown in Figure Because Costa Rica is located in  tropical climate zone with an
average year-round temperature of 25 degrees Celsius (°), domestic space heating
or cooling systems are not commonly found However, districts located near the
coast may require assessing cooling demand in the future In the Greater
Metropolitan Area, the use of cooling technologies is limited to commercial,
industry and public buildings The energy required for domestic hot water (or
eventually cooling) is produced mostly using electricity-based systems These end
uses are represented in the electricity profiles This power utility database
includes all the geo-referenced customers of the electricity company, classified
by sector (residential, commercial or industrial) with the average monthly
energy consumption in kilowatt-hours (kWh) Demand Proﬁles Database Grouping and
Aggregation of Demand Proﬁles Power Utility Database Generation of Daily Demand
Proﬁles Annualisation of Demand Proﬁles  (<) Annual Proﬁles (8760 samples)
Customers  Daily Proﬁles (24 samples)  Annual Proﬁles (8760 samples) Demand
profiles database This database considers high-resolution measured data on the
load profile (10 minutes) from  351 customers These data have been cleaned of
potential measurement errors or outages and then classified into weekday and
weekend The final classification of the load profiles is detailed in Table ,
based on the sectoral categories defined in Table  TABLE : Details on the
amounts of available monitored profiles SECTOR NUMBER OF PROFILES WEEKDAY
WEEKEND 137 99 38 Commercial  145 831 314 Residential 69 Industrial 22 TABLE :
Defined customer categories by monthly average electricity consumption
RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL  – 100  – 300 100 – 200 200 – 300  – 10 000
300 – 500 500 – 700 300 –  000 700+ 10 000 – 100 000  000+ 100 000+ Generation
of daily demand profiles Daily load profiles for each geo-referenced customer
not included in the demand profiles database were generated using the procedure
suggested in Leiva et al (2017) In this procedure, the average monthly
electricity consumption of each customer from the power utility database is
classified according to its sector in Table , then daily profiles are generated
with  Gaussian distribution fitted to the demand profiles database of the
reference sector The distribution of customers and electricity consumption is
presented in Table  TABLE : Customer information and electricity consumption of
the five representative districts in 2018 SAN VICENTE SAN PEDRO SAN ISIDRO SAN
RAFAEL DISTRICT DESAMPARADOS 11 746 12 556 13 258  261  296 Total customers 10
378 11 063 10 590  536  996 Residential customers  323  455  613 691 175
Commercial customers 45 38 55 34 125 Industrial customers Total yearly
electricity consumption (GWh) 21 24 80 19 95 Yearly residential electricity
consumption (GWh) 71 08 46 18 41 Yearly commercial electricity consumption (GWh)
63 42 49 07 48 Yearly industrial electricity consumption (GWh) 90 29 24 70 31
Note: GWh = gigawatt-hours Source: Data processed in the context of the analysis
from the utility-level database 23  Estimation of roof areas in buildings To
better quantify the potential area of rooftop available to install solar PV
systems, the building area was included in the analysis Although GIS databases
were available for some municipalities, the data were insufficient to
approximate the rooftop area of each building Therefore, surveys at the national
level undertaken by the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INEC)
were retrieved According to the National Household Survey of 2019 (INEC, 2019),
the floor area was reported for  portion of houses in every region of the
country With this information and data from the Central Region of the country
(around 970 000 buildings), the average area of the residences was determined
Information published by INEC on the construction sector between 2015 and 2017
made it possible to estimate the area of buildings in the commercial and
industrial sectors (INEC, 2018)  Creation of representative districts By
applying data-mining techniques and considering demographic and geographic
characteristics along with energy use, customer type, and renewable energy
potential, five districts were identified to represent the 109 districts of the
CNFL concession area The five districts are described briefly below, and Figure
13 characterises them according to their electricity needs • District  –
Desamparados de Desamparados: This is the densest district in the country with
more than 35 000 inhabitants, and also has  low Cantonal Human Development Index
in Costa Rica While the district’ energy consumption is not the highest in the
Greater Metropolitan Area, it is expected to double by 2050 driven by economic
growth, even if population growth has slowed Of the nearly 12 000 electricity
customers in this district, 88% are residential, 11% are commercial, and only %
are industrial The potential for deploying solar PV systems in the district at
building level has been investigated in previous works (Valverde et al, 2015),
finding low penetration due mainly to the technology cost However, 120 300
)    ( 100 250 )  80 200                /    ( 60 150 40 100        20 50   San
Desamparados San Vicente San Pedro San Isidro San Rafael Yearly RES elec
(GWh/km2) Yearly COM elec (GWh/km2) Yearly IND elec (GWh/km2) Yearly Electricity
(GWh) 24 the cost is constantly decreasing because of economies of scale, and
incentives for solar PV deployment in the medium and long terms will likely be
available to enhance adoption Due to the district’ density and number of
customers, it will likely face infrastructure planning challenges for
technologies that require  large area for deployment • District  – San Vicente
de Moravia: This district of 30 000 inhabitants has experienced rising energy
needs in recent years, driven primarily by economic growth Of the more than 12
500 electricity customers in the district, 88% are residential, % are
commercial, and only % are industrial The districts within the cluster
represented by San Vicente have seen an increase in the Cantonal Human
Development Index, positioning them at the top of the ranking This suggests that
economic conditions may not be  barrier for the adoption of new technologies, as
is the case in Desamparados This also explains why even if the district’
population growth has slowed, electricity consumption in San Vicente is expected
to double by Due to rising urbanisation rates, the district is likely to face
planning challenges on space availability for deploying some technologies
However, the installation of rooftop solar PV along with energy storage systems
can be an attractive alternative • District  – San Pedro de Montes de Oca: With
the same number of inhabitants as San Vicente, San Pedro has experienced growth
in its energy needs driven mainly by commercial activities around the academic
sector, as the district hosts many universities This district is relatively
dense, and its buildings are typically old San Pedro has the highest electricity
consumption among the five representative districts, with more than 13 000
electricity customers, of which 80% are residential, % are commercial, and only
% are industrial Similar to San Vicente, population growth has slowed but
electricity consumption is expected to double by 2050, in this case due to
energy-intensive activities in the commercial sector As the district’ Cantonal
Human Development Index approaches the top of the ranking in the expectation of
growing economic development, the adoption and deployment of new technologies
seem feasible and worth exploring • District  – San Isidro de Coronado: While
other districts in Costa Rica face urban planning challenges related to their
high population density and lack of available land space, San Isidro is notable
for having around 18 000 inhabitants distributed over  relatively large area Its
energy needs have not changed significantly over the years; however, the need to
electrify activities will likely lead to higher needs in the future Of the  000
electricity customers in this district, % are residential, 11% are commercial,
and only % are industrial Although the district’ Cantonal Human Development
Index has increased, it is not yet at the top of the ranking Growing economic
development, however, indicates that transformations can occur if well-designed
policies are in place The main challenge in this district is not so much land
space for placing technologies, but the relatively low potential for solar PV
production – the irradiance values are not as high as in other districts within
the Greater Metropolitan Area, which may necessitate exploring other
technologies • District  – San Rafael de Coronado: This district has the lowest
number of inhabitants among the five representative districts, with only around
000, as well as the lowest electricity consumption The district is dominated by
farmers, and while the Cantonal Human Development Index remains low, it has
increased over the years Unlike in the other studied districts, the population
is expected to grow by 2050, and along with economic development this is
expected to increase energy consumption in the future Of the  000 electricity
customers in this district, 87% are residential, % are commercial, and % are
industrial, with the latter dedicated mainly to milk and cattle production As in
San Isidro, 25 the land area is vast, allowing the deployment of technologies
that may not be suitable for high-density districts (for example, wind turbines)
According to existing studies (Valverde et al, 2015), solar PV generation may be
unsuitable due primarily to cloud effects The use of waste is another technology
with great potential given the presence of many cattle factories in this
district TABLE : Selected socio-economic and energy-related variables considered
for the analysis SAN VICENTE SAN PEDRO SAN ISIDRO SAN RAFAEL DISTRICT
DESAMPARADOS 37 079 32 146 29 126 18 398  266 Population (2018) 337284 292412
264941 167355 075191 GDP (USD billon) 034957 031414 029875 035458 043777 GDP
growth to 2035 032349 028841 027232 03306 041184 GDP growth to 2050 11 93  01
02  38 67 Population density (2018) 24 79 18 95 21 Electricity demand (GWh) 11
746 12 556 13 258  261  296 Customers 10 378 11 063 10 590  536  996 Residential
customers 691  323  455  613 175 Commercial customers 34 45 38 55 125 Industrial
customers 24 19 95 21 Yearly electricity (GWh) Yearly residential electricity
use (GWh) 71 08 46 18 41 Yearly commercial electricity use (GWh) 63 42 49 07 48
Yearly industrial electricity use (GWh)  29 24  31 Source: Data processed in the
context of the analysis, 26                 /            ©     27 DECARBONISING
THE ENERGY SECTORS AT THE MUNICIPAL LEVEL Given the high urbanisation rate in
Costa Rica and that nearly half of the population resides within the boundaries
of the Greater Metropolitan Area, it is necessary that municipalities be part of
the country’ decarbonisation strategy – the strategy that has been orchestrated
and designed at the national level while being implemented with the support and
engagement from local authorities and stakeholders For example, authorities at
the local level can put forward initiatives such as planning  “15-minute” city
(as proposed by Paris, France) to shift mobility to non-motorised transport Such
initiatives would lead to reduced consumption of fossil fuels, which currently
dominate the transport fuel mix in Costa Rica Other opportunities exist as well
Even though Costa Rica’ electricity demand is well covered under the current
Electricity Generation Expansion Plan, strategically it is worth considering
diversifying the mix to enhance energy security and hedge against the seasonable
variation and climate-induced risks facing hydropower generation From  technical
perspective, local renewable energy sources, particularly solar PV and wind
energy, can be tapped into to diversify the power mix, thus enhancing the
security of energy supply (IRENA, 2021a) Renewables can bring numerous benefits
to local governments, including improving the quality of life of citizens,
contributing to climate mitigation, boosting the local economy and creating
jobs, and improving the quality and reliability of the power supply However,
realising these benefits would require  thorough scenario-based evaluation of
urban energy development options This could provide an overall framework for
different national authorities to better co-ordinate among themselves, as well
as for local governments to utilise, particularly since urban planning needs to
be involved  Medium- and long-term perspectives Costa Rica’ existing national
climate policies provided guidance to construct three scenarios, which are
applicable to the five representative districts The first scenario, business-as-
usual (BAU), considers no decarbonisation targets and assumes that fossil fuels
will continue to be the main source of energy in the transport and industry
sectors The second scenario, 28 urban-level NDP, adopts the targets stated in
the National Decarbonisation Plan, scaling them down to the district level using
the population and GDP, with the objective of analysing the potential for
decarbonisation following the NDP targets with the support of municipalities
involved in urban energy planning The third scenario, net zero carbon (NZC),
considers the country’ vision to become carbon-neutral by 2050 in line with the
NDP, which includes the highest penetration of renewable energy resources in the
transport and energy sectors Business-as-usual (BAU) scenario The BAU scenario
does not consider energy policies towards decarbonisation Fossil fuels continue
to be the main source of energy in the country, particularly in the transport
and industry sectors, and their consumption follows the existing trend This
scenario presents  path dependency future with low penetration of distributed
generation and practically no deployment of electric vehicles Key projections
are presented below: • Energy sector: The renewable energy share increases from
27% in 2020 to only 30% in 2050 considering  low penetration of renewables in
the energy system Low electrification in industry by 2050 to replace fossil
fuels results in this very limited increase in the share of renewable energy •
Residential sector: If new energy policies are not applied in the residential
sector, there will be  small decrease in the renewable energy share due to
slight increase in the use of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) for cooking
Currently, this sector has an 82% renewable share (electricity), which could
decrease % by 2050 due to increased use of LPG for cooking • Commercial and
public buildings: The use of LPG for cooking increases here as well, and the
sector’ current renewable energy share of 93% could drop to 91% • Industrial
sector: Current electrification of the industry sector is 43%, and there would
be  substitution of fossil fuels of up to 50% by • Transport sector: The
transport sector remains as it is today, with the vehicle fleet almost 100%
based on fossil fuels • Emission reduction: Emissions in 2018 were 73 megatonnes
(Mt) of CO2-equivalent, and without decarbonisation they will grow an estimated
35% by Urban-level National Decarbonisation Plan (NDP) scenario The urban-level
NDP scenario considers  full deployment of the policy actions presented in the
NDP, scaled down to the district level It represents  high climate ambition for
the country This scenario shows the pathway towards electrification of the
transport sector (public, private and freight) and  highly renewable electricity
mix with  high penetration of distributed energy resources It considers  gradual
increase until 2050 of targets, as follows: • Total renewable energy share
increases to reach 95% of total final energy consumption by 29 • Renewable
energy share in the residential sector increases to reach 100% of total final
energy consumption in the sector by • Renewable energy share in commercial and
public buildings increases to reach 100% of total final energy consumption in
the sector by • Renewable energy share in industry increases to reach 80% of
total final energy consumption in the sector by • Renewable energy share in
transport increases to reach 90% of total final energy consumption in the sector
by • CO2-equivalent emissions drop 85% by 2050 compared to The use of
electricity for transport is expected to grow significantly by 2050 in the
urban-level NDP scenario, as evidenced by the fuel shares of energy demand at
the national level in the transport sector (Figure 14) This scenario also
considers the gradual replacement of diesel and petrol with electricity and
hydrogen, and  limited penetration of LPG The scenario also expects  reduction
in energy demand due to the greater efficiency of the technologies that use
these new fuels in the transport sector Decarbonisation of the transport sector
is likely to contribute the greatest level of emission reductions and will
potentially drive other socio-economic benefits in cities such as lower
congestion, fewer accidents and more jobs (IDB and DDP-LAC, 2019; Saget, Vogt-
Schilb and Luu, 2020) However, to enable the benefits of an electric transport
sector, the electricity system must also evolve It must ensure high
participation of renewable energy sources with deployment of distributed
generation in the overall energy system BAU NDP 30 000 30 000 25 000 25 000 20
000 20 000 )    ( 15 000 15 000       10 000 10 000  000  000  2018  2018 2022
2026 2030 2034 2038 2042 2046 2050 2022 2026 2030 2034 2038 2042 2046 2050
Diesel Elec Gasoline Hydrogen LPG 30 Electrification of the industry sector must
also evolve, and enabling conditions should be designed Figure 15 indicates
growing share of electricity for this sector, which will help reduce overall
energy consumption through increased energy efficiency Petroleum coke, LPG, fuel
oil and diesel used in the BAU scenario (without decarbonisation) are gradually
decarbonised with low- or zero-emission technologies However, to maximise the
benefits of electrifying the industry sector, challenges remain Electrification
of this sector may lead to higher energy expenditure for the end users as
result of the lost subsidies granted to the substituted petroleum-derived energy
commodities Therefore, restructuring electricity tariffs to support this
technological transition may be required In Costa Rican industry, the main fuels
that emit greenhouse gases are oil, petroleum coke, diesel and LPG According to
the characterisation of industrial energy consumption provided in MINAE (2019b),
the industries that mostly consume these four fuels are the food, metal products
and mineral (cement and glass) industries Large industrial groups require these
fuels to operate equipment such as ovens, boilers, emergency power generators,
forklifts and internal transport, among others Decarbonisation options for the
industrial sector have become an important topic in recent years in Costa Rica,
and alternatives such as electricity-based heat generation technologies,
electricity storage and hydrogen use are currently under discussion Competitive
incentives for electricity and the removal of subsidies for fossil fuels are
necessary for this transition Finally, in the transport sector, the electric
fast passenger train project for the Greater Metropolitan Area is under
discussion, and electrification of the current private/public and
passenger/cargo vehicle fleet is  subject of national focus Electrification of
the transport sector would not only create additional electricity demand, but
potentially provide the flexibility that the future energy system would require,
provided that the charging infrastructure for the electric vehicles could be
managed smartly to avoid the peak demand surge BAU NDP 14 000 14 000 12 000 12
000 10 000 10 000 )    (  000  000  000  000        000  000  000  000  2018
2018 2022 2026 2030 2034 2038 2042 2046 2050 2022 2026 2030 2034 2038 2042 2046
2050 Biomass Diesel Fuel Oil Firewood Elec LPG Petroleum coke 31 Urban-level net
zero carbon (NZC) scenario The NZC scenario aims to promote net zero districts
It follows the pathway of the NDP scenario, in terms of electrification of the
transport sector (public, private and freight) and residential cooking, while at
the same time diversifying the power supply mix by integrating non-hydropower
renewable energy sources in the power grids With energy efficiency improvement
measures in the end-use sectors and the decarbonisation of industrial sectors
thorough electrification and hydrogen, the scenario presents  more aggressive
pathway, illustrated by the following indicators: • Electrification of 100% of
the energy demand for cooking for the residential sector by • Electrification of
100% of the remaining fuel-based transport by 2050 compared to the NDP scenario
It includes the same level of penetration of hydrogen technology as stated in
the NDP scenario • Significant reduction of fossil fuel-based industry, by using
electricity for two-thirds of the industrial sector and hydrogen for the
remainder (for example, for glass and cement industries) The efficiency measures
follow the high-ambition scenario presented by United for Efficiency, which
covers high-consumption appliances, specifically efficiency measures for
refrigerators and lighting (United for Efficiency, 2019) In 2018, these
appliances represented 41% of residential end-use demand, or more than half of
the residential sector energy demand when cooking is included In the NZC
scenario, the transport and industry sectors switch to renewable energy,
including green hydrogen and end-use sector coupling technologies This scenario
includes variations aimed at quantifying the impact of sector coupling
strategies deployed in the districts It considers the potential of vehicle-to-
grid with the utilisation of 10% of the battery capacity of parked electric
vehicles to provide grid services, and the possibility to optimise importation
in relation to local production of hydrogen and on-site storage  Evaluation of
municipal-level roadmaps IRENA’ Planning Platform for Urban Renewable Energy was
employed to evaluate the three scenarios for two key planning horizons (2035 and
2050) The tool provided five different optimal operating points based on
multiple objectives for the same target scenario within each district The five
points represent different solutions that are optimal according to multiple
objective functions considered (for example, minimisation of the annual costs of
the energy system and minimisation of the carbon emissions during operation)
Each Pareto optimal point represents an optimal energy system design and
dispatch solution ranging from point  to point  Point  represents the design
solution with the least carbon emissions for the minimum costs of the system
(operating expenditures and capital expenditures), while point  presents the
least-cost solution for the minimum carbon emissions Each solution provides, for
each district,  system design and operating strategy for an optimised portfolio
of integrated energy systems to supply the energy demand of the district Each
operating point considers different requirements for the deployment of
technologies; thus, they present different costs and efficiencies 32
% BAU % % NDP % % NZC % % BAU           % % NDP % % NZC % % BAU         % % NDP
% % NZC % % BAU          % % NDP % % NZC % % % BAU          % NDP % % NZC % 2035
(%) RE - 2050 (%) Figure 16 presents the share of renewable energy in total
final energy consumption for each of the five districts for the optimised carbon
emission reduction (reflecting point : least cost for minimum emissions) It
illustrates the importance of policies and measures taken at the city level and
their impact on achieving the targets The fluctuation in the renewable energy
share from one district to another is greater in the BAU scenario compared to
the NDP and NZC scenarios, reflecting the impact of optimising the supply side
at the district level with multi-energy carrier integrated systems While it is
possible to reach near net zero carbon in 2050 in all districts, only adequate
urban energy planning combining different efficiency and system integration
measures for the demand and supply sides would allow complete decarbonisation of
the districts Medium-term planning (2035) It is technically possible to reduce
emissions in the medium term (Figure 17) The higher the reduction in emissions,
the higher the total cost per capita per year, as more zero-emission
technologies are needed Most operating points in the no-policy (BAU) scenario
lead to emissions that are higher than the values projected for 2035 in Costa
Rica’ Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) (about  tonnes of CO2 per capita
assuming  linear extrapolation) In the BAU scenario, the optimised solutions
provided on the supply side within the technological scope of the study cannot,
in most of the cases, match the NDC’ targets, except for the district of San
Rafael, which can provide  high share of renewable energy for  contained demand
33 Conversely, all the optimised supply-side solutions deployed at the urban
level in the NDP scenario lead to lower emissions than the NDC goal by The NZC
scenario makes it possible to further decarbonise the districts by an average of
% compared to the NDC scenario This is notable, as Costa Rica has committed to
reducing its emissions by mid-century Deploying low-carbon technologies to
reduce emissions in operating point  requires higher investments, as the cost of
these technologies is currently high (although their cost-effectiveness is
increasing rapidly due to economies of scale) Decarbonising San Pedro (and most
likely the districts within the same cluster) leads to higher total costs per
capita per year compared to the other districts This is likely due to the high
urbanisation level of the district, which leads to challenges in deploying
certain technologies Conversely, San Rafael (and other districts with low
population density such as those within cluster ) has the lowest total costs
Districts with lower density require less investments to reach  low-emission
target, while having higher decarbonisation potential through the deployment of
high renewable energy generation capacity While the results for all districts
are discussed in the sections that follow, illustrations will focus on the two
extreme districts: San Pedro and San Rafael Although decarbonising requires
investments in renewable energy and sector-coupled technologies, the operational
and maintenance costs are typically lower The benefits could be even greater if
the analysis also considered the health savings from lower emissions, as well as
the increased productivity of cities due to reduced traffic congestion and
accidents and to greater development and use of public transport (IDB and DDP-
LAC, 2019) Figure 18 presents the energy carrier costs (imported electricity,
oil derivatives, LPG, etc), infrastructure costs, and operational and
maintenance costs associated with energy use for space heating and cooling,
electricity for electro-mobility, and electricity for all other uses in
residential, commercial and industrial buildings, all normalised with respect to
the district’ GDP  000 )   /    /    ( )   /    /    (  800  800  600  600  400
400  200  200            000  000 800 800           600 600   Carbon emissions
(tCO2/cap/yr)          Carbon emissions (tCO2/cap/yr) NDC Desamparados San
Vicente San Pedro NDC Desamparados NDP San Vicente NDP San Isidro San Rafael San
Pedro NDP San Isidro NDP San Rafael NDP Desamparados NZC San Vicente NZC San
Pedro NZC San Isidro NZC San Rafael NZC 34 SAN RAFAEL SAN PEDRO Point  Point
24% 69% 23% 71% Point  Point  81% 73% 18% Point  Point  79% 71% 18% Point  Point
77% 11% 70% 18% Point  Point  75% 13% 69% 18% 000 006 008 00 01 02 03 04 05 002
004 % of national GDP % of national GDP Costs of energy carriers Investment
costs Operating costs Maintenance costs The equivalent annual costs are higher
in operating point  for all decarbonisation scenarios due primarily to the
electrification of the transport and industrial sectors required to lower the
respective emissions This implies that reaching the least emissions possible
requires higher investments in electro-mobility and electrification of heating
and cooling in buildings and industry However, these costs are lower in all the
other operating points despite reaching high electrification of these sectors
Investment costs in operating point  for all districts except San Pedro are at
least double the costs in all other operating points (Figure 18) This is due to
the deployment of technologies that are currently expensive in Costa Rica (for
example, air-source heat pumps and energy storage systems) However, the results
indicate that these technologies have the potential to help meet the
decarbonisation goal within the districts by combining high-efficiency
technology and the use of local renewable energy potential To meet the
electricity needs of buildings, Figure 19 provides an overview of the capacity
required for each operating point and per district Rooftop solar PV systems were
found to be the most cost-effective technology to enable the transition towards
decentralised electricity generation in the representative districts This is in
line with recent global trends, as the cost-effectiveness of this technology has
increased greatly in the last decade and will likely continue to increase
(García de Fonseca, Parikh and Manghani, 2019) In operating point , the
combination of wind turbines together with solar PV systems reduces the impact
of seasonality associated with hydropower-dominated grid electricity,
maintaining the lowest emissions of the electricity generation The penetration
of wind turbines is greater in San Rafael, and most likely also in other less-
dense districts that have larger areas for turbine deployment Micro combined
heat and power (CHP) appears in operating point , similarly to points ,  and ,
demonstrating the effectiveness of co-generation at the building or community
level, increasing the efficiency of traditional electricity-driven heaters or
air conditioning systems Replacing electric heaters and air conditioners with
air-source heat pumps achieves  reduction in carbon emissions 35 SAN PEDRO SAN
PEDRO Point  Point  53% 100% 41% Point  Point  30% 68% 40% 51% 60        10 30
Capacity for electricity demand (MW) 40 50 20 Capacity for heat demand (MW) SAN
RAFAEL SAN RAFAEL Point  Point  39% 99% 12% 46% 36% 60% 27% 64% Point  Point
10 15      Capacity for heat demand (MW) Capacity for electricity demand (MW)
ASHP heat mode Heat (Grid) Micro CHP heat mode Grid Grid upgrade Wind turbine
Micro CHP cool mode Micro CHP heat mode PV rooftop The combined results
highlight the potential of solar PV systems to support the transition towards
decarbonisation in cities They also illustrate that other technologies are
emerging that will enable the change needed to meet net zero emissions in 2050
while bringing socio- economic benefits to city residents (IRENA 2020b; IRENA
2014) The penetration of new technologies to meet the growing electricity demand
in buildings (considering also heating and cooling requirements) in the
operation point with the least emissions (point ) is complemented with the
deployment of energy storage systems to reduce the intermittency of these
technologies and to enable more resilient operation of the electricity grid As
highlighted in Figure 20, the penetration of energy storage systems is highly
correlated with the penetration of high volumes of energy from solar PV systems
(operating point ) SAN PEDRO SAN PEDRO Point  Point  34% 34% 30% 96% Point
Point  26% 71%        10 15  Capacity for cooling demand (MW) Electricity
storage (MW) SAN RAFAEL SAN RAFAEL Point  Point  100% 18% 57% 23% 88% Point
Point     Capacity for cooling demand (MW)      Electricity storage (MW)   AC
(Grid) ASHP cool mode Micro CHP cool mode Li Vanadium ZincBromine Lead-acid 36
In addition, the results show that lithium-ion batteries are the most cost-
effective due to their efficiency and cost While vanadium batteries are also
found to bring benefits in Desamparados and San Vicente districts, their
deployment typically leads to higher total costs Long-term planning (2050)
Figure 21 provides an overview of the results for the 2050 horizon While the NZC
scenario brings higher emission-saving potential at higher costs compared to the
NDP scenario, both high-ambition scenarios provide carbon emission savings as
well as cost benefits compare to the BAU scenario Following the trend for 2035,
San Pedro will require the highest total investment, due to the higher
population density and the scarcity of area for installing the most cost-
effective technologies Less-dense cities, such as San Rafael, will have lower
total costs in the long term, taking advantage of the highest renewable energy
potential for deploying combined wind and solar technologies The figure
highlights that, despite the combination of technologies, the NDP scenario leads
to lower total costs than the BAU scenario This suggests that decarbonising will
result in lower costs and higher benefits associated with  low- or zero-
emissions city The electricity generation capacity needed to meet the districts’
demand in 2050 is expected to increase compared to the 2035 level, partly
because the growing adoption of air-source heat pumps for providing heating and
cooling services thanks to higher energy efficiencies and the resulting the
lower carbon emissions (Figure 22) In addition, highly dense cities such as San
Pedro will have the highest electricity demands in both scenarios Rooftop solar
PV has  higher capacity in the BAU scenario for all districts (except for less-
dense cities such as San Rafael) These systems, combined with wind turbines,
contribute substantially to reaching the decarbonised pathway Adopting waste-to-
energy incinerators (waste boilers) for energy  000 )   /    /    ( )   /    /
(  000  500  500  000  000  500            500  000  000           500 500
Carbon emissions (tCO2/cap/yr)  Carbon emissions (tCO2/cap/yr) NDC Desamparados
San Vicente San Pedro NDC Desamparados NDP San Vicente NDP San Isidro San Rafael
San Pedro NDP San Isidro NDP San Rafael NDP Desamparados NZC San Vicente NZC San
Pedro NZC San Isidro NZC San Rafael NZC 37 SAN PEDRO SAN PEDRO Point  Point  47%
100% 44% Point  Point  29% 68% 34% 49%      60 Capacity for electricity demand
(MW) 40 20 Capacity for heat demand (MW) SAN RAFAEL SAN RAFAEL Point  Point  99%
12% 12% 40% 34% 11% 88% 20% 57% 17% Point  Point   20        10 Capacity for
electricity demand (MW) 15 Capacity for heat demand (MW) ASHP heat mode Heat
(Grid) Micro CHP heat mode Grid Grid upgrade Wind turbine Micro CHP cool mode
Micro CHP heat mode PV rooftop Waste boiler production also presents  solution,
particularly as these promote the use of waste and  circular economy along with
other benefits It can also be observed that operating point  shows  smaller
installed capacity as far as heating is concerned due to the high efficiency of
the air- source heat pump technology adopted in this operation strategy Energy
storage systems will be part of the technology mix to enable the energy
transformation of cities (Figure 23) The penetration of storage varies by city
and depends not only on the share of variable renewables in the power mix, but
also on the availability of space Since San Pedro is  highly dense city with
high participation and support from the grid, the adoption of energy storage
there was found to be lower in 2050 compared to 2035, due mainly to high
electricity SAN PEDRO SAN PEDRO Point  Point  100% 97% Point  Point  25% 72%
Electricity storage (MW)    Capacity for cooling demand (MW) SAN RAFAEL SAN
RAFAEL Point  Point  99% 100% 96% Point  Point              Capacity for cooling
demand (MW) Electricity storage (MW) AC (Grid) ASHP cool mode Micro CHP cool
mode Li 38 demand that calls for importation to the district rather than storage
capacity Alternative scenarios, presented in the following section, include
sector coupling enablers (such as an optimised hydrogen strategy, relevant to
the NZC scenario) as well as vehicle-to-grid potential through the use of
battery capacity made available from electric vehicles  Alternative scenarios To
cope with the electrification of the transport sector and with industry
decarbonisation strategies, cities will require  mix of technologies that must
be integrated into multi-source energy systems This might raise challenges for
highly dense cities that face growing energy consumption as well as spatial
constraints for installations Desamparados is  dense district in Costa Rica,
making it an interesting case study for the three evaluated scenarios and
proposed alternatives Figure 24 provides an overview of the operating points of
all scenarios for Desamparados for the years 2035 and The contributions to costs
and emissions of the transport and industry sectors are shown in the dotted
lines (the emissions and costs related to electricity- driven solutions for
transport and industry are excluded from the dotted lines) The expected yearly
emissions per capita are represented in the black line, labelled NDC This was
obtained by linearly interpolating the values included in MINAE (2015) for the
years 2030 to 000  000 -61%  800  800 -89%  600  600 )   /    /    ( )   /    /
(  400  400 -96%  200  200 -94% -57%  000  000           800 800           600
600 400 400 200 200          Carbon emissions (tCO2/cap/yr)    Carbon emissions
(tCO2/cap/yr) Mobility: BAU Mobility: BAU BAU Desamparados 2035 BAU Desamparados
2050 NDP Desamparados 2035 Mobility: NDP NDP Desamparados 2050 Mobility: NDP NZC
Desamparados 2035 Mobility+Industry: BAU NZC Desamparados 2050
Mobility+Industry: BAU NDC Mobility+Industry: NDP NDC Mobility+Industry: NDP 39
The figure presents  number of possibilities for fulfilling the NDC targets In
addition, the benefit represented by going from the BAU scenario to the NDP
scenario in percentage terms is included with arrows The NZC scenario was also
included, and it is noted that, for 2035, the point of minimum carbon could be
reduced by up to an additional 15% with respect to the NDP scenario This point
of operation of the energy system would lead Costa Rica to carbon neutrality in
the medium term but would require greater deployment of renewable energy in the
remaining years of the 2050 horizon, mainly to cope with electrification of the
transport sector Similar to the other districts and within the technological
scope of this study, the district of Desamparados would unlikely meet the NDC
target by 2035 by solely deploying supply-side measures, as in the path of the
BAU scenario Furthermore, the BAU scenario appears to be  more costly pathway
when considering the inclusion of distributed energy systems within the district
The carbon emissions related to supplying energy for buildings, industry and
mobility can be lowered by  factor of  to  when respectively considering the NDP
or the more aggressive NZC scenario Most of the optimal points of the NDP and
NZC scenarios can meet the NDC carbon emission target by Alternative
technological scopes for the NZC scenario were considered, in which sector
coupling technologies and strategies are taken into account and their impact is
quantified The alternative options for the NZC scenario analysed in the
following section include flexibility potential for the districts through sector
coupling technologies, as follows: • 10% of the battery capacity of parked
electric vehicles can be used by the optimisation problem as storage capacity in
vehicle-to-grid configuration • Hydrogen technologies are adopted to provide
flexibility The model optimised local production (versus importation) of
hydrogen, along with storage capacity and dispatch, considering the requirements
for hydrogen applications in the end use sectors Combinations of those
alternative scenarios are presented in Figure 25, highlighting the capabilities
to reduce costs (by around 15%) and emissions through increased local storage
capacities, the vehicle-to-grid strategy, and the possibility of on-site
production of hydrogen  500 99%  400 NDP Desamparados 2050 99% 73% )   /    /
( NZC Desamparados 2050  300 89% NZC Desamparados 2050 V2G 66% 99%  200 99% NZC
Desamparados 2050 V2G H2 75% 88%  100 99% 76% NDP San Rafael 2050 66%       000
NZC San Rafael 2050 99% 99%           76%     900 NZC San Rafael V2G 2050 77%
NZC San Rafael 2050 - H2 800 NZC San Rafael 2050 V2G H2 700       Carbon
emissions (tCO2/cap/yr) 40 Another finding of the study highlights the cost
effectiveness of storage solutions for less-dense districts such as San Rafael,
where increasing the storage capabilities decreases the overall costs of the
energy supply For denser districts, the benefit of  storage strategy versus grid
upgrade is lower, given  lower renewable energy potential in relation to higher
electricity demand  community-scale analysis can be developed to further assess
the role of storage in this context  Implications for the national grid
infrastructure The electricity imported from the grid is higher in the NDP
scenario, given increased electricity demand as  consequence of electrification
of the mobility sector At the utility scale, the insights from the study provide
quantification of the requirement from the national grid in terms of electricity
imported to the districts, for the different solutions (Figure 26) These results
account for the potential of  renewable-based distributed energy system deployed
in the districts of Costa Rica and provide insights for the local generation,
transmission and distribution utilities to consider when developing grid
expansion planning at the regional or national scale CNFL     -          -
-          -          -          -        000  000  000  000  000  000  000  000
000 10 000 Electricity Consumption (GWh) Min-costs Min-carbon 41 In the short
term, grid imports to the districts oscillate around today’ value for the cost-
minimal solution, despite the increase in electrification For carbon
minimisation, electricity import to the districts increases by up to 25%
compared to today’ electricity demand In the long term, electricity demand will
grow in the net zero carbon districts scenario, increasing the need for
renewable electricity import to the districts Local renewable energy sources
through distributed energy systems can meet part of the increased electricity
demand that would come largely from electrification of the transport and
industry sectors Further analysis can be performed on the potential to optimise
energy demand and supply by considering inter-district energy exchange, the role
of storage at the community scale and demand-side management measures
Extrapolation to the CNFL area With the application of the clustering analysis,
the district-level results were extrapolated to the CNFL area This provides an
estimate of the potential for renewable energy deployment within the area For
the optimal decarbonisation pathway, considering the minimum carbon emissions
solutions leads to  potential installed renewable energy capacity of  gigawatts
(GW) to  GW of solar PV and 100 MW to 200 MW of wind power, combined with the
deployment of options providing system flexibility in 2050, including 26 MW to
80 MW of electrolyser capacity (13 MW fuel cell) and up to  GWh of electricity-
based storage capacity This provides an estimate of the renewable energy
potential that can be harvested in and around the city as well as in the region
Total costs per capita in cities within cluster  (for example, San Rafael of
Escazú, Guadalupe of Goicoechea, San Pedro of Montes de Oca, Curridabat and Tres
Rios) will tend to be higher than in the other clusters Cities in cluster  will
have the second highest total cost per capita, followed by cities in cluster
and cluster  Cities in cluster  will tend to have the lowest total cost per
capita There is  close correlation between the total costs per capita and the
population density – the higher the density, the higher the total costs Despite
the planning horizon, the results also highlight that the scenario with
decarbonisation typically leads to lower total costs The deployment of rooftop
solar PV systems along with network upgrades to enable their integration was
found to be key across all cities While wind turbines could also help in the
decarbonisation of cities, this technology was found to be suitable primarily
for cities within cluster  Air-source heat pumps are  technology with great
potential to reduce emissions, and lithium-ion batteries will enable greater
integration of renewable energy sources Table  provides the total emissions per
capita in each of the five districts As expected, the scenario with
decarbonisation targets leads to operations with much lower emissions than the
BAU scenario The population of cities can be used to reflect the total costs and
emissions for each district, as well as for the total CNFL concession area Table
highlights that decarbonising the CNFL concession area by 2050 will require
total costs equal to % of the country’ GDP Notably, the BAU scenario leads to
higher total cost ranges Moreover, there are extra benefits associated with the
deployment of renewables that have not been quantified in this analysis Table
indicates that the deployment of renewable energy sources combined with an
electrification strategy enables  reduction of up to around  Mt of CO2 compared
to the BAU scenario This reduction is achieved primarily thanks to the
deployment of renewables and the electrification of the transport sector 42
TABLE : Total per capita CO2 emissions of the energy systems in the five
district clusters for 2035 and 2050 CARBON EMISSIONS (TONNES OF CO2-EQUIVALENT
PER CAPITA) CLUSTER BAU 2035 NDP 2035 NZC 2035 BAU 2050 NDP 2050 NZC 2050 60 -
75 82 - 97 70 - 86 87 - 17 19 - 91 03 - 09  64 - 92 83 - 10 70 - 99 94 - 69 21 -
91 04 - 48  74 - 16 85 - 44 72 - 33 10 - 48 26 - 37 07 - 58  60 - 72 82 - 98 70
- 85 87 - 10 20 - 58 03 - 69  57 - 66 81 - 92 69 - 79 82 - 06 18 - 82 02 - 72
Note: The table presents the variation between emissions to cost-optimal
solutions TABLE : Total costs of the energy system in the five district clusters
for 2035 and 2050 TOTAL COSTS (% OF NATIONAL GDP) CLUSTER BAU 2035 NDP 2035 NZC
2035 BAU 2050 NDP 2050 NZC 2050 14 - 38 89 - 09 04 - 11  - 23  - 83 88 -   77 -
99 64 - 81 72 - 75 79 - 91 62 - 67 67 - 68  53 - 54 47 - 52 52 - 52  - 51 44 -
46 47 - 48  58 - 63 46 - 47 51 - 52 57 - 58 43 - 44 46 - 47  07 - 09 06 - 08 06
- 08 07 - 08 05 - 06 05 - 06  09 - 63 52 - 97 85 - 98 03 - 31 34 - 46 53 - 59
Total Note: The table presents the variation between emissions to cost-optimal
solutions TABLE : Total CO2 emissions of the energy system (MtCO2e) in the five
district clusters for 2035 and 2050 CARBON EMISSIONS (MtCO2e) CLUSTER BAU 2035
NDP 2035 NZC 2035 BAU 2050 NDP 2050 NZC 2050 35 - 48 69 - 82 59 - 73 63 - 90 17
- 67 03 - 83  78 - 91 39 - 52 33 - 47 96 - 34 10 - 95 02 - 23  40 - 49 19 - 33
16 - 30 45 - 17 06 - 72 01 - 98  68 - 73 35 - 42 30 - 36 84 - 94 09 - 71 01 - 76
09 - 10 05 - 05 04 - 05 12 - 14 01 - 12 00 - 11  30 - 71 67 - 14 42 - 91 00 - 49
43 - 17 07 - 91 Total Note: The table presents the variation between emissions
to cost-optimal solutions 43 The population for each city within the CNFL
concession area and the emissions for each district were used to estimate the
carbon emissions reductions for the NZC scenario in 2050 compared to the no-
policy (BAU) scenario Since all cities deploy zero-emission technologies along
with energy efficiency measures in the NZC scenario, the reduction of emissions
is significant (particularly for highly dense cities) and is attributed mainly
to the transport sector Cities such as San Rafael have the least reduction of
emissions mainly because of the smaller population size and lower number of
vehicles The carbon emissions are quantified for the medium-term and long-term
scenarios, stacked by sector and scenario in Figure 27, starting with the
mobility, industry and buildings sectors, which also include the generation of
local energy, such as electricity and hydrogen, based on the scenario The shaded
areas in the figure represent the emissions for the different objective
functions, with the lower end representing carbon minimisation The maximum
emission reduction achieved per scenario is highlighted on the figure, with the
name of the scenario juxtaposed to the final carbon emissions reached in The NDP
scenario provides  potential reduction in carbon emissions of 50% compared to
the BAU scenario Between 83% and 87% of the emissions savings, for 2035 and 2050
respectively, are achieved through the electrification of transport combined
with the development of public transport The NZC scenario provides  further 15%
reduction in carbon emissions in 2035 through efficiency measures for appliances
and by switching LPG use in cooking to electricity- driven systems for buildings
000  000 )      (           000        000  000  2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045
2050 Mobility Industry Cooking Building & energy scenario BAU NDP NZC 44  Key
challenges and proposed actions To implement the district- or city-level
decarbonisation solutions as  contribution to the national plan in Costa Rica,
number of key challenges would need to be addressed Strengthen institutional co-
ordination Urban energy planning requires the co-ordination of  multitude of
fields, stakeholders and information in order to reach  diversity of
sustainability objectives and trade-offs While architects and planners must
rethink buildings and spaces, local and regional authorities need to adapt
organisational procedures; lawyers and politicians need to adjust legal texts
and policy; and utilities must develop profitable business models In addition,
at the national level the co-ordination among different relevant ministries
needs to be strengthened to address the issues around urban development and the
associated growth in energy demand in  co-ordinated fashion and to deliver
optimal solutions to both issues at the city level Urban energy demand is
substantially affected by urban planning and forms, while urban planning offers
opportunities to integrate local renewable-based generation into cities To
achieve this, the institutional barriers that limit the penetration of renewable
energy generation facilities in distribution networks should be removed Co-
ordinate charging of fleets to avoid stress on the power grid The charging of
electric vehicles during periods of maximum electricity demand may pose
challenges to the operation of distribution networks, if smart charging schemes
are not put in place Distribution network operators must study the interactions
between these technologies Thus, detailed technical studies must be executed to
understand the network’ ability to host the new technologies Importantly,
charging schemes to mitigate potential technical problems must be developed to
allow high penetration levels of electro-mobility The technical challenges and
the cost effectiveness of these schemes must be assessed Develop  tariff
structure for the electrification of the industrial sector There have been
discussions in the country on the tariff for the industrial sector The
electrification of industry activities will require reviewing the tariff to
ensure the cost-effectiveness of applications For example, electrical chillers
will increase electricity demand, and this will likely lead to  higher tariff
unless new tariff schemes are deployed to offset the fuel switch from subsidised
fossil fuels to renewable electricity Interestingly, the taxation on fossil
fuels used for the transport sector has represented around 11% of government
revenue –  typical case of cross-subsidisation Electrification of the transport
sector will reduce fossil fuel consumption, and consequentially this revenue
However, on-site renewable electricity generation facilities can usually bring
more local job opportunities and economic activities, thus generating economic
gains Therefore, it would be advisable to review the economics of shifting away
from fossil fuel to renewable electricity in  holistic approach Local
governments manage or oversee all city activities and developments; thus, they
should play  central role in determining the energy and carbon emission
scenarios of their cities They also have direct access to their citizens and are
best positioned to know their needs and to influence their behaviour
Municipalities can also undertake significant energy savings in their own
operations, thereby saving money, setting  good example and even testing new
technologies (ICLEI, 2009) Based on this study, the following actions were put
forth for local authorities in general in the country 45 Create  greenhouse gas
inventory to enable prioritisation of actions based on mitigation targets Only
12 municipalities in Costa Rica have  greenhouse gas inventory (DCC, 2018),
while another 11 are starting this process The remaining municipalities should
also be part of this initiative, as it provides  clear indication of the type of
energy-related measures that will bring the greatest emission reduction benefits
Design an integral long-term strategy with intermediate goals and short-term
policy instruments The design of  long-term strategy is essential for better
planning the transition towards energy efficiency, electrified transport and
higher shares of renewable energy sources This strategy must include mid-term
goals to measure progress in the interim In addition, quantitative analysis that
roadmaps the technological transformation along with its costs and benefits will
enable  better decision-making process The long-term strategy must also account
for multiple development objectives By incorporating different societal points
of view, it is more likely to be accepted by the community, although this brings
an extra layer of complexity Co-ordination with local residents and industry
within the city has to be considered in this long- term energy strategy Use
advanced planning tools to inform transformational plans GIS-based tools enable
capturing the particularities of cities for planning the energy transition, as
they can be used to better understand the relation between energy generation and
demand needs (Valverde et al, 2017) They also allow  better allocation of
renewable energy sources accounting for space limitations The planning of other
key infrastructure such as the building design and waste management activities
in cities can also benefit from GIS tools Temporal granularities and spatial
boundaries must be accounted for when applying these tools, given the unique
geographic and production patterns of renewables such as wind and solar Involve
local governments in the provision of services to bring benefits to city
inhabitants Local governments in the country have little or no participation in
the provision of basic services including water, integrated waste management,
electricity and transport However, they manage or oversee all city activities
and developments It is therefore recommended that they be involved in the
planning and design of these services as well as in transport planning across
and within the city Local governments should prioritise those energy-related
cross-sector projects that could create synergies, improve the overall
efficiency of resource management, and show significant cost savings, while
building  more sustainable urban system 46                 /
© 47 CONCLUSIONS This report explored the plausible decarbonisation pathways for
the Greater Metropolitan Area of the Central Valley in Costa Rica This
represents  potential action that sub-national governments can take to assist
the national government in implementing the National Decarbonisation Plan, given
that the country’ carbon emissions come mostly from the transport, industry and
buildings sectors Additionally, locally available renewable energy potential,
particularly solar PV and wind energy, can in the long run be tapped into to
diversify the power mix, thus enhancing the security of energy supply from
technical perspective The study also found that sector coupling technologies and
strategies will play  critical role in keeping the energy system operation
reliable and stable while diversifying the energy supply by scaling up variable
renewable energy sources In this regard, through applying the Planning Platform
for Urban Renewable Energy –  tool that IRENA has developed – different coupling
options for the five districts located within the concession area of the state-
owned power utility CNFL were evaluated as part of the overall analytical
results, based on which the different scenarios were constructed The granular
temporal and geospatial analyses for those representative districts were
conducted and the ensuing extrapolation to the Greater Metropolitan Area was
taken to understand the potential impact on the entire area The results show
that the resultant emission reduction would be reached by around 90% by 2050
compared to BAU is technically possible in the NDP scenario Crucially, the
results demonstrate that it is possible to reach  100% reduction in this same
period in the NZC scenario In other words, there are no technological barriers
to meeting high- ambition targets by Notably, decarbonisation of the transport
sector is likely to contribute the greatest level of emission reductions and
will potentially drive other socio-economic benefits in cities such as lower
congestion, fewer accidents, improved air quality and more jobs Overall, this
study has created  link between the National Decarbonisation Plan and the
actions that local governments can take to contribute to the national carbon
neutrality goal by However, materialising the net zero scenarios described in
the study would require the removal of institutional and regulatory barriers to
allow sub-national governments to devise specific plans and actions based on
their localities At the national level, the study results would enable better
co-ordination between urban planning and energy planning With the support of the
planning platform to facilitate the decision-making process for long-term urban
energy planning in cities – by analysing and optimising the technical and
financial viability of integrating renewable energy technologies – sub-national
governments could undertake informed planning to maximise the use of renewable
energy potential with the support of sector coupling options to meet their
energy demand This will not only assist them in contributing to the national
climate objectives, but also enhance their climate resilience capacity as well
as benefit the local economy and people 48 REFERENCES Central Bank of Costa Rica
(2020), Commentary on national economy No -2020, San José,
economia_nacional_07_2020pdf CCP (2012), District projections of Costa Rica
population , Central American Population Center, San José,  (accessed 20 May
2020) CEPAL (2018), Economics of climate change in Latin America and the
Caribbean:  graphic view, Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean, Santiago,  repositoriocepalorg/bitstream/handle//S1800475_enpdf DCC
(2018), Carbon neutrality country program – cantonal category, Climate Change
Directorate,  García de Fonseca, ,  Parikh and  Manghani (2019), Future
evolution of renewable energy and storage costs in Latin America, Inter-American
Development Bank, Washington, ,  of Costa Rica and MINAE (2019a), National
Decarbonisation Plan Costa Rica, Ministry of Environment and Energy, San José,
of Costa Rica and MINAE (2019b), II Biennial Update Report to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, Ministry of Environment and Energy, San
José,  CostaRica-BUR2--IBA-pdf Guias Costa Rica (), “Costa Rica cantonal atlas,
(Atlas cantonal Costa Rica)”  guiascostaricacom/atlas-cantonal-costa-rica/ ICLEI
– Local Governments for Sustainability (2009), Sustainable urban energy
planning:  handbook for cities and towns in developing countries, Bonn,
downloads/Sustainable%20Urban%20Energy%20Planningpdf ICE (2019), Generation and
demand: Annual report, Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad, San José,
jsf?init=true&categoria=&codigoTipoArchivo=ICE (2018), Plan de expansion de la
generación electrica , Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad, San José,  834f-
6f5890eebb64/PLAN+DE+EXPANSION+DE+LA+GENERACION+2018-pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CVID=mIeNZK
V IDB and DDP-LAC (2019), Getting to net-zero emissions: Lessons from Latin
America and the Caribbean, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, ,  org
IMF (2020), World economic outlook database, International Monetary Fund,
Washington,  (accessed 20 January 2021) INEC (2019), National household survey,
National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, San José,  INEC (2018),
Construction statistics 2017, National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, San
José INEC (2017), Statistical yearbook : Compendium of data of the country,
National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, San José,  biblioteca-
virtual/reanuario2014-pdf INEC (2016), Manual of geographical classification
with statistical purposes of Costa Rica, National Institute of Statistics and
Censuses, San José IRENA (2021a), Renewable energy policies for cities,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA (2021b), Renewable
power costs in 2020, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  (2020a),
Rise of renewables in cities, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,
IRENA (2020b), Measuring the socio-economics of transition: Focus on jobs,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,
Publication/Feb/IRENA_Transition_jobs_2020pdf IRENA (2014), The socio-economic
benefits of solar and wind energy, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu
Dhabi,  Socioeconomic_benefits_solar_windpdf Leiva, , et al (2017), “Statistical
representation of demand for GIS-based load profile allocation in distribution
networks”, 2017 IEEE Manchester PowerTech, IEEE,  ieeeorg/document/MINAE
(2019b), Study for the characterization of energy consumption in the industrial
sector – final report, Ministry of Environment and Energy, San José MINAE
(2015), Costa Rica' Intended Nationally Determined Contribution, Ministry of
Environment and Energy, San José Nasraoui,  and - Ben ’Cir (2019), Clustering
Methods for Big Data Analytics: Techniques, Toolboxes and Applications,
Springer, Berlin, doi: 1007---2_4 Presidencia de La República (2019) Synthesis:
National decarbonization plan 2018- 2050, (Síntesis: Plan nacional de
descarbonización 2018 2050)”, San Jose, Costa Rica  descarbonizacion-/ 50
Quirós, ,  Rojas,  Arrieta and  Parajeles (2018), Estudio sobre viabilidad de
opciones para almacenamiento de energía, University of Costa Rica, San José
Quiros-Tortos, ,  Arguello and  Valverde (2017), “Statistical analysis of
residential demand behavior in Costa Rica: Creation of load profiles in 2016”,
IEEE 36th Central American and Panama Convention, Concapan 2016, IEEE,
doi:1109/CONCAPANRenewablesninja (),  (accessed 29 July 2020) Rigoni,  et al
(2016), “Representative residential LV feeders:  case study for the north west
of England”, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol 31/, IEEE, pp , doi:1109/
TPWRSSaget, ,  Vogt-Schilb and  Luu (2020), Jobs in  net-zero emissions future
in Latin America and the Caribbean, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington,
,  dxdoiorg/SEPSE (), Costa Rica: datos relevantes de la flota vehicular San
Jos´, Costa Rica 2020- , from  (accessed on 20 May, 2020) SEPSE and MINAE
(2018), “Costa Rica: datos relevantes de la flota vehicular”,
tableaucom/profile/sepse#!/vizhome/Flotavehicular/Dashboard1 (accessed 17 July
2020) UNFCCC (2019), “Costa Rica commits to fully decarbonize by 2050”, United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,  fully-decarbonize-by-UNFCCC
(2018), National Decarbonisation Plan , Government of Costa Rica and United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn,
default/files/resource/NationalDecarbonizationPlanpdf UNFCCC et al (2020),
Survey on NDCs Latin America 2020, United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, Bonn,  Survey%20on%20NDC%2013%20October2020pdf Unidas,  (2009),
Clasificaci´on industrial internacional uniforme de todas las actividades
econ´omicas (ciiu) (No ) Nueva York: Naciones Unidas United for Efficiency
(2019), “Costa Rica: Country saving assessment: Lighting:,
united4efficiencyorg/country-assessments/costa-rica Valverde et al (2015),
An´alisis ´ecnico- financiero de la generaci´on distribuida en la cnfl, Vol ;
Tech Rep No , San Jos´, Costa Rica Valverde, , et al (2017), “Integration of
open source tools for studying large-scale distribution networks”, IET
Generation, Transmission & Distribution, Vol 11, The Institution of Engineering
and Technology, London, doi: 1049/iet-gtdWorld Bank (2020), World Bank
Indicators, “GDP (current US$) – Costa Rica”,
worldbankorg/indicator/NYGDPMKTPCD?locations=CR World Bank (accessed 21 June
2020) 51  © IRENA 2022