Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/COL/ /  UNDP within the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Colombia is facing major
challenges: the stabilization and territorial consolidation of areas affected by
the armed conflict; the economic integration of migrants from Venezuela, which
is expected to increase; and the acceleration of Sustainable Development Goals
catalysts related to gender equality, the environment, sustainable production,
and consumption Within this framework, the ‘Peace with Legality’ policy
implemented by the President underscored people’ constitutional right to peace
within  rule-of-law framework, as  reference for implementing the agreement
between the Government and the former Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(‘FARC’)  Colombia played  central role in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development The country participated in the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development and played an active role in defining and negotiating
the 17 Goals and the 2030 Agenda Colombia pioneered the creation of  High-Level
Commission to prepare and implement the Goals in 2015 and the presentation of
National Voluntary Reviews at the United Nations in 2016 and  The National
Development Plan,  and the Common Country Assessment highlight the following
development challenges and root causes: productivity stagnation; labour
informality; population and regional gaps; violence, illegal economies and
organized armed groups institutional presence; improving transparency;
strengthening justice; vulnerability to disaster and climate change; sustainable
use of natural resources, responsible production and consumption; and prevention
and management of disaster risks and protection of biodiversity in remote
regions with low  In line with the National Development Plan, the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, , and the UNDP Strategic Plan,
this country programme document traces the road map to achieving the 2030 Agenda
Country programme outcomes complement efforts, priorities, and government
responsibilities at the national and local levels Specifically, the priorities
in the National Development Plan applicable to this country programme are
legality, entrepreneurship, equity, development of the ‘orange economy’,
peacebuilding, the implementation of  cross-cutting approach of sustainability,
and environmental conservation and protection  The Government recognized the
comparative advantage of UNDP in providing technical assistance to local
governments – especially municipalities in categories  and 61 –, oversight and
control bodies (public ministries), and judicial and extra-judicial transitional
institutions The strategy supported in this country programme focuses on the
most disadvantaged regions and serves the most vulnerable population, based on
gender, ethnicity, human rights, and environmental sustainability This country
programme supports government efforts to stabilize and consolidate the
territories affected by violence and poverty Increasing income and reducing
multidimensional inequality and poverty gaps remain priorities to fostering
structural transformations in line with the 2030 Agenda  During the COVID-19
crisis, the analytical capacity of UNDP for data management has been essential
in leading the socioeconomic response framework of the United Nations system The
global knowledge network allows UNDP to identify best practices to support
government such as the National Planning Department on micro-focus
systematization and information systems form social programmes The UNDP
multidimensional approach and the application of social, economic, and
environmental dimensions to achieve the 2030 Agenda allowed the organization to
implement  concrete response on the ground to transform people’ lives and to
support the Government and the United Nations system review potential
beneficiaries to  UNDP programming and operations capacities and territorial
presence in conflict-affected areas with weak basic services highlight UNDP
value added in implementation capacity and  Municipalities with  population of
10,000 inhabitants or fewer, with income not exceeding $15,000 as  minimum legal
monthly salary  DP/DCP/COL/ complement government initiatives, as well as United
Nations system efforts and other international efforts The bridging role played
by UNDP between relevant actors was  key contribution to the development and
stabilization process UNDP carved out  niche in the process leading to the final
agreement and its implementation  UNDP focuses on both rural and urban inclusive
development People in poverty and vulnerability include people who are seeking
employment and entrepreneurship opportunities, live in precarious
neighbourhoods, lack equal opportunities, suffer from various forms of
exclusion, or face barriers due to their migrant or returnee status Enhancing
their productive and socio-emotional capacities, respecting their different
needs, and expanding their ability to secure  sustainable livelihood, comprise
one of the focus areas  The new country programme will require UNDP to maintain
strong leadership role in the United Nations system in; the integration, design,
and implementation of innovative, scalable, and sustainable interventions to
address development challenges at the subnational level; resource mobilization;
and partnership building The UNDP comparative advantage is to implement
integrated solutions in income-generation and livelihood activities Based on
previous experience, UNDP signature approaches will foster  strong partnership
with the institutions, while also pursuing synergies among Government and
national/local complementary initiatives Thus agriculture value chains can
enhance biodiversity approaches, links forward and backward in the chain,
opportunities for blended finance and impact investors, improved access to
markets while linking income opportunities with both environmental
sustainability and social cohesion The work on climate change, disaster risk
reduction, adaptation, and mitigation is focused on balancing environmental
conservation with fostering livelihoods and socioeconomic inclusion of the
population strongly dependent on natural resources They also increase energy
efficiency and competitiveness in the private sector Value chains of grains
local to specific poverty and violence-affected regions have led to increasing
resilience and incomes of vulnerable families while fostering biodiversity Water
harvesting in La Mojana (the area most affected by climate change) is improving
livelihoods for the communities that implement water solutions while improving
resilience by the families In addition to targeted initiatives, women’ political
and economic empowerment, their active participation, and the reparation of
gender-based violence crimes were addressed across different projects UNDP is
committed to breaking down the barriers that prevent gender equality in
programme strategies and planning while fostering solid social and environmental
safeguard standards and procedures that lead to inclusive and participatory
project design and implementation The comparative advantage of UNDP in response
to the COVID-19 crisis lies in its ability to () articulate and support the
Government and citizens with accurate response mechanisms, maintaining  holistic
approach and focusing on preventing the exacerbation of inequalities during the
emergency and throughout the recovery process; and () enhance and create
partnerships to complement efforts implemented by the United Nations system,
such as supporting the World Health Organization/Pan-American Health
Organization to provide personal protective equipment so that beneficiaries can
resume economic and educational activities Based on the recommendations made by
the independent country programme evaluation and the assessment of the joint
transitional solution programme, this country programme emphasizes mobilization
and partnership-building with civil society, state institutions, and the private
sector It will take advantage of synergies among diverse initiatives and
programme areas and will focus on developing flexible tools that are fit for
purpose, maximize the effects of partnership at the territorial level, and
enhance the United Nations system contribution  DP/DCP/COL/ / II Programme
priorities and partnerships Through cross-cutting gender, ethnic and human-
rights approaches, UNDP will support national efforts to consolidate the
territories affected by violence and poverty within the framework of the ‘Peace
with Legality’ policy; integrate and reduce socio-economically vulnerable
Venezuelan migrants, Colombian returnees and host populations; and strengthen
institutional technical capacities at national and local levels to accelerate
the implementation of prioritized Sustainable Development Goals Colombia will
thus be in  better position to stabilize and consolidate ‘lagging behind’
territories, turn Venezuelan migration into an opportunity for development, and
advance implementation of the Goals and the 2030 Agenda, leaving no one behind
Expected results of the Cooperation Framework and the country programme
document, particularly in strategic areas  and , reflect the nexus between
humanitarian action, peace, and sustainable development under the ‘new ways of
working’ approach to establish systems and strengthen synergies between
complementary programmes The programme complements efforts of other United
Nations coordination instruments; the regional response plan for refugees and
migrants; the integrated strategic framework for the United Nations Verification
Mission; and the humanitarian response plan of the humanitarian country team The
Government and UNDP have therefore identified three major priorities where our
comparative advantage is recognized The first is support for the implementation
of the Government’ ‘Peace with Legality’ policy in prioritized areas, the
territorially focused development programmes (where 75 per cent of households
are led by women); ex-combatants’ reincorporation into civilian life; the
substitution of illicit crops with other agricultural activities; traditional
economies; industrial activity; and service provision with  focus on sustainable
alternative development Since most municipalities face challenges around
deforestation and require innovative actions aimed at low-carbon rural
development, environmental sustainability criteria will be incorporated Second,
the Government has requested international assistance to support efforts for
economic integration and comprehensive attention to the migratory flows from
Venezuela Its main objectives are the economic integration of migrants, host
populations, and returned Colombians, and to provide comprehensive care in
education, health, family welfare, and habitability Colombia views this
condition as an opportunity for development, capacity- building of institutions
that will benefit the economy in the mid- and long-terms, consumption, labour
expansion, productivity, and the creation of new businesses It also considers
that municipalities would manage strategies to integrate migrants into host
communities The role of UNDP is to develop ‘actor mapping’ at the local level,
identify joint strategies for coordination with the United Nations system, and
explore and manage partnerships with institutions and non-governmental actors
Third, UNDP will complement the Government efforts in strategic issues related
to the acceleration of catalyst Sustainable Development Goals The UNDP approach,
through human and sustainable development, provides an understanding of the
challenges and opportunities within the integrator role of UNDP and enables
platform to achieve the Goals Responsible production and consumption,
environmental liabilities resulting from illegal, artisanal and small-scale
mining, and deforestation, are challenges to sustainable development To move
towards gender equality, better follow-up of national and local public
investment through  public-budget gender-marker is needed Tackling youth
unemployment requires advancing on the fourth industrial revolution, the
circular economy, the ‘orange economy’, and youth entrepreneurship UNDP promotes
training process with sustainable results articulating the role of public and
private sectors in the consolidation of value chains promoting the creation of
entrepreneurial ecosystems in the territories prioritized by the Government
Besides those priorities, it is necessary to strengthen social cohesion and
livelihoods due to COVID-UNDP stands ready to support transformational
challenges while examining  DP/DCP/COL/ medium-term implications Several actors
are working with the Government on the health and economic crisis brought about
by COVID-19 to respond to emergency needs Stabilization: ‘Peace with Legality’
Through its territorial reach and impartiality UNDP will support government
efforts to reincorporate former FARC combatants and their families integrally
and effectively; activate local development in territorially focused development
programmes municipalities; incorporate families belonging to the Substitution
National Programme for Illicit Crops into legal economies with  transversal
approach, and promote the economic empowerment of female ex- combatants Colombia
will strengthen its institutional presence in those municipalities; attend
populations affected by conflict, considering their differentiated needs;
increase the substitution of illicit crops; and achieve stabilization and
consolidation while leaving no one behind UNDP will play  key role in supporting
the comprehensive implementation of territorially focused development
programmes, serving as  trusted partner in integrated transformative projects
UNDP will strengthen local government capacities by formulating transformative
projects prioritized by citizens in the programmes, promoting women’
participation and providing technical assistance for implementing women-led
initiatives; strengthening their capacities in leveraging national and private
sector funding; assisting in the implementation of open-government strategies to
increase transparency, citizen participation, and accountability; bringing
technical assistance to strengthen local and national capacities; promoting the
substitution of illicit crops in rural areas; improving land use, including land
regularization, community infrastructure, and economic development; supporting
local communities in identifying profitable local economic alternatives based on
sustainable agricultural products; providing ecosystem services; and funding
environmental service programmes UNDP will support the Government in the
transition phase of FARC ex-members to civilian life Jointly with organizations
such as UNFPA, the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), UN-Women, the World
Food Programme (WFP), and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), among
others, will support: () technical assistance to institutions whose mandates
affect the reincorporation process, such as the National Reincorporation Council
and the Reincorporation and Normalization Agency, at  technical, financial and
operational levels; ()  comprehensive, integral and locally-based FARC socio-
economic reincorporation process; () promotion of initiatives that allow the
redistribution of care work and encourage the effective participation of women
and their economic autonomy; () structuring and implementation of
reincorporation projects, with  community and gender focus, between the ex-
combatant population and receiving communities, that enable social cohesion,
reconciliation and joint economic development; and () supporting government and
FARC members in formulating  national road map transitioning from previous
aggrupation zones to formal living spaces The implementation of territorially
focused development programmes must consider the environmental aspects of the
final agreement UNDP will support the Government in strengthening local
communities to manage profitable local economic alternatives based on ()
biodiversity and sustainable agricultural products; () ecotourism and
agritourism services; and () technical support to local experts to reconcile
conservation and the sustainable use of natural capital to supersede
agricultural practices These will be jointly implemented with FAO, WFP and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in line with their mandates and
comparative advantages UNDP has experience in implementing solutions to
strengthen the social, commercial, and organizational skills that promote rural
entrepreneurship and business development, and to incorporate technologies that
increase the competitiveness and social capital of local organizations This
model enables individuals and organizations to forge alliances with private and
public partners at the local and national levels  DP/DCP/COL/ / Migration as
development factor UNDP will support government efforts to respond to migration
from Venezuela in various ways: economic inclusion through employment and
entrepreneurship opportunities that identify the different needs of men and
women; development assistance for the most vulnerable populations; strengthening
institutional capacities for providing sectoral services and promoting
favourable environments for coexistence, citizen security, and reduced violence,
including gender-based violence Ensuring the socio-economic integration of
Venezuelan migrants, Colombian returnees, and host communities, turning
migration into  development opportunity, is  priority UNDP will support national
institutions on migration for development, linking early recovery,
stabilization, and sustainable development efforts Jointly with partners such as
UN- Women and WFP, UNDP will support: () fostering socioeconomic integration
opportunities for migrant populations and host communities with  gender lens
that considers care work initiatives intended to allow the active participation
of women; () promotion of citizen security and peaceful coexistence, with
specific focus on protective actions and prevention of gender- based violence,
sexual exploitation and xenophobia; and () support of the institutional response
capacity to enhance sustainability in those actions Knowledge management and
innovation will be core strategies to capitalize on migration as  positive
factor in sustainable development UNDP can assess the social and environmental
impacts of migration within its projects and build government capacities to
assess those impacts Technical assistance for Sustainable Development Goals
catalyst acceleration Based on its experience and tools, UNDP will support
government efforts to () appropriate the Goals and the follow-up, promotion,
monitoring, and open government tools; () implement actions in gender equality,
environmental management, sustainable consumption and production, and food and
nutritional security; () promote the ‘orange economy’ and create opportunities
for entrepreneurship and employability for young people; () improve surveillance
and control of jurisdictional fact-finding functions (judicial and non-judicial)
to assist vulnerable populations and the justice administration; and () enhance
territorial planning and risk management Colombia will advance in strengthening
territorial and national institutions to accelerate the inclusion of the most
vulnerable, leaving no one behind and ensuring environmental sustainability to
reduce gaps in the Goals and comply with the 2030 Agenda UNDP will support the
government in contributing directly to Goal 16 as  facilitator for peaceful
societies to strengthen civil oversight capacities (such as the public
prosecutor’ and ombudsman’ offices), transitional justice (special jurisdiction
for peace), and human rights protection, enhancing access by men and women
victims and populations at risk of being left behind UNDP will support the
judicial representation and non-judicial participation of victims in
transitional justice mechanisms (including victims of sexual and gender-based
violence); social dialogue for reconciliation; research and social participation
for the reconstruction of historical memory; the search for missing persons; and
early warning systems UNDP will ensure differentiated approaches (gender,
lifecycle, ethnic, and disability) and promote community participation Within
its integrated development solutions to end poverty, protect the planet and
ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity, UNDP will harness systemic
approaches connecting issues across sectors and thematic areas, leveraging the
creativity and know-how of society to build solutions that respond to people’
daily realities It will consolidate the acceleration of Sustainable Development
Goals targets for left-behind populations, closing gaps throughout the
strengthening of local capabilities in support of the Sustainable Development
Goals National Commission This country programme document responds to the
pivotal need for  multi- stakeholder perspective recognizing partnerships for
sustainable development to mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology,
and financial resources, supporting private sector collective platforms to
mobilize concrete actions, analyse data, drive innovation, and support well-
informed decision-making processes to meet the needs of subnational authorities
DP/DCP/COL/ The Government is fostering inclusive growth by supporting creative
and cultural industries under the ‘orange economy’ route UNDP supports these
efforts by transferring the initiatives to the territories by prioritized by the
government, with  special focus on youth, migrant and returned women, productive
diversification and  strengthened territorial economy UNDP will contribute its
global expertise and methodologies already tested elsewhere Public priority
inference will enable the forecasting of the achievement of the Goals based on
historic data and policy decisions  local democratic governance index will
enable the tracking of evidence-based progress Methodologies led by the
Management System for Governance (known as ‘SIGOB’) will help local governments
plan and implement programmes to accelerate Goals attainment with strong
monitoring systems Those efforts will take place in conjunction with  strategy
to strengthen civil society, youth, and women by increasing their participation
in public policy proposals and programmes to achieve the Goals The National
Council for Economic and Social Policy (‘CONPES 3918’) defines 49 indicators
within the Sustainable Development Goals Framework regarding pedagogic gender
and differentiated approaches projects, follow-up on progress related to
planning tools, and the provision of inputs to achieve the Goals at the local
level UNDP will contribute to strengthening national environmental system
institutions to support the Government in its environmental commitments,
mobilizing resources in the rural sector for strategic actions, and expanding
studies on indigenous and black communities The UNDP response to COVID-19 is
framed around three objectives: First, helping to prepare and protect people
from the pandemic and its impacts Second, responding during the outbreak,
working across key sectors to slow the spread of the virus, and providing social
protection for vulnerable populations, promoting  whole-of-government and whole-
of-society response to complement health-sector effort Third, recovering from
the economic and social impacts, assessing them, and taking urgent recovery
measures to minimize long-term impact, particularly for vulnerable groups,
including women, and helping societies recover Building on signature capacities
of partnership building, innovation, operational efficiency, technical
assistance and programme delivery, UNDP will: () strengthen and support health
systems and disaster risk management systems, articulating efforts with national
and local governments, to confront COVID-19, including the procurement of
urgently needed health and medical supplies and expansion of the capacities of
health care personnel about government requisitions; () inclusive and integrated
crisis management and response, supporting governments in maintaining core
functions and planning, coordinating, communicating and financing responses; ()
ensuring social protection measures to protect vulnerable populations, including
women, and conducting an economic impact needs assessment and response to
support key actors in stabilizing, reactivating, and establishing sectoral
recovery laboratories (for zero deforestation sectors), allowing the co-creation
of new strategies to face post-COVID- 19 challenges and opportunities III
Programme and risk management This country programme document outlines UNDP
contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional, and headquarters levels with respect to the country
programme are prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures
and Internal Control Framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all the programme to enable  response to force majeure The Harmonized Approach
to Cash Transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects  DP/DCP/COL/ / This country programme will be implemented under the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the National Planning Department, and the
Presidential Agency for International Cooperation in Colombia as the official
and technical coordinators of international cooperation UNDP will provide
technical assistance, and administrative and management support The country
programme will be operated according to results-based management principles to
ensure effectiveness and in accordance with UNDP risk management policies and
procedures Its social and environmental standards, fundamental to the
achievement of development outcomes, will be mainstreamed into programme and
project cycle management The Social and Environmental Compliance Unit will
ensure accountability to individuals and communities, responding to complaints
that UNDP may not be resolving Any person or community who believes the
environment or their wellbeing may be affected by  UNDP- supported project or
programme may file  complaint  representative, such as  civil society
organization, may file  complaint on behalf of affected communities The country
programme received inputs from government entities through international
cooperation coordinators Bilateral counterparts, civil society organizations,
and programme beneficiaries were consulted The country programme includes the
National Development Plan and the Cooperation Framework priorities  country
programme board will be set up with national counterparts responsible for
coordinating international cooperation to oversee programme implementation The
context requires  flexible programme to ensure  timely and integrated response
to address country challenges, territorial reach and administrative capacities,
to be strengthened through  multi-annual investment plan UNDP will expand its
partnership strategy, seeking alliances with new stakeholders such as
multilateral development banks, the private sector, and national institutions
Initiatives will be developed to leverage South-South, triangular, and inter-
territorial (‘COL-COL’) cooperation, within the framework of the priorities
defined by the Government The main programme risks are related to political
polarization, the presence of illegal armed groups, increased migration from
Venezuela, COVID-19 socioeconomic impacts, environmental climate change, and
natural disasters To mitigate them, UNDP will implement inclusive communication
and consultations with relevant stakeholders; provide technical oversight,
knowledge, and support; and build resilient communities to reduce risk from
disasters and health emergencies UNDP will also adopt risk-informed decision-
making, increasing programme effectiveness and relevance, greater assurance, and
innovative solutions  strategic assessment of current and potential partnerships
will be advanced as  stepping stone to forging new alliances illegal economies,
IV Monitoring and evaluation Programme supervision and evaluation will be
coordinated with the government institutions responsible for international
cooperation UNDP will collaborate with the Government to take full advantage of
information systems, tools, platforms, and data-collection mechanisms for
tracking progress UNDP will use national information sources, databases, and
reports from the various ministries, as well as other national and international
sources, as applicable and required Data on evidence will be disaggregated by
sex, age, ethnic groups, territory, life cycle, disabilities, and other
parameters Indicators, baselines, and targets set the bases for monitoring and
evaluation and may be adjusted along with the Cooperation Framework indicators
The monitoring and evaluation plan includes technical meetings with implementing
partners and government entities, annual field visits, annual implementation
progress reviews and reports,  midterm review and  final independent evaluation
to be delivered in the first quarter of Other delivery dates will be
communicated by the Government in due course  DP/DCP/COL/ Most data will derive
from national sources, sector entities, and other partners UNDP is committed to
improving gender mainstreaming in projects promoting gender markers  and
Efforts will be made to increase the financial resources allocated to projects
for the promotion of gender equality and women’ empowerment UNDP will help
monitor the information management and analysis system of the Cooperation
Framework Environmental and social screening mechanisms and protocols will be
included to manage risk for counterparts The strategy will include: ()  quality
assurance support mechanism with  gender-based approach, identification of good
practices, and capacity development; ()  strategic evaluation plan to support
strategic decision-making, learning, and accountability; () an integral, multi-
annual and interdisciplinary research agenda; () an effective communications
plan; and () monitoring environmental and social risks  DP/DCP/COL/ Annex
Results and resources framework for Colombia () National priority or goal:
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) ,,,,,,,16,17 United Nations Sustainable
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) outcome involving UNDP # Stabilization: ‘Peace
with Legality’ Related Strategic Plan outcome:  Strengthen resilience to shocks
and crises Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(), baselines, and target()
Data source and frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Major
partners / partnerships and frameworks Estimated cost by outcome ($) Indicative
country programme outputs Large integrated household survey Quality of life
survey Illicit crop monitoring system Output  FARC women and men ex-combatants
and their families have access to  comprehensive and effective reincorporation
process per their needs supporting government efforts Multidimensional poverty
rate Baseline (2018):% Target (2024): % Regular 300,000 Presidential Adviser on
stabilization and normalization Presidential Adviser on equality for women
(PAEW) Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development Ministry of Finance and
Public Credit Ministry of Labour MESD Territorial Renewal Agency (TRA) National
Planning Department Presidential Agency for International Cooperation in
Colombia Colombia in Peace Fund National Replacement Plan Rural Development
Agency Reincorporation and Standardization Agency Public Employment Service Unit
National Learning Service (NLS) United Nations organizations Private sector
Research institutes Bilateral donors Multilateral donors Other 38,746,846 Urban-
rural extreme poverty gap Baseline (2018): Target (2024): Progress in country
plans and strategies under implementation for the reintegration of former
combatants (Integrated Results and Resources Framework, ) Baseline (2019): %
Target (2024): 70% Percentage of active ex-combatants who are in the process of
reincorporation at 50% Baseline (2019) 30% Target (2024):100% Number of ex-
combatants benefiting from jobs and improved livelihoods in crisis or post-
crisis settings, disaggregated by sex and other characteristics Baseline (2019):
,723 (,000 men, ,723 women) Target (2024):,000 (,892 men, ,108 women) Number of
hectares of eradicated illicit crops Baseline (2018): 33,000 Target (2024):
50,000 Output  Communities in territorially focused development programmes
(PDET) municipalities prioritized by the Government improve their quality of
life through the design and implementation of ad hoc job creation and
livelihoods initiatives within the PDET framework, with  gender perspective
Fiscal performance index Baseline (2017): 37 Target (2024): 80 Number of
vulnerable populations living in PDET territories improving their livelihoods
through the implementation of efficient economic strategies for the development
of their territory, disaggregated by sex, age, and disability Baseline (2019):
,095 (1578 men, ,516 women) Target (2024): ,000 (,250 men, ,750 women) Number of
infrastructure projects and environmental initiatives promoting economic and
social development within PDET municipalities, incorporating  differentiated and
gender approach Baseline (2019):268 Target (2023): 363 10 DP/DCP/COL/ Progress
in national strategies to improve dialogue capacities, consensus-building and
reconciliation around contested issues, with equal participation of women and
men (PDET Strategies) Baseline (2019): 37% Target (2024): 50% Output  Illicit
crops substituted with agricultural, livestock, economic, artisanal, industrial
and service activities are focused on sustainable alternative development, as
support to Colombian government efforts Number of productive solutions to
strengthen livelihoods as  tool for development of legal economies Baseline
(2020):40 Target (2024):80 National priority or goal: SDGs ,,,10,16 UNSDCF
outcome involving UNDP # Migration as  development factor Related Strategic Plan
outcome:  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Unemployment rate Baseline (2018): 18% Target (2024): 17% Migration module Large
integrated household survey Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) databases United
Nations organizations NLS Local authorities Regular 300,000 Output  Venezuelan
migrants, returned Colombian populations and host communities have access to
labour market and entrepreneurship options offered by government and other
actors through  coordinated action of the labour, trade and industry, tourism
and foreign relations sectors, among others Management Unit for the Integral
Response to Venezuela Migrants MFA Ministry of National Education Ministry of
Health and Social Prosperity Ministry of Trade, Industry and Tourism Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology National Family Welfare System NLS
Migration Colombia Local authorities United Nations organizations Private sector
Bilateral donors Multilateral donors NGO members of the inter-agency mixed
migration group (GIFMM) Other ,794,916 Labour informality rate, defined as those
employed who contribute to  pension fund Baseline (2018): 94% Target (2024): 90%
Number of new ventures consolidated, with improved productive capabilities for
Venezuelan migrants and Colombian returnees Baseline (2019): 22 Target (2024):50
Number of women and men supported who effectively access employment
opportunities aligned within the Regional Refugee and Migrant Response Plan
(RPMP) with  gender perspective Baseline (2019):150 (70 Women, 60 Men) Target
(2023):,500 (,375 Women, ,125 Men) Output  Venezuelan migrants, returned
Colombian populations and the host communities in municipalities and localities
prioritized by the Government, enjoy favourable environments in terms of
coexistence, citizen security and risk of gender-based violence, through the 11
DP/DCP/COL/ combined action of government institutions and non- governmental
actors Number of individuals participating in activities promoting social
cohesion aligned within the RPMP Baseline (2019):,250 Target (2024):,000
National priority or goal: SDGs ,,,,10,12,13,15,16,17 Cooperation framework
outcome involving UNDP # Technical assistance for SDG catalyst acceleration
Related Strategic Plan outcome:  Advance poverty eradication in all its forms
and dimensions Presidential Adviser on Youth PAEW MESD Attorney General’ Office
Ombudsman Office TRA National Unit for Disaster Management Unit for the
Attention and Integral Repair of Victims National Administrative Department for
Statistics Local Authorities SDG Commission Members UN Agencies Private Sector
Research institutes Bilateral donors Multilateral donors Percentage value added
of the ‘orange economy’ policy Baseline (2019)  Target (2024)  Regular 208,000
Ministry of Culture Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MESD)
Civil Service Administrative Department Local governments Pan American Health
Organization/World Health Organization, annually Output  The Government and
territorial entities strengthen their capacities to accelerate the 2030 Agenda
and the SDGs Other 256,858,238 Number of platforms and planning tools at local
and national levels promoting alliances to accelerate the fulfilment of the SDGs
using  multi-stakeholder approach with  gender, human-rights and ethnic
perspective Baseline (2020): Target (2024): 26 Number of victims returned,
relocated or locally integrated Baseline (2019): ,602,670 Target (2024):
,115,670 Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions with respect to the to the
national reference scenario Baseline (2017):  million tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalents (tCO2 eq) Target (2023): 36 million tCO2 eq Number of national and
subnational strategies implemented to advance toward  green, low-carbon economy
with  gender perspective Baseline (2019): 44 Target (2024): 60 Output
Government institutions strengthen capacities and implement strategies to
promote production, sustainable consumption, and preservation and sustainable
use of natural resources Growth in national deforestation from previous year
Baseline (2017): 23% Target (2022): % Number of municipalities supported in the
design and formulation of programmes and strategies for rural development in
production and consumption, focusing on the most vulnerable populations, with
gender approach Baseline (2020): 38 Target (2024): 50 Open government index
Baseline (2018): Target (2024): 65 Number of institutions with strengthened
capacities for implementation of environmental management to mitigate the carbon
footprint of infrastructure works and incorporate strategies for consumption
patterns promoting the sustainable use of natural resources Baseline (2019):
Target (2024): 28 12 DP/DCP/COL/ Area of land under sustainable land management
or sustainable forest management (hectares) Baseline (2019): ,164,082 Target
(2024): ,294,082 Output  The Government, through the national ‘orange economy’
policy and the ‘Sacúdete’ strategy, strengthens capacities to consolidate the
entrepreneurial ecosystem, innovation, cultural transformation, productive
inclusion, and formal employment to support government efforts Number of
entrepreneurs’ business models focused on creative and cultural industries,
participating in business- strengthening processes focused on innovation,
cultural transformation, productive inclusion, and formal employment Baseline
(2019):48 Target (2024):302 Number of individuals trained in essential and
technical skills that successfully established productive life projects focused
on innovation, cultural transformation, productive inclusion, and formal
employment Baseline (2019): 108 Target (2024): 300 Output  Surveillance and
control institutions, with jurisdictional, judicial and non-judicial functions,
strengthen their capacities to attend to prioritized populations and justice
administration with  gender and differential approaches Number of national and
local institutions with strengthened capabilities to attend victim redress
mechanisms including transitional justice, community-oriented security services
and oversight mechanisms Baseline (2019): Total 95: ( national, 90 local) Target
(2023): Total 177: ( national, 170 local) Output  Territorial governments,
particularly municipalities under categories  and , design, implement, and
effectively monitor their planning tools in accordance with government
guidelines, considering gender and differentiated approaches 13 DP/DCP/COL/
Number of PDET municipalities supported in formulating institutional management
plans, programmes and projects Baseline (2018):  Target (2024):170 Number of
social organizations in PDET municipalities with strengthened capacities that
allow them to intervene in public management Baseline (2018): 149 Target (2024):
200 Output  Preserve the ability of the most vulnerable and affected people to
meet the basic needs caused by the pandemic, through productive activities and
access to social safety nets and humanitarian assistance in coordination with
the government Number of vulnerable and affected people benefiting from jobs and
improved livelihoods in crisis Baseline (2020):  Target (2024): ,291 Output
Ensure continuity and safety from risk of infection of essential services
(health, water and sanitation, food supply, among others) for population groups
most exposed and vulnerable to the pandemic in coordination with the government
Number of preventive solutions to strengthen livelihoods and protect population
groups exposed to the pandemic Baseline (2020):  Target (2024): 50 Output
Secure continuity of the supply chain for essential commodities and services
such as food, time- critical productive and agricultural inputs, and non- food
items in coordination with the government Number of initiatives for individuals,
that promote the supply chain to maintain essential commodities and services
during the pandemic Baseline (2020):  Target (2024): 50 14