Table of Contents:  Programme rationale  : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships   : Page:  III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV
Monitoring and evaluation : Page:  DP/DCP/BRA/  Programme rationale  Brazil
experienced  decade of economic and social progress from 2002 -2014 in which
over 26 million people were lifted out of poverty and inequality was reduced
significantly (the Gini Coefficient fell from 60 to 53)  The income of the
bottom 40 per cent of the population grew an average  per cent (in real terms),
compared to the  per cent income growth for the total population Between 2003
and 2014, conditional cash transfer policies, like Bolsa Familia, Green Grant
and Family the Agriculture Credit, contributed international poverty line ($
25/day) from per cent to  per cent the population living below to reducing
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Brazil dropped from  per cent in  to  per cent
over , plunging to - per cent in Inflation remains high, ending 2015 at per cent
In 2015, Brazilian Real depreciated by 49 per cent compared to the United States
Dollar  Although inequality has decreased during past decade, poverty persists
among vulnerable populations, especially Northeast rural poor, indigenous, agro
-extractivists and African descents The structural cause is concentration of
political and economic wealth in the top  per cent  of the population that led
to unequal access to rights and public services In the Northeast, poverty and
extreme poverty declined more than in the rest of Brazil, but the region still
lags behind the rest of the country Poverty among agricultural households fell
from 65 per cent to 36 per cent, but many people still live in poverty African
descent households (53 per cent of the population) have  per-capita income 40
per cent lower than non-African descent  Regarding Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), Brazil surpassed all targets in seven MDGs, and improved MDG : maternal
mortality rate While the country target was 35 cases per 100,000 live births
there is still an average of deaths, of which per cent were Afro-Brazilian women
and 34 per cent white women Respectively, they represent 52 per cent and per
cent of Brazilian female population Infant mortality rates among indigenous
children are per ,000 live births compared to 15 per ,000 live births among non-
indigenous children, mostly due to diarrhoea and malnutrition  In Brazil, the
status of women has been improving over the last decades; however, social
markers related to race, ethnicity and class are sources of inequalities faced
by African decent, indigenous and rural women For example, homicide rates
against African descent women are 48 per cent higher that against non-afro
women8, while per cent9 of indigenous women have anemia due to inadequate
management of indigenous lands, lack of access to seeds and health services10
Hence, inequalities based on region, gender, race and ethnicity discrimination
are still structuring and are the main development challenge for the country
More than 80 per cent of the population lives in urban areas, which affects land
use, local and natural resources, household composition, and places pressure on
Instituto de Pesquisa Economica Aplicada (IPEA) DATA , According to Gobetti &
Orair (IPEA, 2015), the top % concentrate 30 percent of total income and 43% of
total wealth  International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth (IPC-IG) Poverty
Profile: the rural North and Northeast of Brazil  Brazilian Institute of
Geography and Statistics (IBGE) Pequisa Nacional por Amostra de Domícilio,
IBGE/Pesquisa Mensal de Emprego, Relatório Socioeconômico da Mulher, UNICEF
Tendências em Mortalidade Infantil, Mapa da Violência, 1º Inquérito Nacional de
Nutrição dos Povos Indígenas 10 UNDP Evaluation “Nutritional Security for
Indigenous Children and Women in Brazil”,  /16 DP/DCP/BRA/ establishing
different access to urban benefits Mobilization from rural to urban continuous
increasing the number of irregular occupations with lack of public services,
worsening the concentration of poverty in urban areas  Brazil’ current
mitigation actions in the global effort represent one of the largest
undertakings by any single country to date, having reduced its greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions by 41 per cent11 in 2012 in relation to 2005 levels Brazil
reduced deforestation rate in Amazon by 82 per cent between 2004 and 2014, and
has undertaken mitigation actions in many areas, including energy and
agriculture The recent Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs)
presented by Brazil in the context of the COP21, has indicated that the country
further intends to commit to reduce GHG emissions by 37 per cent below 2005
levels in 2025, and by 43 per cent in  Brazil experiences continuous increase of
natural disasters The Brazilian Atlas of Natural Disasters mapped an average of
363 catastrophes per year, which affected more than ,500 municipalities
Droughts, floods and landslides killed ,500 people between 1991 and Poor African
Brazilian populations living in favelas are most affected by disasters  Brazil
faces several development challenges when it comes to combining agricultural
growth, environmental protection, rights of indigenous populations and
sustainable development The 2010 Census determined there are 896,000 people
(from 305 indigenous ethnicities and 274 spoken languages) living in protected
areas but face threats from farmers, loggers and illegal mining Alagoas, Bahia
and Ceará are the most violent states in Brazil Over the past decade, homicides
rate has increased, reaching 29 per 100,000 inhabitants In 2012, 56,337 people
were killed nationwide, of which 30,072 were poor young men of African descent
The number of white victims decreased from 20,000 in 2002 to 15,000 in 2012
while the number of African descent victims  ncreased from 30,000 to 41,000,
during in the same period,12 an evidence of racial inequality in Brazil With
regards to gender-based violence, relatives committed per cent of the ,762
registered homicides against women In addition, there has been  54 per cent
increase in the number of murdered African Brazilian women over the past decade
13 Brazil has experienced important advances in access to Justice, such as the
strengthening of Public Defenders Offices, the creation of  National Council of
Justice and the implementation of policies targeted to promote alternative
dispute resolution mechanisms However, challenges are still present The majority
of the persons in the prison system are under 29 years old (per cent) and are of
African descent (per cent) Likewise, the incarceration rate for women increased
567 per cent between 2000 and 2014, totaling 37,380 women of which 50 per cent
is between 18 and 29 years of age14 Corruption draws funding away from economic
and social development, affecting those living in poverty  National Strategy to
Combat Corruption and Money Laundering was created to monitor results and
promote an anti -corruption society The average cost of corruption in Brazil is
roughly  per cent of the GDP 11 Global warming potential-100 Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Second Assessment Report 12 Mapa da Violência,
2011 and 13 Mapa da Violência: Homicídios de Mulheres, 14 INFOPEN Mulheres,  /16
DP/DCP/BRA/ Brazil needs sustained economic growth based on  sustainable and
inclusive development model and the private sector is called to play  crucial
role Approximately million companies 15 employ 40 million people Small and
medium enterprises (SME) comprising 85 per cent of this sector, but only 27 per
cent of national GDP There are nine million micro and small enterprises and five
million individual micro-entrepreneurs (MEI), of which 500,000 are Bolsa Familia
beneficiaries (93 per cent are women and 73 per cent are of African descent)
While MEI have access to social security and reduced taxes, they have trouble
accessing training and new technology Brazilian South-South Cooperation (SSC)
has provided technical cooperation to 98 countries, most in Africa and Latin
America, and particularly Portuguese speaking countries SSC could be further
optimized focusing on enhanced kn owledge brokering and technical and
operational assistance Between 2012 and 2015, UNDP contributed to poverty
reduction and social inclusion in Brazil16 The “Human Development Atlas” (HDA)
helped stakeholders distribute public services in poorer territories, like the
“Mais Médicos” programme, that placed 14,000 doctors in municipalities17 with
low Human Development Index (HDI) Likewise, UNDP mainstreamed the MDGs across
the country and created civil society networks and policy support tools, like
the MDG Portal, Award, Monitoring Report and Conference Inclusion based on
integrated approaches and poverty reduction strategies, economic growth and
environmental sustainability were successfully developed for families in rural
and poor communities Systema tized knowledge kits, developed by the country
office for justice, public security, local development, wellbeing and sports,
and inclusive business, will be scaled up in the next cycle As the main lessons
learnt from the previous program, UNDP should increase dissemination of HDA tool
to keep supporting government allocation of services in municipalities with low
HDI It should also have built on previous MDG experience and scale them up to
mainstream SDGs UNDP should improve communication and dissemination of results
and knowledge products UNDP should also improve projects’ monitoring Finally, it
should work more intensely across the territory, especially with poorer states
and municipalities Hence, inequalities persist between the rich and the poor and
across space (between rural and urban areas, within and among regions), with the
Northeast performing worse in most socioeconomic indicators The rapid
urbanization process resulted in high degrees of concentrated poverty in urban
areas, especia lly in slums on fragile lands, exposed to natural hazards For the
next programme cycle, UNDP will support Brazil in reducing inequalities,
focusing on vulnerable populations that remained on poverty This approach is
aligned with the national priorities   the multiyear plan (PPA ) Partnerships
with government entities, civil society, the private sector, universities,
United Nations organizations, bilateral donors and international finance
institutions (IFIs) are essential to mobilize funds, leve rage resources and
create momentum for sustainable change 15 Censo das Empresas Brasileiras,
Instituto Brasileiro de Planejamento  Tributação, 16 50 Anos de Atuação do PNUD
17 Acessed online:  /16 DP/DCP/BRA/ II Programme priorities and partnerships
UNDP, together with other United Nations organizations, is well positioned to
support the 2030 Agenda as  platform to help transform Brazil into  more
sustainable country, with  view to end poverty and inequality18 Government of
Brazil (GoB) and UNDP will work on social mobilization and territorialisation of
SDGs seeking the participation of vulnerable populations in public policy and
democratic dialogue UNDP will also launch an SDG monitoring platform in
partnership with IPEA In addition, UNDP will provide training and support
government capacity building for mainstreaming the SDGs into public policies
formulation, monitoring and evaluation Special focus will be placed on
vulnerable areas and populations with low and medium HDI, especially North and
Northeast rural poor and women afro -descendants, indigenous people, agro-
extractivists and the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community,
working more intensely with states and municipalities  focus on reduction of
inequalities and building resilience to shocks will be adopted across the
portfolio, especially by promoting alliances between national, local and public
-private institutions and UN agencies Furthermore, UNDP will intensify its
partnerships with Global Centers The Istanbul International Center for Private
Sector in Development will provide assistance on inclusive business The Regional
Bureau for Latin America and Caribbean will provide support on public security,
gender, social participation, transparency and disaster risk management (DRM)
UNDP country office will continue to support the Rio+ Cente People: Inclusive
and equitable society with extensive rights for all men and women UNDP will
partner with municipal, state and federal governments, the civil society,
private sector and international partners to roll out initiatives that address
poverty reduction and inequality through the enhancement of public services, in
the areas of health, social assistance and rural development UNDP will
contribute to strengthen capacities to formulate, implement, monitor and
evaluate social policies, with emphasis on gender, race, ethnicity and
generational equity UNDP will continue its efforts to build resilience of
institutions to economic shocks and avoid people falling back into poverty UNDP
will enhance the HDA, by disaggregating data according to gender and race,
incorporating the household survey data (RADAR PNAD ) and three other
metropolitan regions UNDP will develop  Human Development Report on sports and
physical activities and build  new platform to monitor SDGs indicators Technical
capacity of GoB will be supported to expand the National System for Racial
Equality Promotion (SINAPIR), strengthening decentralization of racial equality
policy In addition, technical capacity will be provided to improve rural
extension to family agriculture and the Green Grant Program benefitting
traditional peoples and communities UNDP strategy on wellbeing will consider
prevention and treatment of diseases within the unified health system, improving
managerial capacity to guarantee access for all people, particularly the most
vulnerable UNDP will support public policies and civil society initiatives that
promote sports and physical activities for all ages and support epidemiological
responses at government request Promote health services that do not discriminate
by gender, race, age or sexual identity is part of the strategy, in 18 Any
mention of poverty reduction after this point is in line with SDG , Target   /16
DP/DCP/BRA/ partnership with Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) and Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) to increase citizen access to HIV
prevention, diagnostic and treatment services UNDP will continue to mainstream
gender equality, engaging women in the protection, management and sustainability
of the environment and its natural resources UNDP will also promote women’
empowerment to close gender gaps in the private sector and will cooperate with
UN WOMEN and UNFPA on preventing gender based violence and promoting women'
political empowerment Brazil knowledge on people-centered development will
continue to be systematized and shared with developing countries under the South
South and triangular cooperation The International Policy Center for Inclusive
Growth (IPG -IG), administered and supported by UNDP Brazil, will intensify its
sharing of SSC initiatives intended to assist interested countries on the design
and evaluation of social protection policies and programmes Planet: Sustainable
management of natural resources for present and future generations UNDP will
work with GoB to implement national environmental legislation, multilateral and
international commitments, focused on biodiversity, desertification, chemicals,
Montreal protocol and climate change UNDP will support the GoB in the
implementation of an environmental regulatory framework and related policies
that promote sustainable management of natural resources, effective ecosystem
services, land use and land use change, recovery of degraded areas, as well as
territorial and environmental management, by indigenous people, quilombolas and
rural populations in order to improve their resilience to climate change, to
reduce land degradation and also to guarantee their constitutional rights By
working with vulnerable groups, UNDP will promote their productive inclusion and
access to markets, increasing their income from maintaining the standing forests
Strengthening the resilience of target populations, will improve their
livelihoods, thereby reducing their vulnerabilities to the impact of climate
change and natural disasters Given the impact of climate change in
desertification, disasters’ increase and the deepening of poverty in groups at
risk, UNDP will support the implementation of INDC, mitigation and adaptation
measures, and promote energy efficiency, renewable energy, sustainable
transportation, and chemical and waste management UNDP will cooperate with state
authorities, academia and civil society to strengthen national DRM capacities
through data production, capacity building of civil servants and technical
advisory in the design and implementation of public policies that have  gender
sensitive and inter-sectorial approach, with  focus on poorer areas UNDP will
promote partnerships that encourage the adoption of sustainable production and
consumption patterns (and include  gender dimension) By way of Montreal
protocol, UNDP will promote awareness and enhanced the technical capacity of
companies involved in Ozone Depleting Substances phase out The reduction of
pollution and hazardous substances into the atmosphere will certainly bring
positive impacts to diseases control and health UNDP will promote an enabling
environment for the sustainability of cities, communities and territories
through policies built on the results of the metropolitan HDA  /16 DP/DCP/BRA/
Prosperity: Prosperity and quality of life for everyone Economic development is
critical for poverty and inequality reduction In Brazil, UNDP will support an
inclusive approach to economic growth by providing information and methodologies
to expand inclusive business at the bottom of the pyramid in order to raise
income of ,140 micro and small enterprises and ,087,860 MEI attended by the
Serviço Brasileiro de Apoio às Micro  Pequenas Empresas (SEBRAE), of which 52
per cent are men and 48 per cent are women This will strengthen the capacity of
15 business accelerators and incubators to support the implementation of
inclusive business models In Brazil, 68 per cent of population has simplified
account, of which per cent are among the 40 per cent poorest, per cent are women
and per cent are young adults UNDP will work with national actors to develop
set of studies, support technological innovation and disseminate information in
order to increase the qualified use of credit and savings accounts across the
country, facilitating access to capital, and opening opportunities to economic
growth and income generation Special attention will be given to developing
business models that incorporates  gender perspective UNDP will provide
technical assistance to national and local stakeholder  Infrastructure,
logistics and basic services will be strengthened so that business communities
can reach underserviced areas UNDP will expand multi-stakeholder partnerships by
engaging further with business networks, public and private companies,
philanthropic foundations and media, advocating for greater awareness on
sustainable consumption and production patterns Likewise, UNDP will promote an
inclusive dialogue with extractive industries and affected populations on
sustainable development UNDP will encourage public-private collaboration for
development, including the organization of relevant large events Peace:
Peaceful, fair and inclusive society The rule of law and development are
mutually reinforcing and, as such, promoting an environment based on democratic
governance, rule of law, justice and peace is key to the promotion of public
policies and initiatives focused on poverty and inequality reduction In this
context, UNDP will support federal, states and municipal governments, the
judiciary and legislative powers to develop initiatives related to promote
peaceful and inclusive societies, especially for vulnerable populations Close
attention will be paid to municipalities with  lower HDI, considering gender,
race, ethnicity and generational inequalities Innovative approaches to violence
prevention and control will be prioritized by promoting coordination and
intragovernmental dialogue with  multidisciplinary vision of the violence issue
Citizen participation and gender mainstr eaming will be key in the process of
design, implementation and monitoring of public security policies UNDP will join
efforts with GoB and other agencies to eradicate violence against women and
girls Promoting access to justice, will be involve strengthening of justice
institutions, like Public Defenders and Prosecutors, their respective access
mechanisms, and supporting alternative mechanisms, that lead to peaceful
resolution of conflicts Furthermore, improving management and access to justice
in prisons, fostering the implementation of guidelines that secure prisoners’
rights and changing the practices that contribute to excessive imprisonment in
the country, especially for women, will also be prioritized  /16 DP/DCP/BRA/
With regards to human rights, UNDP will support public policies (at national and
sub-national levels), that promote dialogue with civil society and focus on
vulnerable population, like LGBT community, African Brazilian women and
immigrants Furthermore, UNDP will support the elaboration of the Stigma Index
with other UN agencies and partners To achieve inclusive and responsive
institutions, and reduce corruption in all its forms, democratic dialogue will
be used as  tool to collectively build  more transparent and accountable culture
and reduce one of the major barriers to achieve SDGs UNDP will support the
modernization of the state especially the at sub -national level and promote
tools such as the Management System for Governance -SIGOB and best practices for
enhancing public management and effective public services delivery, particularly
in municipalities with  lower HDI III Programme and risk management to This
country programme document outlines UNDP contributions the achievement of
national priorities in Brazil and is the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
country level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels, with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the
organization’ programmatic and operational policies and procedures and the
internal controls framework This programme will be nationally executed under the
Ministry of international External Relations as cooperation UNDP will provide
implementation support as needed Other modalities may be pursued, including with
UN or non-governmental organizations, or by direct UNDP implementation to
achieve objectives in line with institutional procedures UNDP social and
environmental standards will be applied to ensure that development is inclusive,
human rights-based and protective of the environment Harmonized approach to cash
transfer (HACT) and fast-track procedures may be applied, as needed UNDP will
support the successful implementation of the Joint Operation Facility in Brazil,
incorporating it in Country Office business model technical coordinator of the
official and The programme is aligned with the priorities in the PPA , the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF 2017 -2021), and the UNDP
Strategic Plan , and incorporates the SDGs in its implementation strategy
programme management committee will be set up with national counterparts to
oversee programme implementation UNDP will expand its partnership strategy,
build upon existing ones and develop alliances with new stakeholders, such as
sub-national governments, IFIs, the private sector, media and national
institutions Programme risks are related to currency fluctuations and political
instabilities, ( municipal elections in 2016 and state government and
presidential elections in 2018) that are likely to change the policy priorities
of sub -national and national governments To mitigate such risks, UNDP will
engage in  dialogue with candidates and authorities across the political
spectrum, aligning initiatives with government plans and policies Fiscal
deficits, high inflation, dependency on commo dities and decreasing oil prices
constitute risks to government revenues and investments Those risks demand sound
analysis from UNDP to support GoB to increase public sector efficiency and
promote structural reforms  /16 DP/DCP/BRA/ UNDP will mobilize funds and in-kind
contributions from national counterparts at all levels of government, IFIs, the
private sector, international donors interested in partnering with GoB  resource
mobilization strategy will cover the program cycle IV Monitoring and evaluation
Indicators, baselines and targets set bases for monitoring and evaluation (&)
Most data will be gathered from national stakeholders, like the Brazilian
Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), sector organizations and others
Data will be disaggregated by sex, race, age and other relevant variables Data
generation strategies will be designed to improve national monitoring
capacities, particularly at the local level and include SDG indicators platform
UNDP will strengthen its & capacities so it can assist in monitoring the UNDAF
and the inter-agency information management Currently, UNDP Gender Marker scored
two GEN3 and 14 GEN2 projects, worth  million dollars (of delivery) To improve
Gender Marker and Gender capacities in the Country Office, UNDP will strengthen
its Gender Equality Strategy with specific projects and activities that focus
women empowerment Annual reviews of CPD implementation will be organized jointly
by UNDP and ABC with all partners It will be reinforced with  comprehensive
planning, & and knowledge management strategy The strategy will include: ()
quality assurance support mechanisms to ensure the use of results-based
management, gender-based approaches, identification of SSC opportunities, and
capacity development; () evaluation plan to support decision- making, learning
and accountability; and ()  communications plan  /16         /    /   Annex
Results and resources framework for Brazil,  / National priority People:
Inclusive and equitable society with extensive rights for all men and women
UNDAF outcome involving UNDP: Outcome  Strengthened social development
throughout the country, with poverty reduction through access to quality public
goods and services, particularly in the areas of education, health, welfare,
food and nutritional security and decent work, equitably and with emphasis on
gender, racial, ethnic and generational equality Related strategic plan outcome
(for strategic plan ) Outcome  Countries have strenghtened institutions to
progressively deliver universal access to basic services UNDAF outcome
indicators, Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators,
baselines, and targets) baselines and targets / Data source and frequency of
data collection, and responsibilities Major partners/ partnership frameworks
Indicative resources by outcome (in $) Indicator: Maternal mortality rate
disaggregated by race Baseline: per 100,000 live births (% afro; 34% white)
(2015) Target: 35 per 100,000 live births (52% afro; % white) (2021) Source:
SVS/Ministry of Health Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: MS  Institutional
capacities strengthened to formulate and implement sustainable policies and
strategies to improve the population access to health and promote wellbeing
Ministries of Health, Justice, Education, Environment Social and Agrarian
Development Regular 187,500 Indicator : Number of strategies implemented to
improve health services and promotion of sports for vulnerable populations,
including afro Brazilian women, indigenous people, LGBT, etc Baseline: 02 (2015)
Target: 10 (2019) Indicator : HIV detection rate ( years old), disaggregated by
sex Baseline: male; female per 100,000 people (2014) Target:  male;  female per
100,000 people (2021) Other 120,000,000 Presidency UNWomen, UNFPA, PAHO, UNAIDS
Indicator: Number of beneficiary families of Green Grant Program, disaggregated
by sex of family head Baseline: 76,220 (66,311 female; 909 male) (2016) Target:
94,000 (81,780 female; 220 male) (2021) IPEA  Institutional capacities
strengthened in order to promote access to rights and sustainable livelihoods,
with special attention to vulnerable populations and traditional peoples FJP ABC
Source: Ministry of Environment (MMA) Frequency: Monthly Responsibilities: MMA
Indicator  Number of rural families with  focus on women empowerment receiving
Technical Assistance and Rural Extension (ATER) Baseline: 629,262 (2015) Target:
900,000 (2021) States Indicator: Number of contracts with National Program of
Family Agriculture, disaggregated by sex Baseline:  million (Female 562,000;
Male ,338,000) (2015) Municipalities Source: Ministry of Agrarian Development
(MDA) Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: MDA Indicator : Number of
participating of SINAPIR Baseline:  states and 23 municipalities (2015) Target:
27 states and 173 municipalities (2021) states and municipalities   -        -
Target: 09 million (Female ,390,000) (2021) Institutional capacities
strengthened  the formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
social policies, with participation and social control to support Civil Society
Organizations 700,000; Male Indicator : Number of new human development
reports/atlas with high disaggregation of data prepared and promoted Baseline:
(2015) Target:  (2021) ( IDHM disaggregated by gender and race,  RADAR PNAD ,
new report with  metropolitan regions,  HDR on sports and physical activities
and  new platform to monitor SDGs indicators) Research centers Indicator: Number
of national data collection, measurement and analytical systems/reports to
monitor SDGs’ progress Baseline:  (2015) Target:  (2021) Source: IPEA Frequency:
Biannual Responsibilities: IPEA Indicator : Number of federative entities
(municipalities, states and consortia) aligning their planning tools to SDGs
Baseline:  (2015) Target: 010 (2021) Indicator: Number of Brazilian institutions
contributing to SSCT Baseline: 312 (2015) Target: 362 (2021)  SSCT initiatives
supported oriented by the Brazilian Foreign Policy priorities Source: ABC
Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: ABC Indicator : Number of new SSTC projects
with GoB established Baseline:  (2015) Target:  (2021) National priority Planet:
Sustainable management of natural resources for present and future generations
UNDAF outcome involving UNDP Outcome  Strengthened institutional capacity to
promote public policies for the sustainable management of natural resources and
ecosystem services, and combating climate change and its adverse effects, and
ensure the consistency and implementation of these policies Related strategic
plan outcome Outcome  Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable,
incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for
the poor and excluded         /  / /   /           /    /   Indicator: Tons of
CO2 equivalent emitted annually Baseline:  GtCO2e (2012) Target: 2GtCO2e (2020)
Source: Estimativas de emissões de GEE Brasil Frequency: Every  years
Responsibilities: MCTI  Policies strengthened for the adoption, implementation,
and monitoring of mitigation and adaptation measures to climate change,
mainstreaming and integrating national plans and international agreements
Ministries of Environment, Science Technology, National Integration Regular
187,500 / / Other 100,000,000 Indicator : Tons of Ozone Depleting Substance-
(HCFC- 141b) phased out Baseline: (2015) Target: (2021) Civil Defense FUNAI
Indicator : Number of Mitigation or Adaptation initiatives implemented Baseline:
03 Target: 06 States Indicator: Amazon deforestation area annually Baseline:
,831 km² (2015) Target: ,915 km² (2021) Source: MMA Frequency: Annual
Responsibilities: MMA Municipalities strengthened  Policies to guarantee
effectiveness of ecosystemic services and biodiversity conservation, promoting
sustainable land and combat desertification Civil society organizations land
use, recover degraded Research centers Indicator : Number of rural poor families
benefiting of rural jobs and business development in Northeast states,
disaggregated by sex of family head Baseline:  Target: 000 (600 female; 400
male) Private sector Indicator: Adoption of policies of sustainable production
and consumption (PPCS) Baseline: Action Plan for PPCS produced (2011) Target: At
least 02 Sectoral plans under implementation (2021) Source: MMA Frequency:
Annual Responsibilities: MMA Indicator : Number of Small Grants Projects
implemented and socio-biodiversity strategies/studies elaborated in Caatinga,
Cerrado and Amazon biomes Baseline: 90 (2015) Target: 135 (2021)  Partnerships
with governmental institutions, private sector and civil society established to
ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns, promoting energy
efficiency, clean and renewable sustainable technologies, and environmentally
practices Indicator: Indigenous population by household situation (inside and
outside indigenous lands), disaggregated by sex Baseline: 517,838 inside (% male
and % female) and 379,539 (% male and % female) outside (2010) Indicator :
Number of partnerships to ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
Baseline: 04 (2015) Target: 10 (2021) Source: Census 2010 - “ Brasil Indígena”
Frequency: Every 10 years Responsibilities: IBGE  Strategies and technical
capacities strengthened for making cities, communities and territories
inclusive, integrated, safe, accessible, resilient and sustainable, with special
attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations   -        -
Target: 700,000 inside (% male and % female and 300,000 outside (% male and %
female) (2020) Indicator : Number of strategies/plans implemented for
Environmental and Territorial management in Indigenous lands Baseline: 10 (2015)
Target: 20 ( 2021) strengthened  Capacities and implementation of policies and
actions in DRM its preventive and disaster preparedness including climate change
adaptation, in  multisector and integrated approach elaboration the for
Indicator: Percentage of subnationals with DRM mechanisms for response and
recovery Baseline: 52% (2013) Target: % (2021) Source: Civil Defense/MUNIC
Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: Civil Defense/IBGE Indicator : National
development and key sectorial plans being implemented, that explicitly address
disaster and/or climate risk management, disaggregated by those that are gender
responsive Baseline:  National, not gender responsive Target:  National and
subnational/sectorial gender responsive National priority Prosperity and quality
of life for everyone UNDAF outcome involving UNDP Outcome Inclusive and
environmentally sustainable economic growth, with productive diversification,
industrial strengthening, resilient infrastructures, increased productivity and
innovation, transparency, social participation and enhancement of micro and
small enterprises Related strategic plan outcome Outcome  Growth and development
are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create
employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded Indicator: of Individual,
Micro and Small Companies Brazil, disaggregated by sex of the entrepreneur
Baseline: 10 million (51% female; 49% male) (2015) Target: 12 million female;
48% male) (2021) SEBRAE Number  Inclusive business and market ecosystem
strengthened, through productive investments, information and implementation
support Indicator : Number of business accelerators and incubators’ capacity
supported for the implementation of inclusive business models Baseline:  (2015)
Target: 15 (2021)  Studies, information and technological innovation increased
to maximize financial inclusion and promote inclusive economic growth Indicator
: Number of new cases on inclusive finance mapped, presented and available
through on-line platform Baseline:  (2016) Target: 10 (2021) Source: Compre do
Pequeno Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: SEBRAE in Regular 187,500 CNI/CNA
States Other 10,000,000 (52% Municipalities Business schools and networks
Indicator: Entrepreneur’ perception of banks financing services Baseline:55%
Very good/good, 10% average, 35% fair/poor (2014) Ministries of External
Relations, Science and Technology Planning, Social Development, Industry and
Trade         /   Technical capacity strengthened to improve infrastructure and
basic services to reach underserved areas and foreign markets promoting an agile
business environment and  more sustainable economic growth / Source:
Financiamento dos Pequenos Negócios no Brasil Frequency: Annual
Responsibilities: SEBRAE to support Brazilian companies /   /           /    /
Target: 75% Very good/good, 10% average, 15% fair/poor (2021) Indicator : Number
of business and networks engaged in knowledge exchange on innovative models for
access to infrastructure and basic services Baseline:  (2015) Target: 10 (2021)
Multistakeholder partnerships intensified and expanded to support and promote
inclusive and sustainable growth, through knowledge exchange and capacity
building activities schools, Indicator : Number of business networks,
associations, think tanks and philanthropic foundations engaged in dialogues
Baseline:  (2015) Target: 11 (2021) / Central Bank / Bilateral donors IFI’ (IDB,
IFDA, World Bank) Number engaged of in international Indicator: companies
national and business networks Baseline: 720 (2016) Target: 1000 (2021) National
priority Peace: Peaceful, fair and inclusive society UNDAF outcome involving
UNDP Outcome   peaceful, fair and inclusive society promoted through social
participation, transparency and democratic governance, respecting the secularity
of the State and ensuring human rights for all Related strategic plan outcome
Outcome  Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and
accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance Source:
Global Compact Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: Compact Global   -        -
Indicator: Homicide rate, disaggregated by age, sex, race Baseline: male;
female; 57, young; 40, afro per 100,000 inhabitants (2012) Target: male;
female; 53 young; 37 afro per 100,000 inhabitants (2021) Source: Anuário
Brasileiro de Segurança Pública Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: FBSP
Innovative approach to security policies and programmes promoted through
capacity development, knowledge building, and dialogue, with  participatory and
multidisciplinary methodologies Ministries of Justice, CGU Regular 187,500
States Other 20,000,000 Indicator : Number of Security strategic plans developed
by municipalities, including cities in violent states of Alagoas, Espirito Santo
and Ceará Baseline: 52 (2014) Target: 104 (2021) Municipalities Indicator :
Number of “Casas da Mulher Brasileira” that provide integrated services to women
victims of Sexual and Gender Based Violence implemented in state capitals
Baseline: (2015) Target:  (2021) Indicator: Federal Government expenditures as
percentage of originally approved budget Baseline: 34% (2014) Target: 38% (2021)
Source: Tribunal de Contas da União (TCU), Contas do Governo Frequency: Annual
Responsibilities: TCU Academia and research centres Civil society organizations
Institutional and technical capacity developed to enhance transparency,
accountability and innovative institutions at all levels, through social
participation, effective management, information, and coordination mechanisms
Private Sector Indicator: Justice Stock Tax, by 1st and 2nd instance courts
Baseline: 73% 1st; 47% 2nd (2014) Target: % 1st; % 2nd (2021) Justice System
Indicator : Number of new commitment agendas to reduce corruption formulated
with public and/or private sector institutions Baseline:  (2015) Target:  (2021)
Source: CNJ Frequency: Annual Responsibilities: CNJ Indicator : Number of states
and municipalities in compliance with Information Access Law (Escala Brasil
Transparente) Baseline:  states and 31 municipalities (2015) Target: 27 states
and 100 municipalities (2021) Indicator: Percentage of compliance of the 170
recommendations received by Brazil in Universal Period Review (UPR) mechanism
Baseline: Brazil MTR underway (2015) Target: 60% (2021)  Access to Justice
actions promoted, strengthening the Justice System resolution mechanisms,
fostering  culture of peaceful dispute resolution at all levels Source: Brazil
Report (2017 and 2021) Frequency: Every  years Responsibilities: MMIRDH
alternative promoting dispute and Indicator : Percentage of prison units
adopting new management models Baseline:% (2015) Target: 70% (2021)         /  /
/   /           /    /   Indicator : Annual increase rate of women incarceration
in Brazil, disaggregated by age and race Baseline: %  year (Total 380;Young 690;
Afro 214) (2014) Target: 20%  year (Total 690; Young 345; Afro 563) (2021) /
Indicator: Percentage of municipalities with human rights policies management
structure Baseline: % (2014) Target: % (2021) / Source: MUNIC Frequency: Annual
Responsibilities:IBGE  Strengthening national and sub-national mechanisms and
policies for the promotion of human rights, considering gender, race, ethnicity
and generational inequalities and excluded groups, regardless of their
nationality Indicator : Percentage of proposals presented in Joint Conferences
of Human Rights (2016) translated into public policies actions Baseline: %
(2015) Target: 40% (2021) Total 250,750,000   -