 PROPOSAL FOR  NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY FOR BELIZE March, 2011 Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS THE GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE PROPOSAL
FOR  NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY FOR BELIZE Project sponsored by the Department of
Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Canada Conducted by OAS/DSD/Energy
and Climate Change Mitigation Section Proposal for  National energy Policy for
Belize / DFAIT-OAS List of Acronyms BAL Belize Aquaculture Limited BEL Belize
Electricity Limited BELCOGEN Belize Co-Generation Energy Limited GPD Geology and
Petroleum Department GST General Sales Taxes ME Ministry of Energy MCTPU
Ministry of Communications, Transport and Public Utilities MNRE Ministry of
Natural Resources and the Environment NEP National Energy Policy OAS
Organization of American States PUC Public Utilities Commission RETs Renewable
Energy Technologies SED Sustainable Energy Development Proposal for  National
energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Table of Contents:  Introduction: Page:
Outlook on Energy : Page:   Objectives and Priorities of the Energy Policy :
Page: 10  Part: Page:   Part: Page:   Energy Supply Side Objectives and
Strategies: Page: 19  Other Renewable Energy Resources : Page: 23  LPG: Page: 25
Rural Energy: Page: 25 Cross-Cutting Issues, Objectives and Strategies: Page: 27
Table of Contents: Governance and Institutional Capacity : Page: 32
Introduction This document outlines  proposed National Energy Policy (NEP) for
the Government of Belize  secure and sustainable energy supply is critical to
the nation’ development Energy services are needed for electricity generation,
water supply, agriculture production, transportation and telecommunications All
these services are integral to the development of Belize The priority areas,
overarching goal and specific objectives for the development of the energy
sector can be summarized as security of supplies, environmental protection and
competitiveness This policy document identifies seven key areas needed to attain
them, including energy efficiency, reduction in reliance on imported fuels,
stability in energy supply, administration and dissemination of national energy
data, measures to curb carbon dioxide and other emissions, efficient and
effective delivery of energy and policy support to the energy sector  Why an
Energy Policy As the country embarks upon  development process and the
modernization of the economy, it needs to address energy challenges All modern
economies are energy dependent If economic prosperity is to be achieved and
sustained, and living standards for Belizeans improved,  paradigm shift in
policy and planning for energy supply and consumption is crucial Belize is
abundant in energy resources, particularly biomass (forestry), hydroelectricity,
solar and wind Although these resources could play  central role in sustaining
development, the nation remains highly dependent on imported energy sources
Furthermore, access to energy in rural areas is inadequate and public awareness
regarding energy efficiency is low The institutional framework put in place in
the mid-1980s has not changed significantly Most of the institutional
deficiencies posing major obstacles in improving the energy sector still exist,
particularly the absence of one single authority responsible for formulating and
coordinating energy sector policy Energy needs of people living in rural areas
remain unaddressed As  result these populations rely largely on biomass
Improving energy access in rural areas would play  pivotal role in poverty
reduction As the government embarks on  revision of the nation’ energy policy,
it is essential that it understands the importance of reliable, sustainable and
indigenous sources of energy in achieving the country’ potential for development
The vulnerability of the economy in the last decade, faced with insecure energy
supplies, must be addressed First of all,  short, medium and long term policy
providing guidance on how to address energy needs must be adopted Secondly,
legal and institutional frameworks must be adapted to favor new investments in
sustainable energy supplies that will yield affordable energy services Critical
changes in this direction are to improve governance, including enhanced sector
management, to emphasize service affordability and to widen access, thus
covering the rural production sector Proposal for  National energy Policy for
Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Outlook on Energy  Global  Oil is the principal source of
energy in the world About 87% of total primary energy consumption comes from
fossil fuel and about 40% from oil World oil prices have been increasing in the
last decade In 2007, they nearly doubled those of 2003 in real terms During the
2008 oil crisis they reached US$147 per barrel in mid-July and, although the
crisis was short lived, current prices in international markets have toppled
US$Prior to 2000, the average spot price per barrel was about US$In March 2011,
the average spot price was US$103 per barrel According to the Energy Information
Administration the forecast of the spot price of oil will reach about US$150 per
barrel in 2014 and US$200 per barrel by  The 2009 edition of the World Energy
Outlook projected that, by 2030, total primary energy demand will increase by
over 50% The demand for oil and natural gas is attributable to the increasing
consumption levels of emerging developing countries and emerging economies like
China and India It is expected that global demand for oil to grow by 41% by Such
increases in demand will drive up oil and gas prices in international markets
Since 2005 the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) have not increased their oil production but have increased the oil prices
The cost of oil exploration and development, across-the-board increases in
commodity prices and  weaker  dollar have all served to drive up prices  The
global challenge is the identification of plausible ways to maintain reasonable
energy prices, mitigate the adverse effects of high petroleum prices, minimize
fossil fuel supply disruptions, lower the rate of increases in consumption of
fossil fuels and minimize the deleterious effects of climate change and
greenhouse gas emissions Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize /
DFAIT-OAS  Regional  The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) is an organization that
comprises of 15 full members,  associate members and  observer members CARICOM
is comprised mainly of small island developing states Most of its member states
have limited natural resources, small populations, small economies, but widely
different energy realities, including Belize  The fifteen CARICOM states are
almost entirely dependent on imported oil and gas It is estimated that up to 95%
of commercial energy consumed in the CARICOM region is derived from fossil
fuels, primarily oil That figure represents about 90 million barrels of oil
equivalent in  year  CARICOM countries are essentially net importers of crude
oil and refined products with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago and, to
lesser degree, Belize —largely because of extra- regional sources Specifically,
CARICOM member states source petroleum products from Trinidad and Tobago
(PETROTRIN), Curação (PDVSA), Puerto Rico (Shell), St Croix (Hovensa) and
through the Energy Cooperation Agreement PETROCARIBE with Venezuela  CARICOM
member states experience the strong negative economic effects stemming from
increasing international demand for petroleum and rising petroleum prices In
order to counteract said effects, CARICOM established the Petroleum
Stabilization Fund in 2004, and in 2005 certain member states signed the Energy
Cooperation Agreement PETROCARIBE  Within the PETROCARIBE energy cooperation
agreement, provisions have been made to allow member countries to purchase oil
on preferential financing terms The price of the world markets has grown, and so
has the value of PETROCARIBE loans to importing countries PETROCARIBE has become
the single largest source of concessionary finance to the Caribbean Region
PETROCARIBE credits to importing countries from June 2005 to December 2007
amounted to $17 billion, and are expected to reach $ billion by In 2010, in
accordance with the provisions of the Lima Agreement, Belize was accepted as
member of the Latin American Energy Organization (OLADE) OLADE provides
technical support to help improve energy security and, advises and promotes
cooperation and coordination among its member countries The Central American
Integration System (SICA) has the potential to support some of the energy
challenges of Belize and to be the ramp for the implementation of regional
agreements Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS
Objectives and Priorities of the Energy Policy  secure, competitively priced,
and environmentally sound energy supply is  basic requirement for  competitive
economy Without an energy supply with these characteristics, sustained economic
growth, employment and prosperity are at risk These components are all
essential, though their relative importance differs In certain instances, they
are clearly complementary, while in others they appear to be mutually
competitive Policy decisions sometimes involve tradeoffs between one objective
and another For example, improvement in energy efficiency will address all
objectives of the energy policy Similarly, investment in renewable energy
sources will address environmental protection and security of supply (though not
necessarily competitive pricing) The importance of security of supply can be
realized by considering the cost of energy not being available when required by
an end-user Interruption of the energy supply, or threats of interruption, could
lead to widespread disruption Better security can be achieved by ensuring that
energy sources are reliable, that markets are designed and regulated
appropriately, and that energy systems are resilient to shocks through
combination of diversity and flexibility Proposal for  National energy Policy
for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Part - Main Policy Goal, Vision and Broad Objectives The
main goal of the energy sector is: To meet the energy needs of the people though
energy efficiency, production, procurement, transportation, distribution and
end-user systems in order to contribute to social and economic development in an
environmentally sustainable manner  Vision for Belize’ future energy
independence: We define energy independence as the ability to meet its vital
energy needs with reliable, affordable and renewable energy resources This
requires the pursuit of  balanced and advantageous transition toward control of
our energy future, built upon  solid and ever growing foundation of our own
free, abundant, clean, and renewable energy resources —the wind, the sun and the
water  Broad Objectives The following broad objectives should be addressed in
the energy policy: Objective  – To ascertain the availability, potential and
demand of the various energy resources in the country To meet this objective,
Government shall:  Create an Energy Unit with appropriate technical staff
offering energy audits and capacity building  Build  database on all the
available energy resources and energy consumption patterns This will enable the
government to match supply to demand over the long term and also provide
information on potential projects for investment  Build the necessary local
capacity to acquire the required data and assess and evaluate the resources
Objective  – To increase access to modern, affordable and reliable energy
services in order to contribute to poverty eradication To achieve this objective
the Government shall:  Encourage private sector investment and management in the
energy sector  Promote competition between energy service providers Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Promote the development of
markets in energy technologies and services  Create an enabling environment to
markedly improve rural energy supply and access by: () applying subsidies for
certain types of capital investments; () applying differential tariffs to
different areas and projects; and () organizing rural communities for better
provision of services  Provide education and technical advice and information on
energy conservation  Encourage local financial institutions to establish
sustainable financing mechanisms for energy programs  Intervene through
transparent, regulatory and other carefully defined and timed mechanisms, to
ensure effective delivery of energy services to consumers where market failures
are identified Objective  – To improve governance of the energy sector by
defining the relative roles and functions of the various governance
institutions, thus making the operation of these institutions more accountable
and transparent, and their membership more representatives, and to strengthen
government capacity to better formulate and implement energy policies To achieve
the above objective Government shall:  Create  Ministry of Energy and define the
roles and functions of the various institutions involved in the energy sector,
increasing the role of the private sector, NGO’ and communities  Create
transparent legal and regulatory framework for the sector  Build capacity at the
national and local levels for better formulation and implementation of energy
policies and programs  Build the capacity of regulatory agencies to provide
even-handed and predictable regulation  Improve the coordination between
government departments for effective implementation of government policies
Consult stakeholders in the formulation and implementation of new energy
policies in order to ensure that policies take into consideration the views of
wider range of stakeholders Objective  – To stimulate economic development,
Government will ensure that energy plays  central role in the economic
development of Belize and the sub-region To achieve this, the Government shall:
Promote energy trade within the region to encourage competition within the
energy markets to achieve efficiency  Attract investments in energy services by
providing appropriate incentives  Ensure energy supply security and reliability
Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Objective  – To
manage energy related environmental impacts Government will ensure that
environmental considerations are given priority by energy suppliers and users to
protect the environment and put in place  monitoring mechanism to evaluate
compliance with established environmental protection guidelines To meet the
above objective, Government shall:  Promote the use of alternative sources of
energy and technologies which are environmentally friendly  Sensitize energy
suppliers and users about the environmental issues associated with energy  Work
toward the establishment and acceptance of broad targets for the reduction of
energy- related emissions that are harmful to the environment and energy users
Promote efficient utilization of indigenous energy resources  Strengthen the
environment-monitoring unit in the Ministry dealing with the environment
Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Part  - Energy
Policy Statements  Regulation Principles for the Energy Sector Due to the
liberalization of Belize’ economy it is essential that decisions pertaining to
the energy sector ensure appropriate energy supply and use An efficient and
sustainable energy sector needs open and competitive markets that will result in
efficient resources allocation Currently, energy prices may not accurately
reflect the full social cost and energy suppliers may not choose the most
efficient options Government intervention may be warranted in such instances
With  current monopoly in the energy sectors, especially the power sub-sector,
legislative and regulatory gaps resulting in unfair practices by the players
This calls for government intervention to ensure fair play, protect consumers,
ensure the financial viability of private investments, promote competition and
collect information  Energy Demand Side Objectives and Strategies  Household
Sector Unemployment in Belize is high (14%) and  large percentage of households
are poor In these poorer households, the main source of energy is fuel wood and
charcoal Kerosene lamps and candles are used mainly for lighting These sources
of energy militate against the efficient and rational use of energy Furthermore,
low-income households tend to purchase cheap, inefficient, unsafe appliances,
thus increasing the risk to their health and other hazards The numerous problems
associated with inefficient appliances would require  combination of policies
that would tackle efficiency of energy use, energy conservation and  change to
more energy efficient appliances In rural areas, there is  need to have access
to electricity especially for communal facilities where RETs are the most
reliable option  Objective: To provide affordable energy services for households
and community-based services including water supply and sanitation, health,
education, public lighting and communication in order to improve the social
welfare of the rural population Policy Statements  The government shall
encourage the use of efficient end-use technologies and good household practices
Alternative sources of energy for cooking, heating, cooling, lighting and other
applications will be encouraged  The safety of household energy appliances will
be ensured through regulation of safety standards  The government shall lend
support to schemes that support the provision of electricity services to
communal facilities in rural areas Proposal for  National energy Policy for
Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Strategies   comprehensive Household Energy Plan, which
adequately addresses issues related to shortages and inefficient use of biomass
and affordability of modern energy services, will be developed  The adoption of
energy demand side management in middle and high-income households and the
implementation of energy conservation measures in institutional buildings and in
government departments will be emphasized  Incentives will be created to make
electricity and other modern fuels more easily accessible in rural areas
Industrial Sector Lack of expertise in industry has been identified as one of
the key barriers to increased energy efficiency Most industries in Belize
consume large quantities of electricity inefficiently Implementing energy
efficiency programs will reduce consumption and operating expenses Objective: To
address the power needs of the industrial sector and to introduce energy
efficiency measures in industry which will result in an overall financial and
environmental benefit that will make the industry more competitive Policy
Statements  Government will ensure that energy supply is adequate in order to
meet energy demand of the industry  Energy audits will be made mandatory and
energy efficiency and conservation measures will be regulated  Government will
promote the performance of audits, demonstrations, information dissemination,
sectoral analyses and training programs Strategies  Training and other
incentives will be provided to industries in order for them to adopt more
efficient energy end-use technologies  Environmental performance auditing will
be enforced  Coordination between institutions concerned with energy, industry
and environmental issues will be improved  Financial incentives will be provided
for energy efficiency (, the introduction of ―time-use‖ electricity tariffs)
Government will promote energy efficiency awareness amongst industrial energy
consumers, and will encourage the use of energy-efficient practices by this
sector Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Commercial
Sector The commercial sector includes, among others, wholesale and retail shops,
hospitals, hotels, restaurants and recreation centers Overall, the demand for
energy in the sector is mainly met by commercial electricity and petroleum
Policy Statements  Government will ensure sufficient and cost-effective energy
supply to meet the increasing demand in the commercial sector  Energy management
practices will be promoted and regulated as necessary  The efficient use of
alternative energy sources will be encouraged  Mining Sector Demand is met
through self-generation and, in fewer cases, through the grid Mining companies
will be encouraged to generate their own electricity and cooperate in the
development of power infrastructure Mining companies will be encouraged to
develop surplus power from self-generation, which will be sold to neighboring
communities Policy Statements  Mining companies will be encouraged to generate
their own electricity and to diversify their generation and distribution energy
mix  Mining companies will be encouraged to provide and, when possible, sell
power to communities in the environs of their mining areas Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Transport The transport sector is
major user of petroleum products Although road transportation is dominant,
various forms of transportation play vital roles in the lives of rural populace
Some regulations are in place, albeit inefficient practices abound the sector
Objective: To promote optimum, efficient and environmentally conscious
utilization of petroleum fuels and substitution Policy Statements  Government
will promote energy efficiency and conservation in the transport sector  Use of
more efficient transportation modes shall be encouraged Strategies:  Government
will formulate fiscal and transport policies to promote energy conservation and
efficiency  The feasibility of introducing measures for pollution control will
be explored, including using environmentally friendly fossil fuels such as
unleaded gasoline, low sulfur diesel and importation of more efficient vehicles
Incentives will be provided to promote mass transport systems so that the
proliferation of individual vehicles is reduced  The development of sub-sectors
concerned with other forms of transportation will be encouraged  Agriculture
Sector The current agricultural policy calls for increased output and efficiency
in agricultural production, timely delivery and efficient use of energy inputs
into agriculture and increased use of tractors The main energy challenge within
the agriculture sector is ensuring the supply of sufficient and cost-effective
energy that meets the requirements for improved agricultural activities,
including agro-processing and irrigation There is  need to create  commercial
environment and encourage entrepreneurs to develop and distribute energy
products and technologies in order to improve efficiency in agricultural
production and add value to agricultural products Furthermore, methods and
approaches on how to maximize the use of alternative sources of energy such as
micro-scale hydro, solar, wind, biomass, and other renewable energies must be
developed and commercialized Objective: To increase the use of modern energy in
agriculture, thus increasing in agricultural production, leading to the
achievement of the country’ food security objectives Proposal for  National
energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Policy Statements  Government shall ensure
sufficient energy supply to meet the increasing demand in the agriculture sector
Energy efficiency measures will be encouraged in irrigation, agro-processing and
other agricultural activities  Agro-processing centers will be facilitated with
appropriate energy alternatives, with emphasis on electrification in order to
promote small-scale industry, employment creation and economic growth
Governmental institutions and private sector related directly and indirectly
with the energy sector will encourage research and development to introduce
appropriate energy efficiency technologies for agriculture activities Strategies
Farmers will be encouraged to implement modest mechanization that focuses on
providing access to energy services, which helps to raise the productivity of
labor-intensive agriculture  Capacity building, information and awareness
campaigns will be undertaken and facilities to finance energy services for rural
agro-processing will be provided  Measures should be taken to ensure that
petroleum products are readily available in rural areas Proposal for  National
energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Energy Supply Side Objectives and
Strategies  Electricity Access to electricity is reduced in rural areas The
power sector reform is aimed at improving the performance of the sector and
increasing access to electricity nationwide at  reasonable cost by using RETs
Policy measures should aim at creating conditions that could attract private
sector capital into the sector Objective To increase access to safe, reliable
and efficient power supply for Belizeans and to meet national, economic and
social development needs Policy Statements  The entry of multiple players into
the generation market will be encouraged Generation of electric power shall be
fully open to private and public investors as Independent Power Producers
Regional cooperation and integration shall be given strong consideration in
investment matters in order to exploit low cost energy sources for regional
trade In the mid-term the Public Utilities Commission will be open to strategic
partnerships with technically suitable, and financially strong, investors in the
region, as  step in the development of  strategy to improve relationships and
create partnerships with foreign countries to import cheap electricity 
Government is committed to extending transmission lines where feasible and will
promote the use of RETs where it is not  Introduce  new national grid to other
parts of the country Extensions from this grid will be made on  rational and
economic basis  Government is committed to setting up  rural electricity fund
Government will take legislative steps to criminalize electricity theft to serve
as  deterrent to the significant amount of people abstracting electricity
illegally Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Strategies
Increase competition in the sector through open participation of IPPs, operate
and expand the existing distribution system at minimum cost and negotiate the
price of electricity to reflect the marginal cost of supply in order to achieve
efficiency  Create incentives to attract private sector investment and regional
interconnection; including, appropriate access to loans on concessionary terms,
financial instruments, government guarantees and ―smart subsidies‖ (or grants)
for infrastructure investment  Establish  regulatory governmental body for
regulation and implement  rural electrification strategy and plan along the
following lines:  Progressive development of rural electrification schemes on
demand driven basis whereby capable sponsors can initiate and develop
electrification projects  Creation and capacity building of  Rural
Electrification Agency  Establishment of  Rural Electrification Committee to
attract grants and loans for rural electrification schemes Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Oil and Gas Exploration and
Production  Petroleum Exploration and Production The sector is in its formative
years and there is room for further exploratory work and investment There is
great need to improve resources and enhance technical capacity for sustainable
oil production Objective: To tap the real petroleum potential and to promote its
exploitation adequately and sustainably Policy Statements  Petroleum exploration
will be promoted in accordance with best international industry practices
Regional and international cooperation will be encouraged in exploration,
development of infrastructure, trade, and database and capacity building  Major
oil companies will be encouraged to invest in exploration General Strategies:
Create conducive conditions for attracting more investors into the sector
Develop  mitigation plan to reduce environmental hazards in all oil operations
Facilitate the acquisition of geological and geophysical data for assessing the
petroleum potential  Build technical capacity and improve the efficiency of the
GPD to monitor and regulate petroleum exploration and development  Petroleum
Marketing and Sales Difficulties with supply, storage, importation and
availability of foreign exchange need to be addressed as they have  major impact
on the economy Also of concern is the distribution network, which makes
petroleum products considerably more expensive in distant rural areas Objective
To ensure an adequate, reliable and affordable supply of quality petroleum
products for all sectors of the economy at internationally competitive and fair
prices and with appropriate health, safety and environmental standards Policy
Statements  International standards and codes of practice will be adopted and
adapted within the industry  Government will keep appropriate levels of
strategic stocks based on an Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize /
DFAIT-OAS assessment of the risk of supply disruption  Petroleum companies will
be encouraged to extend their marketing networks to smaller towns in various
parts of the country It is envisaged that all towns with populations of more
than ,000 will be supplied with fuel directly from the marketing companies,
irrespective of location  Government will lend its support to schemes to pool
resources for the procurement of large stocks of petroleum products to result in
cost reductions  Government will commission  study to assess the economic
viability of building and operating  refinery Proposal for  National energy
Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS  Other Renewable Energy Resources Despite abundant
renewable energy resources, rural areas are still lacking access to electricity
Proactive measures should be taken by government to address problems that
prevent the effective utilization of the indigenous energy sources Objective: To
develop the use of renewable energy sources for both small and large-scale
applications Policies  Appropriate financial and administrative institutions
will be set up to manage RETs Appropriate norms, codes of practice, guidelines
and standards for RETs will be instituted, thus creating an enabling environment
for its sustainable development  Biomass conversion and end-use technologies
will be promoted in order to save resources, reduce deforestation rates and land
degradation, and minimize the threat of climate change  Environmental
considerations will be included in all renewable energy planning and
implementation  Cooperation with relevant stakeholders will be enhanced
Research and development in RETs will be supported   central body will be set up
to regulate the RETs industry  Government will legislate the registering of
associations and organizations involved with fuel wood, charcoal and improved
stoves  Government will consider the reduction of taxes by giving waivers for
the importation of RETs equipment  Agro-based industries will be encouraged to
produce electricity from waste  Manufacturing of RETs equipment will be actively
pursued by encouraging its promotion and providing the necessary investments
Strategies:  Support the dissemination of biomass and other RETs to increase
their positive impact on the energy balance and the environment  Facilitate
adequate financing schemes for RETs by establishing sustainable financing
Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS mechanisms to make
them more accessible  Ensure that RETs producers and importers ascribe to
certified performance and technical standards  Include renewable energy and
energy efficiency in the curricula of schools, Universities, vocational training
centers and other institutions of education  Support efforts to develop biomass
resources in agreement with the national Forestry policy Promote Agro-forestry
enterprises – including fruit trees and mechanization  Encourage solar water
heating in Hospitals, clinics, boarding homes, etc for sterilization and hygiene
purposes  Take measures to allay fears of using solar cookers in rural areas
because of cultural and traditional practices  Co-operatives should be
encouraged to facilitate the financing mechanism for RETs ( reduce RETs
importations of taxation) Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize /
DFAIT-OAS  LPG LPG is  mid-term solution as  source of energy in rural areas
Objective: To develop the use of LPG for small scale applications Policies
Government will actively encourage the use of LPG in urban areas To this end
Government will put in strategies and provide the necessary incentives to make
the use of LPG more persistent Rural Energy Economic activities in rural areas
are greatly influenced by energy All aspects of rural economics, including
agriculture, business, social services, poverty, and gender equality are
influenced by energy services Fuelwood is the main source of energy for most
households, and access to sustainable and secure fuelwood supplies and RETs is
important for rural communities’ survival Inadequate access to modern, reliable
energy services is hampering economic growth and impeding agricultural
mechanization and industrialization  sustainable institutional framework that
can cope with energy diversity is  key factor for successful development of
rural energy There is  need to establish an institutional framework that can
mobilize, coordinate and facilitate private and public initiatives for rural
energy Many of the measures to be taken have been addressed in specific energy
sub-sectors Those that have  significant bearing on rural energy supply are
mentioned below Objective: To improve the traditional methods to supply energy
in rural areas and to improve the supply of commercial energy services to
contribute meaningfully to the social and economic development of rural areas
Policy Statements   rural electrification strategy and plan shall be instituted
along the following lines:  Progressive development of rural electrification
schemes on  demand basis whereby capable sponsors can initiate and develop
electrification projects  Government will set up  Rural Electrification Fund to
support rural electrification The fund, to be set up and administered within the
future Ministry Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS of
Energy, will consist of the following contributions:   levy of part of the
electricity bills paid to the national utility-this requirement to include
rural electrification levy as part of the utility bills will be legislated
Funds provided by the government specifically for rural electrification  Funds
provided by donors and other agencies specifically for rural electrification
Government will support research and development for rural energy  The
application of alternative energy sources other than fuelwood and charcoal will
be promoted in order to reduce indoor health hazards  Entrepreneurship and
private initiative in the production and marketing of products and services for
rural and renewable energy will be promoted  Government will ensure continued
electrification of rural economic centers and make electricity accessible and
affordable to low income customers  There will be  conscious effort to
facilitate increased availability of energy services, including grid and non-
grid electrification, to rural areas  Norms, codes of practice, standards and
guidelines for cost-effective rural energy supplies will be established Proposal
for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Cross-Cutting Issues,
Objectives and Strategies Energy Planning There is no central planning unit that
oversees the energy sector, which results in poor sub sector coordination To
satisfy future energy needs it is necessary analyze the energy sector in terms
of how it is fulfillment will contribute toward attaining national economic and
social goals Policy statements  Government will establish appropriate structures
and systems such as an energy unit to carry out energy planning functions within
the Ministry of Energy  The Energy Unit will consist of planners knowledgeable
in all the energy sub- sectors, who will liaise with ministries and agencies
The future Ministry of Energy will support the strengthening of sub-sectoral
planning and information gathering units Strategies:  The Government is
committed to setting up an Energy Desk within the office of the Prime Minister
and tasks it with developing and fulfilling all the details of the National
Energy Policy prior to setting up the Energy Unit Energy Information Systems and
Dissemination Energy information systems are policy implementation tools Energy
information collection, storage, analysis and exchange are vital for planning,
policy formulation and decision-making In Belize information systems are
lacking, which results in poor information exchange amongst energy stakeholders
Capacity to manage and analyze energy information is inadequate There is  need
to establish an adequate energy information system that will serve to mobilize
human resources, raise awareness and disseminate information to stakeholders for
effective policy implementation The Energy Desk within the Office of the Prime
Minister will have the lead responsibility to delineate the responsibilities of
the future ―Energy Unit‖ The Prime Minister’ office will take the lead in the
implementation of this policy Opportunities exist to integrate energy
information into current communication and education programs run by other
organizations Ministries, NGOs, the private sector and academia, can all play
role in communication and education The prospective Ministry of Energy should
monitor the development of energy awareness programs and regularly assess
communication strategies Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize /
DFAIT-OAS Policy Statement  proper information and communication system will be
established and strengthened in the energy sector, and human resources mobilized
to undertake sensitization, advocacy and dissemination of information to
stakeholders Energy Efficiency and Conservation There is  need for Government to
play  role in facilitating increased efficiency in the use of energy Barriers to
the adoption of efficiency measures include: Lack of awareness, information and
skills; Lack of access to efficient technologies; High cost of capital Policy
Statements  Government commits itself to the promotion of energy efficiency and
the development of holistic programs for households, industry and commerce
Energy audits in industries will be ensured by means of  new national energy
information system Energy and Environment The effects of energy consumption on
the environment need to be considered in all sectors All stages of energy
resources —fossil or non-fossil— exploitation, production, conversion,
transport, storage and end- use can have negative impacts on the environment
Health, safety and environmental consequences of energy production and
utilization must be addressed Policy Statements  Environmental Impact
Assessments will be required for all energy projects  Energy efficiency and
conservation measures will serve as  means to curb emissions  The development of
alternative energy sources, including renewable energy and wood fuel end-use,
and efficient technologies to protect woodlands will be promoted  Programs for
disaster prevention and standards for exploration, production, conversion,
transport, distribution, storage, and consumption will be promoted  Government
will monitor international developments and will participate in Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS global climate change
negotiations, and will strive to balance its environmental responsibilities and
economic interests Research and Development Research and Development (&) efforts
that give rise to technological innovations in the energy sector are important
as they can lead to development and economic growth & issues relating to
biomass, rural energy, energy end-use, affordability, and pricing mechanisms
must be the focus of attention The challenge is to overcome the inadequate
financial resources and lack of skilled manpower for & There is also  lack of
understanding of critical energy & issues Institutional coordination with
respect to various ongoing research activities in the sector are lacking
Cooperation between public and private sectors in & of energy issues such as
demand and supply management, pricing, conservation and rural energy need to be
encouraged and coordinated There is also  need to support regional and
international cooperation in & on technological and non-technological
advancement Policy Statement  Regional and international cooperation on Research
and Development in the field of innovative, environmentally sound energy
technologies will be fostered Capacity Building and Capacity Development
Education is vital to improve the development in any country Most Belizeans are
unaware of energy use practices and options Renewable energy and energy
efficiency must be showcased in schools, vocational training centers, colleges
and other learning institutions There is also  need for mass educational and
promotional efforts on energy issues targeting the public There is  lack of
trained and skilled energy experts in the sector, particularly women In
addition, there are inadequate incentives to attract and retain qualified energy
experts in the sector The present situation is also constrained by cultural and
traditional influences, which inhibit gender-balanced training Policy Statements
Energy education will be encouraged in school curricula, vocational training
centers, colleges and other relevant learning institutions; emphasis will be put
on practical aspects including physical demonstration, installations and
operation  Local and foreign investors will be encouraged to provide training on
basic skills pertaining to energy  Government will allocate funding and staffing
to undertake and support capacity building, education and information
dissemination programs Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-
OAS International and Regional Energy Trade and Cooperation Cooperation between
neighboring countries in the Caribbean and Central America is vital for
development and economic growth Belize is  member of various regional and
international organizations, including CARICOM, DR-CAFTA, PETROCARIBE, OLADE,
OAS, UN, etc In addition the European Union has many funded several activities
in Belize Potential benefits derived from regional and international energy
trade and cooperation must be maximized Belize must deepen its ties with other
countries in the region Joint development of shared energy resources must be
encouraged as  means to enhance cooperation and energy security Policy
Statements  Government will encourage collaboration within the Central American
countries in the area of energy emphasizing future interconnections  Government
will facilitate international collaboration in research and exchange of
information Government will facilitate regional cooperation, including energy
trade, information exchange, capacity building and the training of energy
specialists Fiscal and Pricing Issues Fiscal policies have  direct effect on
energy prices, thus affecting structural demand for energy products The
selective use of fiscal mechanisms can be very effective for achieving energy
policy objectives, such as encouraging fuel switching, rising dedicated sources
of finance for particular needs and encouraging more efficient environmental and
resource management On the other hand, unfettered use of fiscal mechanisms can
lead to unintended consequences It is therefore essential that fiscal policies
be in line with energy policies, particularly as competition increases between
energy service providers Policy statements  Government may use selective fiscal
mechanisms in promoting the use of certain types of fuels with the intention of
satisfying future energy needs This will however be done within  limited
timeframe to avoid introducing structural distortions into the market
Government may consider the use of selective fiscal mechanisms in order to
increase access to energy services, especially to the poor, and also to enable
the effective dissemination of some RETs into the market Proposal for  National
energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Energy Investment Domestic and
international investors must be made aware of the potential for investment
within the energy sector Public and private sector should be encouraged to
invest in the provision of energy services Furthermore, there is  need to
facilitate and encourage investment in the development of alternative sources of
energy, putting emphasis on the utilization of indigenous resources Policy
Statements  Private initiatives will be promoted, and local and foreign
investors made aware of the potential within the energy sector  Government will
ensure that  transparent and predictable institutional framework that includes
incentives is in place to provide for an enabling environment for investment in
the energy sector 10 Gender Issues Gender issues in the energy sector need to
focus on energy needs and resource ownership from both the demand and supply of
energy On the demand side, men and women have different energy needs given their
different socio-cultural and traditional roles On the supply side, women are
underrepresented at all levels of energy generation, transmission and
distribution There is  gender imbalance at various levels of planning and
decision-making On the demand side, especially in rural areas, there is  need to
alleviate women’ task of searching for energy, especially wood-fuel Women should
be encouraged to participate in energy related education, training, programs and
projects, planning and decision-making Policy Statements  Gender equality within
the energy sub-sectors both on the demand and supply side will be promoted
Education and training for women in all aspects of energy will be facilitated
Government will promote awareness on gender issues concerning social roles with
respect to energy, including training on technologies  Government will promote
gender awareness and advocacy in the energy sector Proposal for  National energy
Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Governance and Institutional Capacity Governance
is the complex set of processes and control relationships that occurs between
various players In the energy sector of Belize, these players include
parliament, cabinet, ministries dealing with energy and power issues, the
Minister of Public Utilities, the Minister of Natural Resources and the
Environment, the PUC, various government departments at the national, provincial
and local levels, energy suppliers, energy consumers, the regulator, other
stakeholders (including organized labor, civic organizations, NGOs, researchers,
consultants, financiers, contractors, equipment manufacturers and marketers),
and foreign donor agencies and organizations The range of players and the
complexity of their relationships make energy sector governance difficult to
understand in Belize Further, Belize’ energy portfolio falls under various
ministries The centralization of the administration of energy is vital to ensure
responsible management of the sector and improve governance Objective  To
institute  new governance structure for the energy sector that will meet the
challenge of developing  consistent energy governance framework which addresses
in an integrated manner the key issues that will guide policy formulation and
implementation In this respect the energy governance objectives seek to:
Increase the understanding and role of all Governmental institutions related
with the Energy sector with the implementation of the National Energy Policy
Implement energy policy and, in so doing, achieve the economic, social,
political goals Policy Statements  As  first step, the creation of an Energy
Desk under the Prime Minister’ Office will help support the implementation of
the NEP  Government commits to appoint  Minister of Energy who will be
responsible for the governance of the energy sector, including the integration
of long term energy policies, communication with relevant stakeholders,
management of regional and international cooperation and ensuring that
appropriate institutions are established to achieve energy policy objectives The
Minister will also be responsible for overall coordination and energy planning
Government is committed to set up an independent National Energy Unit in the
medium term that will be responsible of technical support for all energy
planning, coordination and regulation The Energy Unit will function as an
observer, data gatherer and analysis body of the energy sector at the national
level in order to Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS
assist the Ministry of Energy and other national authorities in the reasonable
implementation and monitoring of energy related policies and laws The Energy
Unit will provide advice on energy issues and activities inter alia, creating
discussion forum among governmental institutions, the private sector and public
stakeholders It will have the primary responsibility of updating and improving
the National Energy Policy and the Sustainable Energy Action Plan, so that the
overall objectives of the energy sector are achieved in the shortest possible
time  Cabinet will assist with the coordination and implementation of energy
policy and ensure its integration with other sectoral policies Parliament will
be responsible for the approval or amendment of energy legislation Parliamentary
Committees are responsible for considering proposals for new or amended
legislation and supervising the actions of the ministries especially as they
relate to the budget PUC will continue as an autonomous authority body, with
responsibility for regulating the electricity, water and telecommunication
sectors It will be responsible for ensuring that all customers have safe,
reliable and high-quality services at affordable rates, while allowing
reasonable return on investment, so as to foster an environment that will
stimulate national growth In addition, it will promote the introduction of
certain minimum percentage of RETs in electricity generation  Government
supports the present sub sectoral split of the energy sector which is as
follows:  Ministry of Energy including power-electricity, hydro and other
renewable energy resources Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment
-the traditional energy sector which includes mainly biomass  Ministry of
Economic Development, Commerce and Industry, and Consumer Protection -petroleum
marketing and sales Geology and Petroleum Department - responsible for petroleum
exploration and production  Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment -
exploration and exploitation of minerals  Government commits itself to the
gradual consolidation of the energy sector over the medium term Proposal for
National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS Conclusions The National Energy
Policy of Belize will allow the entire country to meet its basic energy needs in
sustainable manner and to support and improve the national economy The draft
policy is focus on: Developing linkages between the energy sector, poverty
alleviation and economic growth Integrating environmental sustainability into
all energy initiatives Demand-side management and energy efficiency Developing
an energy data bank and disseminate it Promote private participation and the
development of competitive markets in RETs and services Develop, where
necessary, appropriate regulatory frameworks and capacity The policy will be the
basis for progressively expanding investment in modern energy production,
petroleum exploration and development, rural electrification, the supply of well
priced petroleum products, and for increasing the efficiency of energy use in
all sectors from the household to the large productive sectors The
technicalities of the energy policy are important, but more so is its social
dimension The building of human resources is vital to the effective utilization
of energy and its benefits The implementation of  Ministry of Energy is vital to
improve and develop the economy, reduce social injustice and protect the
environment In pursuit of this goal, the Ministry will prioritize the policies
contained in this paper and translate those priorities into action The next step
is to implement the policies based on an action plan for Belize Most of the
resources to move this NEP forward will come from Government and from various
development partners (, multilateral and bilateral cooperation Agencies, Global
Environment Facility, and Clean Development Mechanism, among many other
potential donors) Proposal for  National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS