United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project
Services DP/DCP/DZA/ Distr: General  December 2022 Original: English First
regular session 2023 30 January –  February 2023, New York Item  of the
provisional agenda Country programmes and related matters Country programme
document for Algeria (2023–2027) Contents Chapter  UNDP within the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  II Programme priorities
and partnerships………………………………………………… ………… III Programme and risk management
………………………………………………………………… IV Monitoring and evaluation
………………………………………………………………………… Annex Page     Results and resources framework for
Algeria (2023–2027) 10 22-27872X () 121222 *2227872* DP/DCP/DZA/  UNDP within
the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Algeria,
middle-income country, is engaged in major economic, political1 and
environmental reforms The Human Development Index value of 745 (96 out of 191
countries2) is  testament of the considerable progress made across all human
development indicators The road map to the “New Algeria” shaped  new
Constitution and legislative elections, followed by local and municipal
elections Due to the amendment of the electoral law, the new legislature () has
recorded  significant increase in youth representation, with 135 of the 407
members of parliament under the age of  The country’ socioeconomic model is
based on universal access to social services sustained by subsidized commodities
and services (, water, gas, electricity, housing rental) In 2020, the global
drop in oil prices compounded by the impact of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic resulted in  contraction of the gross domestic product (GDP)
by  per cent The economic situation remains challenging with soaring food prices
and no increase in employment opportunities However, signs of recovery appeared
in 2021 with  significant increase of the GDP by  per cent5 Decade-high energy
prices are fortifying the economic recovery, external and fiscal balances and
spurring new hydrocarbon investment  Given the Algerian commitment to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals, the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)  represents an ambitious blueprint for the
collective efforts of the United Nations UNDP contributes to an important share
of the United Nations development system’ outcomes in terms of both volume of
investment and its substantive, forward-looking approach Guided by the
Government’ Action Plan  and the UNDP Strategic Plan, , UNDP Algeria pledges to
contribute to outcomes ,  and  of the UNSDCF  The national strategy for
biodiversity and its action plan calls for the protection of biodiversity for
sustainable economic and social development and adaptation to climate change
Through the intended nationally determined contribution, Algeria has committed
to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by between  and 22 per cent by 2030, of
which  per cent will be financed through national resources and the remaining 15
per cent through the international financial channel This is an important
milestone for  country with an economic model based on hydrocarbons Algeria has
relatively low share of global greenhouse gas emissions and yet is ranked 39 of
the 58 countries that produce 90 per cent of global emissions Given its
comparative advantage in providing solutions for public policies related to
nature and climate, UNDP will focus on reinforcing institutional capacities for
the preservation of the environment and the fight against climate change  As
result of the country’ development progress and economic growth, energy
consumption has increased exponentially during the last 20 years According to
the Ministry of Energy and Mines, energy consumption increased from million tons
of oil equivalent in 2010 to million in The Algerian nationally determined
contributions aim at reducing consumption of electric energy by  per cent and
increasing the share of renewable energy in the production of electricity to 27
per cent (currently  per cent) by With over two decades of experience in
promoting sustainable energy solutions globally, UNDP is strongly positioned
The Government’ action plan for the implementation of the Programme of the
President of the Republic, published in September UNDP, Human Development Report
Uncertain Times, Unsettled Lives hdr2021-22pdf_1pdf (undporg)  World Bank,
Algeria Economic Update – April   Unemployment, total (% of total labor force)
(modeled ILO estimate) - Algeria | Data (worldbankorg)    DP/DCP/DZA/ within the
United Nations development system to contribute to defining the national energy
transformation road map by catalysing technical expertise, notably on the
transition energy models and related regulatory framework  While Algeria has
made remarkable progress in improving girls’ access to education, access to
decent employment needs to be increased The rate of women’ participation in the
formal sector is around 12 per cent7 and their unemployment rate is double that
of men (per cent compared to per cent) in considerable percentage of the young
population working in the private sector are not affiliated with the social
security system; in 2014, this was the case for per cent of workers aged 15–As
highlighted by the 2019 voluntary national review10 and the government action
plan, the priorities related to equal access to quality services, formal
employment and social protection need to be underpinned by sustainable public
policies and investments that promote inclusive and sustained implementation
efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals Through its democratic
governance and economic diversification portfolios, UNDP is ideally placed to
support the Government in these fields  The response to the COVID–19 crisis is
national priority and includes measures to strengthen the health system and the
implementation of economic recovery reforms, focusing on economic and social
protection measures of households and micro, small- and medium-sized enterprises
(MSMEs) UNDP expertise on the matter is anchored in the principle of enhancing
the resilience of public health system capacities as  vector for lasting
recovery UNDP technically led the socioeconomic response plan to COVID-19 in
Algeria, leveraging the wider competencies of the United Nations system to
inform public policy solutions  UNDP will build on its legacy and achievements
of its  programme, which, as underlined by its evaluation, contributed with
compelling results to: () the elaboration of sectoral strategies (, national
strategy for the development of fishing and aquaculture,  draft national
strategy to prevent and fight corruption); () the strengthening of Algerian
institutional capacities (, the wilayas of Adrar and Médea were capacitated to
support youth employment, and as part of the Participatory Democracy and Local
Development (“CapDel”) programme, seven municipalities elaborated communal
development plans); and () the advancement of gender equality (, over 800
locally elected women were trained in 12 wilayas)  In response to national
priorities for stronger citizen participation in the social, economic and
political life of the country, UNDP, in partnership with the line ministries,
will pursue initiatives to strengthen socioeconomic participation, inclusive
local development and the transparency and accountability of public institutions
that are essential to localizing the Sustainable Development Goals for  peaceful
and inclusive society Across the entire programme, and in collaboration with the
United Nations country team, UNDP will support government efforts to enhance
international cooperation through sharing of good practices and lessons learned,
as part of South- South and triangular cooperation An agreement with the
Algerian Agency for International Cooperation, Solidarity and Development will
outline the actions towards those objectives To that end, UNDP will deploy
technical expertise and support technical capacities related to economic
diplomacy, regional economic 6UNESCO Institute for Statistics : Algeria (  World
Bank, data, Algeria (  World Bank, data, Algeria (  National Statistics Office
Enquête emploi auprès des ménages ( 10 See   DP/DCP/DZA/ development, circular
migration and the promotion of sustainable peace and security The integrated
support of UNDP for implementation of the UNSDCF will to advance cross-sectoral
policies and evidence-based include expertise programming, data analysis and
demand-driven services to national partners and the United Nations country team
(UNCT) In line with the Strategic Plan, 2022- 2025, UNDP will help drive change
via three strategic enablers: () development financing, by leveraging
comprehensive financing in pursuit of all Sustainable Development Goals; ()
digitalization, by providing thought leadership and practical innovations to
build an inclusive, ethical and sustainable digital society and economy; and ()
strategic innovations, by investing consistently into cutting- edge knowledge as
multiplier platforms to trigger systemic changes II Programme priorities and
partnerships The country programme was formulated with the contributions of
government institutions, civil society, academia, the private sector and other
bilateral and multilateral partners UNDP will leverage United Nations
partnerships, among others, to build synergies across programmes and sectors, to
harness the expertise and knowledge required to advance the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development The UNDP programme follows the mandate of the Strategic
Plan, is aligned with the Government' action plan  and anchored in the theory of
change of the UNSDCF11 UNDP will support integrated development solutions
organized around three outcomes of the UNSDCF : () nature, climate and energy;
() inclusive economic growth; and () democratic governance Furthermore, UNDP
will support the implementation of the Government’ commitments to international
cooperation, expanding capacities for stronger South-South and triangular
cooperation, in line with the UNSDCF and with  focus on the African continent
UNDP will pursue its programmatic priorities through contributing to public
policy development and implementation, formulation and systematization of best
practices, the strengthening of national capacities, and piloting and
implementing innovative important contribution towards the UNSDCF outcomes
Synergies and economies of scale are manifested across all outcome areas joint
programming represents an initiatives UNDP Through its programming, UNDP will
impact job creation and income generation within  diversified economy; reinforce
transparency and accountability towards quality public service delivery; and
contribute to achievement of national and global commitments towards the
prevention and mitigation of the impacts of climate change Work in the area of
democratic governance and rule of law will expand to strengthen the social
contract in line with the Algerian Constitution and international normative
frameworks, ensuring that no one is left behind Outcome  Nature, climate and
energy The UNDP contribution to this outcome is anchored in the theory of change
hypothesis that if institutional capacities for the preservation of the
environment are strengthened, if the implementation of strategies and action
plans for sustainable management and conservation of natural resources and
ecosystems are accelerated, if the implementation of energy transition policies
is strengthened, if policies and strategies for the prevention and management of
major risks and the mitigation of their financial impact are strengthened, then
society and its citizens will be more resilient and sufficiently prepared to
face vulnerabilities linked to climate change 11 See page 23, section  of UNSDCF
2023-DP/DCP/DZA/ The outcome will contribute to Sustainable Development Goals -,
and 17, utilizing signature solutions , ,  and 12 Through four outputs, the
pillar addresses conservation of natural resources and ecosystems and land
degradation; climate change; energy transition; and national, regional and
global commitments This will be achieved in collaboration with the Government,
the UNCT and key development partners, as well as measured against national
commitments and available Sustainable Development Goal targets and indicators
The Algerian National Climate Plan constitutes  mitigation and adaptation agenda
which aims at realizing sustained socioeconomic growth and inclusive social
development; and promoting the integration of adaptation strategies in economic
sectors identified as vulnerable to climate change In partnership with the
Ministry of Environment and in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the Global Environment Facility
(GEF), UNDP will support national programmes addressing climate-change
vulnerabilities and developing solutions to implement the National Climate Plan
UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Environment in the preparation of
its third national communication, its first biennial update on climate change
and the elaboration of the national adaptation plan In collaboration with the
secretariat of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and FAO,
UNDP will work to prevent land degradation and desertification, providing
technical and operational support to protect biodiversity UNDP will promote
strategies, including financing, that incentivize the public and private sectors
towards innovative investments promoting social and economic solutions that
protect biodiversity and environment Support to the national adaptation plan is
explicitly linked to economic growth and diversification which, in return, will
benefit from climate financing policy solutions In this regard, the planned work
with the Ministry of Environment and the Global Environment Facility on
integrated waste management will contribute to the development of  circular
economy fostering job creation across emerging green value chains As the lead
agency among resident organizations working on energy transition, UNDP will
provide technical support to the Government to elaborate  new energy model and
draft  new regulatory framework for energy transition This will be undertaken in
partnership with the International Renewable Energy Agency, among other actors
Synergies with an inclusive economic growth model will be sought especially on
job creation and entrepreneurship development The prevention and mitigation of
major natural risks will be another key focus for UNDP As part of the Tripartite
Programme announced at the Secretary- General’ Climate Action Summit in
September 2019, UNDP will collaborate with the Forest General Directorate of the
Ministry of Agriculture and the insurance sector on climate risk financing and
inclusive insurance to enhance institutional and socioeconomic resilience to
climate risks and other natural hazards The latter, among others, are monitored
by the National Delegation for Major Risks, another key partner to foster
reforms in this area Outcome  Inclusive economic growth The UNDP contribution to
this outcome is anchored in the theory of change that if national institutions
have strengthened capacities to anticipate and respond to the labour market’
need for skills, if enterprises have strengthened capacities to develop and
integrate sustainable agrifood value chains, and if people benefit from support
and incentive mechanisms for their inclusion in  green, circular, innovative and
creative economy, then progress will be made towards  diversified economy 12 The
UNDP Strategic Plan  cites six signature solutions:  Poverty  Governance
Resilience  Environment  Energy and  Gender  DP/DCP/DZA/ producing decent and
inclusive jobs, while respecting the environment The outcome will contribute to
Sustainable Development Goals , , , , , , 10 and 12, leveraging UNDP signature
solutions , ,  and  In line with the Algerian Economic Recovery Plan,13 the
pillar will support more resilient, inclusive and solidarity-based national
economic development UNDP will support economic diversification, the creation of
sustainable employment and an efficient entrepreneurship ecosystem To achieve
this, UNDP, in collaboration with the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social
Security and in synergy with the International Labour Organization (ILO), will
consolidate and scale up existing work to promote social and solidarity economy,
with  focus on increasing employment opportunities for the young, women and
people living with disabilities through social solidarity economic models
Seeking synergies at the level of its entire portfolio, UNDP will contribute to
the establishment of an inclusive circular economy by building on its upcoming
waste management project; and incentivizing the MSME sector through the
development of competencies, skills and capacities required for the energy
transition In partnership with the Ministry of Start-ups and Microenterprises,
UNDP will support strengthening of institutional capacities to further develop
the entrepreneurship ecosystem through innovation Building on the work
undertaken as part of the COVID-19 response, UNDP will support strengthening of
the drug testing capacities of the Ministry responsible for pharmaceuticals and
industry,  prerequisite to expand national pharmaceutical value chains The
elaboration of  government road map for scaling up investment in the Sustainable
Development Goals is another priority area that UNDP will lead in partnership
with United Nations agencies This will allow the Government and national
institutions to map, optimize and reorient the existent public policies and to
catalyse strategic investments suitable to the Algerian context In collaboration
with the Ministry of Finance and in partnership with the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), UNDP will support efforts to
finance the Goals through the implementation of the integrated national
financial framework;  solution to design, monitor and review the Government’
financial strategy to achieve sustainable goal-related national priorities This
approach is complemented by  comprehensive programme on budget transparency,
which is expected to trigger, inter alia, social and gender-responsive budgeting
tools Similarly, through the Biodiversity Finance Initiative, UNDP will support
the Algerian Government to catalyse investments which are compatible with both
biodiversity and nature preservation and the imperative of inclusive economic
growth To foster economic growth, government efforts are focused on developing
sustainable and inclusive value chains of promising sectors by strengthening the
capacities of the private sector Agriculture and fisheries are of critical
importance considering global food security challenges UNDP, in collaboration
with United Nations partners and relevant ministries, will support national
efforts to promote the national strategy for MSMEs Financial inclusion and
increased access by MSMEs to finance through digital solutions will also be
sought in collaboration with the United Nations Capital Development Fund and the
International Finance Corporation Outcome  Democratic governance The UNDP
contribution to this outcome is anchored in the theory of change that if the
institutional framework for transparency and accountability is strengthened, if
social cohesion mechanisms and the effective participation of women and youth
are strengthened, if efficient administration and access to quality public
services are enhanced, if access to justice is strengthened in accordance with
the rule of law, 13 Plan de Relance Économique (Economic Recovery Plan),
Services du Premier Ministre, June DP/DCP/DZA/ then Algerian institutions will
be better equipped to provide quality services, address inequalities and ensure
that no one is left behind The outcome will contribute to Sustainable
Development Goals , , , 10, 16 and UNDP signature solutions , ,  and  Through
its thought leadership in democratic governance and rule of law, UNDP will
support national efforts in the effective application of the Constitution The
Constitutional Court and UNDP will jointly promote the expansion of civic space
and strengthening citizen participation in legal, institutional and political
processes The country office will work with the UNDP Oslo Governance Centre and
the United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs to improve
access to justice by promoting constitutional rights the enhancement of The
fight against corruption, transparency and accountability in the public sector
and the promotion of social cohesion are priorities aligned with the new
Constitution adopted in This pillar will build on lessons learned from the
previous programmatic cycle and further expand its approach to include stronger
engagement of civil society, along with robust accountability mechanisms, and
promote youth and women’ social, economic and political participation UNDP will
work with the parliament and its members to effectively exercise their
legislative, representative and oversight functions while also supporting
initiatives aiming at increasing women’ political participation14 Jointly with
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UNDP will support the State' efforts
to finalize and implement  national strategy to promote integrity and anti-
corruption, while also promoting sectoral efforts to identify and tackle
corruption risks that undermine the potential of the sector to progress towards
the Sustainable Development Goals With the aim of leaving no one behind, UNDP,
jointly with the Ministry of Youth and Sports and the United Nations Populations
Fund, will support development and implementation of public policies fostering
youth inclusion and proactive participation across social, economic and
political spheres With the Ministry of Justice, UNDP will deepen its prior work
on promoting the rule of law through increasing the chances of social
reintegration of former detainees in support of social cohesion, thereby
building trust between the citizens and the State In response to national
priorities for stronger citizens participation in the social, economic and
political life of the country, UNDP in partnership with the Ministry of
Interior, Local Collectivities and Territorial Planning will pursue initiatives
to strengthen socioeconomic participation, inclusive local development and the
transparency and accountability of public institutions that are essential to
peaceful and inclusive society UNDP will build on its prior achievements, which
include the elaboration of communal development plans, and draw on
complementarities with development partners to promote and contribute to the
attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals at the local level In addition,
access to social services, particularly in health, will be improved by
strengthening national capacities including through engagement of civil society
III Programme and risk management This country programme document outlines the
UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework 14 The new electoral law impacted the system of
quotas leading to  setback, with just 35 women elected (59 per cent of the
seats) against 119 in the former legislature  DP/DCP/DZA/ The programme will be
nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure
The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions
and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged
to the concerned projects Owing to its middle-income country status, bilateral
and multilateral donors allocate limited funding to Algeria UNDP will work with
government and other partners to adapt to uncertainties and disruptions related
to funding Innovative programming instruments, , the engagement facility,
government cost sharing, development advisory services and joint programming
instruments, will be envisaged in concertation with the Government UNDP will
work with the Government through data analysis, midterm evaluations and other
management and monitoring tools on the principle of shared accountability to the
successful implementation of the country programme Annual project steering
committee meetings and when necessary, ad hoc meetings, will ensure that any
issues arising are addressed in  relevant and timely manner to anticipate and
mitigate risks related Quality assurance and social and environmental safeguards
will be ensured to avoid negative social impacts and control the environmental
footprint of the programme Accordingly, grievance mechanisms will be put in
place UNDP has integrated gender equality and women’ empowerment into
programming and paid particular attention to the needs of youth and rural women
in localities lagging behind in terms of development to promote inclusive
development where no one is left behind As recommended by the evaluation of the
previous programme, UNDP will strengthen its programme and operational capacity
and that of its partners to effectively support implementation of the new
country programme The programme’ contingency planning will help UNDP to respond
effectively to any significant incident, event or situation, , the COVID-19
pandemic, disaster risks, etc IV Monitoring and evaluation The programme will be
aligned to the UNDP corporate monitoring and evaluation requirements including
United Nations Evaluation Group standards and, where relevant, will mobilize
dedicated competencies As part of the United Nations system, UNDP will
contribute to the monitoring of the country programme and the UNSDCF towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals Based on the evaluation of the
previous country programme, UNDP will establish  strong results-based management
system supported by an internal monitoring and evaluation framework Indicators
and targets will be optimized and aligned with the specific, measurable,
attainable, relevant and time- bound (“SMART”) standard to measure both impact
and progress at outcomes and outputs levels Programme monitoring will feed the
decision-making process, allowing for course corrections and inclusion of
lessons learned Efforts to strengthen national data systems where relevant will
be supported and UNDP will be responsible to answer any request that strengthen
measuring progress against the 2030 Agenda thematic evaluations will Independent
inform programme design and implementation, identify opportunities for synergies
across the country programme and promote joint learning and innovation
DP/DCP/DZA/ Gender analysis will be conducted through  whole-of-programme
approach, including  15 per cent budget allocation The gender marker will be
used to monitor targeted and mainstreamed interventions knowledge management
plan comprising policy briefs, thematic papers and periodic reports will
accompany the implementation of the programme It will promote institutional
memory, the culture of sharing and strengthening internal and external advocacy
and communication  DP/DCP/DZA/ Annex Results and resources framework for Algeria
() NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDG , , , 12, 13, 14, 15 and 17 COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: The population benefits from
the implementation of policies adopted by the Algerian Government in accordance
with the constitutional right to  healthy environment, conform with the energy
transition objectives, and in alignment with the multilateral environmental
treaties relating, among others, to the fight against climate change, the
preservation of biological diversity, the management of disaster risks, the
fight against desertification and land degradation RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME:  (Building Resilience) Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(),
baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data collection, and
responsibilities Area of sustainably managed forest ecosystems (management
plans, operational management plans) Baseline: 166,187 ha Target: 550,000 ha
Rate of electricity generation through renewable energy Baseline: % (source:
IEA) Target: 13% CO2 emission rate Baseline: 151,670 kt of CO2 (2019) Target: ,%
reduction compared to 2015 (without international support) and 13,% (with
international support) NDC Sustainable development of urban environments
Baseline: Number of strategies developed through the UNSCDF ; Number of people
benefiting from capacity-building activities; Archives, reports, official
documentation of the forest administration National Energy Balance Sheet (
bilan_energetique_national_2019_5f7b107 553bcdpdf) National greenhouse gas
inventory UNSDCF  Implementation Reports/Reviews; Minutes of the Steering
Structure Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines
targets) Output : Institutional capacities for the preservation of the
environment and the fight against climate change are strengthened Indicator :
Number of public and private institutions whose capacities were strengthened
Baseline (2023):  Target (2027): At least 35 Data source, frequency: UNDP
Algeria reports, official documentation Indicator : Number of municipalities
with an operational climate risk management tool Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027): at least  Data source, frequency: UNDP Algeria reports, official
documentation Major partners/partnerships frameworks Estimated cost by outcome
($) Regular resources: $776,000 Government: The Ministries of Foreign Affairs;
of the Environment, of Energy; of the Interior, including civil protection; of
Finance; of Agriculture; of Industry, of Water Resources; of Housing; of
Solidarity; of Higher Education National Agencies for Climate Change; for Dams
and Transfers; for the Promotion and Rationalization of the Use of Energy; for
the development of investments Renewable Energies Research Centre; Electricity
and Gas Regulatory Commission; Renewable Energies and Energy Efficiency
Commissariat United Nations: FAO, IAEA, UNCTAD, United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertification Civil society: Institut National de Recherche Forestière,
Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique ’Alger, Institut National de la
Vulgarisation Agricole, Institut National de la Protection des Végétaux,
Institut 10 Development of sustainable agricultural practices Baseline: see
above baseline Target: see above target UNSDCF  Implementation Reports/Reviews
Minutes of the Steering Structure DP/DCP/DZA/ Other resources: $,050,000
Technique des Grandes Cultures, Institut National de Recherche Agronomique,
Bureau National ’Etude pour le Développement Rural, Association pour la
promotion des femmes (, Association Promotion des Femmes Rurales de la Wilaya de
Skikda) The private sector: National banks, international finance institutions,
assurances Donors: GEF, GCF, Governments of Denmark; of Germany; of Japan; of
the Netherlands; of the United States of America Others: International Renewable
Energy Agency, GIZ Output : The implementation of strategies and sustainable
management action plans for the conservation of natural resources and ecosystems
is accelerated Indicator : Number of national strategies supported for their
implementation Baseline (2022):  Target (2026): At least  Data source,
frequency: project and government data Indicator :  mechanism is in place to
observe and monitor the impact of climate change on the coast and the marine
ecosystem Baseline 2022: No Target: 2027: Yes Output : The national strategy for
the energy transition is supported Indicator :  set of options for  new energy
model is defined and available for decision makers Baseline (2022): no Target
(2027): yes Data source, frequency: UNDP reporting Indicator :  draft regulatory
framework is finalized and ready for adoption Baseline (2022): No Target (2027):
Yes Data source, frequency: UNDP reporting, laws 11 DP/DCP/DZA/ Output :
Institutional capacities to prevent and manage major risks and financial
mechanisms to mitigate their impact are strengthened Indicator : Number of
institutions whose capacities are strengthened Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):
At least  Data source, frequency: UNDP reporting, official data, National
Insurance Council NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDG , , , ,  and 12 COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: The population including
people living in situations of vulnerability, benefits from  more resilient and
diversified economy thanks to an environment conducive to investment and the
development of sustainable businesses that generate decent jobs RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  (Structural Transformation) National Office of
Statistics (ONS) National Employment Agency (ANEM) ONS ANEM Proportion of youth
(aged ) not in school and not in employment or training by gender (National SDG
indicator ) Baseline: Overall: % (2019); Women: % (2019) Men: % (2019) Target:
Overall: 22%; Women:27%; Men:17% Unemployment Rate Baseline: Overall: % (2019)
Women: % (2019) Men: % (2019) Overall Youth (16 - 24 years): % (2019) Female
Youth (): % (2019) Male Youth (): % (2019) Output : National institutions have
strengthened capacities to anticipate and respond to the skills needs of the
labour market and support the transition to decent work, especially for women
and youth Indicator : Number of national institutions whose capacities are
strengthened to promote inclusive and sustainable employment Baseline (2022):
Target (2027): at least  Data source, frequency: UNDP Reporting Output :
Institutions and enterprises (micro, small and medium-sized enterprises) have
strengthened capacities to develop Government: The Ministries of Labour; of
Vocational Training; of Trade; of the Interior; of Foreign Affairs; of Finance;
of Agriculture; of Fisheries; of Industry; of the Environment; of Energy
Transition; of Higher Education; of Start-ups; of Post and telecommunications;
of Tourism; of Youth Central Bank; National Waste Agency; National Agency for
Entrepreneurship Support and Development; National Conservatory of Environmental
Training; The Regulatory Authority of Post and Electronic Communications;
Chambers of Commerce and Industry FAO, ILO, International Trade Centre, WIPO
Regular resources: $700,000 12 Target: Women: 17%; Overall Youth 20%; Female
Youth: 38%; Male Youth 22% ONS Directorate General for the Customs Bank of
Algeria ONS Centre National du Registre du Commerce DP/DCP/DZA/ Civil society:
Houari Boumediene University of Science and Technology Houari Boumediene,
Mouloud- Mammeri University of Tizi Ouzou, Associations of CapDel, Sidra
(Association for youth development), CirculeR, cooperatives, professional
organizations, Torba (collective for agroecology) The private sector: Mobile
operators, banks, producer organizations, incubators, BBC Media Action IFIs:
African Development Bank, International Finance Corporation, World Bank Donors:
Governments of Germany; of Belgium; of France; of Italy; of Japan; of the
Netherlands; of the United Kingdom European Union, GEF Others: Spanish Agency
for International Development Cooperation, French Development Agency Other
resources: $,370,000 promising sectors in  sustainable manner Indicator : Number
of MSMEs that have benefited from capacity- building programmes Baseline (2022):
32 Target (2027): 382 Data source, frequency: Sectoral data, UNDP reporting
Indicator : Number of local institutional structures supported in the field of
Social and Solidarity Economy and support to job creation: Baseline (2022): 16
Target (2027): 371 Output : Young women and men entrepreneurs benefit from
sustainable economic inclusion through the promotion of social solidarity
economy Indicator : Number of people disaggregated by age and gender who have
benefited from financial inclusion solutions Baseline (2022): 3040 (,535
women/,505 men) Target (2027): ,640 Data source, frequency: UNDP reporting 13
DP/DCP/DZA/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDG , , , 10, 16 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
(OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: The population benefits from
transparent, accountable and effective institutions that guarantee their
effective participation and representation, the rule of law, as well as the
promotion of inclusiveness and non-discrimination values, including people
living in situations of vulnerability RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  (Leaving
no one behind) Corruption Perception Index Score Baseline: 36 (2020) Target: TBD
Primary public expenditure as  proportion of initial approved budget, by sector
(or budget code or other similar criteria) - Indicator SDG  Baseline: 7983
(2019) Target: TBD Participation and representation at all levels of decision-
making (SDG indicator ); Women' representation in parliament/government
Baseline: Women in national parliament: National parliament 11% (2021) Target:
TBD Youth’ capacities for political participation Baseline: Youth (< 40 yrs) in
national parliament: 41% (2021) Target: TBD Proportion of population whose last
experience with public services was satisfactory - Indicator SDG  Baseline: NA
Target: TBD 14 Transparency International Classification Output : The
institutional framework for transparency and accountability, and its application
are strengthened in line with the SDGs Government: The Ministries of the
Interior; of Relations with parliament; of Finance; of Justice; of Health; of
Labour; of Training; of Solidarity Regular resources: $,000,000 SDG Global
Database SDG Global Database Ministry of Youth and Sports; of the Interior
Ministry of the Interior Ministry of Digitization and Statistics Indicator :
Number of regulatory texts on transparency and the fight against corruption
elaborated Baseline (2022): None Target (2026): At least  Data source,
frequency: Official publications, UNDP reporting Indicator : Number of supported
institutions Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): At least  Data source, frequency:
Memorandums of Understanding, project documents, UNDP reporting Indicator :
government road map for development financing is developed Baseline (2021): No
Target (2026): Yes Data source, frequency: Official publications, Project
Documents, UNDP Reporting Ministry of Finance Output : Sectoral strategies that
promote the effective participation of women and youth and integrate Central
Bank; National People' Assembly and Council of the Nation; Court of Auditors;
Inspectorate General of Finance; National Prevention and Anti-Corruption Body;
National Economic, Social and Environmental Council; Mediator of the Republic
United Nations: UNCTAD, UNICEF, UN-Women, WFP Civil society: National integrity
network, investigative journalism, specialized research laboratories IFIs: World
Bank, Islamic Development Bank Donors: Governments of the Republic of Korea, of
Switzerland of the United Kingdom, of the United States European Union;
Peacebuilding Fund Others: Berghof Foundation, Folke Bernadotte Academy,
Collaborative Learning Projects Inter-Parliamentary Union, Global Organization
of Parliamentarians Against Corruption, UNDP Oslo Governance Centre; UNDP Crisis
Bureau Other resources: $,350,000 Ministry of Digitization and Statistics social
cohesion mechanisms into public life are supported DP/DCP/DZA/ Indicator :
Number of sectoral strategies supported Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): At
least  Data source, frequency: official documentation, UNDP reporting Output :
Local development and governance are strengthened through improved access to
services and inclusive economic diversification Indicator : Number of supported
communes Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 20 Data source, frequency: official
documents, UNDP reporting Indicator : Number of health facilities that have had
their capacity strengthened Baseline (2022): 50 Target (2027): at least 70 Data
source, frequency: UNDP programmatic data, Ministry of Health, Population and
Hospital Reform, Ministry of Pharmaceutical Industry Output : Access to justice
in accordance with the rule of law is strengthened Indicator : Number of
communication activities on the Constitutional Court for the benefit of the
population Baseline (2021):  15 DP/DCP/DZA/ Total 16 Target (2027):  Source:
Official documentation (data from the Constitutional Court), UNDP reporting
Indicator : Per cent of inmates disaggregated by sex with  standardized
reintegration plan containing  release plan Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 40%
male & 40% female Data source, frequency: Official documentation, UNDP Reporting
Output : The effectiveness of parliamentary functions is strengthened in
accordance with the rule of law Indicator : Per cent of seats in national
parliament who were trained by UNDP Baseline (2022): % Target (2027): At least
20% Source: Official documentation (data from the parliament), UNDP reporting
Regular resources: $,476,000 Other resources: $24,770,000 Total: $27,246,000