NIGER RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 2013 Copyright © IRENA 2013 Unless
otherwise indicated, the material in this publication may be used freely, shared
or reprinted, so long as IRENA is acknowledged as the source About IRENA The
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental
organisation that supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy
future, and serves as the principal platform for international cooperation,
centre of excellence, and  repository of policy, technology, resource and
financial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption
and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy,
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy in the pursuit of
sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low carbon economic
growth and prosperity Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA), Safiatou Alzouma Nouhou
(IRENA) and Mohamed Youba Sokona (IRENA) About RRA  Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA) is  holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions and identifies
the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment This is
country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support and
expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders
While the RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each
country determines which renewable energy sources and technologies are relevant
and consistent with national priorities The RRA is  dynamic process that can be
adapted to each country’ circumstances and needs Experience in  growing range of
countries and regions, meanwhile, has allowed IRENA to continue refining the
basic RRA methodology In June 2013, IRENA published  guide for countries seeking
to conduct the process in order to accelerate their renewable energy deployment
For more information visit  Acknowledgements IRENA prepared this report in close
collaboration with Yacob Mulugetta (University of Surrey), Abeeku Brew-Hammond
(The Energy Center, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology), and
Abdoulaye report benefited from review and consultations with the ECOWAS Centre
for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) IRENA wishes to thank the
following experts for their insights and constructive guidance during the peer
review process: Mahamane Rabiou Balla (Programme 'Accès aux Services
Énergétiques - Commune Rurale de Safo - PRASE/SAFO), Soumana Boubacar (National
Centre for Solar Energy - Niger), Boaventura Cuamba (Eduardo Mondlane,
University of Mozambique), Ismail Khennas (Energy and Climate Change Expert -
UK), Monica Maduekwe (ECREEE), Issa Maidagi (Ministry of Energy and Petroleum -
Niger), Bah Saho (ECREEE) and Frank Wouters (IRENA) Issa (Ingenierie Conseils
Energie Environment ETIC - Niger) The For further information or to provide
feedback, please contact: SAlzouma@irenaorg or secretariat@irenaorg Disclaimer
The designations employed and the presentation of materials herein do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the International
Renewable Energy Agency concerning the legal status of any country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its
frontiers or boundaries NIGER RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 2013 IV NIGER
FOREWORD It is  great honour and pleasure for me to introduce our Renewables
Readiness Assessment (RRA), which allowed us to identify specific, high-impact
actions for the optimal deployment of renewable energy, taking into account the
elements of economic, social and environmental sustainability Although Niger
developed its Strategy and Action Plan on Renewable Energy as far back as 2004,
these have suffered from  lack of clear objectives and have hardly been
translated into results the ground Lately, however, we have started implementing
our National Reference Programme for Access to Energy Services (PRASE) with the
assistance of our technical and financial partners This ground-break- ing
programme for improving access to energy services was launched in 2010, in line
with the regional energy policy outlined in the White Paper of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Furthermore, our Plan for Economic and
Social Development, adopted in November 2012, calls for  substantial role for
renewable energy Findings from RRA consultations, therefore, will definitely aid
the Government of Niger in its efforts to alleviate poverty by increasing the
population’ access to energy Already, some of the recommended actions are being
implemented: renewable energy sources are increas- ingly being factored into the
on-going Master Plan for Power Generation and Transmission;  renewable energy
law has been initiated; and the government’ commitment has been underlined with
budget allocations for the renewable-based electrification of 100 villages
yearly RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT    can
further assure you, measures will very soon be taken to address the
institutional and regulatory gaps highlighted by this study Overcoming such gaps
will be fundamental for the sustainable uptake of renewable energy in Niger
Furthermore, the outcomes of the RRA process, as outlined in this report, will
provide  basis for the development of future cooperation programs with our
international partners, as well as for our discussions with investors in the
renewable energy sector  would like to take this opportunity, therefore, to
express our gratitude to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) for
assisting Niger in the drafting of this important decision-making tool, as well
as to the consultants involved for their endeavours and teamwork during the
process in the country Foumakoye Gado Minister of Energy and Petroleum, Niger VI
NIGER VI FOREWORD The Africa High-Level Consultative Forum held by the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in July 2011 highlighted the need
for technical support for African countries and regions to identify their
renewable-energy readiness The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process
stemming from this involves  holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions and
identifies the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy
deployment This is  country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing
technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different
national stakeholders Since 2011, more than 14 countries in Africa, the Middle
East, Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific Islands have
undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge of good practices and
supports international cooperation to enable the accelerated deployment of
renewable technologies Niger, in keeping with its strong and consistent support
of IRENA’ mission, is one of those pioneering countries The new Rural
Electrification Agency, established shortly after Niger’ RRA, will help to
manage electrification more holistically and create the conditions to enable
private-sector investment in rural areas As the RRA confirms, decentralised
systems could ensure universal electricity access, despite Niger’ dispersed
population and largely rural economy, as long as the country continues to
address identified institutional and financial gaps RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT VII IRENA wishes to thank Minister Gado and his team for their
tireless contributions and warm hospitality in hosting this study We are
grateful for their positive engagement and valuable input, which has given us
additional insights for undertaking further RRAs in the 2014- 2015 period
Additionally, this report will feed into other IRENA regional work, including
modelling and analysis on planning and prospects for renewable energy in West
Africa We sincerely hope that the outcomes of these RRA consultations will
assist Niger in fulfilling its aim to scale up renewable energy IRENA stands
ready to provide continuing support to Niger in implementing the actions
identified Adnan  Amin Director-General, IRENA VIII NIGER CONTENTS ACRONYMS LIST
OF FIGURES LIST OF TABLES XI XII XII EXECUTIVE SUMMARY XIII  INTRODUCTION
COUNTRY BACKGROUND ROLE OF ENERGY IN DEVELOPMENT IN NIGER THE RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT PROCESS IN NIGER    II ENERGY CONTEXT  REGIONAL CONTEXT
ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN NIGER ELECTRICITY SYSTEM RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCE
POTENTIAL AND USE   11 17 III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 27 KEY
ENERGY STAKEHOLDERS AND INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURES ENERGY POLICIES AND REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK FINANCING AND INVESTMENT 27 29 30 IV OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE DEPLOYMENT
OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 34 GRID-CONNECTED RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS OFF-GRID
RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS BIOMASS FOR COOKING AND HEATING OPPORTUNITIES AND
CONSTRAINTS FOR SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT 34 39 50 52 RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT IX  SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 55 VI REFERENCES 57
ANNEX: DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 60 Action : Develop  national
Renewable Energy Policy and Action Plan Action : Develop  Renewable Energy Law
and supporting mechanisms Action : Create an institutional and regulatory
framework to 60   facilitate the deployment of renewable energy in rural areas
62 Action : Support the energy component of the Public Private Partnership
strategic framework 63 Action : Enable the National Centre for Solar Energy
(CNES) to fully play its role as the lead technical institution for renewable
energy research and development 64 65 Action : Create conditions for the
development of  rural biogas industry  NIGER ACRONYMS AfDB CNES ECOWAS ECREEE
EREP GDP INRAN African Development Bank Centre National 'Energie
Solaire/National Centre for Solar Energy Economic Community of West African
States ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency ECOWAS Renewable
Energy Policy Gross domestic product Institut National de Recherche Agronomique
du Niger/ National Institute for Agronomy Research Independent power producer
International Renewable Energy Agency Kilovolt Kilowatt hour Liquefied petroleum
gas Millennium Development Goals Ministère de ’Energie et du Pétrole/Ministry of
Energy and Petroleum Ministère du Plan, de 'Aménagement du Territoire, et du
Développement Communautaire / Ministry of Planning, Territorial Zoning and
Community Development Megawatt Société Nigérienne 'Electricité/Niger Electricity
Company Plan de Développement Economique et Social/ Plan for Economic and Social
Development Public Private Partnership Programme National de Référence ’Accès
aux Services Energétiques/ National Reference Programme on Access to Energy
Services Renewables Readiness Assessment Société Nigerienne du Charbon 'Anou
Araren/ Nigerien Anou Araren Coal Company Total Primary Energy Supply Tonnes of
Oil Equivalent United Nations Development Programme West African Power Pool Watt
Peak IPP IRENA kV kWh LPG MDGs MoEP MP/AT-DC MW NIGELEC PDES PPP PRASE RRA
SONICHAR TPES TOE UNDP WAPP Wp RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT XI LIST OF
FIGURES Figure  WAPP Regional Sub-programmes Figure  Total Primary Energy Supply
in Niger Figure  Energy consumption by sector Figure  Niger’ Electricity Sector
Figure  Power Generation and Distribution by Source Figure  Transmission network
in Niger Figure  Forecasted Electricity Supply until 2020 Figure  Electricity
tariffs comparison for selected West African countries Figure  Solar radiation
in four cities in Niger Figure 10 Niger Solar Irradiation (resolution  km)
Figure 11 Installed PV capacity in 2012 Figure 12 Wind speed in four Niger
cities at 10m height Figure 13 Wind Speed at 50  height in Niger Figure 14
Cumulative cash flow and payback period Figure 15 Cumulative cash flow and
payback period at USD ,000/kW Figure 16 Life-cycle cost comparison of PV, hybrid
and diesel systems Figure 17 Levelised cost against rising diesel prices Figure
18 Life-cycle cost comparison of wind and hybrid systems Figure 19 Life-cycle
cost comparison between PV and diesel for water pumping at different depths and
flows 07 10   12 14 15 17 18 19 20   22 23 35 36 40 42 44 45 46 Figure 20 Solar
water heater: Cumulative cash flow and payback period LIST OF TABLES Table
Installed Capacity by Source in Niger Table  Power Generation and Transmission
Project Table  Potential agricultural residues and energy content Table  Funding
sources for Energy within the PDES Table  PV installed capacity in 2013 13 16 24
39 XII NIGER EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Niger is  landlocked country in West Africa and
member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) It has  surface
area of ,267,000 square kilometres (km2), and population of 16 million with an
annual growth rate of % Over the past ten years, the Nigerien economy grew at an
average rate of %, but only grew % in 2011, because of  poor harvest and  severe
food grain short- age However, it bounced back in 2012, growing by 13%,
according to the African Development Bank The economy is dominated by
agriculture, forestry and livestock, which contribute 43% of gross domestic
product (GDP) and employ about 80% of the country’ workforce The energy balance
in dominated by biomass, which represents 79% of total energy consumption and
meets 83% of household energy needs, followed by petroleum products (18%) and
mineral coal for electricity generation (%) Renewables other than biomass remain
negligible at less than % The energy sector in Niger is at  critical crossroads
The country has recently discovered oil and gas This will contribute to widening
energy access and allow the country to solve the enormous problem of household
energy access through  liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) programme Niger also aims
to move towards greater electricity secu- rity by investing in domestic power
production, thereby reducing its dependence on imports from Nigeria However,
Niger’ energy demand is growing rapidly, and significant pent-up demand
continues to be felt from businesses and socio-economic development sectors,
which continue to experience shortages and blackouts To address this, Niger
needs to explore  variety of technological options to diversify its energy
supply base and build stability in the energy sector This would include
harnessing the country’ significant renewable energy resources and accelerating
their exploitation to power the growing economy The government recognises the
important role renewable energy will play in Niger’ future energy
infrastructure, providing input to both centralised and decentralised systems
Policies are currently being developed and relevant laws drafted to create the
governance structure required for  credible energy access and security programme
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT XIII View over the Niger River Photo: IRENA/
Lucas Like in most countries in the region, the energy sector in Niger is
characterised by parallel energy systems, the traditional and the modernised
Both face intrinsic chal- lenges, which cross all sectors and affect the whole
population Current biomass use in Niger has major health implications,
especially for women It also has significant environmental implications in terms
of land degradation and deforestation With the population increasing at over %
per annum (), the pressure on humans and ecosystems will continue to increase
boosting its own generation capacity There are occasional power-supply
interruptions from Nigeria due to technical problems, and these highlight Niger’
vulnerability in the arrangement between the two coun- tries Load shedding and
blackouts are as commonplace in Niger as in Nigeria, prompting most businesses
and urban households to invest in portable diesel generators, or “gen-sets”, as
standby power source The impact of voltage fluc- tuations, spikes, blackouts,
brownouts and other disruptions has been consider- able for the wider economy
Energy inse- curity has, therefore, become  barrier to development Electricity –
in terms of both quality and access – is  key challenge for Niger The existing
power infrastructure is underde- veloped, and the country continues to rely
heavily on imported electricity from neigh- bouring Nigeria Niger has been
import- ing electricity at  very low price, which has historically served as
disincentive to The West African Power Pool (WAPP) represents an opportunity for
Niger As part of its contribution to WAPP, Niger will invest in two fossil-fuel
(coal and gas) power generation systems However, major XIV NIGER proportion of
the power expected to be generated through WAPP will be hydro- power Given the
scale of power produced through the power pool, as well as power production and
transmission challenges in Niger, the country is likely to benefit notice- ably
in terms of cheaper and more reliable electricity Niger possesses significant
renewable its present energy resources to meet and future energy needs The
country is endowed with abundant solar energy resources, good biomass resources
in its southern parts, and  modest wind regime, especially the north These
resources can be harnessed to bring high- er-quality energy services to
populations across the country towards Broadening energy access is  central
national development objective in Niger At present, less than 25% of the
population enjoys access to electricity, and the picture in rural areas is
bleaker, at less than % electricity access Generation of electricity through
renewables has long been viewed as an important way to close this gap However,
the focus on the contribution that renewables could make to the national grid
has only emerged because new tech- nologies are beginning to compete with
conventional power generation To this end, an energy policy is needed, embrac-
ing renewables as part of  longer-term energy vision This must include  system-
atic roadmap for delivery, supported by research and financial support Niger was
one of the first countries across the world to consider renewable energy
technologies as  solution to its energy needs This dates back to the 1960s, when
Niger set up the Solar Energy Office (Office de ’Energie Solaire – ONERSOL),
later renamed the National Solar Energy Centre (Centre National 'Énergie Solaire
– CNES) ONERSOL was founded to under- take applied renewable energy research,
provide diagnostic studies on renewable energy technology use, and run train-
ing programmes on renewable energy systems Yet this ambitious and promising
programme did not achieve its intended goal of creating  strong renewable energy
technical capability for the West African region This was because financial
resources for sustaining the programme dried up and priorities shifted Off-grid
renewable power can meet the demand in currently unserved rural areas Niger,
still in the early stages of building its energy infrastructure, has the oppor-
tunity to develop and invest in its energy system in  planned and systematic
manner At the moment, the rural elec- trification programme relies largely on
international donors However, Niger has begun to allocate funding to meet the
cost of implementing decentralised renewable technologies for  range of social
develop- ment needs This effort could be extended to productive sectors in rural
areas, since renewable energy systems, with their flex- ibility and scalability,
are especially well- suited to meeting rural energy demand The Government of
Niger views providing reliable electricity and other basic energy services to
all populations and parts of the country as  critical aspect of its inclusive
economic transformation plans It also recognises decentralised renewable energy
options as  cost-effective alternative to grid expansion in many rural areas The
government electrification strategy has embraced both grid-based and off-grid
options, although the main policy focus still remains on the former RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT XV greatly reduced by setting up  one-stop shop for the
private sector dealing with renewable energy projects Key recommendations Niger
needs to develop an energy policy that embraces renewables as part of  longer-
term energy vision The current strategy has set the objective of 10% renewables
(excluding biomass) in the national energy mix by However, there are no specific
guidelines or road- map for reaching the target This needs to be rectified, in
order to provide sufficient substance to for the successive shorter- term
targets needed to realise this goal Additionally, work is about to begin in
Niger to develop  master plan for the produc- tion and transmission of
electricity, part of determining the country’ medium- to long-term investment
priorities for devel- oping the power sector (up to 2035) This offers  real
opportunity to integrate renewable energy into future plans and also strengthen
Niger’ case for support from development partners To better inform the
development of the master plan, the country’ solar and wind economic poten- tial
needs to be adequately quantified Niger’ Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
office, which has expressed the desire to promote solar power investments, could
be mandated by the renewable energy law to become the permitting and licensing
authority for all renewable energy projects The law could also enshrine
bankable PPA model that would reduce the length and complexity of negotiations
required with private sector for every investment  model of this kind could open
the door to self-producers and IPPs wishing to feed their electricity into the
grid It could also let in producers who wish to collaborate with utilities to
hybridise existing fossil-fuel generators PPP office capacities would need to be
upgraded and streamlined, with clear, transparent administrative proce- dures
being created for the private sector Niger has been using auctions to select
IPPs to provide power to the grid at competi- tive prices Although these have
for the most part been for conventional (fossil- fuel) generators, the country
can capital- ise on this experience to design renewable energy auctions and
support large-scale renewables deployment Renewable energy auctions have already
become  commonly used policy instrument in some countries Such auctions have
helped achieve large- scale deployment in  cost-efficient and regulated manner,
while allowing price discovery for renewable-energy based electricity through
their inherent price competition, which also tends to boost the scale of
competition Although Niger’ power generation sector has been opened to IPPs,
renewable power projects have not come forward The devel- opment and expansion
of the country’ renewable energy market partly depends on the creation of
favourable legal and regulatory framework This would, among other things, reduce
technical, legal and administrative barriers while increasing private-sector
confidence An overarching renewable energy law would create the right conditions
Such  law should provide guaranteed access to the grid and priority dispatch of
renewable electricity genera- tion These are currently lacking in the grid code
Furthermore, the development of  standardised, bankable PPA would greatly
support the evolution of renew- able energy auctioning Transaction costs, which
currently reflect lengthy permitting and administrative procedures, could be
Niger needs  comprehensive energy policy that puts the needs and demands of
rural communities at centre stage and provides clear guidance on how to achieve
progress on rural energy services The policy should confirm explicitly that
rural XVI NIGER communities need  bottom-up approach, due to their low energy
demand and scat- tered nature The comprehensive policy would bring together
local development plans and information on resources, finance and skills,
facilitating the design of coordi- nated plans of action, sensitive to location
An organisation must be established to manage, develop and implement Niger’
rural renewable electrification strategy and programme The proposed organisation
must also create enabling conditions for the private sector, ensure effective
imple- mentation, and maintain quality assurance This organisation needs to be
legal entity It could fill several important gaps comparative advantage in rural
electri- fication in particular, are unsuitable for conventional financing
because of their high transaction costs In Niger, rural communities with little
disposable income hardly feature as natu- ral clients for conventional financial
institu- tions Soft loans can be attractive, requir- ing only  small sum as
down payment on the total price, with the rest being payable over  number of
years Therefore, grants from multilateral agencies or donors could be ring-
fenced to mobilise soft loan schemes for household or community elec-
trification While this cannot be considered  long-term solution to the challenge
of raising funding, it could provide energy for social development needs It may
also serve to stimulate the renewables market in rural areas The proposed
organisation must aim to optimise the use of resources for rural electrification
and maintain mechanisms already in place, while upholding impor- tant principles
These include equity, tech- nology neutrality, high technical standards, poverty
eradication and the protection of investor interests Furthermore, provi- sions
should be made within the renewable energy law to amend the country’ current tax
policies on renewable energy technolo- gies Amendments would include reducing
current import duties and VAT that affect the competitiveness of renewable
energy The cost of each type of technology, including hybrid technologies, needs
to be assessed and documented in the differ- ent regions of the country This
would provide  dynamic data system, assem- bling data on the range of
technologies and their performance under different conditions The diesel based
mini-grid operated by NIGELEC offers  compel- ling case for hybridisation with
renewable energy sources Solar irradiation is abun- dant throughout the country
Detailed feasibility studies on hybridising the diesel mini-grids with solar PV
would, therefore, help demonstrate the economics of these systems to potential
investors The rural electrification challenge is enor- mous and will require
both external and finance Niger’ Renewables domestic Readiness Assessment (RRA)
drew atten- tion to the importance of raising domestic finance, as well to
calibrate internal invest- ment with wider development goals As the consultation
process underscored, rural electrification should feature prominently within any
such framework Niger will rely on technologies sourced from abroad for the
foreseeable future Technology in tandem with efforts to upgrade innovation
systems that will support domestic technol- ogy adoption and development
However, cheap solar panels and components are entering the Nigerien market from
neigh- imports must continue Niger could consider raising funds to promote rural
electrification from taxes on mineral and petroleum exploitation Decentralised
renewables, despite their RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT XVII bouring
countries, with no institutionalised quality assurance and standard schemes This
does not help the reputation of these technologies, still in their early stages,
when systems break down In various parts of the world, the biogas sector has
delivered excellent results and supported rural development Niger has
significant potential for biogas, and feasi- bility studies in the biogas sector
have been conclusive The development of  biogas business model would be worth
exploring for Niger, with  view to bringing microfinance institutions to the
negotiat- ing table to set up  commercially viable biogas industry, including
innovative and effective financial structures This would contribute to the well-
being of the coun- try’ population while reducing pressure on natural resources
As part of the industry’ revitalisation, CNES could play an important role in
supporting the development of renewable energy technology standards and
certifica- tion schemes for installers  programme of this kind would have the
additional benefit of creating new skilled jobs throughout the value chain, from
small distributors to installers, maintainers and end-users XVIII NIGER
INTRODUCTION country bacKground Niger is  landlocked country in West Africa and
member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) It has  surface
are of ,267,000 square kilometres (km2), bordering Mali, Burkina Faso and Benin
to the West, Nigeria to the South, Chad to the East and Algeria and Libya to the
North Niger is divided into eight regions, 36 provinces and 265 districts It is
crossed by the Niger, the country’ only perennial river, which has  length of
550 km Niger has  population of 16 million with an annual growth rate of % The
population density is of 12 people per km2 It is young (52% under 15 years of
age), and predomi- nantly rural (84%) However, it is undergoing  high
urbanisation growth rate of about %  (International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD), 2012); Institut National de la Statistique (INS), 2012) Over
the past ten years, the Nigerien economy grew at an average rate of %, but only
% in 2011 due to  poor harvest and  severe food grain shortage However, it
bounced back in 2012, growing by 13%, accord- ing to the African Economic
Outlook (2013) This was helped by heavy rains that generated  surplus of over
million metric tons () of cereals (World Bank, 2013a) This clearly demonstrates
the Nigerien economy’ direct dependence on rainfall and water availability It
also illustrates the country’ vulnerability to climate shocks and the importance
of manag- ing water resources to sustain development Niger’ growth is attributed
to an exceptionally dynamic secondary sector, which grew by almost 38% in 2012
driven by the extractive industries Niger commenced oil produc- tion in late
2011 in  joint venture with the Chinese National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) As
part of this plan,  new refinery has been built with  capacity of 20,000 barrels
per day The emergence of oil on the Nigerien economic landscape has triggered
new optimism concerning the country’ future development and balance of trade
management The economy is dominated by agriculture, forestry and livestock,
which contribute 43% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employ about 80% of the
country’ workforce (IMF, 2013) Given the country’ location in the Sahel region,
these sectors are highly vulnerable to climate variabil- ity, leading to
frequent droughts and affecting productivity Service and RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT   village school in Niger Source: Wikimedia commercial sectors are
also major contrib- utors to the economy, accounting for 41% of GDP and further
improvements are expected The mortality rate for children under five has fallen
from 320 to 130 per thousand in  (World Bank, 2013b) However, major challenges
remain, as all develop- ment indicators point to very low human and economic
development accord- ing to the United Nations Development Programme (United
Nations Development Programme UNDP, 2013) Niger is currently ranked 186th on the
Human Development Index (HDI) Nearly 76% of the population lives on less than
two dollars  day and is experiencing extreme poverty Improving living conditions
in Niger will therefore remain at the forefront of the country’ growth agenda
Although it is  fast growing sector with significant potential, heavy industry
accounts for only 16% of GDP Uranium, gold, coal and limestone are the principal
products mined, contributing % of GDP in With the emergence of oil produc- tion
as  major activity, exports from the extractive industries are expected to
double by 2016 compared to Manufacturing has also increased its share to about %
in 2011, largely in the domain of food process- ing (AEO, 2013) AfDB states that
flows of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) exceeded USD  billion (bn) in 2011 and
remained high in 2012 at about USD 830m Much of the investment was in the mining
and oil sectors The government of Niger’ new poverty reduction strategy — its
Plan for Economic and Social Development (PDES) — is the country’ overarching
development frame- work according to the Ministry of Planning, Lands and
Community Development (MP/ AT-DC, 2011) The principal focus of the PDES is to
achieve economic growth of about % in 2012-It identifies 86 programmes needed to
reach 11 strategic objectives The programmes are clustered into five areas: Over
the past two decades, Niger’ social indicators have improved noticeably The
gross primary school enrolment rate has increased from about 29% in the early
1990s to 76% in The ratio of girls to boys in primary schools also increased
from 25% to 40% during the same period,  NIGER () strengthening the credibility
and effec- lation does not have access to electricity, much of which is
restricted to urban areas This indicates significant pent-up demand in the power
sector and  need to close the gap between demand and availability tiveness of
public institutions (ii) creating the conditions for sustainable, balanced and
inclusive development (iii) providing food security and sustain- Niger’ energy
profile is typical of  low- income economy in that the household sector remains
the main energy user This signifies  limited use of energy in the productive
sector Households across Niger rely heavily on traditional biomass to meet their
basic energy needs However, during the last couple of years LPG consumption has
experienced major growth able agricultural development (iv) promoting
competitive and diverse economy for accelerated and inclusive growth ()
fostering social development The PDES acknowledges the central role energy
services will play in reaching social development goals and raising income
generation This is required for individual development and community transforma-
tion It therefore channels energy access into short and long-term development
objectives It also suggests specific plans for modernising the electricity
supply infrastructure, improving coverage levels, reforming the existing
regulatory frame- work and increasing the contribution of renewable energy to
energy security Niger is endowed with significant renew- able energy resources
and has the potential to develop  diversified portfolio of renew- able energy
technologies With improve- ments in technologies and costs, potential renewable
energy is well suited to both urban and rural applications Although Niger’
recent discovery of oil and gas will provide much-needed relief from the coun-
try’ energy security problems and endless difficulties maintaining  healthy
balance of trade in the short term, renewables are also likely to feature as an
important long- term platform for closing the electricity access gap, especially
in rural settlements Several strategies such as Programme National de Reference
’Acces aux Services Energétiques –PRASE - National Reference Programme on Access
to Energy Services, have outlined the important role of renew- able energy in
delivering energy services Over the past five years this programme has increased
the installed capacity of decentralised solar systems for  wide range of end
uses by about  MW role of energy in development in niger Fulfilling the vision
outlined in the PDES depends on the ability of Niger to scale up and improve the
quality of energy services This means putting in place good poli- cies, creating
the enabling environment for energy investment and building strong institutions
that can deliver good outcomes The per capita electricity consumption was less
than 50 kWh in 2012 against an African average of over 575 kWh and  global
average of over 2770 kWh This makes the average Nigerien citizen among the
lowest consumers of electricity in the world Moreover, about 76% of the popu-
Niger’ future development will largely be determined by whether it exploits the
range of energy resources it has to good effect The country still has some way
to RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT  go in addressing  number of social devel-
opment problems in education, health and water services Energy services will
continue to play  major role in resolving them The government of Niger has long
recognised that lack of energy access seri- ously handicaps development, and
efforts to remedy this problem need to be scaled up Indeed, in many of these
successful cases elsewhere, energy intervention in the social and economic
sectors namely health, water, agriculture and education was made as part of
comprehensive development strategy These two aims are not mutu- ally exclusive
but intertwined For Niger, increasing electricity access and making  transition
from inefficient biomass use is not only about having the resources available It
will require sound policies, an effective regulatory framework, robust and
dynamic institutions and sustained capac- ity development programmes note
prepared by the national consultant (ETIC-Sarl) in advance of their scheduled
meetings The subgroups reviewed the tentative list resource-service pairs
suggested by MoEP after discussions with the national consul- tant to be further
analysed and discussed  national workshop held in September 2012 prioritised
five manageable short- to medi- um-term priority resource-service pairs The
workshop also identified and recom- mended  set of seven concrete action points
to resolve limited systemic, institu- tional and individual capacity constraints
Resolving these will create good syner- gies and have  positive cumulative
effect on the country’ readiness to scale up RE deployment This report is
structured in five substantive sections Section  presents the introduc- tion
covering country background and  brief on the RRA process in Niger Section
presents the renewable and general energy context in the region It includes an
over- view of the energy sector in Niger, its chal- lenges and an overview of RE
potential and use It also provides  detailed discussion of the electricity
sector Section  explores Niger’ energy institutions and the policy and
regulatory framework as well as the conditions of financing and investment in
the country Section  presents the emerg- ing concerns relating to solar/wind
electric- ity (on-grid),  range of decentralised (off- grid) applications as
well as the biomass sector Opportunities and constraints that affect deployment
scale-up are discussed along with the RRA findings Section  presents the
recommended action neces- sary for scaling up RE in Niger Annex  presents
detailed account of the recom- mended action identified by the RRA the
renewables readiness assessment (rra) process in niger  senior officer at the
Ministry of Petroleum and Energy (MoEP) with  thorough knowl- edge and
experience in renewables was the RRA focal point in Niger Following preparations
by the national consultant and MoEP,  representative from the ECOWAS Centre for
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) wrote to identified key
institutions selected to be part of the technical/expert team They were invited
to the formal launch of the RRA at  kick-off meeting on in July 2012 where they
were divided into three thematic subgroups The subgroups met in August 2012
respectively, having had time to go through the background  NIGER II ENERGY
CONTEXT regional context The total population of the ECOWAS region in 2011 was
about 309 million and growing at an annual rate of about % according to the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO, 2012)
Per capita GDP remains low by world levels at USD 983, but the range within
countries in the region is at USD 245-Real GDP growth has for the most part
remained strong over the past decade It reached % in 2012 due to good rainfall
and positive developments in the mining and petroleum sectors (ECOWAS, 2013) The
energy system in West Africa is faced with  number of interrelated challenges:
low energy access, insecure energy supply and growing envi- ronmental
degradation Total Primary Energy Consumption (TPES) in the region is about 155
million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE)  (ECREEE, 2012) Fuelwood and charcoal
account for the largest sources of energy, representing 77% of primary energy
consumption Petroleum products in 2012 accounted for 22  TOE of consumption, and
as  whole the region consumes about 43 terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity
(ibid) Sustained economic growth seen in the past few years has been accompanied
by growing demand for  modernised energy infrastructure This is creating
pressure on governments to improve energy production to meet growing consumption
Access to electricity in the ECOWAS region is low at 42% Over 75% of those with
access live in urban areas, leaving some 77% with no access to electricity
(ECREEE, 2012) There are variations between countries Some are doing better than
others at providing electricity for their populations These include Ghana, Côte
’Ivoire, Cape Verde, Senegal and Nigeria Unmet electricity demand amounted to
around -10 TWh in  (ECREEE, 2012) The electricity systems in West Africa also
face challenges arising from existing supply capacities unable to satisfy
growing demand Furthermore, the region faces the difficulty of raising
sufficient funds internally or attracting outside investors willing to incur the
high perceived risk of the electricity sector in the region (IRENA, 2013a)
Overall, unreliable power RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT  holds back the
region' enterprises and has  negative impact on productive activities
Transmission and distribution losses are around 40%, increasing electricity
tariffs significantly  number of countries in the region have some of the
highest tariffs in the world with  regional average exceed- ing USD 20/kWh The
cost of providing backup power (typically USD / industries kWh) handicaps
productive Eberhard, et al (2011) estimate that black- outs reduce annual
economic growth in Africa by about % ECOWAS/West African Economic and Monetary
Union (UEMOA) White Paper for  Regional Policy on Access to Energy Services to
Rural and Semi-Urban Areas was adopted in Three targets were set for 2015: )
100% of the total population, or 325 million people, to have access to improved
cooking fuels and stoves, including % to LPG cooking devices ii) at least 60% of
people in rural areas to have access to productive energy services in villages,
especially motive power, to boost productivity energy regarding Concerns access
and security are not new in the region Following the adoption of the first
ECOWAS energy policy in 1982, the region has been engaged integrated in
developing an approach for the energy sector The aim is to provide better access
to modernised energy services Several initiatives have been made with that in
mind and some of these are discussed below iii) 66% of the population, or 214
million people, to have access to individual electricity supply (ECOWAS, 2006)
The Regulatory Authority for Regional Electricity Sector of ECOWAS (ERERA) was
created in Its aim was to ensure the regulation of cross-border exchanges in
electricity and provide substantial support for national electricity regulators
of member states ( The West African Power Pool (WAPP) was established in Its
objective was to curtail the power deficit in the region by integrating the
operations of national power systems into  unified regional electricity market
(cross-border trade flows) This is intended to facilitate stable, reliable and
cost-competitive electricity to all ECOWAS citizens in the medium to long term
In 2006, the WAPP secretariat was created and mandated to ensure the promotion
and development of power generation and transmission facilities ( The ECOWAS
Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) was estab- lished by
the Council of ECOWAS in Its mandate was to promote measures to improve access
to modern energy services, reduce increase energy security and adverse impacts
on the environment The creation of favourable framework condi- tions and an
enabling environment for renewable energy and energy efficiency are viewed as
tools to achieve these goals The Energy Protocol was adopted in 2003 by ECOWAS
member countries This is  legal framework aimed at promoting long- term
cooperation in the energy field It is based on complementary relationships and
mutual benefit to increase investment in the energy sector and develop energy
trade in the region Much effort will be required to address the energy issues in
the region and capitalise on the opportunities that clearly lie ahead ECREEE
developed and adopted the ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy (EREP) is designed in
November EREP  NIGER Figure  WAPP regional sub-programmes �����������
������������������������������������ ����������������������������������
���������������������������������� �����������������������������������
��������������������������������������� ���������� ���� ������� ����� ������
������� ���� ������ ������ ������ ������� ����� ��������� ������ ����� ����
����� ����� �������� ���� ���������������� ������� Source: MOE, 2012b RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT  to make renewable energy  vector for universal access to
electricity by It is also intended to ensure  more secure and sustainable supply
of domestic energy for cooking This will meet the objectives of the ECOWAS White
Paper for access to modernised energy services by From  purely economic
standpoint,  number of countries would benefit from the opportunity to reduce
costs they incur at present by importing more than half their power Savings for
countries such as Guinea Bissau, Liberia and Niger could amount to USD /kWh
(Eberhard, et al, 2011) The largest beneficiaries of regional trade would be
smaller nations that lack domestic hydropower resources For these countries, it
is estimated that the cost savings generated by regional trade could repay the
required investment in cross-border transmission in less than  year This depends
on neighbouring coun- tries developing sufficient surplus power to export WEST
AFRICAN POWER POOL WAPP is looking at developing  regional electricity market
through successive phases: Phase  will last from 2012 to around 2015, when most
regional transmission infra- structure is expected to be commissioned This phase
formalising trad- ing arrangements, agreeing transmission pricing and
strengthening the role of the regional regulator includes In cooperation with
ECREEE and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), IRENA has created an
energy system modelling tool for West African countries called energy system
that meets including various system requirements reliability At the same time,
it takes into account the optimal economic configura- tions (including both
investment and oper- ation costs) of the system to meet daily and/or seasonally
fluctuating demand Using EREP, IRENA developed  transition scenario for the
renewable power sector in ECOWAS countries This shows that the share of
renewable technologies in the region could increase from 22% of elec- tricity
generation at present to as much as 52% in 2030 (IRENA, 2013a) Phase  - based on
the preparations carried out during Phase , should include bilateral agreements
on transit through third coun- tries, short-term exchanges through day- ahead
markets, regional transmission pric- ing and regional system operator/market
operator functions Phase  -  long-term vision, which includes regional
optimisation of operations WAPP has approved  regional master plan for
infrastructure development with timings for the different projects This master
plan is organised around 30 generation and 26 transmission priority projects
with the objective of developing 10% renewable energy (excluding large hydro)
More specifically, IRENA assessed the investment needed in addition to funds
already committed to the present power supply investment would mean integrating
renewable tech- nology generation into the grid, including off-grid power
systems when technologi- cally and economically feasible Niger has long
benefited from cross-border elec- tricity exchange with Nigeria, obtaining The
implementation of the master plan will add an additional capacity of 10,000 MW
and 16,000 km of transmission lines in the region This would consist of an
electric- ity mix of 21 hydropower plants, five ther- mal power plants and four
wind and solar plants (Figure ) infrastructure This  NIGER electricity at low
cost On occasions, the negative aspects of its overdependence on Nigeria becomes
clear when power inter- ruptions occur due to technical problems This draws
attention to the vulnerability of Niger’ power sector Niger would partici- pate
in both the generation and transmis- sion priority projects in the region Two
power generation projects are planned that will feed into WAPP These include
400 MW coal-fired power plant due to come on stream by 2019 and  500 MW gas-
fired plant that will use the country’ newly discovered natural gas The power
generated from these plants will be chan- nelled through the WAPP 330 kilovolt
(kV) interconnector This also Nigeria-Niger connects Burkina Faso via its left
branch and Benin and Togo via its right of household energy needs Biomass in the
form of fuelwood, charcoal and agricultural residues is used in inefficient
cooking appli- ances This practice has contributed to the ongoing deforestation
problems in Niger Mainly used for electricity generation and transport,
petroleum products account for 18% of Niger’ energy mix Their share of the total
has increased in recent years Mineral coal for electricity generation accounts
for the remaining balance at % of total energy supplies in Niger The share of
renewables as  proportion of TPES remains negligible at less than %, assuming
that all biomass is non-renewable - which is not the case The household sector
is the main end- user of energy in Niger at 90%, followed by transport and
industry at % and % respectively (see figure ) This energy consumption profile
is typical of least devel- oped country economic structures These countries have
industrialisation limited Furthermore, energy needs for the residen- tial sector
are met by traditional biomass, although more recently LPG has come to assume
greater importance in the house- hold energy supply mix Energy consump- tion in
the agricultural and commercial sectors remains small – less than % energy
supply and demand in niger Like all ECOWAS countries, Niger has  dual energy
system containing co-existing traditional and modernised energy systems and
practices On the one hand, traditional biomass fuels and inefficient
technologies dominate household energy needs On the other, electricity and more
refined fuels are also used in Niger as well as up-to-date appliances However,
these are mainly used in urban areas, where the energy picture is complex The
simultaneous use of biomass fuels, kerosene or LPG is common in urban areas,
even in relatively high-income households The fragmented nature of the energy
system creates enormous difficul- ties for policy makers to overcome the energy
challenge in an integrated manner Until recently, Niger imported oil and gas
needed for domestic consumption, creat- ing balance of trade difficulties for
the country’ policy makers However, since 2011 Niger has become an oil producer,
improving the prospect for social and economic development The Agadem perimeter,
entrusted to NCPC, has proven oil reserves estimated at nearly one billion
barrels while its natural gas reserves are estimated at 30 bn cubic metres (m3)
At present, Niger has the capacity to produce 100,000 barrels per day but
currently produces 20,000 barrels per day This is earmarked to meet domestic
demand for petroleum products In 2011,  refinery with TPES in Niger was about 91
petajoules [PJ] (2173 thousand tonnes of oil equivalent) in As shown in figure ,
the most strik- ing feature of Niger’ energy system is the dominance of biomass
This represents 79% of total consumption and meets 83% RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT   Figure  Total Primary Energy Supply
in Niger  capacity of 20,000 barrels per day was built in Zinder to supply
Niger’ current and future needs Given that Niger’ present demand stands at ,000
barrels per day, some of the surplus petroleum products from Zinder are already
finding markets in neighbouring countries, including northern Nigeria the
country, including in rural households and businesses Conditions in Niger for
this increased use of LPG are favourable as LPG costs are the lowest in the
region They amount to USD  per kilogramme (kg), which is  significant reduction
in cost compared to USD /kg before the refinery was built Moreover, the
associated gas is tapped as part of the government’ ambitious campaign to
promote LPG as an alter- native to wood and charcoal consump- tion in Niamey and
other urban centres The campaign has delivered positive results, with
consumption increasing from ,000 metric tons () in 2011 to 10,000  in 2012
(Practical Action Consulting, 2013) LPG production has reached 47,000   and is
expected to amount to 70,000   once the refinery reaches its maximum capacity
This will provide further oppor- tunities for mainstreaming LPG use across
received atten- Other options have is endowed with proven tion Niger coal
reserves amounting to more than 68m  in Salkadamna (Tahoua) with  calorific
value of ,000 kcal/kg and over 20  in Anou-Araren and Solomi (Agadez) At
present, only the Anou-Araren deposit is mined It feeds  power generation plant
for mines in the region, as well as the cities of Agadez, Akokan, Arlit and
Tchirozerine Proven uranium reserves in Niger are estimated at over 280,000  The
mines are operated by Société Miniere ’Air – Air Mining Company (SOMAIR) and 10
NIGER Figure  Energy consumption by sector energy services (both electricity and
heat for cooking) Urban areas enjoy signifi- cantly better conditions for access
The following section provides  review of the state of the power sector in
Niger, including the tariff structure and planned expansion electricity system
The institutional arrangement of Niger electricity sector is depicted in figure
The Ministry of Energy and Petroleum is responsible for policy development and
the Multisectoral Regulatory Authority is the independent regulator The Société
Nigérienne 'Electricité - NIGELEC - the Nigerien Electricity Company, is the
util- ity responsible for electric power genera- tion, transmission and
distribution in Niger Established in 1968, NIGELEC is major- ity owned by the
government of Niger Petroleum products (70%) dominate Niger’ energy generation
mix, followed by coal (28%) and solar (%) As shown in table , the national
installed capacity of less than 175 MW includes the NIGELEC 83 MW thermal power
station It also includes  36 MW coal-fired power plant run by the Nigerien Anou
Araren Coal Company (SONICHAR) and the AGGREKO 15 MW thermal power plant
Furthermore, the two Independent Power Producers (IPPs) SORAZ ( refinery) and
SOMINA ( uranium mining company) produce 23 MW and 15 MW respectively to meet
their elec- tricity needs (Figure ) Installed PV capac- ity amounts to about  MW
and meets  variety of end uses Approximately 47% of the electricity produced is
consumed by households Industry uses around 39%, commercial entities and
services 13% and agroprocessing % (Oumarou, 2012) Compagnie Minière ’Akouta –
Akouta Mining Company (COMINAK) Their annual production increased from
approximately ,900  at the end of the 1990s to an annual average of ,000  in All
uranium produced in Niger is exported, although there are ambitions to use it to
generate electricity for the ECOWAS region The first phase of development of
regional nuclear programme is in progress and has the assistance of the IAEA
Energy access in Niger remains  criti- cal barrier to the country’ development
Modest improvements have been experi- enced in recent years However, electricity
access in Niger remains low at about 24% and almost all the population relies on
the unsustainable use of traditional biomass (MP/AT-DC, 2011) Moreover, there is
major disparity between rural and urban areas in terms of access to modernised
Niger does not generate sufficient electric- ity to meet the growing need for
power from its population of 16 million It has RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
11 Figure  Niger’ Electricity Sector historically relied on imported power from
Nigeria following an agreement in 1977, and this provides % of its national
electricity requirements Niger’ depen- dence on imported power is illustrated in
figure  The preferential rate of electric- ity from Nigeria at USD 04/kWh partly
explains this continued trend It amounts to  50% subsidy for every unit of power
imported (Eberhard, et al, 2011), as consumers in Nigeria purchase electricity
at USD 08/kWh This agreement is there- fore not certain to last and it leaves
Niger vulnerable to any tariff adjustments made by Nigerian authorities The
heavy reliance on Nigeria for electricity can potentially undermine the
resilience of Niger’ energy system, as in 2008 and Erratic power supplies from
Nigeria prompted Niger’ government to gradually reduce its reliance on Nigeria
by purchasing new diesel-pow- ered generators However, these interven- tions
appear to be emergency responses driven by necessity to act rather than part of
longer-term strategy of energy self- reliance TRANSmISSION ANd dISTRIbuTION in
The electrical transmission network Niger is divided into five zones (Figure )
These consist of: ) the River Zone fed by the 132 kV interconnection line from
BirninKebbi (Nigeria) to Niamey (Niger) with  contractual power of 120 MW ii)
the Niger Centre East (NCE) Zone which brings together the regions of 12 NIGER
Table  Installed Capacity by Source in Niger Generation Responsibility Installed
capacity by source (MW) Total MW Coal Solar PV Oil 83 15 23 NIGELEC AGGREKO
SORAZ SONICHAR SOMINA Other* TOTAL *Other includes households, community
installations, telecom towers, etc 83 15 23 36 15 36 15   121 51  174 Zinder,
Maradi and Tahoua, powered by the 132 kV interconnection line from Katsina
(Nigeria) to Gazaoua (Niger) with  power contract of 60 MW with Nigeria in 2005
to about 17% now However, they still remain higher than the European aver- age
(%) Given that  significant propor- tion of Niger’ population lives far from
gridlines, electricity from the grid alone will not deliver the promise of
universal access It is important that there is  mean- ingful dialogue on the
genuine prospect of decentralised systems as  complementary solution to energy
access in Niger iii) the Northern Zone which includes the towns of Agadez, Arlit
and Tchirozerine, as well as mining companies, fed from the SONICHAR coal plant
and  central thermal diesel in Agadez with an installed capacity of 37 MW Power
distribution works through medium voltage 33 kV and 20 kV cables as well as low
voltage cables to connect subscrib- ers Electricity supply in Niger also faces
frequent blackouts due to limited power infrastructure In 2009, for instance,
there were some 21 outages  month compared to an average of 11 outages for sub-
Saha- ran Africa (Eberhard et al, 2011) Power outages in Niger were shorter at
two hours against six hours for the region Outages are frequent during the dry
season (February- May) when demand is high and power reli- ability can fall up
to 13% as was the case in Over 40% of Nigerien firms reported that power
shortages were  major obsta- cle to administration and good economic performance
They also reported that % of annual turnover was lost due to electric- ity
shortages (World Bank, 2009) This has iv) the Diffa Zone connected to the 33 kV
Nigerian network from Damasak with  capacity of  MW and installed ther- mal
diesel production of  MW ) the Gaya/Malanville Zone, which is fed by  33 kV
interconnection from Kamba in Nigeria and has contracted power of  MW with
Nigeria The cost of the transmission infrastruc- ture can be significant,
ranging from USD 132 kV power for lines to USD 17,000/km for 20 kV lines
Distribution costs amount to USD 20,000/ km Transmission and distribution losses
in Niger are lower than the African aver- age, having been brought down from 27%
120,000/km RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 13 Figure  Power Generation and
Distribution by Source prompted 20% of Nigerien firms to acquire their own
generators (World Bank, 2010)  growing number of urban households are also
purchasing their own gensets as  backup power source the code paved the way for
IPPs, breaking up the monopoly NIGELEC had enjoyed for electricity generation,
transmission and distribution since its establishment However, IPPs were still
required to sell their surpluses through NIGELEC, which remained responsible for
transmission and distribution This new arrangement treats SONICHAR as an IPP It
sells electricity directly to mining companies in northern Niger as well as to
NIGELEC for distribu- tion in the cities of Agadez, Arlit, Akokan and
Tchirozérine To date, the number of registered IPPs remains limited, and the few
that have emerged use conventional energy sources to generate electricity As
shown in figure , power demand in Niger has risen by about 50% in 2005-This
trend is expected to increase as the ambi- tious PDES calls for broadening
electricity access to improve livelihoods and deliver the economic growth
trajectory of %  Projected demand shows that Niger will need to scale up its
efforts to boost domes- tic production as well as rely on imports from Nigeria
and WAPP (Figure ) As part of this endeavour, Niger is actively pursu- ing
wholesale power generation and trans- mission improvement projects These will
develop its own domestic power sources, particularly hydropower, other
renewables and the oil and gas sector (Table ) The government of Niger, with the
assis- tance of the World Bank, is currently work- ing on an electricity master
plan with  view to providing an integrated strategy for the sector’ future
development Intensive stakeholder consultation is taking place with
participation from key representatives from government, business and civil soci-
ety to feed into the strategy The electricity sector was reformed in One
important change was the adoption of the Electricity Code in The terms of 14
NIGER Figure  Transmission network in Niger Source: NIGELEC is an opportunity
cost if crude oil had been sold at international market prices It is important
to note that Niger will continue to remain dependent on cheap electricity from
Nigeria unless there is  price review COSTS ANd TARIFFS Electricity tariffs
remain in the hands of the government, and are set by decree, as in  number of
other West African coun- tries (figure ) The tariff set depends on  number of
factors, such as the electricity production cost (including operation cost),
social cost and other political and economic criteria There are three categories
of production costs in Niger They consist of the NIGELEC domestic power plants
(USD plants (USD 12/kWh) and electricity imports from Nigeria (USD 04/kWh) The
util- ity purchases tax-free domestically-pro- duced diesel directly from the
refinery at USD 70 per litre The country does not currently export crude oil
However, sale of diesel to the utility at the subsidised price Furthermore, in
2012 the government accepted the creation of  social tariff as part its energy
access improvement efforts This supports low income and low consumption
subscribers This cate- gory of households ( kWh) is charged USD 11/kWh for the
first 50 kWh consumed There are also plans to reduce the costs of electrical
connections to the poor These stand at USD 102 for 3kW and USD 144 for  kW
Concessionary rates also apply for industries and agricultural facili- ties for
water pumping These tariffs are fixed at USD 11/kWh and USD 07/kWh 22/kWh),
coal-fired RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 15 Table  Power Generation and
Transmission Project Power plant projects Transmission network projects PV solar
electric power: 20 MW in the Niamey area - negotiations are under way Power
transmission (lines and stations) Installation of  compensation series on the
BirninKebbi - Niamey 132 kV interconnection line– ongoing contract negotiations
Central diesel engine power: 100 MW at Gorou Banda (Niamey right bank) - funding
mobilised and installation in progress Transport network restructuring in the
river zone with project integration between Gorou Banda and Kandadji Coal: 200
MW power plant at Salkadamna (Tahoua) extendable to 400 MW - funding sourced for
investigation and research 132 kV transmission line projects (Soraz - Zinder and
Maradi/Malbaza) - EPC & ongoing partnership negotiations Hydroelectric power:
130 MW at Kandadji - work is ongoing WAPP Ridge North 330 kV project - looking
for long-term funding Lines and posts related to constructing the Kandadji and
Salkadamna power plants respectively These lower tariff rates are set in order
to reach the government’ social and economic goals, which require afford- able
and reliable energy services demonstrates that present tariff structures do not
reflect costs The overwhelming majority of those who remain unserved by the grid
live in villages very far away from national grid lines The cost of transmission
lines to these communities with low electricity demand could amount to USD
20,,000/ km, which in many cases is not financially viable Furthermore, grid
connection fees cost USD  in Niger This is far too expensive for low-income
households with- out appropriate financial support Niger needs substantial
investments in system modernisation, but more importantly, in new generation
plants, as well as transmis- sion and distribution facilities Power sector
reforms in 2004 were supposed to contribute to the recovery of costs and
performance improvements in Niger However, at USD 158/kWh, Niger’ consumers pay
approximately USD 07/kWh more than citizens in the average African country that
rely heavily on thermal power systems (Eberhard, et al, 2011) However, tariffs
are lower than in some countries in the subregion such as Burkina Faso, Benin
(USD 20/kWh) and Senegal (USD 24/kWh) These tariffs therefore do not allow the
utility to recover costs incurred from the sale of power Indeed in 2011, for
example, revenues from power sales amounted to USD 5m (with  recovery rate of
102%) against operat- ing expenses of USD 100m This clearly  parallel strategy
will be important to meet the needs of remote communities that use little energy
Niger has consider- able conventional and renewable energy 16 NIGER Figure
Forecasted Electricity Supply until 2020 (MW) resource potential It therefore
has the opportunity to create  more cost-effective grid and off-grid renewable
energy supply system This can play  major role in reduc- ing dependency on
imported power and increasing access to energy services The practical solutions
may appear obvious, but Niger will need to develop the policy framework and
incentives to accommodate new business models and new domestic and external
energy investment Given its geographic and climatic condi- tions, Niger could
develop  diverse port- folio of renewable energy technologies Niger has an
excellent renewable energy resource profile There are considerable solar energy
resources and  moderate wind regime for electricity and mechanical power towards
the North There is modest hydro and biomass potential towards the South  summary
of the resource and potential for Niger is outlined below renewable energy
resource potential and use HydROPOWER RESOuRCES Hydropower potential in Niger is
estimated at about 400 MW (ECOWAS, 2006) and is only partially developed Three
potential medium and large hydropower sites along the river Niger and its
tributaries have been identified They would have  combined capacity of MW and
include: The energy sector in Niger faces some formidable challenges and new
opportuni- ties Its resource constraints in the energy sector have undermined
economic and social development goals Rural communi- ties face  particular
challenge Widespread poverty, low incomes, limited scope for moving beyond
subsistence activities and the inherent disadvantage of the grid’ remoteness
create structural obstacles to rural development Niger’ untapped renewable
energy potential provides opportunities for transforming urban and rural
livelihoods • Kandadji Dam,  large multipurpose dam with  capacity of 130 MW (
MW) and estimated annual gener- ation rate of about 630 GWh This high profile
dam project will generate hydro- power and regulate the flow of the river Niger,
retaining water during the RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 17 Figure
Electricity tariffs comparison for selected West African countries The Gambia
Source: World Bank, 2012 ation is - kWh/m2 per day (figure ), and there are
seven to ten hours of sunshine per day on average April to August is the period
of high insolation, when the diurnal variation between minimum and maximum
radiation values is small dry season and supporting irrigation initiatives
downstream Construction has started and is expected to be completed by •
Hydropower at Gambou and Dyodyonga, which could generate about MW and 26 MW
respec- tively, according to feasibility studies The lowest radiation values are
observed in December and January The rainy season coincides with the high solar
radiation summer months Although solar radiation levels are high in all four
meteorological stations, there appears higher variability over the year in
cities of Arlit and Agadez located in the northern and central regions
respectively Niamey and Zinder, located at lower latitudes, show less
variability across the year, hence making them excellent locations for
harnessing solar energy  number of mini-hydro sites have also been identified
along the four tributaries of the Niger River (Mekrou, Tapoa, Gorouol and
Sirba), amounting to  combined capacity of  MW These will not require dams and
will be quicker to install They will have the strategic advantage of generating
electricity close to consumption areas thus limiting costly power lines Before
moving ahead, further data need to be collected and analysed to ensure their
potential and viability There is  long history of solar energy use in Niger This
began in the mid-1960s when the Centre National 'Énergie Solaire (National Solar
Energy Centre; CNES) was established Previously known as the Office de ’Energie
Solaire (Solar Energy Office; ONERSOL), it had been set up to under- SOLAR
ENERgy RESOuRCES Niger enjoys high solar radiation conditions in all eight of
its regions Average solar radi- 18 NIGER Figure  Solar radiation in four cities
in Niger Based on GAISMA, 2013 take applied research on renewable energy and
provide diagnostic studies on the use of renewable energy technologies for vari-
ous sectors of the economy It was also established to run training programmes in
renewable energy systems As part of this initiative,  factory was set up to
assemble and produce various types of solar equip- ment that were distributed
locally with strong government support technologies continued to be promoted in
Niger through various outlets, including the national school television
programme Solar technology installation also contin- ued, largely in PV pumping
areas and through education and health infrastruc- ture electrification During
the 1980s and 1990s,  two-phased Special Energy Programme was initiated by the
Niger-German technical cooperation Through ground-level projects, it popular-
ised and promoted various renewable tech- nologies such as PV systems,
biodigesters and solar water heaters Other smaller scale donor programmes also
started up However, much of this effort remained driven by donors with little
national accep- tance and did not lead to the development of  lasting renewables
market in Niger Solar energy applications in use in Niger at present include PV
for mini-grid and stand- alone applications, solar crop dryers and solar water
heating for homes and commu- nity applications This programme continued with
some force until the mid-1970s However, it failed to maintain its promise due to
high produc- tion costs, poor management and product quality control as well as
its inability to compete against cheaper and better qual- ity imports Solar PV
and other solar energy At present, there is little in the way of private sector
participation and incen- tives to draw investors in the development RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT 19 Figure 10 Niger Solar Irradiation (resolution  km) and
distribution of solar products in Niger There are  few private sector players
such as SunTotal and YASMA who dominate the national market, while policies have
yet to excite wider commercial interest Moreover, the market is limited by its
small size It is also partly constrained by taxes of over 52% (import tariffs
and VAT),  lack of regulation on poor quality products smug- gled from
neighbouring countries, and the absence of  meaningful government renewables
stimulus Still, in 2012 total installed PV capacity was over  MW (see figure
11), and there are some good examples worth scaling up With financial assistance
from the govern- ment of India, the villages of Moli Haoussa (commune rurale de
Tamou) and Banigueti (commune de Torodi) have been electri- fied by solar PV
Moreover,  large rural PV electrification project is in progress in the Dosso
and Tillabery region costing 20 NIGER Figure 11 Installed PV capacity in 2012
nearly USD 15m to meet basic services for about 150 villages What makes this
project interesting is that it is being co-financed by the ECOWAS Development
Bank This demonstrates that regional development banks are interested in
renewable energy development holds The country also has domestically- produced
water heaters and solar dryers that are cheaper than imported systems, but their
quality is often of lower standard WINd ENERgy RESOuRCES  wind energy resource
study was conducted in the 1990s by the University of Waterloo (Canada) and the
Institut National de Recherche Agronomique du Niger (INRAN), the National
Institute for Agronomy Research The study concluded that average wind speeds of
- metres per second (/) are obtained at  height of 10 metres, but wind speeds at
hub height (, 50 metres) are usually % higher, warranting further investigation
Wind speed is moderate in the southeast of the country at less than  /, but
rises to an average of over  / towards the northern part of the country (Figure
12) Wind regimes are very site-specific, requir- ing detailed site studies
However, it is clear that the relatively high wind speed in some parts of the
country means electric- There is growing investment interest in PV grid
connection as the falling cost of PV in recent years brings the technology
closer to grid parity in many parts of the world Niger’ high electricity
generation cost is likely to provoke investor inter- est in introducing PV to
the grid The government of Niger is negotiating  PPA for  20 MW solar plant with
French company However, this project is facing opposition due to the proposed
price of USD 165/kWh, which is significantly higher than imports from Nigeria
but lower than the utility domestic generation costs With regards to other solar
energy tech- nologies, solar water heaters are used in Niger in some schools,
clinics and house- RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 21 ity production makes sense
The problem is that the high investment cost is not justi- fied because many of
these parts of Niger are uninhabited or sparsely populated and lack electricity
infrastructure However, further studies may identify favourable sites in the
more populated parts of the south and southeast For example, the general wind
regime in Zinder, provided in figure 13, gives cause for conducting further
evaluation There is no experience of wind energy proj- ects in Niger Much of the
limited experi- ence is restricted to rural water pumping projects There are at
present about 30 small-scale wind pumping installations, which are installed by
donor funding and to  lesser extent community financing Wind water pumping
system in Chikal village Courtesy: Ministry of Energy and Petroleum, Niger
Figure 12 Wind speed in four Niger cities at 10m height 22 NIGER Figure 13 Wind
Speed at 50m height in Niger bIOmASS RESOuRCES Niger lacks adequate information
on forest cover and biomass potential Much of the data are either dated or
fragmented, cover- ing isolated mountain areas or river basins Estimates by the
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), however, indicate  forest inventory of
16 million hectares (ha) or about % of the country’ land area Within this total,
600,000 ha accounts for natural forests, 4m ha for converted forest and 11m ha
for marginal forest land (less than % forest cover) Woody biomass productivity
is estimated at - m3/ha per annum Given the dominance of energy biomass in
Niger, often freely harvested from surrounding areas, only  portion of the
forest capital can be regarded today as renewable The pace of wood harvesting
has long exceeded the replenishment rate RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 23
Table  Potential agricultural residues and energy content Product Production
2012 () Ratio residues/ grains Amount waste () Calorific value (GJ*/) Physical
Potential (GJ/year) Millet Sorghum Rice  702 370  354 927  031 00 00 ^ ^^15 00
43  404 740  709 854  547 755 22 830 96 305  17 113 952 11 999 399 525 1637 191
Corn Peanut  610 223 966 ^Straw ^^Ball *Gigajoules Adapted from MoA, 2012 It is
estimated that about 3m  of wood and agricultural residues are consumed
domestically every year (Government of Niger, UNDP and Food and Agricultural
Organisation (FAO), 2003) This trend shows  steady decrease in supply to meet
growing demand for wood energy Other biomass energy resources are used in Niger
too Agricultural residues are widely used by rural households for livestock and
energy purposes This sometimes harms soil fertility as bio resources are
diverted from agricultural land to meet energy needs Nevertheless, the potential
of agri- cultural residues to meet energy services can be significant, mainly in
southern areas (Table ) The production of biogas by anaerobic fermentation of
agricultural and animal biomass (anaerobic digestion) has also been used in
Niger, but no numbers have been recorded Digesters require  large amount of
water, which may limit the benefit of their widespread use in Niger or other
Sahelian countries 24 NIGER Truck with firewood Photo: IRENA/ Lucas RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT 25 Solar water pumping system in Tondigameye Village, Niger
Photo: IRENA/ Singh 26 NIGER III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY Key
energy staKeholders and institutional structures The energy sector in Niger
contains  multitude of stakeholders, which include government bodies and
parastatal organisations, NGOs and asso- ciations as well as the private sector
Some of these play multiple roles in policy, regulation, finance, knowledge
generation and advocacy Ministère de ’Energie et du Pétrole – MoEP, the Ministry
of Energy and Petroleum, is in charge of the development, monitoring and imple-
mentation of the national energy policy in accordance with the guide- lines set
by the government Within the ministry, Direction des Energies Renouvelable set
Energies Domestiques – DERED, the Renewable and Domestic Energy Directorate, is
tasked with the responsibility for renew- able energy and household energy It
distributes and installs energy systems across the country to serve the needs of
households The minis- try also oversees the work of various independent bodies,
described below Under the supervision of the Office of the Prime Minister,
Conseil National del’ Environnement pour un Development Durable – CNEDD,
National Council of the Environment for Sustainable Development,is composed of
representatives of the government and civil society It has  wide remit,
coordinating and monitoring policy concerning the environment and sustainable
development CNEDD is also responsible for defining the objectives of the rural
energy access programme It coordinates the intervention of the different
ministries and manages programme implementation Société Nigérienne ’Electricité
– NIGELEC, is Niger’ power utility, established in 1969 and responsible for
electricity production, transmis- sion and distribution While IPPs are allowed
to generate power, NIGELEC has  monopoly over power distribution across the
country Centre National ’Energie Solaire – CNES, the National Centre for Solar
Energy, was created in 1998 by Act 98-Its mandate is to conduct RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT 27 applied solar energy research and solar technology
experimentation Company, is in charge of the Salkadamna coal complex including
the mine and  200 MW coal-fired power plant extendable to 600 MW It is also in
charge of hight- ransmission lines and associated items as well as the
production unit of  carbonised form of bulk briquettes used domestically It also
participates in diagnostic and prospective studies on renewable energy use and
in training programmes and in promotion and communication of renew- able energy
technologies Agence Nationale de Financement des Collectivités Territoriales –
ANFICT, the National Agency for Financing National Collectives, manages two
funds These include the fund supporting decentrali- sation and the equalisation
fund, which welcomes development partner contri- butions local authority to
investments The High Commission on the Development of the Valley of the river
Niger is respon- sible for the Kandadji Programme This 130 MW hydroelectricity
project is now under construction financing de National Institut la Recherche
Agronomique du Niger – INRAN, the National Institute of Agronomy Research in
Niger, carries out applied research on wind energy, biogas and biofuels Autorité
de Régulation Multisectorielle – ARM, the Multi-Sector Regulatory Authority,
addresses IPP licensing, the price of energy and the long-term stability of the
sector It has several mandates: to develop regula- tions, train stakeholders and
communicate information It also conducts audits, moni- tors and evaluates
procurement and deals with bidder complaints Finally, it prepares general
administrative clauses and coordi- nates the draft of clause specifications
Société Nigerienne du Charbon 'Anou Araren - SONICHAR, the Nigerien Anou Araren
Coal Company, created in 1978, produces electricity from coal and distrib- utes
it to northern Niger However, its sales are restricted to the mining companies
at Arlit, and it sells the surplus to NIGELEC which feeds the cities of Agades,
Arlit, and Tchirozerine with electricity It works closely with Société
Nigérienne de Carbonisation du Charbon Minéral (SNCC), the Nigerien Mineral Coal
Company, which produces and sells mineral coal for industrial and household use
Cellule pour le Partenariat Public Prive – PPP, the Public Private Partnership
hub, was established with  mandate to suggest potential areas for PPP
development However, it is yet to be fully operational This hub is intended to
support techni- cal ministries and public administration in developing,
negotiating and monitoring PPP project implementation des Société Nigérienne
Produits Pétroliers - SONIDEP, Nigerien Petroleum is responsible for Products
Company, distributing petroleum products, and Société de Raffinage de Zinder -
SORAZ, Zinder Refining Company, established in 2010, refines crude oil produced
in Niger Abdou Moumouni University is mandated by the government to carry out
basic research and offers  certificate of advanced studies in solar energy It
has  chair in renewable energy recently set up by UNESCO Compagnie Miniere et
Energetique du Niger – CMEN, Nigerien Energy and Mining 28 NIGER ment DPE
highlights that Niger is endowed with its own significant energy resources and
needs to mobilise internal and external resources to harness them Specifically,
the policy advocates energy policies and regulatory frameworK To forge
strategic pathway, the Nigerien authorities need to reconcile short-term
imperatives for solving urgent concerns with long-term plans capable of opti-
mizing natural and human resources for sustainable development Niger’ new Plan
de Développement Economiqueet Social  – PDES, the Economic and Social
Development Plan, is the frame of reference for interventions under the
government’ medium-term development agenda It is aligned with the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) To this end, it builds on progress made in implementing
the Accelerated Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy (ADPRS) Energy infra-
structure to sustain long-term economic growth is one of the important pillars
of PDES Renewable energy deployment will help widen energy access for poverty
reduction and develop local economies, particularly in rural areas () the
promotion of renewable energy and (ii) national energy resource improvement to
help raise household energy access particularly in rural areas National
strategies on domestic and renewable energy, rural electrification, oil research
promotion, and potential hydropower assessments would this process (MME, 2004b)
support The policy has been  major step towards the introduction of renewable
energy systems  series of follow-up strategies were developed Electricity reform
2003-The elec- tricity sector was reformed in 2003- and the Electricity Code was
enshrined into law through Decree no 2003-This was intended to govern the
production, trans- mission, distribution, import and export of power The terms
of the code created the conditions for IPPs to play  role in the future
development of the power sector To this effect, the code asserts that ‘the State
may authorise one or more natural persons or corporate entities to build and to
oper- ate, to the satisfaction of their own needs, private electrical
installations’ There are four recent policies and strat- egies that directly
affect the Nigerien energy sector Declaration de Politique Energétiques – DPE,
the 2004 Energy Policy Statement, the national electricity reform (2003-), three
national energy strategies on renewable energy, energy access and domestic
energy (2004) and Programme National de Reference ’Accès aux Services
Energétiques - PRASE, the 2010 National Reference Programme on Access to Energy
Services This was intended to be the initial step towards privatising the power
sector by allowing new players into the electricity market However, Niger did
not proceed with the privatisation process Declaration de Politique Energétique
This was adopted by Decree no /PRN/MME on 28 October It stipulates the need to
ensure  reliable and adequate energy supply at affordable prices as an important
component of the country’ social and economic develop- Three energy strategies
followed up the energy policy These include: RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 29
) Stratégie Nationale sur les Énergies Renouvelables – SNER, National Strategy
for Renewable Energy This was designed to increase the renew- able energy
contribution to the national energy balance from less than % in 2003 to 10% by
iii) educating and communicating infor- mation to stakeholders on domestic
energy production and use PRASE is  national programme that resulted from the
2006 ECOWAS White Paper It was set up by Comité National Multisectoriel Energie
– CNME, the National Multisectoral Energy Committee It involved stakeholders
from multiple government bodies and civil society in recognition of the cross-
cutting nature of energy PRASE specifically meets the needs of five target
clusters: This was to be done by ) facilitating the promotion of renewable
energy supply ii) reducing the impact on forest resources iii) promoting rural
electrification on the basis of renew- able energy resources iv) promot- ing
education, training, research and development related to renewable energy
technologies ) the infrastructure of utilities with  social impact (water,
health and education) ) Stratégie Nationale 'Accès aux Services Energétiques
Modernes - SNASEM, National Strategy for Access to Modernised Energy Services
This was designed to increase the propor- tion of the population with access to
modernised energy services by ii) agricultural infrastructure (crop production,
livestock and processing) iii) communal infrastructure (town halls, markets,
public lighting, and cultural centres) This was to be done through ) access to
modern cooking fuels ii) access to motive power for villages with ,000– ,000
inhabitants iii) access to elec- tricity for 66% of rural and semi-urban
populations iv) small economic production units (multifunctional platforms,
agricultural product transformation, handicrafts, trade) ) household electricity
and modern cooking fuels At the end of PRASE, it is anticipated that at least
40% of the population in rural areas will benefit from modernised energy
services (MME, 2010) ) Stratégie Nationale des Energies SNED, National -
Domestiques Strategy for Household Energy This was prepared to create  coherent
framework for the domestic energy subsector by financing and investment )
ensuring the sustainable use of forest resources and better reforestation,
promoting alternative energy sources improving (other than wood) and appliance
efficiency State-backed companies have primar- ily led finance and investment in
the energy sector These include NIGELEC and SONICHAR, self-generators such as
SORAZ and SOMINA and the IPP Aggreko The bulk of the funding sourced by state-
backed companies is obtained through institutions development partners and These
include the African Development ii) strengthening the capacity of the main
market players to better manage the sector 30 NIGER Table  Funding sources for
energy within the PDES Source of funding Total cost (million USD) National
budget Technical and Financial Partners Revitalisation of institutional and
regulatory framework Diversification of energy production TOTAL1 10   184 184 17
77 024 424 Source: MP/AT-DC, 2011 Bank, Islamic Development Bank, World Bank,
West African Development Bank and other donors Although the genera- tion sector
has been open to the private sector since 2003 with the enactment of the
Electricity Code, only one IPP, Aggreko, has entered the market That was in The
lack of investment in power generation can be mainly attributed to the low cost
of electricity imports (USD 04/kWh) from neighbouring Nigeria, accounting for
about 70% of the national electricity grid mix financial partners (Table )
However, the government began to allocate  national budget in 2012 for the
promotion of rural electrification It budgeted USD 8m for 2012 and This is
expected to increase to USD 6m  until internal mechanisms Nevertheless, to
mobilise resources exist, such as the Energy Fund and the tax on electricity The
Energy Fund consists of monies collected through  levy of USD 007 on every litre
of oil product sold at the pump  study was commissioned by the Executive
Secretariat of CNEDD on the renewable energy sector Its findings showed that the
country experienced  cumulative solar PV investment amounting to USD 89m in
2005-More than 90% of this invest- ment was made by development part- ners
Meanwhile, investment in solar ther- mal and energy efficiency were entirely
made by households and businesses Each amounted to less than USD 1m over the
same period This is at present used to subsidise LPG and oxygen in hospitals The
tax on elec- tricity (TSE) established by Act  of February 12, 1972 was set at
USD 004 per kWh consumed Its aim is to contribute to financing grid extension
The resources collected through this tax are managed by ANFICT and amount to
approximately USD 2m   renewable energy law is currently being drafted under
which the reallocation of part of these funds to rural electrification and
renewable energy promotion is envis- aged The draft also considers ploughing
portion of revenues generated by mineral resource exploitation into the country’
renewable energy programme Niger’ tendency to rely on external finan- cial
resources to get the energy sector moving is confirmed in the PDES The 2012–
2015 energy priority action plan supporting the country' economic growth is
expected to be mostly sourced from technical and  These funds do not include the
oil subsector, financing from NIGELEC, SONICHAR or loans made to these companies
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 31 In 2012,  law on PPPs was adopted This law
allows  public entity to contract  private entity for the development of public
infrastructure  special office was opened within the Prime Minister’ cabinet to
supervise the implementation of the PPP law The aim is to support technical
minis- tries and public administration in elaborat- ing and negotiating PPP
projects to the implementation of the approved investment programme During the
investors are operational phase, completely exempt from: • Licence • Property
tax or estate tax • Tax on industrial and commercial prof- its and the minimum
tax INCENTIvES The investment code grants continual legal protection to private
investors in energy production involved in promot- ing programmes contributing
to the social and economic development of the coun- try Under the code, foreign
investments are protected against expropriation and/ or nationalisation The code
provides three privileged regimes and advantages in the first five years,
depending on the amount invested: Category  (also known as the prior- ity
category) is for investments of USD 200,000-,000,Investors in this category
benefit from the same advantages as those in category  but are also accorded the
following: • Exemption from duties and taxes (excluding VAT) on raw materials,
consumables and imported or locally produced packaging where there is no
availability in the local market Category  (also known as the promo- tional
category) is for investments of USD 100,,Exemptions are divided in two areas,
implementation and implementation operations During the phase, investors are
completely exempt from: • Exemption from duties and taxes on product exports
Category  (also known as the conven- tional category) is for investments of over
USD ,000,• Duties and taxes including VAT on imported materials and equipment,
provided that these are not available locally Investors in this category may
also benefit from the same advantages as the previous category In addition, they
have the possi- bility of claiming  50% reduction on fuel duties and taxes and
any other source of energy used in fixed equipment based on an annual agreement
• Duties and taxes including VAT on consulting work and services related 32
NIGER Solar dryers in Makalondi village Photo: IRENA/ Lucas RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT 33 IV OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY IN NIGER
Opportunities to develop the renewables sector in Niger are explored in this
section The different subsections focus on different resources and conversion
technologies, known here as service-resource pairs In each subsection, the
status of each particular subsector is reviewed This is followed by the problems
that need to be solved and concludes with  list of action points recommended by
the RRA grid-connected renewable energy options Reliable and affordable
electricity is  prerequisite for transformative development The grid remains an
important means for reaching large numbers of people cost-effectively, and
extending the grid is by far the most common way to provide power to communities
In Niger, the grid offers  significant opportunity to broaden access to
electricity, though formidable technical, institutional, resource and financial
barri- ers remain Less than 75% of people in urban and less than % in rural
areas are served by the grid at present This limits growth in critical
productive sectors such as agro-processing and other small-scale indus- tries
Globally, many of the renewable energy technologies are becom- ing increasingly
cost-competitive Their deployment would diversify the energy supply and build
stable and resilient power infrastructure This section considers grid-based wind
and PV technologies for Niger ON-gRId Pv Solar resource conditions in Niger are
excellent, so utility-scale and distributed solar power generation shows
significant promise all over the country In recent years, the cost of PV systems
has fallen sharply, making it possible for grid-based PV to achieve grid parity
It is, therefore, fast becoming  genuine alternative for countries to meet their
energy access goals and cushion their economies from vola- tile fossil fuel
prices PV module prices have declined sharply from USD 70/Wp in 2009 to USD
20/Wp today They may fall yet further to USD /Wp, making the Balance of System
(BoS)  crucial determi- nant of solar PV system costs (IRENA, 2013b) These
trends make PV  compelling product for end-users in countries such as Niger,
which are yet to fully develop their energy infrastructure 34 NIGER Figure 14
Cumulative cash flow and payback While there is considerable experience of PV
systems in Niger, much of it is off- grid There are no utility-scale PV systems
Nevertheless, there is growing interest in investor and policy-making circles in
taking advantage of the potentially major econo- mies of scale of PV-based grid
develop- ments  financial analysis has been made as part of the pre-feasibility
study of  20 MW grid-connected solar PV system near Niamey under negotiation at
pres- ent It provides  concrete example of how grid-based systems are likely to
perform under the resource and macroeconomic conditions prevalent in Niger Cost
figures from the project developer were used, and it was assumed that power
would be supplied to NIGELEC at the current utility tariff of USD 158/kWh The
analysis demonstrated  number of important features of PV grid systems in Niger
The payback period for the system is about 12 years (figure 14) This is also
demonstrated in the levelised cost result of USD 10/kWh2, illustrating that the
large PV system can generate power at  rate competitive with conventional
systems Generation costs for NIGELEC are USD 22/kWh, which makes the PV option
attractive from cost as well as security of fuel supply considerations However,
as the cost of PV systems continues to fall, their value as  reliable and cost-
effective power  Assumptions: capital cost = USD ,000/kW; annual & cost = USD
32/kW (for  20 MW plant), inverter replacement at  and 15 yrs = USD 10/Wp,
project time = 20 years, inflation = %, discount rate = 12% RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT 35 Figure 15 Cumulative cash flow and payback period at USD ,000/kW
generation option increases, particularly for periods of peak electricity demand
during the day Furthermore, the bulk of the total cost of the PV systems is in
the initial cost, while fossil-based systems have higher recurrent costs over
their lifetime in the relatively windy area of Agadez Turbines would have
combined capac- ity of 20 MW with an annual genera- tion rate of 45 GWh and
system costs of USD ,000/kW The analysis showed  payback period of about 15
years for  system that will operate over 20 years, feeding the utility at USD
158/kWh The levelised cost result was also encourag- ing at USD 10/kWh,
illustrating that  large wind system can generate electric- ity at  rate
competitive with the incum- bent generation system Further analysis was made
using  more optimistic system cost scenario of USD ,200/kW, yielding  payback
period of about ten years and  levelised cost of USD 07/kWh (Figure 15) The
Agadez Area draws electricity from  coal-fired system at the moment, and this is
estimated to have  generation cost of about USD 12/kWh This makes ON-gRId WINd
There are no grid-connected wind power generators in Niger Windy areas suitable
for wind power generation are generally located in the northern part of the
country However, these tend to be sparsely popu- lated Nevertheless,  few urban
centres may benefit from wind power investment, and in these isolated cases, it
may be possi- ble to make the economic case for it  pre-feasibility study was
carried out for grid-connected wind power generation  Assumptions: capital range
= USD ,000-,000/kW, annual & cost = USD 40/kW (for  20 MW plant), inverter
replacement at  and 15 yrs = USD 10/Wp, project time = 20 years, inflation =%,
discount rate =12% 36 NIGER wind power  cost-competitive option in this part of
Niger if only generation is taken into account Naturally, other factors also
need to be taken into account before an investment of this magnitude is
considered There may be other sites that combine favourable wind conditions with
other factors such as high electricity demand and high density of settlement
However, wind data across Niger are scanty at best, and  detailed national wind
energy assessment would go some way to identifying appro- priate sites for wind
power generation mission infrastructure It also brought to light some of the
institutional, financial and capacity issues associated with PV and wind-based
power generation to feed the grid These are discussed below RENEWAbLE ENERgy
RESOuRCE ASSESSmENT Lack of information on solar and wind energy resources is
major obstacle to investment due to the difficulties in developing robust
project proposals The RRA has recommended  set of steps the government of Niger
should take These include: Wind power generation offers an oppor- tunity to
improve the electrification rate by harnessing and diversifying the use of
locally available resources It also meets the government’ social and economic
transformation aspirations as outlined in PDES New business models are needed to
address the frequently high capital cost of renewable energy systems and to
reduce investment risk to meaningfully engage the investor community This
requires the creation of robust policies and an invest- ment climate conducive
to renewable energy development and implementation ) identify and analyse
existing satellite data maps in the public domain ii) identify and select areas
of great inter- est in the country from the satellite data maps iii) install and
maintain monitoring stations in the selected areas iv) compare new data with
existing satel- lite data and refresh the calculation models Appropriate
regulations including waiver on import sales tax and favourable corpo- ration
tax for renewable energy developers would need to be part of the effort to stim-
ulate investor confidence Strong efforts will also be required to build
efficient administration and management capac- ity in responsible government
agencies There is also  need to strengthen skills in engineering, business,
finance and contract negotiations across the various actors in the private
sector ) build  national inventory of renewable energy resources CNES could play
pivotal role as the data centre,  role it has played in the past before the
programme was discontinued Re-engaging CNES in this role would allow it to build
the required human and technical capacity to undertake regular renewable energy
assessments This would be both on behalf of the government and other clients If
this does not work out, Niger has other options to consider It could, for
instance, engage IRENA and/or other partners to support its long-awaited solar
and wind assessment programme RECOmmENdATIONS The RRA has highlighted several
techni- cal opportunities and barriers facing Niger renewable energy generation
and trans- RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 37 help achieve large-scale
deployment in  cost-efficient and regulated manner and allow price discovery of
renewable energy based electricity due to the inherent price competition (IRENA,
2013c) Policy makers designing auctions should investigate the pros and cons of
each type and deter- mine the most appropriate for the coun- try (sealed bid
auctions, reverse clock auctions and hybrid auctions) They should also clearly
determine the capacity to be deployed and the numbers of bid rounds to be
conducted This has an impact on the scale of competition They also need to
streamline and create clear, transparent administrative procedures for all
bidders Finally, they should provide guarantees and penalties to minimise risks
including underbidding, delays and completion fail- ure (Ibid) ImPORTANCE OF
NATIONAL RENEWAbLE ENERgy POLICy Broadening energy access is  central national
development objective in Niger At present, less than 25% of the population
enjoys access to electricity, and the picture in rural areas is less than %
Generation of electricity through renewables has long been viewed as an
important way to close this gap However, the focus on the renew- ables
contribution to the grid has only emerged because new technologies are beginning
to compete with conventional power generation To this end, an energy policy is
needed to embrace renewables as part of  longer-term energy vision It requires
systematic roadmap for deliv- ery supported by research and financial support
Policy statements need to be translated into concrete action Policy makers in
Niger widely acknowledge the important role renewables can play in developing
the power sector Solar and wind are being promoted as reliable energy sources
that can contribute to reducing dependence vis--vis imported electricity from
Nigeria  number of possibilities are being consid- ered such as the 20 MW solar
project near Niamey and   MW PV plant in Zinder funded by an Indian loan
However, these do not give the impression they are part of  programme of action,
moving beyond ad hoc projects LONg-TERm PLANNINg Work is about to begin on
master plan for the production and transmission of electricity, with the
assistance of the World Bank The principal objective of the master plan is to
define short, medium and long- term investment priorities () for developing the
power sector This exercise offers  real opportunity for the architects of the
master plan to integrate renewable energy into short, medium and long-term plans
This is likely to stimulate investment interest and acts as  basis for
developing  portfolio of bankable projects Meaningful integration of renewables
into the plan would be useful to the private sector and also strengthen Niger’
case for support from development partners Niger has been using auctions to
select IPPs to provide power to the grid at competitive prices Although these
have for the most part been conventional (fossil fuel) gener- ators, the country
can capitalise on this experience to design renewable energy auctions supporting
large-scale renew- ables deployment Renewable energy auctions have already
become  popular policy instrument in some countries They SETTINg RENEWAbLE
ENERgy TARgETS The current strategy has set the objective of 10% renewables
(excluding biomass) in the national energy mix by However, there are no specific
guidelines or roadmap 38 NIGER for reaching this target This needs to be
rectified to provide sufficient substance to these targets for the realisation
of this goal The RRA makes clear that the vision set out by the energy policy,
and indeed the broader development policy of the coun- try, needs to be
complemented by concrete studies and analysis These show how these targets would
be achieved, who they will reach and what the cost implications are likely to be
The master planners should consider incorporating these requirements, since the
RRA has demonstrated that they have strong political acceptance energy law could
mandate it to become the permitting and licensing structure for all renewable
energy projects It could also develop  bankable PPA model that would cut down on
negotiations with private sector  model of this kind could open the door to
self-producers and IPPs wishing to feed their electricity into the grid It could
also let in producers who wish to collabo- rate with utilities to hybridise
existing fossil fuel generators off-grid renewable energy options The Nigerien
government considers energy  cross-cutting challenge, given the heavy reliance
on traditional biomass using unsustainable appliances, increasing power demand
for economic transformation and less than % rural energy access Grid extension
has been traditionally viewed as  ‘silver bullet’ for universal electricity
access However, it is increasingly becom- ing clear that the grid pathway on its
own has limitations High population dispersal, small loads and low load
densities across large countries such as Niger are some of the limiting factors
Extending transmission ENAbLINg ENvIRONmENT Although Niger’ power generation
sector was opened to IPPs, renewable power proj- ects have not come forward The
devel- opment and expansion of the country’ renewable energy market partly
depends on the creation of  favourable legal and regulatory framework This
would, among other things, reduce technical, legal and administrative barriers
while increasing private sector confidence An overarch- ing renewable energy law
would create the right conditions It should provide guaranteed access to the
grid and priority dispatch of renewable electricity genera- tion These are
currently lacking in the grid code Furthermore, the development of  standardised
and bankable PPA would greatly support the evolution of renewable energy
auctioning Transaction costs due to lengthy permitting and administrative
procedures could be greatly reduced by setting up  one-stop shop for the private
sector when dealing with renewable energy projects Niger needs to create
specialised office in charge of PPAs This would define  framework for getting
PPP contracts up and running As the office in charge of the PPP has expressed
the desire to promote solar power investment, the renewable Table  PV installed
capacity in 2013 Installed Power (kWp) CSI* Lighting in schools 15 85 Pumping 00
Community radios 00 Telecommunications ,33 Administrative & cultural centre 61
Fan for drying 46 Private Installations 63 Public lighting 16 TOTAL ,19
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 39 Figure 16 Life-cycle cost comparison of PV,
hybrid and diesel systems lines to remote areas in Niger at  cost of USD
20,,000/km will be financially prohibitive Different small-scale renewable
energy technologies like solar PV, wind energy and biomass systems are commer-
cially maturing, along with new and inno- vative service delivery mechanisms
This means off-grid electrification has emerged as  viable alternative for rural
electricity access pumping), education (lighting), health (lighting and
refrigeration), telecommu- nications, agriculture and livestock As of 2013,
installed PV capacity for off-grid services amounted to over ,000 kW (Table )
Most of these are installed by government agencies, community-based
organisations, telecommunication compa- nies and NGOs There is considerable
scope for deploy- ing PV for rural electrification in Niger Depending on the
load characteristics and resource availability, this could take the form of
stand-alone PV, mini-grids or hybrid PV-diesel systems The stand-alone systems
are generally suitable for small loads whereas the other two are gener- ally for
meeting larger loads at commu- nity scale Such schemes are vital for rural
productivity as they provide continuous electricity They sometimes combine two
or more different kinds of technologies There is considerable experience of off-
grid PV electrification, water pumping and solar water heating systems in Niger
Each of these will be explored below OFF-gRId Pv ELECTRICITy The main
decentralised renewable energy system being promoted in Niger for rural
electricity is solar PV It has been employed since the 1970s for  variety of end
uses: water services (village water solar/wind 40 NIGER for generating and
distributing electric- ity to  range of consumer types through an independent
grid Combining different technologies with different energy sources means the
comparative advantage of each technology is exploited control There is little
resilience and stabil- ity in the system The second interesting observation
relates to the hybrid system This combines the best features of the two options
On the one hand, the reduced size of the PV system implies lower upfront costs
On the other, reduced diesel consumption means lower system vulnerability In
addi- tion, the hybrid option (without storage) performs better It has
levelised cost of USD 17/kWh against USD 20/kWh and USD 24/kWh for the PV and
diesel options respectively For example, using renewable energy alongside
genset has proved to be the least cost option in many rural communities This is
because the benefits of each tech- nology can be mutually complementary  cost
simulation was carried out for  typical village around Ayorou in Niger with
daily load of 585 kWh to meet  variety of end uses These included community
lighting, water pumps, lighting for homes, schools and clinics, and power for
small businesses Three options were evaluated4: PV grid (with battery storage)
as well as diesel and hybrid (PV and diesel), using present Nigerien component
and fuel prices The life cycle cost result showed that both PV and the hybrid
options compare favour- ably against the diesel option (Figure 16) This is true
even at  low diesel price of USD 75 per litre () It is worth noting here that
the cost of diesel for electrification at USD 75/litre is below the pump selling
price in Niger (USD 076) and the African average This is at about USD 20/litre
(World Bank, 2013c) An analysis against diesel costs shows that if prices
increase in line with the selling price and average African levels, the
levelised cost of generation using diesel rises sharply However, the likely
changes are relatively smooth and therefore easier to manage and adapt (figure
17) Of course, PV prices are also falling rapidly, and if further reductions are
experienced in the market, the cost of PV generation only becomes more
attractive The govern- ment’ import tariff at 52% will need to be reviewed so
that Niger can fully benefit from global price changes Two observations can be
made from the life cycle cost comparison Firstly, the distribution of costs for
the diesel option shows that 60% of total costs are in the operating costs
(mainly fuel costs) For the PV option, on the other hand, over 75% of total
costs are capital costs Clearly, this has major implications for rural communi-
ties in acquiring finance for PV systems It brings all the more urgency to new
busi- ness models, sound policy development and supportive institutions For the
diesel option, the risk is put off to  time when rising or falling prices could
expose the plant to changes beyond user community Important new players are also
enter- ing the PV market, and their involve- ment and reach could be beneficial
Telecommunications companies such as Airtel and Orange fall into this category
In order to reduce their oil bill and improve the reliability of services, both
Airtel and  Assumptions: capital cost = USD ,200/kW for the PV module, battery
size = 200/kW replaced every  years, inverter cost = USD 10/Wp replaced every 10
years, annual & cost = USD 20/kW, genset cost = USD 700/ kW, installation cost
for middle-sized genset = USD 30,000, & = USD 10/kW replaced every  years; fuel
cost = USD 75/, project time = 20 years; inflation = %, discount rate =12%
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 41 Figure 17 Levelised cost against rising
diesel prices Diesel PV Hybrid 35                          30 )    /    ( 25 20
115 75 00 20 Cost of diesel (USD/litre) Orange are investing in solar PV to
power their sites off the mains By 2011, Airtel had equipped its 170 sites with
PV; each site consisted of 36 panels (185 Wp each) for  system size of  kW per
site Airtel has thus far installed  total of 132 MW PV capacity Prior to this
initiative, all these sites used diesel and each had  monthly consumption of
,500 litres This amounted to 18,000 litres  Migration to solar PV enables Airtel
to save USD 16,700 per site or USD 84m  The cost of the equipment amounts to USD
100,000 per site, so there is  payback period of about  years target is to reach
25% solar PV penetra- tion in its overall energy consumption The emergence of
these powerful commercial players in the PV market indicates that the technology
is reliable and low cost for generating electricity It could go some way to
helping the PV sector achieve some degree of visibility and credibility They can
also be useful partners in communi- cating the technology as  serious, mature
alternative to be taken seriously by policy makers and the general public OFF-
gRId WINd POWER Orange started making  similar move in Currently, 250 sites
located in remote areas are powered by solar PV with an installed capacity of 11
kW per site The cost of the equipment by site is about USD 90,000 and replaces
600 litres of diesel consumption per month Savings amount to USD ,600 per site
or about USD 7m for all 250 sites The company’ Wind power for rural
electrification using stand-alone and mini-grid delivery systems has come  long
way Though this technol- ogy is not new, the learning curve in turbine and
control technologies over the past two decades has been significant As indicated
in section , the favourable wind regime across Niger can provide much needed
power for rural communities, especially in 42 NIGER the northern part of the
country However, work needs to be done to improve wind intelligence for energy
resource assess- ments It is also important to recognise that Niger’ experience
is limited to  few cases of wind pumping Wind energy for electri- fication is
new area for Niger However, it could be significant if the country is able to
prepare the ground for investment OFF-gRId Pv WATER PumPINg Access to an
improved water source refers to the percentage of the population with least 20
litres per person per day within  km of the dwelling from an improved source
This could be  household connec- tion, public standpipe, borehole, protected
well or spring, and rainwater collection According to African Ministers’ Council
On Water (AMCOW) (2011), Niger is still  long way from achieving the MDG targets
for water supply At present, water coverage extends to 48% of the population -
39% of the rural population and 96% of the urban population This leaves  water-
related MDG target gap of 32% Niger has an esti- mated 5bn m3 of underground
renewable water, but only 20% is currently exploited, according to the United
Nations Children' Fund Hence, Niger has the potential to achieve universal
access to water and sani- tation, but financial resources are limited and
institutions to help deliver this goal are weak Using available data from Agadez
( north- ern urban area),  simple simulation was carried out to assess the
potential that wind could play in off-grid electrification The study looked at
the cost involved to install  wind generator capable of delivering ,000 kWh per
day to  rural community with multiple loads The study also looked different
price scenarios ( USD ,000/kW and USD ,000/kW) for  hybrid system combined with
diesel over  20-year timespan5 As illustrated in figure 18, the analysis
demonstrated two points Firstly, wind systems can potentially be cost-effective
options Levelised costs are USD /kWh However,  significant upfront cost is
incurred, and financing it will remain  challenge Secondly, the anal- ysis
showed that the hybrid system, with  levelised cost of USD 25/kWh, did not
perform as well as wind systems on its own The northern regions tend to enjoy
fairly good windy conditions and thus hybrid systems may not offer better
answers for rural electrification Yet the hybrid option provides the important
advantage of lower initial cost compared to  single resource renewable system It
is worth noting that the hybrid option may offer other advan- tages in regions
where the wind is not as strong or with  high degree of intermit- tency This is
because it would improve power output stability Hand pumps, diesel generators,
PV systems and some wind pumps are in use There are ongoing and upcoming
projects in Niger to improve access to rural water services, and development
partners and international institutions provide significant support to the
government’ efforts The government also recognises that part of the water chal-
lenge is rooted in the lack of energy tech- nologies for pumping water to the
end- users Hence, high water coverage requires the introduction of new
technologies and improvement of existing ones As PV tech- nologies are coming
down in price, PV pumps are rapidly becoming more attrac- tive than the
traditional power sources such as diesel and gasoline driven systems  life-cycle
cost analysis conducted for  Assumptions: Capital range = USD ,000-,000/kW,
annual & cost = USD 15/kW, inverter and other replacements at  and 15 yrs = USD
40/Wp, genset cost = USD 700/kW, installation cost for middle-sized genset = USD
30,000, & = USD 10/kW replaced every  years, fuel cost = USD 75/, project time =
20 years, inflation = %; discount rate = 12% RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 43
Figure 18 Levelised cost against rising diesel prices Niger using country-
specific data showed that over the longer term PV performs better than diesel
for the same service (Figure 19) It also provides  more stable water supply6 The
high initial cost of the PV system compared to the diesel system is moderated
when taking  longer-term perspective This is because the running cost of the
diesel system places  higher cost burden on users over the longer term The
levelised cost for the two PV system sizes indicated was USD /m3 of water
delivered, while the diesel yielded USD /m3 This illustrates how emerging trends
in price and technology favours PV over diesel This is likely to continue Thus,
the need to provide water services is not limited to the household sector It
also extends to the agricultural sector, which the government is eager to
support to boost food security as well as diversify its trade Thus the need for
improved irrigation services will assume greater importance Affordable and
reliable energy for pumping water for irrigation could play  central role in
improving the earnings of smallholders and transform rural economies SOLAR WATER
HEATINg Solar water heating has  long history in Niger CNES was  central player,
installing some 508 solar water heaters in , with capacities of 200-,000 litres
per day  large percentage of Niger’ popula- tion works in subsistence farming,
relying entirely on rainfall and therefore vulnerable to high climate
variability This form of agri- cultural practice is unsustainable as farm- ers
are falling victim to recurrent droughts Most of these were installed in homes
However, this programme could not be sustained as the local currency went
through  devaluation for imported compo- nents Maintenance quality and cost
control  Assumptions: PV system cost = USD 96,000 for smaller system (120m3 @
30m) and USD 140,000 for larger system (160m3 @60m); pump replacement every
years @USD ,000/unit, annual & cost = USD 02 of capital cost, genset cost = USD
,800 for smaller system (120m3 @ 30m) and USD 27,000 for larger system replaced
every  years, fuel cost = USD 75/, project time = 20 years, inflation = %,
discount rate =12% 44 NIGER Figure 19 Life-cycle cost comparison between PV and
diesel for water pumping at different depths and flows were other factors that
led to the demise of this programme However, there was never any doubt that
solar water heating systems can contribute significant energy savings for
businesses and large institutions The technology is mature, simple to repair and
replicate, and heats water cost-effectively This is for  system with  20-year
lifetime (Figure 20) Imported systems, which fetch USD ,000 in the Nigerien
market, pay back within less than four years Hence, continuing to rely on grid
electricity or diesel means more expensive water heat- ing services  shift
towards solar systems means grid electricity could be freed up for other end
uses or could satisfy suppressed demand in various sectors The CNES programme
was motivated by the fact that major hot water users could make significant
financial savings by switching from diesel and electric water heating to solar
heating systems The most common type of solar water heater in Niger incor-
porates  2m2 flat-plate solar collector and  200 litre storage tank It has
payback period of less than - years The CNES experience indicates  robust
national promotions programme and skills development is critical to
mainstreaming the technology Capacity development is not  single intervention
but  process that needs to envisage the long-term picture and be integrated into
broader innova- tion policy This requires long-term plan- ning and investment It
has to be framed into  comprehensive policy framework stimulating the emergence
of new regula- tions These have  specific mandate for different sectors
(industrial, tourism and households) to install solar water heaters Based on
these experiences, the viability of solar water heaters in the resource and
economic context of Niger is convincing  domestically produced (refurbished)
solar heater with  typical 200 litre load and capital cost of about USD ,000 has
payback period of under three years RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 45 Figure 20
Solar water heater: Cumulative cash flow and payback period communities need
bottom-up strategy due to their low energy demand and scat- tered nature This
would bring together local development plans and information on resources,
finance and skills in order to design  coordinated plan of action sensi- tive to
location RECOmmENdATIONS The RRA has highlighted that the contri- bution of off-
grid renewable systems to the energy mix in Niger is growing It is also
important to note that decentralised renewable energy development in Niger will
not provide all the answers to univer- sal access However, given the dispersed
population and type of economic activities, decentralised systems are part of
the solu- tion Some specific findings from the RRA relevant to decentralised
energy systems in Niger are outlined below The RRA underscored that
institutional and financial support efforts need to clearly distinguish not only
between grid-based and off-grid but also between urban and rural electrification
Rural electrification should centre around two main implemen- tation axes:
ImPORTANCE OF  COmPREHENSIvE ENERgy POLICy FOR RuRAL ENERgy ) promotion of the
private sector as  major player in implementing rural electrification and
creation of the enabling environment for the private sector to flourish Niger
needs  comprehensive energy policy that puts the needs and demands of rural
communities centre stage and provides clear guidance on how to make progress The
policy should also be explicit that rural programmes ii) introduction of rural
energy service 46 NIGER concessions that would allow an entity (private sector,
NGO, community- based organisation etc) to exclusively serve one or more defined
areas under  concessionary agreement and the protection of investor interests
Furthermore, provision within the renew- able energy law should be made to amend
the country’ current tax policies on renew- able energy technologies This can be
done by reducing the current import duties and VAT that affect their
competitiveness ImPROvE THE REguLATORy ENvIRONmENT FOR RuRAL ELECTRIFICATION
RAISE dOmESTIC FuNdS FOR RuRAL ELECTRIFICATION An organisation must be
established to manage, develop and implement  rural renewable electrification
strategy and programme It must also create the enabling environment for the
private sector, ensure effective implementation and maintain quality assurance
The rural electrification challenge is enor- mous and will require both external
and domestic finance The RRA drew attention to the importance of raising
domestic finance to calibrate internal investment with wider development goals
It asserted that rural electrification should feature prominently within such
framework Mozambique’ FUNAE Fund is  case in point Niger could consider
following this example to raise funding from taxes collected from mineral and
petroleum exploitation to promote rural electrification This could include: This
organisation needs to be  legal entity and could fill several important gaps For
example, it could: ) stimulate the supply and demand of rural electrification
services through communications with potential part- ners (both public and
private); ) taxes on electricity concessions ii) guide operators towards lowest
cost ii)  rural electrification levy on electricity innovative solutions; sold
to end-users iii) establish the annual rural electrifica- tion programme and
ensure effective follow-up; iii) taxes on bulk electricity consumers iv) taxes
on oil and mining exploration iv) manage relationships with donors and ) taxes
related to the transport and marketing of petroleum products potential
investors; ) ensure effective in accordance to enforced norms and standards
implementation vi) taxes on commercial licences vii) annual budgetary allocation
by the state This organisation must aim to optimise the use of resources for
rural electrifica- tion and maintain mechanisms already in place through
important principles These include equity, technology neutrality, high technical
standards, poverty eradication viii) funding obtained from development partners
ix) personal contributions from the opera- tors and other donors RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT 47 ENERgy mASTER PLAN LOAd SHEddINg: AN OPPORTuNITy FOR
RENEWAbLES Part of the difficulty of appreciating Niger’ deep energy crisis is
explained by almost non-existent national planning on current and future energy
demands The forthcom- ing master plan is welcome and long over- due It needs to
help define short, medium and long-term access targets supported targets within
by predefined geographic areas for off-grid electrification The limited energy
resource assessments already available show that Niger enjoys sufficient
resources to make major progress in meeting energy access targets, especially
solar and to some degree wind Renewable energy options like solar and wind
should feature prominently in the master plan Power cuts are costly and weigh
heavily on the economy, both in Niger and across the whole of Africa The
widespread response from wealthier households and businesses is to find
alternative solutions –  gensets There has been  noticeable increase in the
sales of gensets in Niger since 2010 due to recurrent load shedding and
generation problems in Nigeria However, there are no official data on the number
of gensets in Nigerien households This is  problem from the perspective of
national energy planning Lack of data on this suppressed demand makes it
difficult to plan But this presents an opportunity for PV systems because load
shedding difficulties are deep-seated structural problems and unlikely to be
resolved immediately Many in Niamey are already using solar to cope with rolling
blackouts However, in most of these cases this is  form of crisis manage- ment
rather than  more permanent solu- tion to energy dilemmas The electricity code
(article ) allows one or more natu- ral persons or corporate entities to build
and operate private electrical installations to the satisfaction of their own
needs Nigerien policy makers could encourage individuals and businesses to
become self-producers This would solve the user’ immediate energy problems and
help boost the renewable energy market This market is under-estimated, both for
its size and its potential as an important driver for scaling up renewables
technology-specific ImPROvE &: REvITALISE CNES Niger will rely on sourcing
technologies from abroad for the foreseeable future This will need to continue
in tandem with efforts to upgrade innovation systems that will support domestic
technology adop- tion and development However, cheap solar panels and components
are entering the Nigerien market from neighbouring countries, with no
institutionalised qual- ity assurance and standard schemes This does not help
the reputation of these tech- nologies, still in their early stages, when
systems break down CNES could play an important role in supporting the develop-
ment of renewable energy technology stan- dards and certification schemes for
install- ers as part of the industry’ revitalisation This increases end-user
confidence in the technologies deployed  programme of this kind would have the
additional benefit of creating new skilled jobs throughout the value chain from
small distributors to installers, maintainers and end-users ASSESS THE ECONOmICS
OF  RANgE OF TECHNOLOgIES There is growing experience of  variety of
technologies in Niger It is important to document and assess the cost of single
48 NIGER Diesel power plant in Niamey Source:  and hybrid technologies in the
different regions This provides  dynamic data system that assembles data on the
range of technologies and their performance under different conditions The
diesel based mini- grid operated by NIGELEC offers  compel- ling case for
hybridisation with RE sources Solar irradiation is abundant throughout the
country Detailed feasibility studies on hybridising the diesel mini-grids with
solar PV would, therefore, help demonstrate the economics of these systems to
potential investors  down payment of the total price and the rest paid over
number of years With bank interest rates at 13% in Niger, house- holds and
businesses are unlikely to take out loans to meet renewable energy costs
However, grants from multilateral agen- cies or donors could be ring-fenced to
mobilise soft loan schemes for household or community electrification While this
cannot be considered  long-term solution to the challenge of raising funding, it
could provide energy for social development needs It may also serve to stimulate
the renewables market in rural areas PROvIdE SOFT LOAN SCHEmES OR OTHER CREdIT
LINE FACILITIES FOR SOLAR Pv CAPACITy dEvELOPmENT ANd mObILISATION their
comparative advantage, Despite decentralised renewables are not suitable for
conventional financial mechanisms due to their high transaction costs Rural
communities with little disposable income hardly feature as natural clients for
conven- tional financial institutions Soft loans can be attractive when  small
sum is paid as Niger suffers from capacity deficit in the energy sector in
general With the estab- lishment of CNES as long ago as the 1960s, it was one of
the first movers in renewable energy However, that was not sustained, though
there is some capacity to build on in PV and water heating applications The RRA
has identified capacity development RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 49 Niger
River near Niamey Photo: IRENA/ Lucas for planning, financing and implementing
off-grid and on-grid programmes as  top policy priority Only then will the prom-
ise of renewable energy development be fulfilled  high investment cost, the
technology is unsuitable for local conditions There have been significant recent
devel- opments that may transform the cooking and heating landscape This is the
emer- gence of important players like the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves
(GACC) This is beginning to mobilise global and national institutions and
resources to solve this problem At the same time,  new generation of advanced
and more effective biomass cookstoves is showing signs of commercial viability
Meanwhile, new busi- ness models are coming through that will generate new sales
biomass for cooKing and heating Energy for cooking is  major preoccupa- tion in
Niger It is one aspect of the energy picture in Niger and other parts of the
Sahel that has confounded experts The solutions to problems associated with
biomass, such as indoor air pollution and the extensive time and energy needed
for its collection, appear straightforward Yet most stud- ies indicate that
biomass energy (or fuel wood) will remain an important source of household
energy This is due to  whole range of obstacles For instance, LPG and other
petroleum fuels are not affordable to many people, other energy sources are
remote, non-biomass appliances have These developments show plenty of prom- ise,
but the path to large-scale adoption faces many barriers These include insti-
tutional, technical, consumer, finance and national development priorities These
all exist in Niger to  varying degree depend- ing on the social and economic
group 50 NIGER fuel used is calculated first The compari- son is between
collected fuelwood and biogas In the case of wood, the average fuel collection
time per month is multi- plied by the national wage rate using  per capita
income estimate for Niger World Bank figures of USD 160  per capita assuming 40
working hours per week produce  maximum labour rate of USD 08/hour The number of
hours spent collecting wood for traditional stoves amounts to USD  and USD  for
the new generation of stoves Stove costs are estimated by dividing the stove
price by its average lifetime The biogas cost is estimated at USD 916 for  6m3
plant (ten-year life- time) while costs for traditional stoves are USD
lifetime) New generation stoves are assumed to cost USD 25 (five-year lifetime)
Thus, the total cooking cost is worked out by adding together the fuel cash
cost, the value of fuel collection time and the stove costs bIOgAS AS  POTENTIAL
COOkINg RESOuRCE Numerous discussions and initiatives exist in Niger involving
improved cookstoves, sustainable wood harvesting and biofu- els However, the RRA
focused on biogas, largely because there is positive experi- ence in this
technology, and biogas offers benefits beyond cooking Nigerien experience in
biogas dates as far back as 1980 under  project by INRAN Ten facilities were
installed by INRAN in collaboration with the French organisa- tion GERDAT
Another five were installed through Chinese cooperation to produce biogas for
cooking, lighting and electricity in combination with diesel fuel for electric-
ity production These facilities were aban- doned by the beneficiaries due to
lack of maintenance The failures observed were of  technical and socio-economic
nature (three-year  feasibility study was carried out in Niger to set up
national biogas programme This planned to establish 15,000 rural biodigesters
over five years for  total of USD 45m around the river Niger, rich in water
resources The following financial arrangement was planned:  grant of 40% from
the Dutch Cooperation, 55% from recipients who had to be engaged with
microfinance institution and % from the state Unfortunately this programme
failed to materialise because the microfinance institutions did not want to
engage in the energy sector They asked for  guarantee from the state to back the
risk if their invest- ment did not yield the expected returns the above
assumptions, Using  profile of comparative cooking costs is constructed These
estimates suggest the new stoves perform best at USD 17/kg of wood equivalent,
traditional stoves at USD 28/kg and biogas at USD 64/kg of wood equivalent These
estimates are for illustrative purposes to highlight the cost of labour (mainly
women and children) for fuelwood collection as the defining variable in this
comparison But there is  caveat here When other aspects such as health impacts
and envi- ronmental externalities are considered, the picture is likely to look
different Furthermore, if the national wage triples to USD 480 — still very low
— and wood collection hours remain constant, the cost comparison shifts in
favour of biogas This suggests that the higher cost of labour increases the
economic cost of using In trying to understand the potential of biogas in rural
areas, it is worth analysing the economic impacts by calculating and comparing
the cooking costs The analysis below makes  comparison of the costs of various
stove types where the value of the RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 51 collected
biomass beyond the biogas-bio- mass break-even point This rather rough analysis
indicates that biogas could have  wider appeal in future It could there- fore be
worth investing in  robust biogas programme as in parts of Asia This would also
bring down the cost of biogas plants as they move from their current niche
status into the mass market This has occurred in various Asian countries such as
India, Nepal and China iii) Importance of standards for biogas and other biomass
fuel types Some specific interventions areas were iden- tified during the RRA
EmPHASIS ON bIOgAS This biomass sector has delivered excellent results and
supported rural development in various parts of Asia In Africa, Rwanda now has
promising programme The National Biogas Programme of Rwanda has reached an
important milestone in that it has successfully set up  commercially viable
biogas industry production possibilities Other biofuel mainly involve crop waste
This includes crops specifically intended for human consumption grown during the
winter season (millet, sorghum, maize, rice, cow- pea) and cash crops (peanut,
cotton, sesame, sugarcane, moringa) It also includes forest species that grow
naturally such as jatrophacurcas, neem and balan- ites For the moment there is
no biodie- sel production in Niger, and the different oils such as peanut oil
and shea butter that can be used to generate biodiesel are mainly used for food
There is little experi- ence in Niger of using crops like these for bioenergy
This will contribute to the well-being of the country’ population while reducing
pres- sure on natural resources The RRA recog- nised the potential of biogas in
Niger, and the Niger biogas feasibility study has been conclusive There is good
reason to develop  business model that would bring microfi- nance institutions
to the negotiating table CRITICAL NEEd FOR FINANCE Nepal is an excellent example
of how multiple innovation nodes are critical to successful biogas programmes
The central elements of this programme have been innovation in financial
engineering as well as the judicious distribution of grants to beneficiaries
Furthermore, the Nepal programme successfully motivated the external and
domestic banks to sculpt  well-structured loan and grant programme for small-
scale farmers and medium-sized rural enterprises RECOmmENdATIONS During the RRA,
the discussion focused mainly on biogas and improved cook- stoves  number of
opportunities and problems were identified that are specific to the biomass
sector They include: ) The absence of  clearly defined policy on the use of
biomass, including biogas Niger could emulate the Nepalese programme However,
bringing together stakeholders such as these requires lobby- ing by potential
project developers ii) Lack of institutional coordination and collaboration
between financial institu- tions and other stakeholders 52 NIGER opportunities
and constraints for scaling up renewable energy deployment WAPP EFFECT West
African regional power development work is progressing, and  number of trans-
mission and rehabilitation projects have already been completed Niger is
expected to benefit from power imports and exports as  way to stabilise its
power sector and create greater supply reliability Moreover, renewable energy
technologies can play  major role in developing an integrated power pool This is
because their share in the region could reach 52% by 2030 if the cost of these
technologies continues to fall and if fossil fuel prices remain volatile (IRENA,
2013a) POLICy STAgNATION Policies need to be dynamic because they often have
side effects or unintended consequences Part of the problem in Niger, and indeed
in much of Africa, is that energy policies are  static list of goals or laws
They do not undergo periodic reviews to evaluate their effectiveness and help
guide operational decisions Policy tends to evolve with changing contexts, so
formal policy needs to be periodically adjusted The government of Niger should
carry out  review of existing policies and strategies and revise them For low
consumption countries such as Niger, this could represent  reduction in the
long-run marginal cost (LRMC) of power by USD /kWh (Eberhard et al, 2011) WAPP
promises to usher in an era of cheaper and more secure power That should be
welcome, but cross-border power transmission will still require consid- erable
investment,  high degree of collec- tive ownership and coordination This is new
territory for public policy with limited precedence in Africa Niger has mixed
experiences of its electricity imports from Nigeria The effect of an emerging
highly interconnected power infrastructure on costs and reliability is uncertain
It is also important to consider the effect WAPP will have on rural areas, as
most will continue to rely on decentralised systems Further assessment will be
needed to guide Nigerien policy makers on the benefits and costs of the WAPP
interconnection system They can then plan appropriately They need to be
compatible with the coun- try’ development goal of supporting social welfare,
and enhance income-generating activities The renewable energy law and master
plan are important steps to embed- ding energy service provision into develop-
ment needs After the formal presentation of the renewable energy law, dialogue
with the whole range of stakeholders should be maintained TRACk RECORd IN
AuCTIONS Niger has been using auctions as an instru- ment to select IPPs for
providing conven- tional power at competitive prices to the grid As far as
renewable power genera- tion is concerned, it can capitalise on this experience
to design renewable energy auctions This could be applied to both large-scale
grid-connected power plants but also for hybridising bundles of decen- tralised
power plants Policy makers and executives should be equipped with the knowledge
of the intricacies of design- ing renewable energy auctions and ensure they are
successfully conducted POLITICAL FRAgmENTATION Energy supports development and
there- fore cuts across ministerial and sector boundaries Policy makers face
energy supply and cost challenges as they aim to RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
53 deliver positive outcomes for their respec- tive sectors The fractured
responsibili- ties within Niger’ energy policy make the different government
entities prone to turf battles This indicates  lack of coordina- tion among the
departments involved This tension is expected to rise with the discov- ery of
oil and gas There may be power struggles between those who see the
transformative potential of renewables and those who supervise the fossil-fuel
sector role in rural energy programmes However, more work is needed to ensure
that prices become competitive and affordable for which the range of pro-poor
financing mechanisms can be tested and evaluated The renewable energy law and
master plan will have to come up with potential recom- mendations to bring costs
down for both potential suppliers and end-users They will need to consider the
financial measures often necessary in the first stages of tech- nology diffusion
At that point, there are few market players and the opportunities to develop
economies of scale are limited Furthermore, it is important to build an
inventory of experiences in Niger in terms of the range of delivery mechanisms
and business models It is also important to assess how emerging regulatory
frame- works could impact on mainstreaming decentralised renewable energy
options This calls for  comprehensive energy policy that places sector
requirements within  coherent framework It requires policy makers to appreciate
that  mix of technologies at different scales is the foun- dation for healthy
energy governance in Niger, and to act on that basis Central to the success of
any energy policy is getting the governance structure right Government players
need to be willing to be part of  wider inter-ministerial dialogue on energy
matters and build appropriate institutions that deliver results on the ground
uNIquE kNOWLEdgE STORE Energy knowledge generation of this kind could help
develop  dynamic techno-eco- nomic assessment framework for decen- tralised
electricity and heat system design It could take materials sourcing, instal-
lation costs, available energy resources, energy storage options, design
robustness and social acceptance into consideration Building this store of
knowledge would help Niger develop its energy strategy using informed and
tailored technical and business models These would be compat- ible with local
resources, institutions and economic factors Institutionalising energy knowledge
in this way would give ample confidence to policy makers, social entre- preneurs
and private sector players This is because it would provide them with up-to-
date information about various technolo- gies in the context of Niger Clearly,
this will require some degree of policy experimentation and learning through
doing Ultimately, the success of the country’ energy development mission will be
judged by the quality of its results and scale of improvements in livelihoods
Renewable energy applications across Niger have been linked to excellent social
development outcomes The cost of renew- ables is at an all-time low, especially
PV If they are to support productive sectors in rural areas, stronger
coordination between all stakeholders is required dECENTRALISATION Experience in
Niger demonstrates that off- grid energy systems can play  significant 54 NIGER
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS The RRA process identified and recommended the
action below The six points, which apply to all the priority resource-service
pairs, are not given in any order of importance  list of action points from
rapid assessment is unlikely to be exhaustive  more detailed list is contained
in the Annex ACTION STEPS Develop national renewable energy policy and action
plan • Conduct thorough renewable energy resource assessment with ground
measurements • Set up targets for different renewable energy applications •
Include solar and wind in national generation and transmission master plan
Develop renewable energy law and devise support mechanisms • Develop renewable
energy law to establish legal, economic and institutional basis for renewable
energy • Devise support mechanisms such as net metering, competitive bidding,
and standardised bankable PPAs Create institutional and regulatory framework to
facilitate renewable energy deployment in rural areas • Establish organisation
in charge of rural electrification using latest renewable energy technologies •
Set up funding mechanism to support renewable energy deployment (revolving
funds, guarantee funds, credit lines, etc) RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 55
Support energy component in the strategic PPP framework • Develop appropriate
PPP model for solar PV Allow CNES to flourish as lead technical institution for
renewable energy & • Strengthen CNES capacity to conduct detailed wind and solar
assessments across the country and build  comprehensive database • CNES to
spearhead &, including standard development and quality control procedures for
solar and wind equipment • Develop installer certification schemes and
facilitate training Create conditions for developing rural biogas industry •
Develop appropriate business model for biogas uptake for both domestic and
productive use 56 NIGER VI REFERENCES AEO (African Economic Outlook) (2013),
"Niger Country Note", AEO,
coutlookorg/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/PDF/Niger%20-%20African%20Economic%20
Outlookpdf AMCOW (African Ministers' Council on Water) (2011), Country Status
Overview: Niger, AMCOW, Nairobi Eberhard, , et al (2011), Africa’ Power
Infrastructure: Investment, Integration and Efficiency, World Bank, Washington,
DC, pp ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States) (2013), Press
Communique, No 55,  ECREEE (ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency) (2012), The ECOWAS Energy Efficiency Policy, ECREEE, Cape Verde, pp
Gaisma (2012),  (accessed September 2013) Government of Niger, United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) (2003),
“Stratégie Nationale et Plan ’Actions sur les Énergies Renouvelables” (National
Strategy and Plan of Action on Renewable Energy), pp 60,  International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD) (2012), “Republic of Niger: Country Strategic
Opportunities Programme”, IFAD, Rome,  eb/docs/EB---pdf Institut National de la
Statistique (INS) (2010), Statistique (Statistics),  statistique, (accessed 17
October 2013) INS (2012), Statistique (Statistics),  (accessed 17 October, 2013)
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (2013), Niger: IMF Country Report No 13, IMF,
Washington, DC IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013a), West
African Power Pool: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu
Dhabi IRENA (2013b), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2012: An Overview,
IRENA, Abu Dhabi RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 57 IRENA (2013c), Renewable
Energy Auctions in Developing Countries, IRENA, Abu Dhabi MP/AT-DC (Ministry of
Planning, Land Management, and Community Development) (2011), “Plan de
Développement Economique et Social (PDES) ” (Economic and Social Development
Plan ), République du Niger, Niamey,  pubs/ft/scr/cr13105fpdf MME (Ministère des
Mines et de ’Energie) (2004a), Décret°/PRN/MME du 14 Septembre 2004 Fixant les
Modalités ’Application de la Loi Portant Code de ’Electricité (Decree /PRN/MME
of 14 September 2004, setting out the arrangements for implementing the Act on
the Code of Electricity), MME, Niamey MME (2004b), “Déclaration de Politique
Energétique” (Energy Policy Statement), MME, Niamey, pp 14,
tique%20%C3%A9nerg%C3%A9tique%20du%20NigerPDF MME (2010), Programme de Référence
’Accès aux Services Energétiques (Referral Programme on Access to Energy
Services), MME, Niamey Ministère de ’Energie et du Pétrole (MoEP) (2012),
Document de Project Pilote ’Accès, (Pilot Project Report on Energy Access),
MoEP, Niamey Ministère de ’Agriculture (MoA) (2012), Evaluation préliminaire des
récoltes et campagnes agricoles, MoA, Niamey Ourmarou,  (2012), “Energy
problems, potentials and alternatives in Niger Republic”, Continental Journal of
Engineering Sciences Vol , No , pp 52 – Practical Action Consulting (PAC)
(2013), Building an Enabling Environment for the Promotion of Renewable Energy
in Niger, PAC, Rugby, UK UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2013),
“Human Development Report”, UNDP, New York,  UNESCO (United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization) (2012), “ECOWAS Education for All
Profile”, UNESCO, Dakar Office,
MULTIMEDIA/FIELD/Dakar/pdf/RECProfileECOWAS_ENGpdf World Bank (2009), “Niger
Enterprise Surveys 2009”, World Bank, Washington, DC,  58 NIGER World Bank
(2010), “Getting Electricity:  Pilot Indicator Set from the Doing Business
Project”, World Bank, Washington, DC,  electricity World Bank (2012), Energy
Sector Diagnostic Review, Government of the Republic of Niger, Niamey World
Bank, Washington, DC World Bank (2013a), “Niger - Country Partnership Strategy
for the period FY13-16”, World Bank, Washington, DC,  niger-country-partnership-
strategy-period-fy13-16 World Bank (2013b), Data: Urban Population (% of total),
World Bank, Washington, DC,  World Bank (2013c), Data: Pump Price for Diesel
Fuel (US$ per liter), World Bank, Washington, DC,  RENEWABLES READINESS
ASSESSMENT 59 ANNEX: DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS The RRA process
identified and recommended the action below It is not given in any order of
priority, and the list of action points from  rapid assessment is unlikely to be
exhaustive This action could improve the Niger’ readiness to scale up its
renewables deployment It is designed to be taken in the short- to medium-term,
largely through decisions made by the Government of Niger Action : Develop
national Renewable Energy Policy and action plan Action Develop  national
Renewable Energy Policy and action plan Resource-Service Pair() Centralised and
decentralised grid electricity, all RE resources Description There is wide
acknowledgement among policy makers in Niger about the important role renewables
can play in the development of the power sector The Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum (MoEP) is to be responsible for developing  national renewable energy
policy and action plan which will set up the guidelines for the broad
utilisation of country RE potential mainly solar and wind being seen as reliable
energy sources that can contribute to reducing dependence vis--vis imported
electricity from Nigeria While the National Centre for Solar Energy (CNES) is to
play  pivotal role in serving as the data centre by conducting thor- ough
assessment of solar and wind energy resources through ground measurements MoEP
will set up achievable targets for the existing RE resources based on the
results of the assessment and coordi- nate with the High Commission for the
Development of Niger Valley (HCDNV) and all relevant stakeholders the
integration of renewables into the on-going master plan for power gener- ation
and transmission Stakeholders MoEP, CNES, HCDNV, donors and all other
stakeholders 60 NIGER Timing End of 2014 Keys to success The development of the
policy will be backed up by the results of the renewable energy resources
assessment The effective- ness of the policy will depend on the results of the
assessment as well as the extent to which it attracts investment interest, and
basis for the development of  portfolio of bankable projects Action : Develop
Renewable Energy law and supporting mechanisms Action Develop  Renewable Energy
mechanisms law and supporting Resource-Service Pair() Centralised and
decentralised grid electricity, all RE resources Description Niger’ power
generation sector although having been opened to IPPs has not attracted
renewables based power generation projects to come forward  precondition to the
development and expansion of the country’ renewable energy market is the
creation of  favourable legal and regulatory framework that would among other
reduce technical, legal and adminis- trative barriers while increasing private
sector confidence in the sector The MoEP is to be responsible of coordinating
the develop- ment of an overarching renewable energy law which will include
provision for guaranteed access to the grid, priority dispatch of renewable
based electricity generation which are currently missing in the grid code
Furthermore, the MoEP will consider in cooperation with all relevant
stakeholders, the development of  standardised and bankable PPA for support- ing
the drafting of RE auctions Stakeholders MoEP, NIGELEC, relevant stakeholders
and potential investors (private companies, utilities and commercial banks)
Timing Mid-2014 Keys to success Engagement with organisations with similar
experience in other countries and regions (, The Gambia, Ghana, Egypt)
RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 61 Action : Create an institutional and
regulatory framework to facilitate the deployment of renewable energy in rural
areas Action Create an institutional and regulatory framework to facilitate the
deployment of renewable energy in rural areas Resource-Service Pair()
Decentralised electricity, all RE resources Description In Niger, rural
electrification challenge is enormous, with less than % electricity access in
rural areas, heavy reliance on tradi- tional biomass using unsustainable
appliances, and increasing demand for power to drive economic transformation The
MoEP is to trigger the establishment of  body in charge of developing and
implementing  renewable energy based rural electrification strategy/programme as
well as creating the enabling condition for private sector involvement and
effective implementation of programmes and maintains qual- ity assurance This
structure must aim to optimize the use of resources for rural electrification
and sustain the mechanisms already in place through important principles such as
equity, technological neutrality, high-levels of technical standards, poverty
eradication, and the protection of the interests of investors Furthermore, the
MoEP in cooperation with relevant stake- holders will set up  resource
mobilisation (both internal and external) framework for financing rural
electrification The rural electrification body will advocate for raising
domestic finance in order to calibrate internal investment with the wider
development goals, featuring the rural electrification promi- nently within such
framework Stakeholders MoEP, Cabinet, National Assembly, donors and all other
stakeholders Timing End of 2014 Keys to success Engagement with organisations
with similar experience in other countries and regions (, Mozambique, Morocco)
62 NIGER Action : Support the energy component of the Public Private Partnership
strategic framework Action Support the energy component of the Public Private
Partnership strategic framework Resource-Service Pair() Centralised and
decentralised grid electricity, all RE resources Description In Niger
transaction costs created by long permitting and lengthy administrative
procedures could be greatly reduced by setting up  one stop shop for the private
sector to engage with when dealing with renewable energy projects Recently the
country has defined  framework to operationalis  public- private partnership
(PPP) contracts by creating  specialized office in charge of the latter (CPPP)
CPPP will be mandated to become the permitting and licens- ing structure for all
renewable energy projects as well as developing  bankable PPA model that would
reduce negotia- tion with private sector Such  model could open the doors to
self-producers, IPPs wishing to feed in their electricity into the grid as well
as those who wish to collaborate in with utility to hybridize existing fossil
fuel generation facilities Stakeholders CPPP, MoEP, NIGELEC, ARM, and potential
investors (private companies, utilities and commercial banks) Timing End of 2014
Keys to success Engagement with organisations with similar experience in other
countries and regions (, Morocco, Egypt) RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 63
Action : Enable the National Centre for Solar Energy (CNES) to fully play its
role as the lead technical institution for renewable energy research and
development Action Enable the National Centre for Solar Energy (CNES) to fully
play its role as the lead technical institution for renewable energy research
and development Resource-Service Pair() Centralised and decentralised grid
electricity, all RE resources Description Niger rely on sourcing technologies
from abroad and this will need to continue in parallel with efforts to upgrade
innova- tion systems that will support domestic technology adoption and
development However, cheap solar panels and compo- nents are entering Nigerien
market from neighbouring coun- tries, with no institutionalised quality
assurance and standard schemes which does not help the reputation of these tech-
nologies, still in the early stages of their being established, when systems
breakdown CNES will play an important role as part of its revitalisation in
supporting the development of RETs standards and certifica- tion schemes for
installers in order to increase end user confi- dence in the technologies
deployed Such  programme would have the co-benefit of creating new skilled jobs
throughout the value chain starting with small distributors, installers, and
maintainers to beneficiaries Stakeholders MoEP, Cabinet, CNES, ARM, all other
relevant stakeholders Timing Early 2015 Keys to success Engagement of an RE
expert with  good track record in research, improved staffing, donor assistance
to equip the centre and ensure adequate continuous funding 64 NIGER Action :
Create conditions for the development of  rural biogas industry Action Create
conditions for the development of  rural biogas industry Resource-service Pair()
Biomass for cooking and heating Description The experiences of Niger in biogas
date as far back as However all biogas facilities have been abandoned by the
beneficiaries due to lack of maintenance The observed fail- ures were technical
and socio-economic The country is endowed with good potential for biogas, and
the feasibility study of the biogas Niger programme has been conclusive There is
good reason to believe in developing  "business model" that would bring the
micro finance institu- tions to the negotiating table The MEP, Ministry of
Agriculture (MOA), Ministry of Health (MOH) and other relevant stakeholders will
work on develop- ing sound business model for setting up  commercially viable
biogas sector to contribute to the well-being of the country’ population while
reducing the pressure on natural resources based on successful experiences from
other countries such as Nepal, Vietnam and Rwanda Stakeholders MEP, MOA, MOH,
MFIs, CNES, project developers, and donors Timing End of 2015 Keys to success
Engagement with organisations with similar experience in other countries and
regions (, Nepal, Rwanda) RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 65 Solar PV system for
telecom tower Source: Airtel Niger 66 NIGER Biomass plantation and firewood
storage in Mossipaga village Photo: IRENA/ Lucas RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT
67 IRENA Secretariat CI Tower, Khalidiya (32nd) Street  Box 236, Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates  Copyright © IRENA 2013