Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships……………………………………………………………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/NER/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Niger,  low-income country
located in the heart of the Sahel region along the Lake Chad Basin, is endowed
with immense natural resources, including oil reserves that cover 90 per cent of
its territory, but still marginally exploited The country’ development faces
strong socioeconomic, environmental and security constraints that impede its
timely attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Governance
challenges are rooted in unresolved historical inequalities and  weakened social
contract, which leads to polarization in  context where only per cent of the
population has access to electricity for productive use  Multidimensional
poverty affects per cent of the country’ population of 20 million, with 83 per
cent in rural areas, 78 per cent women and 70 per cent between the ages of 15 to
24, who are not in employment, education or training Persons with disabilities
account for  per cent of the population and are often subjected to stigma and
exclusion in education, employment and social protection Globally, with  human
development index of 394, Niger ranks last among 189 countries, with the highest
population growth at  per cent  The COVID-19 pandemic, the ongoing Russia-
Ukraine war, rising insecurity along borderlands with neighbouring countries,
and  poor 2021 crop season have aggravated the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation Security challenges cost the State 17 per cent and per cent of its
budgetary resources in 2021 and 2022, respectively, severely constraining
investments in the productive sector Economic growth declined from  per cent in
2019 to  per cent in 2021, with   per cent contraction of gross domestic product
at the tertiary level Implementation of the African Continental Free Trade Area
(AfCFTA) strategy presents undeniable opportunities to expand and diversify
exports and economic partners, provided political stability is sustained to
advance progress on national priorities  The country’ Vision 2035, set out in
its sustainable development and inclusive growth strategy, aims to make Niger
well-governed, peaceful, emerging economy based on fair sharing of the fruits of
progress Recognizing that only eight years remain in the Decade of Action to
achieve the SDGs, the Government has defined the national development priorities
for  around three main axes: () development of human capital, inclusion, and
solidarity capturing the demographic dividend and ensuring people-centred,
equitable human development by addressing varied forms of structural and
societal capacities at the subnational level to deliver basic services for all;
() consolidation of governance, peace and security, strengthening the capacities
of national and local institutions, and legal and regulatory frameworks to
assure efficiency, accountability, inclusivity and equity to provide quality
services to the population, especially in rural communities; and () structural
transformation of the economy, strengthening the resilience to climate change
through natural resource management to ensure food security, renewable energy
access and women’ and youth empowerment for peace and development These areas
also form the backbone of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF)  The UNSDCF places people at the centre of development in
bid to reach the 83 per cent of the rural population who are more vulnerable to
poverty and insecurity and are left the furthest behind in political
representation, social and economic development, employment and social
protection The underlying strategy emphasizes building the resilience of people,
institutions, and systems to deliver people-centred development  UNDP will
support the United Nations system in achieving UNSDCF outcomes through  two-
pronged approach centred on the resilience of people and institutions UNDP has
successful track record supporting resilience as the lead United Nations
organization in the Lake Chad Basin Stabilization Facility in Niger, which has
enhanced the resilience capacities of local authorities and communities in the
Diffa region Over 900,000 people in the most vulnerable districts, including
youth and women, have benefitted from livelihoods support,  Institut Nationale
de la Statistique,  UNDP Human Development Report  Economist Intelligence
Country Report  DP/DCP/NER/ facilitating the return of 42,000 people to their
places of origin and providing access to basic services, including health
centres, markets, police stations and solar energy in rural communities  UNDP
comparative advantages stem from its strategic positioning, trust generated
during previous programming cycles, and ongoing investments at the central and
decentralized levels to strengthen systems and policies, such as the development
of national and subnational SDG plans, reforms for the modernization of the
State, and electoral reform; strengthening the peace and security architecture,
the Stabilization Facility, and rural development; reinforcing local government
institutions; and strengthening data collection and analysis to inform decision-
making on inequalities, violence against women and the impact of COVID- This
UNDP strategic positioning, lauded by the Government and partners, has laid the
groundwork for: () resilient institutions, systems and communities; () conflict
prevention, peacebuilding and social cohesion; () stabilization and search for
innovative sustainable solutions in areas affected by insecurity and climate
change; () constructive policy dialogue and an operational coordination
framework with the entire electorate, notably women and youth, to capitalize on
the achievements of the  electoral process and programme cycle  Given its
decades-long experience supporting local governance in the hinterlands and key
national governance institutions, UNDP will expand its governance offer to help
strengthen the social contract between the people and the State, stabilize
communities, and build resilience, particularly in borderlands and rural areas
UNDP will leverage its position in the United Nations country team to experiment
and scale up innovation and integrated development solutions Drawing lessons
from the previous country programme, , UNDP will offer its operational and
technical expertise to promote innovation in building the resilience of
communities, systems and productive value chains The subcontracting and fast-
track mechanism, tested in the context of the COVID-19 response, will be
consolidated to enable access to risk areas and ensure diligent service delivery
by optimizing operational costs in  fragile security context UNDP will
consolidate its leadership in the United Nations business operation strategy,
supporting  coherent, harmonized, effective inter-agency approach Through the
UNSDCF, UNDP will help deliver integrated programming across the climate-
humanitarian-development-security nexus to deal with the multidimensional nature
of poverty and inequality UNDP will also use its experience leveraging
international public finance while unlocking private sector investment for the
SDGs II Programme priorities and partnerships The country programme is premised
upon the theory that if marginalized populations obtain the benefits of
participatory, inclusive, equitable, accountable and transparent governance and
green economic growth; and if rural communities are well governed to sustainably
manage natural resources, including land and energy access for risk-informed
sustainable livelihood opportunities; and if the capacities of national and
subnational institutions are enhanced, and policies and frameworks to boost
resilient, inclusive socioeconomic growth and accountability are
operationalized, then national and subnational institutions will be capacitated
to provide pro-poor, inclusive, equitable, efficient development solutions and
services; confidence in government systems will be improved, reducing public
discontentment and vulnerability to conflicts; then people, institutions’ and
systems’ resilience to shocks and climate hazards will be strengthened and jobs
created, leading to transformative change in rural communities, building social
cohesion and addressing inter and intraregional inequalities UNDP contribution
to the UNSDCF, in line with national development priorities, will be achieved
through two fundamental pillars: () structural transformation of the rural
environment and climate change; and () governance, stabilization, peace and
security The programme therefore aims to help restore the population’ trust in
national structures, systems  DP/DCP/NER/ and institutions, , the social
contract, create the conditions for people to live in peace, be resilient to
crises and shocks, and for internally displaced persons to return to their
villages of origin safely and decently while benefitting from the positive
impact of inclusive growth, development and shared prosperity To implement these
programme priorities, UNDP will develop technical partnerships with the
Government, United Nations, development partners, the private sector, and civil
society and local communities The strength of the United Nations system in Niger
will be leveraged in the UNSDCF through which UNDP will deliver on shared
outcomes with other United Nations organizations in the two programme pillars
Priority areas (Lake-Chad-Basin, Liptako- Gourma, Maradi, Dosso and Zinder) and
the most vulnerable populations, including youth and women, will be targeted
UNDP will continue its strategic collaboration to mobilize technical and
financial partners, as well as national resources, in support of socioeconomic
development initiatives and by the humanitarian-development-peace-climate nexus
Multisectoral and multidisciplinary ways of working, given the diverse
opportunities in Niger and at its frontiers, will be integral to the programme
Lessons from the current country programme will inform scaled-up, tailored local
solutions to encourage youth employment (boys and girls) by promoting
innovation, digitalization and green jobs leveraging UNDP will fulfil its
facilitator of integrated solutions role, including the extension of the United
Nations flagship regional stabilization strategy, by providing advisory and
technical support to the Resident Coordinator and the country team
Stabilization, as  critical piece of the humanitarian-development-peace-climate
nexus will help realize rights and address needs, vulnerabilities, risks, and
drivers/underlying causes of conflict over the long term Every effort will be
deployed to cooperate, exchange information and coordinate with the United
Nations humanitarian and security country-level teams to avoid duplication and
achieve coherence with humanitarian, development and security strategies UNDP
will provide thought leadership, advisory and technical support in other areas
by: () creating integrated platforms to accelerate SDG achievement, including
establishing an integrated SDG database with UN-Info ; () mobilizing SDG-
financing innovative modes through the integrated national financing framework;
() promoting data-driven integrated development solutions and strengthening
national statistical systems and capabilities; () facilitating knowledge and
technology transfer through South-South and triangular cooperation, including
the accelerated community development programme (PADC); () providing
combination of high-level strategic advice and programmatic interventions,
including to address the lingering effects of COVID-19; () continuing to
mainstream conflict sensitivity, gender and human rights; and () managing
knowledge and innovation and developing strategic communication to mobilize and
administer domestic, international, public and private resources Pillar : Rural
transformation and climate change Under this pillar, UNDP, in collaboration with
the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction (UNDRR) will work to increase the resilience of people,
households and communities, focusing on: () conserving ecosystems and natural
resources by engaging communities and creating decent jobs; () investing in
resilient and environmentally sustainable livelihoods; () promoting good
practices based on lessons learned and UNDP comparative advantages to promote
access to clean and affordable energy; () developing sustainable value chains
and productive social safety nets; () effectively mobilizing funds for climate
action, including green businesses and achieving the nationally determined
contributions; () reducing disaster risk and adapting to climate change; ()
effectively implementing policies and strategies, including development planning
and budgeting that mainstream gender dimensions, promote local economies, and
integrate the SDGs The programme will prioritize rural communities, particularly
borderlands with natural resources, to improve access to basic needs consistent
with the sustainable development and inclusive growth strategy  DP/DCP/NER/ In
context marked by vulnerability to climate change and strong pressures on
natural resources that threaten the ecosystem and population’ living conditions,
UNDP will contribute to developing the capacities of national actors and to
improving the management of natural resources by adopting best practices related
to: () biodiversity protection; () ecosystem restoration; () reduction of
pressure on natural resources; and () natural disaster management UNDP will
ensure that international standards are applied and will prioritize
interventions considering disaster risks and land conflicts related to natural
resources sharing For low-carbon production, preparation of local economic
partnership strategies and exchange of innovative solutions in sustainable
natural resources management will be key UNDP will support sustainable, modern,
competitive agricultural value chains, including adoption of international
standards and smart production systems that protect natural resources and
promote  green economy UNDP will support South-South cooperation initiatives to
encourage knowledge and best practice sharing Partnerships established under
international climate change commitments will continue to leverage climate
finance mechanisms, including the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Green
Climate Fund (GCF), and the Private Sector Window and the Adaptation Fund UNDP
will assist the Government in mobilizing climate resources and implementing
regional initiatives and programmes The off-grid electrification of communities
with renewable energy sources will create sustainable livelihoods and economic
growth through innovative business models to also benefit youth and women Based
on current country programme successes, UNDP will foster dialogue and
collaborative partnerships on sustainable natural resources management with
ministries responsible for environment, agriculture, livestock, water resources,
humanitarian action, disaster management, and women and youth promotion in
collaboration with FAO, UNEP and the United Nations Capital Development Fund
(UNCDF) on unlocking sources of private finance UNDP will support interventions
to increase farming incomes and diversification of the rural economy to reduce
rural household vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters This
growth must allow achievement of zero hunger by revitalizing traditional methods
of farming, particularly in rain-fed areas PADC will respond to  pressing need
from the Government for the development of value chains, an export base, and the
priorities of the most vulnerable populations living in areas affected by
socioeconomic, security, health and climate shocks UNDP will encourage
development dialogue with Parliament, the private sector and civil society
organizations (CSOs) UNDP will strengthen institutional and community capacities
for disaster risk reduction and management in the post-COVID-19 recovery context
This will entail strengthening the institutional framework for disaster risk
reduction and post-disaster recovery support; improving national and local
multi-risk early warning systems; and mapping risk areas and damage assessment
for better disaster management to achieve greater resilience and sustainable
inclusive growth These activities will be implemented through joint United
Nations programmes and strategic partnerships with international financing
institutions, line ministries, local partners and CSOs, among others They will
aim to ensure creation of sustainable income-generating value chains,
emphasizing UNDP comparative advantages in facilitating entrepreneurship,
production, creating economic opportunities, and sustainably developing business
skills to reduce economic disparities due to location, gender and age To
effectively plan responses and strengthen adaptive capacities of communities
exposed to disasters and natural risks,  recovery plan based on thorough
knowledge of risks and the principle of building back better will be key
Strategic partnerships with current partners will be consolidated, and new
partnerships with the World Bank and bilateral donors will be developed
DP/DCP/NER/ Pillar : Governance (peace, security, stabilization) Under this
pillar, UNDP prioritizes participatory, inclusive, equitable, accountable and
transparent governance Major components are: () strengthening the legal,
judicial and regulatory framework and its operationalization; () improving
governance and operational systems throughout the national territory of entities
responsible for security, stabilization, social cohesion and peacebuilding; ()
consolidating national political institutions, including the electoral
management body to guarantee impartiality and accountability; () strengthening
central and local governance for more efficiency, innovation and digitization,
allowing for competent and harmonized management of development; () supporting
trade regulation and competitiveness to leverage AfCFTA; and () increasing
participation of youth, women and persons living with disabilities in conflict
management mechanisms and decision-making bodies to fulfil their role in citizen
control and oversight In response to the national policy on modernization of
government services for  more effective civil service and transformed State
structure, UNDP will prioritize the security of territories through  mutual
security and civilian coordination mechanism and funding To strengthen the rule
of law, security, human rights and gender, UNDP will continue to work with
national counterparts to provide an integrated, gender, age and conflict-
sensitive programme to strengthen the social contract and build peace Pilot
projects such as the Stabilization Facility for Liptako-Gourma and the Lake-
Chad-Basin, have laid the foundation to develop  national reintegration strategy
for former members of non-state armed groups to strengthen community resilience
in Southern Maradi UNDP will support interventions aimed at strengthening the
peace and security architecture to enhance cross-border coordination and
conflict-prevention mechanisms These combined approaches improve security,
strengthen social cohesion and contract, and provide sustainable socioeconomic
opportunities for youth and women human rights-based approach that works with
rights-holders and duty-bearers, and draws on the principle of fulfilling
economic, social and environmental rights, will underpin the governance pillar
This includes integrating  gender and disability dimension into the design,
implementation and monitoring of policies, as women and persons with
disabilities are more negatively affected by climate change, environmental
degradation and crises due to food insecurity, loss of livelihoods, and the
resultant increase in domestic violence UNDP will support national efforts to
deepen impartiality, accountability, efficiency, innovation and digitalization
of political and legal institutions as well as local and central entities UNDP
will strengthen legal and regulatory frameworks in line with international norms
and standards These objectives will be ensured by: () building capacity of the
permanent Electoral Commission (CENI); () improving access to justice for
vulnerable populations by setting up legal clinics and building capacity of
legal actors; () establishing  multidimensional legal and administrative
database for faster processing of legal cases; () improving detention
conditions, living environments in prisons, and socioeconomic reintegration of
former prisoners; () strengthening quality basic public services and ensuring
better distribution and accessibility over the national territory using an
integrated approach to implementing regional and local planning; ()
strengthening the capacities of administrative actors and developing  PADC to
promote grassroots development aligned with good governance; and ()
strengthening regional coordination to develop synergy between stakeholders To
contribute to improved national development management, UNDP will continue its
strategic support to and monitoring of the implementation of the national
development plan, including the SDGs Emphasis will be placed on post-COVID-19
economic recovery towards achieving green, inclusive, sustainable and integrated
economic reconversion within the framework of implementing AfCFTA  cross-
cutting, participatory approach will be adopted to ensure national ownership to
help scale up interventions and ensure achievement of expected results based on
catalytic interventions with lasting effects  DP/DCP/NER/ III Programme and risk
management This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to
national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
country level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the
organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal
control framework The programme will be nationally executed If necessary,
national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all the
programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash
transfers (HACT) will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects UNDP will strengthen and adapt its technical, programmatic, operational
and organizational capacities to ensure efficient delivery of the programme
Resources will be used effectively through financial management controls,  sound
internal control framework and improved cost recovery mechanisms The programme
and project steering and technical committees will enable national partners to
fully take part in planning and management activities, ensuring full ownership
of the programme and the sustainability of results achieved  portfolio approach
will be prioritized to optimize project management and resources while promoting
better integration of results UNDP will collaborate with new partners such as
universities, research institutes and private sector To ensure the
sustainability of changes, the roles and capacities of local partners and actors
will be strengthened and prioritized, including their stronger involvement in
the design phase The programme is likely to encounter  range of interconnected
risks, including security risks such as increased violence in borderlands,
social and political instability resulting from  deterioration the socioeconomic
and political situations, marginalization, youth radicalization and gender-based
violence, especially of women, with disruptive impact UNDP will increase
coordination and continuous monitoring and surveillance with the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security and through civil-military coordination It
will scale up early warning systems in stabilization facilities which have
proven effective for conflict settings in Operational risks include UNDP
internal processes and limited capacity of government institutions and national
partners to swiftly implement programmes and apply HACT rules and procedures
Financing risks due to the contraction of the global economy, resulting from
COVID-19 and the ongoing Russia-Ukraine war, will be mitigated through advocacy
for increased government cost-sharing and joint programming to do more with less
Environmental risks manifested in flooding, desertification and drought will be
mitigated through early warning and by strengthening social and environmental-
impact assessment monitoring of oil mining companies Regular monitoring will be
carried out and risks assessed regularly to ensure effective implementation of
mitigation measures Programme activities will apply the revised UNDP social and
environmental standards to enhance programme quality and the enterprise risk
management policy to conduct regular quality assurance and risk assessments
throughout the programme cycle UNDP will contribute to implementing United
Nations security recommendations according to the results of the security risk
assessment carried out by the country team UNDP will rely on the risk control
mechanism for early warning, information, communication and decision-making UNDP
will strengthen its strategies for knowledge management, partnerships,
communication and resource mobilization, including diversifying its partnership
base through strategic innovative advocacy and regular engagement with donors
and partners UNDP will  DP/DCP/NER/ design and implement  strengthened quality
assurance plan incorporating spot-checks, audits and targeted appropriate
capacity-building to support national partners All staff and non-staff, vendors,
implementing partners and responsible parties will be sensitized on
fraud/corruption policy and related sanctions Fraud and corruption risks will be
fully and carefully considered in programme and project document design Finally,
the business continuity plan will be regularly updated and implemented drawing
lessons from COVID-19 and its impact IV Programme monitoring and evaluation An
integrated monitoring and evaluation plan with indicators aligned with the UNDP
Strategic Plan, , the UNSDCF, , and the Economic and Social Development Plan
(PDES), , will ensure continuous monitoring to inform decision- making and to
reach the programme’ targets The choice of performance indicators for the
programme were informed by analyses and recommendations of various evaluations
carried out during the current country programme Programme indicators,
disaggregated by sex and age to the extent possible, will be integrated into the
UNDP monitoring and knowledge-sharing system, as well as external communications
for transparency, accountability, resource mobilization and visibility,
including that of donors UNDP will use adaptive management practices and proven
innovative tools and methodologies, including online data collection mechanisms
from beneficiaries and real-time participatory monitoring Various strategies and
multimedia communication tools will be used to share and promote results and to
develop partnerships to strengthen advocacy activities for development issues
Traditional and social media will be used to tailor communication products to
specific audiences Regular joint monitoring across outcomes will be undertaken
as part of the UNSDCF joint workplan through UNSDCF results groups’ meetings,
and through institutions responsible for implementing the programme as well as
beneficiary representatives Evaluations will be conducted, in line with the UNDP
evaluation policy and plan and for quality assurance, learning/knowledge
management and adaptive programming, as agreed with development partners An
independent midterm evaluation will be carried out to inform implementation of
the programme and development of the subsequent country programme Mandatory
project evaluations will be carried out as planned UNDP will participate in
United Nations system-wide evaluations as part of UNSDCF obligations At least
per cent of programme resources will be devoted to monitoring, evaluation and
data collection Project quality assurance will be conducted as per the policy,
and the gender marker will be used to ensure that 60 per cent of all projects
will be rated GEN- or GEN- and that at least 25 per cent of expenditure will be
allocated to promote gender equality In collaboration with other United Nations
organizations, UNDP will continue to build the monitoring and evaluation
capacities of its partners, including the Government Strategic support will be
provided to strengthen the national economic and social development plan
monitoring and evaluation and national statistics systems, to improve the
quality and availability of data and facilitate the targeting of programme
beneficiaries  DP/DCP/NER/ Annex Results and resources framework for Niger ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PDES, 2022–2026: Outcome  – The Nigerien economy is
structurally transformed Sustainable Development Goals: , , , , , , 10, 12, 13
and OUTCOME OF THE UNSDCF 2023–2027 INVOLVING UNDP: By 2027, the most vulnerable
populations, particularly women, girls, boys and persons with specific needs,
improve their food and nutritional security, the management of natural resources
and the living environment, and strengthen the resilience of food system to
climate change, including in areas affected by conflicts and disasters, using
innovative approaches Related Strategic Plan outcome, 2022–2025: Structural
transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transitions Indicative resources by outcome ($) UNSDCF outcome indicator(),
baselines and target() Data source and frequency of data collection, and
responsibilities Major partners/partnerships frameworks Indicative country
programme outputs (including indicators, baselines and targets) Regular:
$27,412,000  Prevalence of chronic food insecurity Baseline (2018): 35% Target:
25% Source: chronic food insecurity (integrated food security phase
classification) Frequency: Annual Outputs  The populations, State, para- state
and non-state actors at the national, regional and local levels enabled to
develop and implement sustainable agro-sylvo- pastoral and fisheries value
chains GEF GCF FAO UNEP UN-Women UNCDF UNDRR GFDRR GFCS CADRI PSW Other:
$53,000,000  Prevalence of acute food insecurity Baseline (2021): 17% Target:
≤10% Source: Harmonized framework sessions (June-August and March) Frequency:
Annual  Number of functioning agro-sylvo- pastoral and fisheries value chains
developed Baseline (2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Ministry of Agriculture
Frequency: Annual  Prevalence of chronic malnutrition among children aged -
months Baseline (November 2021): % Target: 30% Source: SMART Frequency: Annual
IFAD World Bank, African Development Bank (AfDB) Islamic Development Bank (IsDB)
Number of active and functioning rural organizations contributing to agro-sylvo-
pastoral and fisheries value chains Baseline (2021):  Target (2027): 15 Source:
Ministry of Agriculture Frequency: Annual  Prevalence of global acute
malnutrition (GAM) among children aged -59 months) Baseline (Nov2021): % Target:
≤% Source: SMART Frequency: Annual Belgium, Luxembourg, Japan, Sweden and
Switzerland Output  Vulnerable people in targeted areas, in particular, women
and youth, have access to clean and affordable energy and innovative techniques
and technologies to improve their livelihoods Ministry of Environment, Ministry
of Agriculture Ministry of Livestock, Ministry of Water Resources MAH-GC
Ministry for the Advancement of Women, MoYE  Forest surface area (in % of land
area) Baseline: ,85% Target: TBD Source: Ministry of Environment report
Frequency: Annual  Number of people benefitting from services from clean,
affordable and sustainable energy Baseline (2021):  Degraded land as  proportion
of land area Baseline: (2019): % Source: Ministry of Environment report
Frequency: Annual  DP/DCP/NER/ Target: % Women: 455,945 Men: 440,188 Rural:
896,133 HC3NI CNEDD National Disaster Prevention and Management System National
Assembly Local authorities Private sector actors CSOs Academic and research
structures  Annual growth rate of agro-pastoral production Baseline (2021): %
Target: 10% Source: Directorate of Agricultural Statistics Frequency: Annual
Target (2027): Women: ,055,000 Men: ,040,000 Rural: ,095,000 Source: Ministry of
Energy Frequency: Annual  Number of vulnerable producers implementing innovative
techniques and technologies Baseline (2021): Women: 16,902 Men: 24,815 Target
(2027): Women: 48,000 Men: 32,000 Source: Direction Générale des Eaux et Forêts
(DGEF); CNEDD Frequency: Annual  Number of youth and women with regular and
decent income Baseline (2021): Women: 86,931 Youth: 51,085 Target (2027): Women:
350,000 Youth: 350,000 Source: Ministry of Youth Entrepreneurship (MoYE),
Ministry of the Promotion of Women (MoPW) Frequency: Annual Output  Innovative
techniques and technologies enhanced for the management of natural resources,
including conservation of ecosystems  Number of people directly benefiting from
innovative initiatives to protect nature and promote sustainable use of
resources Baseline (2021): Women: ,386 10 DP/DCP/NER/ Men: ,787 Target (2027):
Women: 10,000 Men: 13,500 Source: DGEF/CNEDD Frequency: Annual  Natural
resources that are managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access and
benefit-sharing regime: () area of terrestrial and marine protected areas
created or under improved management practices (hectares); () number of shared
water ecosystems (fresh or marine) under new or improved cooperative management
Baseline (2021): ()13,712,403 ha; (): 10 Target (2027): ():13,721,403 ha; (): 50
Source: () DGEF; () Niger Basin Authority (ABN), UNIDO Frequency: Annual Output
The populations, and national, regional and local institutions have strengthened
institutional, technical and technological capacities to identify and apply
climate change adaptation/mitigation and disaster risk reduction measures  Level
of implementation of climate change adaptation/mitigation, disaster prevention
and management measures (=low; =medium and =high) Baseline (2021):  Target
(2027):  Source: DGEF, CNEDDMAH-GC), Dispositif National de Prévention et
Gestion des Crises Alimentaires (DNPGCA) Frequency: Annual  Number of women and
men applying climate change adaptation and mitigation measures and techniques
Baseline (2021): Women: 97,395 Men: 79,687 Target (2027): Women: 165,000 11
DP/DCP/NER/ Men: 135,000 Source: CNEDD, MAH-GC, DGEF, DNPGCA Frequency: Annual
Number of risk-informed development strategies and plans in place at national
and subnational levels Baseline (2021):  Target (2027):  Source: MAH-GC
Frequency: Annual  Level of application of international commitments and
agreements by institutions responsible for climate change and disaster risk
reduction (Rating scale:=low; =medium; =high) Baseline (2021):  Target (2027):
Source: CNEDD, MAH-GC, Ministry of Environment Frequency: Annual NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: PDES, 2022–2026: Overall outcome  – The country is well
governed in  secure environment Sustainable Development Goals: , 10, 16 and
OUTCOME  OF THE UNSDCF 2023–2027) INVOLVING UNDP: By 2027, national and local
institutions have improved the application of legal and regulatory frameworks,
the efficiency, accountability, inclusiveness and equity in the implementation
of public policies to promote the provision of quality public services to
communities and families in target areas, including in humanitarian emergency
situations RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN 2022–2025 OUTCOME:  No one left behind
centring on equitable access to opportunities and  rights-based approach to
human agency and human development  Satisfaction rate of communities with the
delivery of quality public services Baseline (2020): 85% Target: 100% Source:
Ministry of Civil Service Frequency: Annual Output  Deconcentrated and
decentralized entities have the technical, technological and operational
capacities to provide quality, inclusive and accessible basic services to
communities CENI, CNDP, Parliament, Mediator of the Republic, HACP, CNCCAI,
CNESS, CNAP, INS Regular: $18,275,000 Other: $69,000,000 MoI, MoJ, MoPW,
Ministry for the Protection of the Child, MoYE, Ministry of Planning, Ministry
of Professional Training, Ministry of Transportation, Ministry for Community
Development  Number of people accessing basic services, including through one-
stop shop and PADC: Baseline (2021): Women:  Poor (income measure):   Ibrahim
index of African governance Baseline (2019): Target: Source: Mo Ibrahim report
Frequency: Annual 12 DP/DCP/NER/ Source: World Bank Frequency: Annual  Score for
public sector management and institutions (CPIA) Baseline (2021): 40% Target:
TBD Deconcentrated and local bodies; governorates, town councils, regional
councils Youth:  Persons with disabilities:  Displaced populations:  Target
(2027): Women: 10,000 Poor: 10,000 Youth: ,000 Persons with disabilities: ,500
Displaced persons: ,500 Source: INS, Ministry of Interior (MoI) Frequency:
Annual UNIDO, UN-Women, UNODC, UNCDF, FAO, UNFPA, United Nations Peacebuilding
Fund Source: World Bank report on statistical capacities indices (INS)
Frequency: Annual  Institut Nationale de la Statistique capacity score and
ranking Baseline (2021): Score: Ranking: 2nd Abdou Moumouni University
Laboratory of Studies and Research on Social Dynamics and Local Development
(LASDEL)  Number of civil status certificates issued through one-stop shops
Baseline (2021):  Target (2027): 50,000 Source: MoI Frequency: Annual Target:
WANEP, NDI, IFES Score: 75 Ranking: 1st Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Sweden,
Denmark, Norway, Luxembourg, Republic of Korea, Japan, United States (INL),
European Union, the Netherlands Output  Legal and judicial institutions have the
technical, technological and operational capacities to provide quality,
accessible and equitable legal services Private sector AfDB, IsDB, World Bank
Number of institutions providing information and processing cases through the
digitized legal and judicial database Baseline:  (2021) Target (2027): 12
Source: Ministry of Justice (MoJ) Frequency: Annual  Number of people supported
who have access to justice Baseline (2021): Women: ,736 Men: 16,485 Children:
,601 Target (2027): Women: 10,000 Men: 50,000 Children: 10,000 Source: MoJ,
National Agency for Legal Assistance (ANAJJ) Frequency: Annual 13 DP/DCP/NER/
Outputs  Institutions in charge of cross- border and internal security as well
as the targeted communities have strengthened capacities to prevent conflicts
and create the conditions for stabilization, social cohesion and peacebuilding
Number of people benefiting from improved infrastructure for recovery in crisis
or post-crisis settings Baseline (2021): 23,036 Target (2027): 150,000 Source:
MoI-, governorate Frequency: Annual  Number of people benefiting from jobs and
improved livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings Baseline (2021): Women:
24,481 Men: 29,352 Youth: 278 Target (2027): Women: 30,000 Men: 40,000 Youth:
,000 Source: MoI, HACP Frequency: Annual  Number of people (disaggregated by
gender and age) who have returned to secured and stabilized areas Baseline
(2020): 12,519 Women: ,514 Men: ,005 Youth: ,756 Target (2027): 75,000 Women:
45,000 Men: 30,000 Youth: 52,500 Source: MoI, HACP Frequency: Annual Output
Accountable, efficient and sustainable democratic institutions in place 14
DP/DCP/NER/ for transparent, inclusive, democratic and credible management of
the electoral cycle  Extent to which the country has constitution making
processes with mechanisms for civic engagement: () Electoral management bodies
with strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive, peaceful and credible elections
() Parliaments with improved capacities to undertake inclusive, effective and
accountable law-making, oversight and representation () Democratic institutions
are accountable, agile and sustainable, allowing for transparent, inclusive,
democratic and credible management of the electoral cycle (=Not in place, =Work
started, =Work in progress, =Work almost complete, =In place) Baseline (2021):
(), (), () Target (2027): (), (), () Source: MI-, Parliament, CENI Frequency:
Annual  Number of new voters registered Baseline (2021) Women: ,093,291 Men:
,353,265 Target (2027): Women: ,149,302 Men: ,150 Source: Electoral roll
Frequency: Biannual  Extent to which local, legislative and presidential
elections are deemed peaceful, inclusive and credible (=Not peaceful, not
inclusive and not credible, = of the ; = of the ; and =all three) Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Observer reports, CENI Frequency:  15
DP/DCP/NER/ Output  Institutions and bodies enabled to design, implement,
monitor and evaluate quality publics policies  Number of planning documents
produced that respond to international quality standards and integrate SDGs
Baseline (2021):  Target (2027):  Source: PDES,  regional development plans
Frequency: -2027  Extent to which the country has data collection and/or
analysis mechanisms providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the
SDGs: () Conventional data collection methods (, surveys)() Administrative
reporting systems () New data sources (, big data) (=Not in place, =Work
started, =Work in progress, =Work almost complete, =In place Baseline (2021): ()
, () , ()  Target (2027): () , () , ()  Frequency: Annual  Number of national
reports produced on the progress towards the SDGs Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027):  Source: CNEDD/SDGs Frequency: Annual Output  Women and youth
socioeconomic empowerment and gender- based violence measures strengthened to
promote gender equality  Number of partnerships with women led CSOs and other
bodies and networks to advance women’ leadership and participation, and gender
equality Baseline (2021):  Target (2027): 15 Source: Partnership agreements
Frequency: Annual 16 DP/DCP/NER/  Number of start-ups created as  result of the
networking of young men and women through the YouthConnekt Niger platform
Baseline (2021): 200 Target (2027): ,500 Source: MoYE Frequency: Annual  Share
of the national budget allocated to the promotion of women and youth and the
fight against gender-based violence Baseline (2021): Less than % Target (2027):
% Source: Ministry of Finance, MoYE, MoPW Frequency: Annual ____________ 17