2022 Renewables Global Futures Report - REN21   Facebook Twitter Instagram
Linkedin Youtube Email ABOUT US Who we are What we do Annual Reports Meet the
team Work with us (Y)OUR NETWORK Get involved Members The REN21 Community
Strategic Intelligence and Renewable Energy Leadership REPORTS About REN21
Reports Renewables Global Status Report Renewables in Cities Global Status
Report Regional Status Reports Global Futures Report Thematic Reports DIALOGUES
About REN21 Events Event Calendar RENdez-vous Series International Renewable
Energy Conference (IREC) REN21 Academy NEWS REN21’s news Newsletters REN21 in
the news REN21 in videos & podcasts Press releases CONTACT Search for: Search
Primary Menu Search for: Search                                     Home REPORTS
GLOBAL FUTURES REPORT 2022 Renewables Global Futures Report 2022 Renewables
Global Futures Report 11 August 2021 11 August 2021   The 2022 edition of the
Renewables Global Futures Report will ask the question: “ What is the role of
renewables in decarbonising the transport sector ?” The question will be applied
globally  and  regionally (Asia)  to both energy and transport experts from the
public, private and non-profit sectors, looking at existing scenarios and
including interviews with companies and country/regional experts. This coming
edition of the GFR falls under REN21’s activities as the renewable energy voice
of the  NDC Transport Initiative for Asia consortium . The initiative is a joint
programme of seven organisations and is funded by the International Climate
Initiative of the German Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and
Nuclear Safety. Participate in the formation of the next GFR Enter your details
on the  Expression of Interest form  for the opportunity to share insights about
your country and activities. Through signing up, you will be kept informed about
developments and how to get involved depending on your expertise! You will also
become part of the growing community of actors surrounding the energy-transport
nexus, as well as the larger REN21 community. If you have any questions, please
feel free to contact us at  gfr@ren21.net . The report is intended as a tool for
education and discussion, and as an objective framework for thinking about the
future.   Share 3     REN21’S DATA CULTURE     REN21's unique renewable energy
reporting culture  has earned the organisation a reputation as a neutral data
and knowledge broker that provides credible and widely accepted information. The
process is built on the elements of collaboration (drawing on the power of
many); consolidation (of data); and transparency (open and rigorous validation).
All data and information are openly available to be used to advocate for a
sustainable energy future.   NEWSLETTER   Afghanistan Albania Algeria American
Samoa Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia
Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas, the Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium
Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil
British Virgin Islands Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia
Cameroon Canada Cabo Verde Central African Republic Chad Channel Islands Chile
China Colombia Comoros Congo, Dem. Rep. Congo, Rep. Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia Cuaracao Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican
Republic Ecuador Egypt, Arab Rep. El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia
Ethiopia Eswatini Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Polynesia Gabon
Gambia, The Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guam
Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hong Kong SAR, China
Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran, Islamic rep. Iraq Ireland Isle of Man
Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea, Dem. People's
Rep. Korea, Rep. Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyz Republic Lao PDR Latvia Lebanon Lesotho
Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao SAR, China Macedonia, FYR
Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania
Mauritius Mexico Micronesia, Fed. Sts. Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro
Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands, The New Caledonia
New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman
Pakistan Palau State of Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru
Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Romania Russian Federation Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
São Tomé and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone
Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovak Republic Slovenia Solomon Islands
Somalia South Africa South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden
Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taipei, China Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand
Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and
Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Uruguay
United States of America Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Virgin Islands
(U.S.) West Bank and Gaza Yemen, Rep. Zambia Zimbabwe DATA TO GO   Latest
information on renewables: Thousands of renewable energy data points at your
fingertips Zoom in on any specific renewable energy sector Share figures
instantly on social media or via email Get translation into your own language
Strategic Intelligence and Renewable Energy Leadership   REN21’s strategic
intelligence activities works to change perceptions about renewables by
strategically positioning renewable energy in the development and climate
discussions and to strengthen a global, cross-sectoral renewable energy voice.
ABOUT US (Y)OUR NETWORK REPORTS DIALOGUES NEWS CONTACT   INSTAGRAM   TWITTER
Tweets by REN21     Legal & Privacy   Facebook Twitter Instagram Linkedin
Youtube Email                                       @2019 - ren21.net. All Right
Reserved.                       Facebook Twitter Instagram Linkedin Youtube
Email   ABOUT US Who we are What we do Annual Reports Meet the team Work with us
(Y)OUR NETWORK Get involved Members The REN21 Community Strategic Intelligence
and Renewable Energy Leadership REPORTS About REN21 Reports Renewables Global
Status Report Renewables in Cities Global Status Report Regional Status Reports
Global Futures Report Thematic Reports DIALOGUES About REN21 Events Event
Calendar RENdez-vous Series International Renewable Energy Conference (IREC)
REN21 Academy NEWS REN21’s news Newsletters REN21 in the news REN21 in videos &
podcasts Press releases CONTACT   This website uses cookies to improve your
experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish.
Cookie settings ACCEPT Privacy & Cookies Policy Close Privacy Overview   This
website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the
website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are
stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic
functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us
analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in
your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of
these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on
your browsing experience.
Necessary                                                        Necessary
Always Enabled
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly.
This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and
security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal
information.                                                               SAVE
& ACCEPT New York UNITED STATES New York City introduced building codes in 2019
that require the installation of solar PV on all new buildings in the city.
Driven in part by air quality concerns, the city also requires that homes and
businesses that use oil for heating buy fuel blended with 5% biodiesel.  Burning
of coal, briquettes and some oils for heating has also been banned.
×                        Freiburg GERMANY The Vauban district of Freiburg was
established in 2001 as a demonstration project for sustainable community
development. Through a combination of solar PV panels, high efficiency standards
in all buildings, and a bio-fueled district heating grid, many houses in Vauban
produce more electricity than they consume. Surplus electricity is sold back to
the city grid, and the profits are split among the district’s households. Use of
renewable energy is further supported through federal tax credits and financial
support from the regional electric utility.                         ×
Vancouver CANADA Vancouver wants to be the “Greenest City in the World” by 2020.
Renewable energy represents an important aspect of this plan: the city plans to
use 100% renewable energy by 2050.  Further, city officials have pledged that
all new building will be net-zero emissions buildings starting in 2030, and that
all buildings will meet this standard by 2050.                         ×
Shenzhen CHINA Shenzhen has a 100% electrified bus fleet (comprised of 64
e-buses in 2018) and is now working on the replacement of the city’s taxis and
trucks with electric vehicles. The city requires delivery companies to purchase
‘new energy vehicles’, including hydrogen and other zero-emission vehicles, and
has allocated free parking space to electric vehicles. Other incentives such as
reduced charging fees, usage subsidies and road access incentives are also used.
Controlling air pollution has been a main driver.                         ×
Seoul REPUBLIC OF KOREA Seoul Metropolitan Government has established the Seoul
Energy Corporation, to oversee the implementation of the city’s energy policies.
This includes developing a city-wide feed-in tariff, direct subsidies, leasing
schemes and loans for solar PV panels at preferential rates. By end-2018 13,125
households in Seoul have become prosumers, generating a combined 252,989 MWh of
electricity.                         ×                        Paris FRANCE Paris
has developed various policies to promote the use of renewable energy. The
EnerCit’IF project provides renewable energy co-operatives access to roof spaces
to set up solar PV systems on publicly owned buildings. In the first half of
2019, solar PV systems were set up on nine schools in Paris. The city has also
issued green bonds specifically to finance renewable energy investments within
its boundaries.                         ×                        Medellin
COLOMBIA Medellin offers tax exemptions for companies that manufacture equipment
for solar, wind and geothermal power to encourage more economic activity in the
city’s renewable energy sector. Tax exemptions range from 20% to 100% for a
given five-year period.                         ×                        Évora
PORTUGAL Évora launched the Inovcity project in 2010 to develop a ‘smart’
electricity grid for residents, businesses and public buildings. The project
provides incentives for individuals and businesses to invest in distributed
generation technologies, such as rooftop solar PV and small wind turbines, as
well as in high-efficiency lighting. As of 2019, the project has been able to
save around 60% in electricity costs.                         ×
Copenhagen DENMARK Copenhagen plans to become the world’s first carbon-neutral
city, by 2025. Wind power already supplies almost all the city’s power needs. 
The local district heating system supplies 97% of the city’s heat demand and is
transitioning from fossil fuels to sustainable biomass.  The city has invested
heavily in carbon-neutral transport solutions, including pedestrian centres,
bike routes, public transportation and support for electric vehicles.
×                        Cape Town SOUTH AFRICA Cape Town includes citizens in
renewable energy planning through discussion with community groups, civil
society organisations and businesses to share solutions and discuss concerns and
project updates. Another initiative, the local small-scale scale embedded
generation programme, enables residential, commercial and industrial electricity
customers to generate their own onsite electricity from renewable energy
technologies and sell their surplus to the grid.                         ×
Bristol UNITED KINGDOM To simplify the adoption of renewable energy in the city
Bristol developed a comprehensive solar map for homes and businesses.  Bristol
has set a target for 1 GW of solar PV installed capacity by 2020, and founded
Bristol Energy in 2016, aiming to increase the share of renewables while also
fighting energy poverty.                         ×                        New
Delhi INDIA The metro system in Delhi is powered, in part, by an off-site solar
PV facility, with auxiliary services such as lighting and air conditioning
powered by on-site rooftop solar PV systems. The city has also recently expanded
its solar PV policy to allow customers who do not have suitable roof space to
participate in solar PV generation via Virtual Net Metering.
×                        Heerlen THE NETHERLANDS Geothermal energy has been used
for heating and cooling in Heerlen since 2008, when an abandoned coal mine near
the city was repurposed into a source of geothermal heat. The project uses
flooded underground mine shafts to access thermal energy to power a large-scale
district heating system. The system provides homes and local businesses in
Heerlen with heating and cooling services and reduces the city’s carbon dioxide
emissions by 65%.                         ×                        Aberdeen
SCOTLAND The Aberdeen Hydrogen Bus Project is the world’s largest demonstration
of hydrogen fuel cell buses. Implemented by Aberdeen City Council as part of the
H2 Aberdeen initiative this fleet of 10 hydrogen-fuelled buses transports more
than 1.8 million passengers over 1.6 million kilometres. In 2017, the buses used
192,645 kilograms of hydrogen, saving an estimated 460 metric tonnes of carbon
dioxide in well-to-wheel emissions.                         ×
Sydney AUSTRALIA On 11 March, 2019 the City of Sydney approved the purchase of
100% renewable energy for the city after their large-site electricity contract
expires on December 31, 2019. This 100% renewables portfolio will enable them to
achieve their 2021 and 2030 greenhouse gas emission reduction and 2021 renewable
energy targets ahead of schedule.                         ×
Skellefteå SWEDEN Skellefteå has been a pioneer of renewable energy since the
early 1900s when municipality-owned power company, Skellefteå Kraft, was
founded. The company, one of the biggest power suppliers in Sweden, boasts an
80% share of renewables and has a goal of transitioning to 100% renewables by
2040. The city also is host to a leading CleanTech cluster.  This cluster houses
numerous companies specializing in environmental technologies, including
bioenergy developers, basic and noble metals recyclers, and leading-edge
companies that are developing wind technologies for cold climates.
×                        San Diego USA San Diego may benefit from California’s
relatively progressive environmental policies, but the city is deliberately
embracing renewable energy to reach its goal of 100% renewables by 2035. Its
Metropolitan Transit Agency was the first transit agency in California to use
biogas from renewable sources to fuel 100% of its fixed route bus fleet. The
city also supports residents and businesses that want to engage with Community
Choice Aggregators (CCAs). CCAs offer an alternative to the incumbent utility
company. providing residents and businesses the option to select an electricity
provider that uses higher share of renewables in its energy mix.
×                        Rio de Janeiro BRAZIL In 2008, Rio de Janeiro passed a
law requiring that all new and refurbished public buildings install solar water
heaters. Decarbonisation of this sectors is high: electric water heating
accounts for an estimated 22.6% of electricity consumption in the Brazilian
residential sector.                         ×                        Quito
ECUADOR Quito, Ecuador is working to densify its Bus Rapid Transit and Metro
transport corridors with a new policy that also supports renewable energy.
Depending on how well a developer scores on an eco-efficiency assessment, the
developer can apply for a buildable increase, in the designated corridor, above
the standard permissible floor area for that zone.                         ×
Quelimane MOZAMBIQUE Despite no sewage system or consolidated waste management
system, Quelimane, Mozambique recognizes its role in climate change.  The
municipality is turning its waste into an asset. It uses organic composted waste
for community farming and is conducting experiments in partnership with Sweden
into the conversion of food waste into cooking gas. They also boast a remarkable
cycling rate of 90% among city residents.                         ×
Lagos NIGERIA In Lagos, Nigeria, solar is becoming a popular investment. This is
in part due to the city government’s Eko Solar project that has installed solar
panels to electrify all primary healthcare centers and more than 20 primary
schools. Residents, businesses, and local government authorities continue to
invest in building solar capacity across the state despite the project’s end.
×                        Graz AUSTRIA In Graz, Austria, the city and Big Solar
Graz are building the world’s largest solar thermal system to provide 10% of the
city’s district heating supply, using 200,000 m² of solar panels and a 900,000
m³ seasonal pit storage. Construction is planned to start in late 2019.
×                        Geneva SWITZERLAND Local businesses and associations
can fundraise for renewable and energy efficiency projects in an innovative, yet
familiar way. An exclusive crowdfunding site, sig-impact.ch, allows community
members to contribute funds to the greening efforts of local organizations in
exchange for rewards, including discounted services and gifts from the recipient
company.                         ×                        Burlington USA In
2018, renewable energy supplied 100% of Burlington’s electricity. More than a
third of the renewable power is generated at a city-owned and operated 50 MW
biomass power plant fueled by wood, most of which arrives via rail from
sustainably managed forests in Vermont and New York, and all within a
100-kilometer radius of Burlington.                         ×
Bonn GERMANY Residents of Bonn have the opportunity to shape their own renewable
energy landscape with membership in a citizen energy cooperative. The
BürgerEnergie Rhein-Sieg eG cooperative gives community members the option to
buy shares in local renewable energy infrastructure and have an equal vote –
regardless of the amount of equity bought – in the future development of the
cooperative.                         ×                        Barcelona SPAIN
Barcelona takes the energy poverty challenge to heart. Climate justice and
citizen action are at the heart of it Climate Plan 2018 – 2030. The city is
mandated to ensure that energy access and social equity are woven into every
aspect of its Climate Plan. This has led to a number of inclusive actions,
including a “No Cuts” policy prevent gas, water, or electricity supplies from
being cut off for the most vulnerable communities, the development of energy
rights support services, and accessible climate shelters that provide cooled
spaces during high heat events.                         ×
Johannesburg SOUTH AFRICA The University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South
Africa has helped the city make big strides in its transition to renewable
energy. Their project installed a first-of-its-kind Southern African district
heating project, which combined solar, co-generation, and gas heating
technologies to serve more than 1,000 students living in 14 residence halls.
×                        Zhytomyr UKRAINE In Zhytomyr, Ukraine, the city
government has made a commitment to reach 100% renewables by 2050. To reach this
commitment, they are constructing four biomass fired combined heat and power
plants with a total capacity of 100MW and have developed an incentive programme
to help community members purchase and install residential solar PV systems.
×                        Bujumbura BURUNDI In Burundi, 95% of the population do
not have access to electricity, and the national supply cannot keep up with
growing demand. Bujumbura, Burundi’s largest city, has taken a number of actions
to improve electricity access with renewables. Through partnerships with the
private sector and investment banks, the city is installing solar-powered “light
islands” throughout the city. These “light islands” allow activities to continue
after nightfall and improve safety and quality of life. The city has also
installed a 260kW PV system at Hospital University Center of Kamenge. The grid-
connected system will provide more reliable energy for the hospital and help
reduce cuts in power during blackouts. Any surplus energy will be feed back into
the grid.                         ×
Tashkent, Uzbekistan                     Tashkent UZBEKISTAN In 2017 65% of the
city of Tashkent’s traditional city-wide heating infrastructure was past its
useful life. Instead of repairing the systems with the same technology, the city
is decentralizing and improving the efficiency of the heating system by building
solar collectors and local boiler houses across the city’s existing district
heating network.                         ×                        Santiago CHILE
Chile has introduced two new metro lines that are powered by 42% and 18% of
solar and wind energy respectively.  Serving 2.2 million people daily, this
investment is estimated to have cut Santiago’s yearly carbon dioxide emissions
by 130,000 tonnes.                         ×                        Tokyo JAPAN
In March 2019, the five-kilometer Tokyu Setagaya rail line became the first
urban rail service in Japan to be powered entirely by renewable energy. The
light rail line, which transports 57,000 passengers each day, is powered by
geothermal and hydro power. The rail service used 2,200 megawatt-hours of
electricity in 2018. The switch to renewable power is projected to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions by an estimated 1,263 metric tonnes per year.
×                        Agence web Creation site internet