ASEAN Renewables Investment: Opportunities and Challenges – Analysis - IEA IEA
Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports ASEAN Renewables Investment: Opportunities
and Challenges ASEAN Renewables Investment: Opportunities and Challenges
A Joint Report by the International Energy Agency and the Centre for Climate
Finance & Investment                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
As the world contends with a slowdown in global economic activity, inflation and
heightened geopolitical tensions, it is increasingly important to address energy
security issues. For our fourth and final report, we shift our focus the ASEAN
region. Countries in the ASEAN region are amongst the most affected globally by
climate change, with substantial socio-economic impacts experienced over the
last two decades. The ASEAN region's economies also experienced high economic
and demographic growth, with rapid urbanisation, industrialisation and a
continuing rise in energy demand.  Yet, renewable power development in the
region is lagging from inadequate policy and investment frameworks. Regulatory
barriers, incumbent interests and inflexible commercial arrangements have
enabled the continued prioritisation of fossil generation over renewables.
Despite falling costs around the world for renewable technologies, solar and
wind project costs remain elevated in Southeast Asia due to lack of deployment
scale and underdevelopment of supply chains. In this report we examine how a
rapid scale up in investment in renewable power is required for ASEAN countries
to meet sustainability goals and we identify priorities for decision makers to
help unlock investment in renewable power, with a focus on attracting lower cost
capital from international investors. Published March 2023 License Terms of Use
for Non-CC Material Supported by Share Cite         Related content      All
results circle-arrow Climate Infrastructure Investing: Risks and Opportunities
for Unlisted Renewables A Joint Report by the International Energy Agency and
the Centre for Climate Finance & Investment                     Report — March
2022                  Clean Energy Investing: Global Comparison of Investment
Returns A Joint Report by the International Energy Agency and the Centre for
Climate Finance & Investment                     Report — March 2021
Energy Investing:  Exploring Risk and Return in the Capital Markets A Joint
Report by the International Energy Agency and the Centre for Climate Finance &
Investment                     Report — October 2020                  Previous
slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  ASEAN Renewables
Investment: Opportunities and Challenges , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/asean-renewables-investment-opportunities-and-
challenges Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.