Best Practices for Electrifying Rural Health Care Facilities with Decentralised
Renewables - The Alliance for Rural Electrification Become a member About About
us Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What
our Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us?
What our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for
Electrification Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for
Electrification Hub Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre
Discover DRE Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News
Events Media kit Member login About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 28 July, 2020 Best Practices for Electrifying Rural Health Care
Facilities with Decentralised Renewables Electricity is a prerequisite to enable
health services for every health care facility around the globe. While the
struggle of rural communities to access quality health services has long been a
critical issue, the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the essential role that
electricity plays in rural health care facilities. Against this emergency
background, DRE solutions offer the cleanest, cheapest and smartest solution to
electrify rural health care facilities in most cases. DRE is not just an
essential pillar to empower health care facilities and vulnerable citizens in
their fight against COVID-19, but also a promising catalyst to power tomorrow’s
local economies and speed up post-disease socio-economic recovery. By showcasing
16 case studies  from ARE Members, as well as providing  core recommendations
for international funding partners, philanthropies and governments  building on
those, this publication aims to: Demonstrate the ability of DRE solutions to
quickly deliver sustainable, reliable power to rural health care facilities ,
helping such projects to attract more investment; Serve as inspiration for new
DRE projects  and support vulnerable communities in their fight against and
subsequent recovery to the global health crisis. The publication was published
by ARE with the support of  GET.invest . Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy
Policy Alliance for Rural Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon
63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses,
market intelligence & insights from the rural electrification sector in your
inbox every second month. For free. Subscribe
©2024 Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept