Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2022 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2022
Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2022                                 Annual
report 2022                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
In the five years since its launch, the Clean Energy Transitions Programme
(CETP) has become the largest and most important programme at the International
Energy Agency (IEA). It has been the main vehicle through which the IEA has
established, deepened and strengthened partnerships with major non-member
countries – those countries that are at the forefront of the clean energy
transition. The programme has also played a crucial role in enabling the IEA to
strengthen its global leadership role in clean energy transitions at a pace and
scale that would otherwise not have been possible, with great benefit to the
programme’s focus countries and IEA member countries alike. This CETP Annual
Report 2022 provides an overview of the programme’s major achievements in the
last year. During this time, the CETP has driven forward an ambitious and
impactful agenda, even as the world has contended with multiple overlapping
crises. As just some examples, the CETP delivered the Energy Sector Roadmap to
Net Zero Emissions in Indonesia, which ministers strongly welcomed at the G20,
and has played a key role in shaping Indonesia’s landmark Just Energy Transition
Partnership (JETP). Similarly, the IEA has been able to take its engagement to a
whole new level with various African countries, such as with its first-ever
report on the Clean Energy Transitions in the Greater Horn of Africa, and
provided policy advice that was directly accepted into China’s latest five-year
plan. More broadly, it has also supported strategically important work on
critical minerals, energy employment and clean energy investment. Overall, the
CETP’s combination of data, insight, advice and capacity building is making a
strong positive contribution to advancing clean energy transitions around the
world – with a focus on emerging and developing economies. Finally, the CETP
Annual Report 2022 also provides an overview of the programme’s objectives,
governance and strategic framework, as well as new developments related to the
Joint Commitment of the Funders adopted at the IEA Ministerial Meeting in March
2022. Published March 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite The Energy Mix Get
updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2023),  Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2022 , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/clean-energy-transitions-programme-2022, Licence: CC
BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.