CO2 storage resources and their development – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports CO2 storage resources and their development
CO2 storage resources and their development                                 An
IEA CCUS Handbook                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) technologies are an important
solution for the decarbonisation of the global energy system as it proceeds down
the path to net zero emissions. CCUS can contribute to the decarbonisation of
the industrial and power generation sectors, and can also unlock technology-
based carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) removal. However, its successful deployment hinges
on the availability of CO 2  storage. For widespread CCUS deployment to occur,
CO 2  storage infrastructure needs to develop at the same speed or faster than
CO 2  capture facilities.  CO 2  has been injected into the Earth’s subsurface
since the 1970s and dedicated CO 2  storage (where CO 2  is injected for the
purpose of its storage and not for CO 2 -based enhanced oil recovery) has been
occurring since 1996. There are seven commercial-scale dedicated CO 2  storage
sites today, with more than 100 others in development. Lessons learned from
these sites, along with research, pilot and demonstration projects, contribute
to our understanding of CO 2  storage resources, their assessment and their
development into CO 2  storage sites.  This IEA CCUS Handbook is an aid for
energy sector stakeholders on CO 2  storage resources and their development. It
provides an overview of geological storage, its benefits, risks and
socio‑economic considerations. The handbook is supported by an extensive
glossary of CO 2  storage-related terminology found at the end of this report
and complements the  IEA CCUS Handbook on Legal and Regulatory Frameworks .
Published December 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Online table of contents
1.0  Executive summary read Read online 2.0  Introduction read Read online
Explore the database behind the report
CCUS legal and regulatory database                              arrow-right
Related content      All results circle-arrow Legal and Regulatory Frameworks
for CCUS An IEA CCUS Handbook                     Technology report — July 2022
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage: the opportunity in Southeast Asia
Technology report — June 2021                  CCUS around the world in 2021
Featured pilot, demonstration, and early stage projects
Technology report — April 2021                  About CCUS Playing an important
and diverse role in meeting global energy and climate goals
Technology report — April 2021                  Roadmap : Carbon Capture and
Storage in Industrial Applications Roadmap                     Technology report
— August 2012                  Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get
updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  CO2 storage resources and their development , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/co2-storage-resources-and-their-development,
Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close
dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking
the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.