Coal in Net Zero Transitions – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Coal in Net Zero Transitions Coal in Net
Zero Transitions                                 Strategies for rapid, secure
and people-centred change                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
Coal and its emissions are a critical issue as the world contends with both the
global energy crisis and the climate crisis.  Coal in Net Zero Transitions:
Strategies for rapid, secure and people-centred change  is a new IEA special
report in the  World Energy Outlook  series. It presents pragmatic, real-world
guidance on how policymakers can achieve a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
from coal without harming economies or energy security, outlining measures to
finance energy transitions and address their social and employment aspects. All
long-term IEA scenarios that meet international climate goals feature a rapid
decline in global coal emissions. Without this, it will be impossible to avoid
severe impacts from a changing climate. However, the world is currently far from
heading decisively in this direction. Renewable energy options are the most
cost-effective new sources of electricity generation in most markets, but there
are still multiple challenges in reducing emissions from the existing global
fleet of coal-fired power plants. This special report explores the options for
the power sector and other parts of the economy where coal plays a notable role.
It examines a range of policy and technology areas, including the potential for
carbon capture, utilisation and storage. And it addresses investment and
financing needs, taking into account the importance of ensuring reliable and
affordable energy supplies and of tackling the social consequences of change.
Published November 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite Online table
of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online 2.0  High level policy
messages read Read online 3.0  Coal emissions by region in 2021 and 2050 read
Read online The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data
and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Coal in Net Zero
Transitions , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/coal-in-net-zero-
transitions, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog
Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.