Efficient Grid-Interactive Buildings – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Efficient Grid-Interactive Buildings
Efficient Grid-Interactive Buildings                                 Future of
buildings in ASEAN                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
A future with net zero emissions requires scaling up improvements in energy
efficiency, electrification of end uses and renewable energy generation. For the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), a growing population and rising
standards of living will massively increase future energy demand. Mitigating
growing electricity demand and integrating renewable energy into electricity
generation will therefore be paramount for the region’s clean energy transition
and avoid lock-in of additional fossil fuel generation. The intermittent nature
of variable renewable energy and increasing deployment of distributed energy
resources are putting additional pressure on existing grids. In response to
these challenges, this report explores the opportunities and challenges for
efficient grid-interactive buildings in the ASEAN region. Such buildings are
becoming a crucial element for the global ambition to attain net zero emissions,
as they can combine enhanced energy efficiency, advanced smart digital
technologies and decarbonised electricity generation. This integration creates
the potential for buildings to shift from energy-intensive consumers to low-
carbon prosumers, empowered by digital technologies that can offer flexibility
benefits to the electricity grids. With the ability to produce, consume, store,
sell and buy energy, buildings become active participants in the building-to-
grid ecosystem. Drawing on relevant international trends and best practices, the
current report lays out an analytical framework to assess a variety of factors
that can enable a building to become energy efficient and grid-interactive. The
framework is used to analyse the current situation in countries of the ASEAN
region. The report provides policy-oriented recommendations and guidelines
tailored to different stages of the process for adopting efficient grid-
interactive solutions in buildings. These recommendations can support ASEAN
policy makers in their policy development to create an energy-efficient and
grid-interactive built environment, contributing to a cleaner and more
sustainable energy future. Published October 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Efficient Grid-
Interactive Buildings , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/efficient-grid-
interactive-buildings, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report
Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on
LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription
successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any
time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.