Financing Clean Energy in Africa – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About
News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system
Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil
Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings
Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Financing Clean Energy in Africa Financing
Clean Energy in Africa                                 World Energy Outlook
Special Report                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
Although Africa accounts for one-fifth of the global population, the region
currently attracts only 3% of global energy investment. By 2030, energy
investment needs to double to over USD 200 billion per year, in order for
African countries to achieve all their energy-related development goals,
including universal access to modern energy, while meeting in time and in full
their nationally determined contributions. Financing Clean Energy in Africa, a
World Energy Outlook Special Report, builds on the key findings from the Africa
Energy Outlook 2022, which introduced the Sustainable Africa Scenario (SAS), and
charts innovative investment solutions across the continent that are critical to
scale up energy investment. It develops a theory of change based on the positive
spillover effects of increasing the availability of affordable capital for clean
energy projects. Currently, the cost of capital for energy projects in African
countries is at least 2-3x higher than in advanced economies and China, which
hinders investment by raising project costs. The International Energy Agency
(IEA) and the African Development Bank Group have joined forces to produce this
new analysis, which benefitted from the review of over 85 case studies and over
40 stakeholder interviews. The report focuses on a range of topics, spanning
technologies and financing providers, including local institutions, and looks at
what types of capital are most suited for the specificities of each sector or
technology. The analysis pays close attention to how to scale up private
investment, including the role of de-risking support from development finance
institutions (DFIs) and donors: by 2030, USD 28 billion of concessional capital
will be necessary to mobilise the required USD 90 billion in private investment
in clean energy. Increasing the role of the private sector allows DFIs and
donors to also scale up support to non-commercial areas, such as enabling
environments, unproven technologies and fragile and conflict-afflicted states,
unproven technologies.  Published September 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press release
Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online 2.0
Clean energy investment landscape: setting the scene read Read online 3.0
Designing finance solutions for clean energy: solutions for key sectors read
Read online 4.0  Mobilising capital for a sustainable future read Read online
Africa Energy Outlook 2022  Today’s global energy crisis underscores the urgency
and magnitude of the task of transforming Africa’s energy sector, as well as the
benefits of an accelerated shift to more affordable and cleaner sources of
energy.The Africa Energy Outlook 2022 is a new special report from the
International Energy Agency’s World Energy Outlook series. It explores pathways
for Africa’s energy system to evolve toward achieving all African development
goals, including universal access to modern and affordable energy services by
2030 and nationally determined contributions.The report analyses infrastructure
expansion needs, investment requirements, financing options and energy policy
priorities. It also explores a shifting fuel mix that supports resilient
development, opportunities for new exports, and just transition issues –
including energy access, affordability and employment. Read more Africa Energy
Outlook 2022 World Energy Outlook Special Report                     Country
report — June 2022                          Related content      All results
circle-arrow Clean Energy Transitions in the Greater Horn of Africa
Country report — October 2022                  Africa Energy Outlook 2022 World
Energy Outlook Special Report                     Country report — June 2022
Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Financing Clean
Energy in Africa , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/financing-clean-
energy-in-africa, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.