Global EV Outlook 2023 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Global EV Outlook 2023 Global EV Outlook
2023 Download pdf                             Overview
Related files                                                              1
Previous editions                                                              1
About this report The Global EV Outlook is an annual publication that identifies
and discusses recent developments in electric mobility across the globe. It is
developed with the support of the members of the Electric Vehicles Initiative
(EVI). Combining historical analysis with projections to 2030, the report
examines key areas of interest such as electric vehicle and charging
infrastructure deployment, battery demand, electricity consumption, oil
displacement, greenhouse gas emissions and related policy developments. The
report includes analysis of lessons learned from leading markets to inform
policy makers and stakeholders about policy frameworks and market systems for
electric vehicle adoption. This edition features analysis of the financial
performance of EV-related companies, venture capital investments in EV-related
technologies, and trade of electric vehicles. Finally, the report makes
available two online tools: the Global EV Data Explorer and Global EV Policy
Explorer, which allow users to interactively explore EV statistics and
projections, and policy measures worldwide. This report is part of the IEA’s
support of the first global stocktake of the Paris Agreement, which will be
finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN Climate Change Conference, at the
end of 2023. Find other reports in this series on the IEA’s  Global Energy
Transitions Stocktake  page. Published April 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press
release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read
online 2.0  Electric Vehicles Initiative read Read online 3.0  Trends in
electric light-duty vehicles read Read online 4.0  Trends in electric heavy-duty
vehicles read Read online 5.0  Trends in charging infrastructure read Read
online 6.0  Trends in batteries read Read online 7.0  Policy developments read
Read online 8.0  Corporate strategy read Read online 9.0  Prospects for electric
vehicle deployment read Read online Electric car sales break new records with
momentum expected to continue through 2023         Related files
Launch presentation                                  Download "Launch
presentation"         Previous editions
Global EV Outlook 2022                              arrow-right         Related
content      All results circle-arrow Global EV Data Explorer Explore historical
and projected data on electric vehicles sales, stock, charging infrastructure
and oil displacement Data explorer card data set Global EV Policy Explorer Key
policies and measures that support the deployment of electric and zero-emission
vehicles Data explorer card data set Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2023),  Global EV Outlook 2023 , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-outlook-2023, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to
clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.