Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles Grid
Integration of Electric Vehicles                                 A manual for
policy makers                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
This policy makers manual is prepared under the framework of the Global
Environment Facility programme aimed at supporting low- and middle-income
economies in their transition to electric mobility. It aims to serve as a guide
for policy makers to effectively integrate electric vehicle charging into the
grid, thereby supporting road transport electrification and decarbonisation.
The key steps can be summarised as preparing institutions for the shift to
electric mobility, assessing the impacts on the grid, deploying measures for
grid integration and improving power system planning. Each of these steps is
informed by insights from various studies and inputs from international
stakeholders, with recommendations based on best practices from around the
world.  Published December 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Supported by Share Cite Online
table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online 2.0  EV factsheet 2022
read Read online Downloads                                     EV Factsheet 2022
Download "EV Factsheet 2022" The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest
news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View
sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy
system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and
commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-
north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA
©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Grid
Integration of Electric Vehicles , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/grid-
integration-of-electric-vehicles, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share
this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.