Hydrogen Patents for a Clean Energy Future – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Hydrogen Patents for a Clean Energy Future
Hydrogen Patents for a Clean Energy Future                                 A
global trend analysis of innovation along hydrogen value chains
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report A successful transition to a clean energy future will be
supported by rapid changes in the global economy and in people’s patterns of
energy consumption, all of which have the potential to sustain healthier
societies, more equitable outcomes and a more resilient planet. Technology will
be at the heart of many of these changes, and nowhere more so than in the scale-
up of hydrogen as a clean energy carrier. While strong policy will be needed to
make low-emission hydrogen cost-competitive, it will not be possible without
technology improvements across a value chain that touches nearly every part of
the energy system. Innovators around the world are ramping up their efforts in
areas as diverse as fossil fuel conversion, electrochemical splitting of water,
graphene tanks, cryogenic storage, fuel cell motors for aircraft and the
reduction of iron ore. If hydrogen is to play a major role in reducing fossil
fuel emissions, its future depends on uniting a wide range of advances in
different types of hardware and creating new markets for them. Compared with
digital technologies such as software, hardware generally takes more time to
develop and involves greater investment risk during the prototyping and market
entry phases. Through patenting, inventors seek to ensure that they can recoup
these investments in innovation. Coordinating the deployment of the full
hydrogen energy value chain is perhaps the most complex of all the technical
challenges facing energy engineers and it is sometimes hard to discern the
status of all the underpinning technology areas. Patents are strong indicators
of innovation activity which can give very detailed insights into the state and
direction of the science. This study, which combines the expertise of the
International Energy Agency and the European Patent Office, is the most
comprehensive, global and up-to-date investigation of hydrogen-related patenting
so far. Uniquely, it covers technologies for the full range of hydrogen supply,
storage, distribution, transformation and end-user applications, as well as
introducing new search strategies to compare incremental innovation related to
established fossil fuel processes with emerging technologies motivated by the
climate challenge. Published January 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share
Cite         Related content      All results circle-arrow Patents and the
Energy Transition Global trends in clean energy technology innovation April 2021
Statistics report — April 2021                  The Energy Mix Get updates on
the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  Hydrogen Patents for a Clean Energy Future , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/hydrogen-patents-for-a-clean-energy-future, Licence:
CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.