Implementing Clean Energy Transitions – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Implementing Clean Energy Transitions
Implementing Clean Energy Transitions                                 Focus on
road transport in emerging economies                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
This report assesses the impact of the road transport sector on energy demand,
CO 2  emissions and air pollution in several selected major emerging economies
over the coming decades under several IEA modelling scenarios. Most notably the
Announced Pledges Scenario (APS) aims to show to what extent announced ambitions
and targets, including the most recent ones, are on the path to deliver
emissions reductions required to achieve net zero emissions by 2050. Bringing
about a road transport decarbonisation pathway in line with the APS in the
selected major emerging economies - Brazil, People’s Republic of China, India,
Indonesia, Mexico and South Africa - will require significant enhancement of
existing policies and the introduction of new innovative policies and measures
in each of selected countries. Our report sets out six policy areas critical to
the achievement of the road transport transitions and a series of
recommendations for strengthening financing for the sector. Importantly, the
report provides detailed reference to a wide range of policy measures and good
practice already in place in many major emerging economies elsewhere to
facilitate knowledge sharing among countries. It also places a special emphasis
on the road transport sectors of India and Indonesia. These countries are IEA
partners in their respective regions and benefit from an enhanced programme of
work. Published August 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Policy library This
road transport policy library aims to identify the key implemented policies in
selected emerging economies, namely Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, and South
Africa, in order to assess where gaps may arise and help governments and
policymakers to explore other international policy experiences. The library
groups transport policies within three overarching categories: Regulation, incl.
standards and mandates:  This includes fuel-economy standards, emission
standards, blending mandates, charging standards and EV mandates.  Incentives:
This includes for both cases incentives for electric vehicle, modal shift,
biofuels and scrappage schemes. Fuel excise taxes and carbon pricing are also
included in this category. Information:  This includes policies and initiatives
focused on informing consumers, training, and networking. This library builts on
the joint I EA/IRENA Policy and Measures database . This library may not be
comprehensive, and its content will be updated regularly. For more information,
questions or suggestions about new policies to include, please do contact us at
policies@iea.org . Regulation, including standards and mandates Incentives
Information The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data
and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Implementing Clean
Energy Transitions , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/implementing-clean-
energy-transitions, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.