Introducing comprehensive e-waste system to enable environment for solar energy
and electric mobility markets’ development | Green Climate Fund Green Climate
Fund Search Login Menu About                 GCF About GCF Secretariat Structure
Management Headquarters Careers Procurement Governance GCF Board Committees,
panels & groups Policies & strategies Partners National Designated Authorities
Accredited Entities Observers Resource mobilisation Initial Resource
Mobilisation GCF-1 GCF-2 Accountability Evaluation Integrity Redress mechanism
Information disclosure Projects &                 programmes Areas of work
Countries Themes & result areas Private sector financing Project portfolio List
of projects Portfolio dashboard Sustainability & inclusion Results-based
management Access funding Project cycle Programming manual Appraisal guidance
Sectoral guides Investment framework Other funding modalities Simplified
Approval Process Project preparation support Requests for Proposals Project-
specific Assessment Approach Country & entity engagement Country commitments &
ambitions Readiness support Entity accreditation News &                 events
News & stories News releases Stories Announcements Videos Events Calendar of
events Board meetings Data &                 Resources Documents Publications
Operational documents Board documents Knowledge Readiness Learning Data library
GCF  Board GCF Board Board meetings Documents Decisions B.38 About GCF About GCF
Secretariat Secretariat Structure Management Headquarters Careers Procurement
Governance Governance GCF Board Committees, panels & groups Policies &
strategies Partners Partners National Designated Authorities Accredited Entities
Observers Resource mobilisation Resource mobilisation Initial Resource
Mobilisation GCF-1 GCF-2 Accountability Accountability Evaluation Integrity
Redress mechanism Information disclosure Projects & programmes Areas of work
Areas of work Countries Themes & result areas Private sector financing Project
portfolio List of projects Portfolio dashboard Sustainability & inclusion
Results-based management Access funding Overview Project cycle Programming
manual Appraisal guidance Sectoral guides Investment framework Other funding
modalities Overview Simplified Approval Process Project preparation support
Requests for Proposals Project-specific Assessment Approach Country & entity
engagement Country & entity engagement Country commitments & ambitions Readiness
support Entity accreditation News & events News & stories News releases Stories
Announcements Videos Events Calendar of events Board meetings Data & resources
Documents Publications Operational documents Board documents Knowledge Readiness
Data library Learning GCF Board GCF Board Board meetings Documents Decisions
B.38      Back              Subscribe Suggestions B.38 Governing Instrument
Concept note Projects   GCF apps portal Welcome to GCF’s online platform. The
GCF Apps portal is available for GCF Board members, National Designated
Authorities (NDA) / Focal Points, and Accredited Entities (AE). Login Looking to
get  accredited ? Request a Digital Accreditation Platform (DAP) account
Introducing comprehensive e-waste system to enable environment for solar energy
and electric mobility markets’ development Download
English                         |                         PDF
|                         2.47 MB                     Introducing comprehensive
e-waste system to enable environment for solar energy and electric mobility
markets’ development   This Readiness Programme is aimed at supporting the
enabling regulatory and investment framework for sustained climate action in the
energy and transport sectors in line with the sectoral development visions,
updated NDC and LT-LEDS, and the national priority readiness needs (identified
in the current version of the “GCF-Armenia Country Cooperation Programme”) by
addressing the following capacity constraints and regulatory gaps pertaining to
e-waste: No assessment of environmental and economic risks from e-waste
generated from end-of-life solar panels and electric-vehicle batteries No
policy, legislative framework and regulations in place for management of e-waste
from end-of-life solar panels and electric vehicle batteries No assessment of
socio-economic opportunities and benefits from recovering, reusing and recycling
end-of-life solar panels and electric vehicle batteries Low level of awareness,
lack of technical capacity and coordination among national stakeholders on
e-waste management practices   Cover date 06 November 2023 Document type
Approved readiness proposal Country Armenia Share   Green Climate Fund Who we
are About GCF Secretariat Careers Procurement Login GCF Apps portal Request
access to the Digital Accreditation Platform Reach us Contact Information
disclosure Filing a complaint Reporting fraud Terms and conditions Privacy
statement Songdo Business District                                 175 Art
center-daero                                 Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004
Republic of Korea +82 32 458 6059 (KST) Subscribe Subscribe to GCF updates ×
Stay up-to-date with the Green Climate Fund's activities. So we can get to know
you better, please identify yourself and the organisation you are affiliated
with: I am a media representative. Subscribe to: GCF newletter GCF event updates
GCF COP updates GCF-2 replenishment newsletter Privacy policy acceptance By
submitting this form you are allowing GCF to collect and store the entered data
in accordance with our  privacy statement .   Submit