Making blended finance work for nature-based solutions | Green Climate Fund
Green Climate Fund Search Login Menu About                 GCF About GCF
Secretariat Structure Management Headquarters Careers Procurement Governance GCF
Board Committees, panels & groups Policies & strategies Partners National
Designated Authorities Accredited Entities Observers Resource mobilisation
Initial Resource Mobilisation GCF-1 GCF-2 Accountability Evaluation Integrity
Redress mechanism Information disclosure Projects &                 programmes
Areas of work Countries Themes & result areas Private sector financing Project
portfolio List of projects Portfolio dashboard Sustainability & inclusion
Results-based management Access funding Project cycle Programming manual
Appraisal guidance Sectoral guides Investment framework Other funding modalities
Simplified Approval Process Project preparation support Requests for Proposals
Project-specific Assessment Approach Country & entity engagement Country
commitments & ambitions Readiness support Entity accreditation News &
events News & stories News releases Stories Announcements Videos Events Calendar
of events Board meetings Data &                 Resources Documents Publications
Operational documents Board documents Knowledge Readiness Learning Data library
GCF  Board GCF Board Board meetings Documents Decisions B.38 About GCF About GCF
Secretariat Secretariat Structure Management Headquarters Careers Procurement
Governance Governance GCF Board Committees, panels & groups Policies &
strategies Partners Partners National Designated Authorities Accredited Entities
Observers Resource mobilisation Resource mobilisation Initial Resource
Mobilisation GCF-1 GCF-2 Accountability Accountability Evaluation Integrity
Redress mechanism Information disclosure Projects & programmes Areas of work
Areas of work Countries Themes & result areas Private sector financing Project
portfolio List of projects Portfolio dashboard Sustainability & inclusion
Results-based management Access funding Overview Project cycle Programming
manual Appraisal guidance Sectoral guides Investment framework Other funding
modalities Overview Simplified Approval Process Project preparation support
Requests for Proposals Project-specific Assessment Approach Country & entity
engagement Country & entity engagement Country commitments & ambitions Readiness
support Entity accreditation News & events News & stories News releases Stories
Announcements Videos Events Calendar of events Board meetings Data & resources
Documents Publications Operational documents Board documents Knowledge Readiness
Data library Learning GCF Board GCF Board Board meetings Documents Decisions
B.38      Back              Subscribe Suggestions B.38 Governing Instrument
Concept note Projects   GCF apps portal Welcome to GCF’s online platform. The
GCF Apps portal is available for GCF Board members, National Designated
Authorities (NDA) / Focal Points, and Accredited Entities (AE). Login Looking to
get  accredited ? Request a Digital Accreditation Platform (DAP) account  Making
blended finance work for nature-based solutions Download
English                         |                         PDF
|                         1.24 MB                     Making blended finance
work for nature-based solutions   There is global recognition that biodiversity
loss is just as urgent as the climate crisis and that they are intimately
linked. One effective solution is to use nature-based solutions which can
address the climate crisis, land degradation and biodiversity loss, as well as
contribute to addressing a variety of social issues, such as water scarcity
management and poverty alleviation. Nature-based solutions have enormous
potential, however they are greatly underfunded. Thus, there is an urgent need
to restructure and redirect the planning and distribution of public and private
finance to better support these initiatives.  This paper provides an overview of
various financial instruments available for climate action and nature
conservation, focusing on the innovative approaches taken by the Green Climate
Fund (GCF) and its partners to catalyze finance at scale. This paper discusses
five categories of instruments to catalyze finance for nature-based solutions
and how instruments can be combined for maximum impact, such as blended finance
mechanisms. It also aims to share the experiences of GCF and its partners in
designing examples of these and other blended finance mechanisms through three
approaches: complementarity, sequencing and partnerships.   Cover date 31 March
2023 Document type   Working paper Share   Related Sectoral guide: Ecosystems
and ecosystem services    Green Climate Fund Who we are About GCF Secretariat
Careers Procurement Login GCF Apps portal Request access to the Digital
Accreditation Platform Reach us Contact Information disclosure Filing a
complaint Reporting fraud Terms and conditions Privacy statement Songdo Business
District                                 175 Art center-daero
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 22004                                 Republic of Korea +82
32 458 6059 (KST) Subscribe Subscribe to GCF updates × Stay up-to-date with the
Green Climate Fund's activities. So we can get to know you better, please
identify yourself and the organisation you are affiliated with: I am a media
representative. Subscribe to: GCF newletter GCF event updates GCF COP updates
GCF-2 replenishment newsletter Privacy policy acceptance By submitting this form
you are allowing GCF to collect and store the entered data in accordance with
our  privacy statement .   Submit