Scaling Up Private Finance for Clean Energy in Emerging and Developing Economies
– Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help
centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-
Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy
challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions
Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving
Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water
Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19
All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or
region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia
Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania
Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain
Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Scaling Up Private Finance for Clean Energy
in Emerging and Developing Economies Scaling Up Private Finance for Clean Energy
in Emerging and Developing Economies Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
A massive scaling up of investment is essential in emerging and developing
economies to sustainably meet rising demand for energy, as well as to ensure
that climate targets are met. Getting on track for net zero emissions by 2050
will require clean energy spending in emerging and developing economies to more
than triple by 2030 – far beyond the capacity of public financing alone and
therefore demanding an unprecedented mobilization of private capital. This
special report by the International Energy Agency (IEA) and International
Finance Corporation (IFC) examines how to scale up private finance for clean
energy transitions by quantifying the investments required in different regions
and sectors to build modern, clean energy systems, including achieving universal
access. The new global energy economy represents a huge opportunity for growth
and employment in emerging and developing economies. This report’s analysis
identifies key barriers and how to remove them – and sets out the policy actions
and financial instruments that can deliver a major acceleration in private
capital flows for the energy transition. This report is part of the IEA’s
support of the first global stocktake of the Paris Agreement, which will be
finalized in the run up to COP28, the next UN Climate Change Conference, at the
end of 2023. Find other reports in this series on the IEA’s  Global Energy
Transitions Stocktake  page. language English chevron-down Language Close dialog
English English Français Published June 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Supported by
Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read
Read online 2.0  Key findings read Read online The Energy Mix Get updates on the
IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  Scaling Up Private Finance for Clean Energy in Emerging and Developing
Economies , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/scaling-up-private-finance-
for-clean-energy-in-emerging-and-developing-economies, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy
to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.