SDG7: Data and Projections – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports SDG7: Data and Projections SDG7: Data and
Projections                                 Access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all
Overview
Methodology                                                      About this
report The International Energy Agency is at the forefront of global efforts to
track access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all, and
is one of the co-custodians for tracking progress on Sustainable Development
Goal 7 (SDG7). The other co-custodians include International Renewable Energy
Agency, United Nations Statistics Division, the World Bank, and World Health
Organisation. Published September 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Online table
of contents 1.0  Overview read Read online 2.0  Access to electricity read Read
online 3.0  Access to clean cooking read Read online 4.0  Modern renewables read
Read online 5.0  Energy intensity read Read online SDG7 Database  Historical
time series on access to electricity and clean cooking (SDG 7.1) and progress
towards SDG targets on renewables (SDG 7.2) and energy efficiency (SDG 7.3) Get
data card data set This data set is updated with the IEA’s latest energy
balances, which serve as the official data on renewables (SDG 7.2) and energy
efficiency (SDG 7.3), with support from UNSD to cover the countries that do not
appear in IEA balances. The IEA also publishes timely, alternative data for
monitoring access to electricity based on administrative data collected from
Ministries of Energy. The official SDG data for electricity access (SDG 7.1.1),
however, is from the World Bank. Finally, this data also includes the IEA’s
latest estimates for the last year’s progress on SDG7 indicators, as well as
long-term projections for all the SDG7 indicators. Defining energy access: 2020
methodology circle-arrow About the data         Related content      All Reports
News & Commentaries All results circle-arrow Access to electricity improves
slightly in 2023, but still far from the pace needed to meet SDG7
Commentary — 15 September 2023                  A Vision for Clean Cooking
Access for All World Energy Outlook Special Report                     Flagship
report — July 2023                  Tracking SDG7: The Energy Progress Report,
2023                     Statistics report — June 2023                  Previous
slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  SDG7: Data and
Projections , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/sdg7-data-and-projections,
Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close
dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking
the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.