Skills Development and Inclusivity for Clean Energy Transitions – Analysis - IEA
IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Skills Development and Inclusivity for Clean
Energy Transitions Skills Development and Inclusivity for Clean Energy
Transitions Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Ongoing energy transitions and decarbonisation efforts are
poised to bring profound shifts in the sector’s employment, including massive
new opportunities for job creation in clean energy. At the same time,
traditional energy sectors will experience declining job opportunities. In most
cases, this will require the development of both new programmes of education,
certification and vocational training along with targeted upskilling or
reskilling programmes for the existing workforce.  Several governments,
companies and industry organisations, among other stakeholders, are already
developing robust educational and skills training programmes to meet the
challenges of the workforce transition. Therefore, a review of existing skills
and training programmes can provide valuable insights for others embarking on
their own energy transitions.  This report compiles a collection of case studies
from around that world that showcase programmes designed to address skills
development of workforces for energy transitions. Published September 2022
License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite         Related content      All
results circle-arrow World Energy Employment                     Report —
September 2022                  The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest
news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View
sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy
system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and
commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-
north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA
©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Skills
Development and Inclusivity for Clean Energy Transitions , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/skills-development-and-inclusivity-for-clean-energy-
transitions, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog
Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.