Sustainable energy for all: The gender dimensions       Skip to main content
English Español Français         Who we are            Who we are - About us
About us About UN Women Guiding documents Business model Worldwide presence Who
we are - Leadership Leadership Governance structure Executive leadership
Executive Board Accountability Who we are - Work with us Work with us Employment
Procurement Calls for proposals Contact us Image                UN Women
Strategic Plan 2022-2025                What We Do            What we do - Focus
area Focus areas Ending violence against women Peace and security Humanitarian
action Leadership and governance Economic empowerment Innovation and technology
Women with disabilities Youth HIV and AIDS What we do - How we work How we work
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Commission on the Status of Women
Intergovernmental support Partnerships UN system coordination Gender parity in
the UN system Research and data Training Centre Image                Gender
Equality Accelerators                News and Stories            News and
Stories - Latest Latest News Editorial series In focus Multimedia News and
Stories - Media center Media center Press releases Media contacts Image
Expert’s take: Gender equality is critical for Afghanistan’s future, long-term
development, and sustained peace        Image                Addressing the
digital gender divide in Africa through the African Girls Can Code Initiative
Resources            Resources - Resources Resources Publications Annual report
Resources - Column 2 GenderTerm Reprint permissions Image                Annual
report                       Learn the facts: Rural women and girls        close
search Open Search Search Donate English Español Français Open Menu Breadcrumb
Home Publications Image Sustainable energy for all: The gender dimensions
Publication year:
2013 Share to Facebook Share to Twitter Share to LinkedIn Share to E-mail This
guidance note, prepared for the regional and country offices of UN Women and
UNIDO, provides a brief overview of issues related to gender equality, women’s
empowerment and sustainable energy. It aims to provide guidance for UN
programming and work with policy makers around sustainable energy that
integrates the gender dimensions. This guidance note seeks to help strengthen
collaboration with national and regional partners, as well as members of UN
Country Teams, and promote South-South exchange of experiences in generating and
supplying sustainable energy for all women and men, girls and boys. It also aims
to create a momentum for targeting gender equality as one of the critical
pathways for a successful transition to sustainable energy for all by 2030 and
for reaching the objectives of the Future We Want. The note presents the
international energy situation and the enabling power of energy for economic and
social development, as well as the importance of providing communities with
access to sustainable energy solutions. Next, the nexus between women’s
empowerment, sustainable energy and sustainable development is elaborated.
Finally, policy recommendations for UN Women and UNIDO staff are outlined.
Additional documents English Publishing entities
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
Energy Related publications The climate–care nexus: Addressing the linkages
between climate change and women’s and girls’ unpaid care, domestic, and
communal work 10 November 2023 Working paper: The climate–care nexus: Addressing
the linkages between climate change and women’s and girls’ unpaid care,
domestic, and communal work Gender equality in the sustainable energy transition
25 May 2023 Gender equality in the sustainable energy transition Gender Analysis
in Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure 8 December 2022 Gender Analysis in
Technical Areas: Energy Infrastructure Scroll to top Footer Menu 1 Get involved
News and stories Resources What we do Where we are Footer Menu 2 Partnerships
Employment Procurement Contact us Footer Menu 3 Commission on the Status of
Women Executive Board Donate Donate Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter
Follow us on LinkedIn Follow us on Flickr Follow us on Snapchat Follow us on
YouTube Follow us on Instagram Footer bottom [Menu] Information security Privacy
Policy Report wrongdoing Terms of Use