UNDP promotes innovation for energy saving in Uzbekistan | United Nations
Development Programme     Skip to main content
Uzbekistan
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Русский O`zbek   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Русский O`zbek Locations                 Home Uzbekistan         UNDP
promotes innovation for energy saving in Uzbekistan                       UNDP
promotes innovation for energy saving in Uzbekistan   November 22, 2023
Photo: UNDP Uzbekistan         The Ministry of Construction, Housing and
Communal Services, in collaboration with UNDP and the GEF hosted an event
dedicated to International Energy Saving Day to showcase results underscoring
the strides Uzbekistan has taken towards sustainable housing, aligning with
international efforts to combat climate change. Globally, the building sector,
accounting for around 40 percent of total greenhouse gas emissions, has been a
key focus for environmental impact. This statistic is mirrored in Uzbekistan,
where, according to the first biennial update report of Uzbekistan under the
UNFCCC, industry and construction contribute to 22.3 percent, while building in
the residential sector makes up 21 percent of emissions.     Photo: UNDP
Uzbekistan       As Uzbekistan's population continues to grow, so does the
demand for energy. With the country facing limitations in fuel and energy
resources, addressing this rising demand through energy efficiency and renewable
sources has become imperative. According to the same UNFCCC report, Uzbekistan
has actively worked towards these goals to meet its obligations under the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. Mr. Anas Fayyad Qarman ,  UNDP Deputy Resident
Representative in Uzbekistan , in his opening statement noted, "Today we
gathered here not only celebrate the International Energy Saving Day but also
signified a milestone in our joint efforts towards sustainable rural housing.
UNDP is committed to advancing strategic goals for sustainable housing and
energy efficiency in Uzbekistan." The event commenced with a ceremony of
transfer of the newly constructed Nearly Zero Energy Building (NZEB) in the
Tashkent region to the Ministry of Construction, Housing and Communal Services.
The NZEB will then be provided to a family of the successful contestant that
will be in charge of testing and monitoring the performance of the house as part
of the daily routine. The ceremony was followed by a presentation showcasing the
preliminary outcomes of a comprehensive survey conducted among rural residents.
The survey aimed to assess their awareness of Energy Efficiency and Low Carbon
Technologies in the residential sector.     Photo: UNDP Uzbekistan       Finally
the event culminated with the launch of the Solar City Simulator tool and a
workshop for energy specialists and interested parties on how to use this
simulator. Developed by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), this
web application serves as a valuable resource for residents, businesses, and
local authorities. It enables them to evaluate the potential for electricity
generation through rooftop-mounted solar photovoltaic (PV) systems.     Photo:
UNDP Uzbekistan       Ms. Ute Collier ,  Acting Director of Knowledge, Policy,
and Finance Centre ,  IRENA , highlighted,  "The Solar City Simulator equipped
local decision-makers and experts with a powerful tool to enhance the use and
introduction of solar energy on rooftops. It empowered communities to make
informed decisions, supporting IRENA's vision for a global transition to
renewable energy." The Solar City Simulator tool to be piloted for Mirabad
district, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, was developed in collaboration with the Ministry
of Energy, UNDP in Uzbekistan, and IRENA through funding from the GEF.   Press
Releases UNDP Empowers Monocenters: Training Specialists for Green Jobs Read
more  Press Releases New Collaboration Paving the Way for Affordable and
Attractive Sustainable Energy Solutions in Rural Communities Read more  Press
Releases The first Nearly Zero-Energy building constructed in Uzbekistan Read
more  Press Releases Journalists of Uzbekistan for energy-efficient rural
housing Read more  Press Releases Study Tour to Renewable Energy Facilities in
Tashkent 12th of May, 2022, Tashkent. How the renewable energy sources are
utilized at industrial facilities and by the households? What benefits do they
bring to their ow... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Funding and
delivery                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Our team
What we do                                                      Sustainable
Development Goals                                                            Our
focus                                                            Accelerator Lab
Our impact                                                      News center
Publications                                                            Blogs
Projects                                                            Speeches
Stories                                                      Get involved
Careers                                                            Contact us
Procurement                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use facebook instagram
twitter youtube © 2024 United Nations Development Programme