Unlocking the Potential of Distributed Energy Resources – Analysis - IEA IEA
Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Unlocking the Potential of Distributed
Energy Resources Unlocking the Potential of Distributed Energy Resources
Power system opportunities and best practices
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Distributed energy resources (DERs) are small-scale energy
resources usually situated near sites of electricity use, such as rooftop solar
panels and battery storage. Their rapid expansion is transforming not only the
way electricity is generated, but also how it is traded, delivered and consumed.
Accordingly, DERs can create new power system opportunities, but at the same
time, can pose new challenges when a grid has not been properly prepared. Many
jurisdictions are just beginning to understand how DERs fit into the wider
energy landscape – what they are and what impacts they have on the grid, and how
they can be used to improve system reliability and reduce overall energy costs.
Meanwhile, other regions have built up experience with DERs, demonstrating that
they can provide valuable services to the grid when incentivised with
appropriate technologies, policies and regulations.  Nonetheless, not all
countries use the same electricity market model or are at the same stage of DER
penetration, and the fit-for-purpose solutions will vary from place to place.
This report reviews lessons from forerunners and distils best practices (with
examples and case studies) to help policymakers, regulators and system operators
across the globe understand what experience is most relevant to their own
situation. Readers will be able to draw on a wide range of practical insights
for electricity market design and regulation to help unlock the multiple grid
benefits of DER technologies. Published May 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  Unlocking the Potential of Distributed Energy Resources ,
IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/unlocking-the-potential-of-distributed-
energy-resources, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.