Unlocking Smart Grid Opportunities in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies
– Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help
centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-
Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy
challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions
Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving
Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water
Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19
All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or
region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia
Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania
Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain
Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Unlocking Smart Grid Opportunities in
Emerging Markets and Developing Economies Unlocking Smart Grid Opportunities in
Emerging Markets and Developing Economies Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
The clean energy transition requires a fundamental transformation of power
systems, including much higher levels of digitalisation at scale across all grid
domains, from generation to transmission and distribution to end-use. Strong
policy attention is required to scale up investments in smarter and more
resilient grids in emerging and developing economies where electricity
consumption is set to grow at a rapid rate while also providing greater levels
of electricity access. Investments in smarter and more resilient grids will be
necessary to accommodate the greater deployment of renewable energy and enhance
energy security.  Digital technologies designed for power systems are
instrumental to unlock essential system services required to integrate high
shares of variable renewable energy. They can also provide solutions to leverage
data flows, connectivity, and management across the whole electricity system. To
unlock these digital opportunities, adequate planning, investment, and policy
action are needed. As part of the Digital Demand Driven Electricity Networks
(3DEN) initiative, this report provides guidance for energy policy makers on
possible ways to enable and drive investments in smart and resilient electricity
grids. It also gives suggestions on how to start creating an environment that
supports the effective use of innovative digital technologies within the
electricity sector. It draws on examples and case studies to show the wide range
of digital opportunities and solutions that can help governments implement
efficient and smart power systems.  Published June 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press
release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read
online The IEA gratefully acknowledges the Italian Ministry of Environment and
Energy Security for their support of this project as part of their contributions
to the IEA’s  Digital Demand Driven Electricity Networks Initiative  (3DEN) on
electricity grid modernisation and digitalisation and to the  Clean Energy
Transitions Programme  and Ricerca sul Sistema Energetico, RSE Spa for the
technical advice to the above Italian Ministries since the 3DEN project
inception. The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data
and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Unlocking Smart Grid
Opportunities in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/unlocking-smart-grid-opportunities-in-emerging-
markets-and-developing-economies, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share
this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.