Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and
evaluation…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/CAF/  UNDP within the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The Central
African Republic is endowed with agricultural potential, mineral resources and
vast forests, yet its population remains the world’ poorest, faced with numerous
human development challenges The country ranks next to last (188) on the Human
Development Index with  value of Along with the chronic insecurity that has
plagued the country for decades, its economic and social development are
hampered by the lack of basic infrastructure, investments in productive sectors
and the State' weak institutional and financial capacity to fulfil its crit ical
functions The country is facing increasing climate risks, which can derail the
prospects for sustainable development  History shows that pre- and post-
electoral periods lead to risin  sociopolit ical tensions, most recently
manifesting in  iolent attacks by armed groups attempting to  isrupt national
elections in 2020-Some  rmed groups, signatories to the peace agreement, formed
an alliance to disrupt voting, thus reducing the participation rate despite the
timely deployment of trained agents and equipment  In response, the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) for  is based on
national priorit ies, the National Recovery and Peacebuildin  Plan (Plan
National de Relèvement et de Consolidation de la Paix2 (RCPC )) UNDP will target
groups at risk of being left behind identified in the Common Country Analysis:
() young people underemployed at risk of recruitment into armed groups; ()
internally disp laced persons, est imated at 722,101, with immense needs for
emergency and recovery assistance; () vict ims of human rights  iolations; ()
ethnic minorities  who continue to face significant obstacles in claiming their
rights; () women, who remain the main victims of gender-based discrimination; ()
persons with disabilities,  who are more likely to face stigma, abuse and
exclusion from education; and () prisoners, estimated at ,000, 73 pe cent of
whom are awaiting trial  The comparative advantage of UNDP is based on its
strategic positioning within the United Nations country team (UNCT) As  provider
of integrated solutions and  trusted partner for the implementation of the
UNSDCF, UNDP prio rit izes: () consolidation of the rule of law by supporting
access to justice and security, the fight against corruption and the
organization of national elections;() access to economic opportunities by
supporting the private sector while promoting access of vulnerable populations
to decent jobs, basic services and social protection; () the consolidation of
peace and the prevention of conflict by capitalizing on the Government' efforts
towards decentralization, local development and governance, but also by tackling
the main barriers to gender equality; and () sustainable management of natural
resources by upscaling protected areas while creating new jobs  The evaluation
of the previous programme showed that UNDP demonstrated its unique comparative
advantage in provid ing basic infrastructure, materials and human capacities
UNDP supported the organization of national elections, whose results have been
accepted by all stakeholders, despite rising vio lence by armed groups The UNDP
contribution was essential to the temporary functioning of ru le-of-law
institutions and combating gender-based violence Moreover 24,000 people
benefited from the UNDP resilience-build ing programme which created employment
opportunities and enhanced social cohesion UNDP also 1Human Development Index
2019   The RCPCA priorities are to:() support peace, security and
reconciliation; () renew the social contract between the State and society; and
() ensure economic recovery and the revival of productive sectors  Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) report, September Aka/Bayaka
(Pygmies) and the Mbororo (Fulani)  OCHA report, 2022 estimate is
430,DP/DCP/CAF/ contributed to fostering policies and advocating for inst
itutional changes to improve access to energy  Reflecting the country context
and its lessons learned, UNDP will apply  two-level strategic approach focusing
on resilience At the inst itutional level, UNDP will strengthen the State'
capacities to promote security and the rule of law to end impunity related to
war crimes, including gender-based violence, thus creating conditions for
transformative and inclusive development essential for sustaining peace in the
country At the individual and community levels, UNDP will improve community
infrastructure, strengthen resilience to climate change, and promote inclusive
finance to expand economic and social opportunities Enhanced collaboration with
the Government to scaling-up decentralization and local development will be at
the heart of the UNDP st rategic approach followin  the 2019 Po lit ical
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic The
adoption of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus will ensure  bridge and
bring more coherence between humanitarian support, peacebuildin  and development
UNDP will scale up innovations building on the results of UNDP Accelerator Labs
II Programme priorities and partnerships  The programmatic prio rit ies emerged
from consultative workshops held with government and other national counterparts
Guided by the vision of the UNSDC  to make the Central African Republic  country
guided by the rule of law that is stable, prosperous and in harmony with nature,
where its populations fully realize their potential and benefit equitably from
the development of the country, the UNSDCF has four priorities aligned to the
RCPC : () promotion of peace, security, human rights and the rule of law; ()
inclusion and equitable access to quality basic social services; () sk ills
development and accelerated, inclusive and sustainable economic growth; and ()
environmental sustainability and resilience to crises and the impacts of climate
change  To achieve these priorit ies, the UNCT developed seven UNSDCF outcomes
Four pertain to UNDP, which grouped them under three country programme pillars,
namely: () structural transformation and citizen participation, () recovery,
stabilization and peacebuilding; and () environment, energy and climate change
The relationship between the UNSDCF and the UNDP county programme is illustrated
in the table below UNSDCF pillar UNSDCF outcome Country programme pillar
Structural transformation and citizen participation Recovery, stabilization and
peacebuilding Country programme outcome (by 2027) Peace Outcome  People in the
Central African Republic live under the rule of law, have access to justice and
security and their human rights are promoted and protected Prosperity Outcome
People in Central African Republic, including women, youth, refugees, returnees,
internally displaced persons and all other vulnerable groups, have equitable and
sustainable access to economic opportunities that promote the creation of decent
jobs, entrepreneurship, innovation and digitalization People in the Central
African Republic live in an environment where peacebuilding, national
reconciliation and governance mechanisms are inclusive, accountable and
effective  Peace Outcome  Recovery, stabilization and peacebuilding  DP/DCP/CAF/
Planet Outcome  Environment, energy and climate change The resilience of the
State and population is strengthened through the sustainable governance of
natural resources and the environment  To maximize impact, the UNCT has adopted
two approaches The first aims to pool efforts among the UNCT members by
involving two or more agencies (joint projects) The second, the humanitarian-
development-peace nexus, aims to build  bridge between humanitarian responses,
development activities and peacebuilding efforts UNDP has  demonstrated track
record in this area, especially  ru le of law and gender mainstreaming, as found
by the evaluation of the previous programme The hypothesis underlying the
country programme’ overarching theory of change states that: () if people in the
Central African Republic live under the rule of law, have access to justice and
security and their human rights are promoted and protected; () if they live in
an environment where peacebuildin , national reconciliation and governance
mechanisms are inclusive, accountable and effective; () if all people in the
country, including women, youth, refugees, returnees, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and all other vulnerable groups, have equitable and sustainable
access to economic opportunities that promote the creation of decent jobs,
entrepreneurship, innovation and digitalization; () if the resilience of the
State and the population is strengthened through the sustainable governance of
natural resources and the environment; and () assuming that peace and security
are restored throughout the territory , the political commitment of all
stakeholders is obtained , structural resistance to gender equality and the
empowerment of women are overcome and the technical and financial partners
continue their support; () then the country will be  stable, prosperous State,
in harmony with nature, that respects the rule of law and its people will fully
realize their potential and benefit equitably from the development of the
country In this perspective, the programme will pay attention to innovation,
digitalization and strategic partnerships as main enablers Pillar  Structural
transformation and citizen participation Focusing on signature solutions  and
of the UNDP Strategic Plan,  and in partnership with the Ministry in charge of
justice, civil society organizations (CSOs), the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
donors, the programme will continue to support the strengthening of the judicial
system to end impunity, includin  from major crimes, and broaden access to
justice for all citizens, particularly focusing on women, prisoners, ethnic
minorities and victims of human rights violation At the core of the programme
priorit ies will be the redeployment of institutions throughout the country, th
strengthening of operational capacities on the ground, the continuation of
judicial proceedings undertaken by the Special Criminal Court, the
operationalization of the Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation
Commission, the promotion of the rule of law and the protection of human rights
For the operationalization of the Court, South-South and triangular cooperation
will be stren gthened with key countries Buildin  on good practices from the
previous cycle, partnering with the Ministry of Interior and Public Security and
MINUSCA, UNDP will support the capacity-building of internal security forces on
community policin  and accountability of public services , crucial for restoring
trust between State institutions and citizens while advocating for greater
representation of women Collaborating with MINUSC  and donors, UNDP will support
democratic processes through transparent and inclusive elect ions, ensuring the
participation of women, persons with disabilit ies and ethnic minorities The
capacities of institutions including the National Election Commission, National
Assembly, Constitutional Court and communal councils will  DP/DCP/CAF/ be
strengthened In parallel, capacity-buildin  for CSOs, including those led by
women, youth and persons with disabilities, will be priorit ized along with the
promotion of citizen participation and the fight against inequalities at all
levels UNDP, in collaboration with line ministries, the United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), MINUSCA, donors and
CSOs, will promote women' empowerment and leadership for sustainable development
UNDP will ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout the programme, while
also addressing multiple forms of discrimination based on age, disability,
class, ethnicity, religion and displaced person status, so that no one is left
behind To optimize the provision of accessible and quality public serv ices, in
partnership with the High Authority for Good Governance and lines min istries,
the programme will support the revitalization of public administration at the
central and local levels by consolidating ongoing South-South cooperation with
Rwanda and Burundi and promoting strengthened economic and financial governance
The results obtained in this  illar intend to create  favourable environment for
pillar  below Pillar  Recovery, stabilization and peacebuilding Equitable and
sustainable access to economic opportunities and basic public services In line
with UNDP signature solutions ,  and , this pillar is st ructured around two
priorities: () the development of sustainable and inclusive economic
opportunities for entrepreneurship, innovation and digit ization, and the
creation of decent jobs; and () the consolidation of peace, national
reconciliation and the establishment of inclusive, accountable and effective
governance mechanisms These mechanisms seek to advance an enabling environment
for recovery and sustainable and inclusive growth UNDP will support capacity-
building to promote inclusive sustainable development at the national and local
levels It will take the lead in supporting strategic planning and monitoring of
development, working with the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation
Various studies and collection of gender- and age-disaggregated data will be
carried out to gu ide policy and programme formulation and facilitate the
monitoring of implementation To improve access to economic opportunities and
basic public services for women, IDPs, youth, persons with  isabilities and
ethnic minorities, the programme will emphasize creating the conditions for
inclusive growth, partnering with line minist ries and CSOs, including through
joint programming with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), Un ited Nations Population Fund and the World Food Programme
(WFP) This will include capacity support to various stakeholders, developing
frameworks for the private sector to operate efficiently and the promotion of
micro and small enterprises The value chains in the productive sectors6 and
public–private partnerships will be upscaled, taking advantage of the African
Continental Free Trade Area agreement and other regional opportunities
Similarly, innovative financial services will be diversified Given the multiple
challenges to reviv ing and accelerating growth and achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and reflecting on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,  holistic
approach will be adopted under the leadership of the Government to mobilize all
available  The productive sectors include agriculture, livestock, fisheries,
forestry, handicrafts and mining For the mining sector, UNDP will support
artisanal, small-scale and informal mining to improve productivity through
access to resources, while ensuring that social and environmental safeguards are
strictly adhered to and fully transparent  DP/DCP/CAF/ resources and channel
them towards national development Based on an assessment of existing potential,
includ ing  ining and forestry resources, public–private pa rtnerships, etc, an
integrated framework for financing development will be developed in coordination
with all relevant actors within  renewed governance framework UNDP will
accelerate actions, partnering with the UNDP Financial Hub and optimizing
results using South-South cooperation Challenges posed by IDPs will be addressed
through the national durable solutions strategy UNDP will intervene in strategic
areas identified, collaborating with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, anchored in the humanitarian-development-peace nexus UNDP will partner
with the Government, humanitarian actors and CSOs to support IDPs in accessing
durable solutions Resilient and sustainable preparedness systems will be
developed to mitigate the effects of potential natural hazards and health crises
To leave no one behind, this pillar will focus on strengthening social
protection services and systems through improved capacity and governance of
existing structures and mechanisms The implementation of  gender-sensitive
national social protection policy reflecting the national context will be
essential to increase economic and social opportunities for the most vulnerable
Consolidation of peace and national reconciliation UNDP will coordinate and/or
strengthen partnerships with various actors especially United Nations agencies
and donors, noting the critical coordination and management roles of local
communities for peacebuilding through reconciliation and dialogue processes To
ensure “do no harm” and maximize peacebuilding opportunities, the program me
will stress prevention of and response to violent extremism, applying  conflict-
sensit ive lens to local development planning and natural resource management
while st rengthening women’ leadership and full participation in peace and
recovery Given the multip le operational challenges on the ground, particularly
in the eastern regions marked by insecurity, remoteness, isolation and  small
local market for goods and services, UNDP will upscale partnerships with MINUSC
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) Pillar  Environment, energy and
climate change Partnering with line minist ries, FAO, WFP and the secretariat of
the Convention on Biological Diversity, this pillar will support the Government
on UNDP signature solutions , ,  and  in buildin   gender-sensitive, resilient,
risk-informed and inclusive green economy that sustainably manages and harnesses
its natural resources for prosperity for all its people The linkage with the
Green Climate Fund on forests, biodiversity, food security, small and medium-
sized enterprises, non-timber forest products and renewable energy will be
expanded The programme will wo rk with key NGOs, focusing on the sustainable
management of natural resources, the acceleration of the energy transition to
renewable energies and the implementation of policies that promote sustainable
development  Inclusive and rights-based approaches will be applied to promote
gender equality and women’ leadership in climate action UNDP will support the
Ministry in charge of environment to implement multilateral environmental
agreements through enhanced partnership, particularly the formulation and
implementation of strategies for nationally determined contributions The
transfer of innovative and environmentally sound, risk-informed technologies,
practices and capacities addressing the projected climatic risks will be
prioritized Gender-responsive disaster risk  DP/DCP/CAF/ management, climate
change adaptation and co-mitigation actions will target the energy, agriculture,
forestry, protected areas, water and basic infrastructure sectors Innovative
climate finance opportunities will be fully explored to meet the country’
funding needs of $ billion for its nationally determined contributions  new
national climate fund will be operationalized and the capacities of the
ministries responsible for environment, agriculture and livestock, rural
development, energy and land -use planning will be strengthened to benefit from
global opportunities III Programme and risk management This country programme
document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headqua rter levels with respect to
country programme are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and internal control framework The programme will be
nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure
The harmonized approach to cash transfers and the Enterprise Risk Management
Policy will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies
to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects To mitigate
the risks related to the programme delivery, the country office will develop
quarterly delivery acceleration plans, the implementation of which (includin
national execution advance liquidation) will be monitored on weekly basis The
national governance mechanisms of the RCPCA will be used to ensure that United
Nations and UNDP support are implemented in line with nationally led priorit ies
and ensure that partners participate on mutual accountability through the RCPCA
mutual commitment framework These mechanisms include the Policy Board, which
promotes high-level  ialogue on policymaking; and the Joint Steering Committee,
which ensures strategic coordination at portfolio level and constitutes the
framework for consultation between the Government and all partners for
implementation of the RCPCA The latter is co-chaired by the Resident Coordinator
and the Government UNDP is posit ioned as lead or co-lead for sectoral and
programmatic coordination within the three pillars of the RCPCA The
implementation of the programme will take place in an uncertain environment
marked by political and security risks Armed groups continue to operate on the
country' territory with the potential for the security situation to deteriorate,
which could hinder or even prevent UNDP accessing target populations UNCT and
MINUSCA will monitor and mitigate risk by ensurin  balance between upstream and
downstream interventions by taking account of endogenous causes and cross-border
conflict dynamics The programme will be adjusted with  focus on more accessible
and secure regions UNDP will wo rk in enhanced partnerships with other United
Nations agencies, development partners and CSOs promoting conflict-sensitive
approaches focused on the humanitarian-development-peace nexus, allowin  the
programme to change course without losing focus on delivering long-term results
Financial risks are crit ical, reflect ing various contexts and the “wait and
see” position of the country’ traditional international partners (European
Union, World Bank, Internationa  Monetary Fund, Government of France etc) To
mitigate these risks, in addition to revitalizin  the existing partnerships
(European Union, Governments of Japan, United States, etc), UNDP intends to
establish new partnerships with non-conventional donors such as  DP/DCP/CAF/
universities, the private sector and financial institutions including those
outside of the country  In the event of resource gaps, UNDP will scale down
activities by focusing on the geographical areas covered by the previous
programme to maximize impacts while ensuring cost-effectiveness Electoral
processes are exposed to signif icant risks of post -electoral conflict This
programme will start during the extension of the current electoral cycle with
local elect ions scheduled in These elections could induce sign ificant risk or
resent an opportunity by creating an environment conducive for local development
This risk will be mitigated by promoting intra -party dialogue and advancing the
agenda for political sta bilization and consolidation of peace UNDP will use
innovative programming instruments for the delivery of quality results such as
the engagement facility and development services, in addition to standard
development projects, to provide rapid and flexible response mechanisms to
support upstream policy resu lts, evaluation and assessments, crisis responses
and testing of innovations with scale-up potential and seizing opportunities for
collaboration with the private sector The social and environmental risks
associated with UNDP action, particularly in artisanal small-scale minin , will
be addressed by applying the corporate social and environmental safeguards,
accountability, early warning and grievance-redress mechanisms for communities
UNDP will put in place proper mitigation measures The steerin  committee
governance mechanism will ensure proper implementation of the programme through
regular review and recommendations according to the evolving context IV
Monitoring and evaluation The country office will prepare an integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan, which will serve as  reference framework
throughout the programme period This five-year plan will be broken down into
annual plans to guide monitoring and evaluation at both progra mme and project
levels coherent, gender-sensit ive monitoring system will be established to
ensure that disaggregated data are collected and available in  timely manner
Period ic progress reports will be  roduced at programme and project level to
assess progress towards agreed outputs Field  isits will be organized to
validate results, collect the opin ions of beneficiaries and stakeholders and
propose recommendations to improve the implementation of projects and programme
The information generated will be capitalized for the monitoring of strategic
documents such as the UNDP Strategic Plan, the UNSDCF, the RC PCA and other
international agendas For areas where access can be restricted, data will be
collected in partnership with third parties Mechanisms will be established to
ensure the credibility of collected data Remote meetings for project and
programme steering committees will be considered For monitoring at the outcome
level, national and international sources will be prio rit ized when available
In collaboration with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will strengthen
national capacities to organize surveys, collect and analyse the data needed to
fill gaps All new projects will be subject to  prior social and environmental
screening procedure and the identified risks will be monitored and mitigated
through appropriate actions Innovation data will be collected in real time
through the Accelerator Lab The theory of change, the results and resources
framework and the evaluation plan will be reviewed and updated according to the
evolution of the country context, the results obtained and the lessons learned
DP/DCP/CAF/ Progress towards gender equality will be monitored through the
gender marker and the collection of sex-disaggregated data UNDP will allocate 15
per cent of programmatic resources to projects whose main objective is gender
equality Similarly,  to 10 per cent of the programme budget will be allocated
for monitoring, evaluation and communication knowledge management strategy will
be available to ensure that target audiences are regularly informed about
programme performance and lessons learned and tangible results will be
disseminated through innovative communication channels such as social networks
DP/DCP/CAF/ Annex Results and resources framework for the Central African
Republic () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan
(RCPCA) Pillar : Restoring peace, security and social cohesion Pillar : Renewing
the social contract between the State and the population UNSDCF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP# : By 2027, people in the Central African Republic live under the
rule of law, have access to justice and security, and their human rights are
promoted and protected RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation
accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions DATA SOURCE
AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES UNSDCF OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS  % of the
population who indicate having confidence in ordinary justice Baseline (2021):
35% Target (2027): 60% Source: Peace, justice and security polls Frequency:
annual Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ office Line ministries MINUSCA
Government of the United States European Union CSOs Media network Regular:
$11,120,000 Output : Civic space and access to justice expanded for the most
vulnerable including prisoners and victims of human rights violations, and rule
of law, human rights strengthened to meet national and international standards
Other: $56,500,000 Indicators:  Number of trials organized by the Special
Criminal Court Baseline (202):  Target (2027):  Source: Reports of the Ministry
in charge of justice Frequency: annual  Number of victim files processed by the
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission Baseline (2022):
Target (2027): 40 Source: Reports of Ministry in charge of justice Frequency:
annual  Number of people supported who have access to justice (SP indicator )
Baseline (2020): 22,700 (64% women) Target (2027): 42,700 (70% women) Source:
Reports of Ministry in charge of justice Frequency: annual  Number of internal
security forces deployed to ensure the safety of the population outside Bangui
10 DP/DCP/CAF/ Baseline (2022): ,668 (% women) Target (2027): ,500 (10% women)
Source: Reports Ministry of Interior and Public Security and MINUSCA Frequency:
annual Source: Peace, justice and security polls Frequency: annual
Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ office  % of the population having
confidence in the Defence and Security Forces, Armed Forces and police to ensure
their safety Baseline (2020): Gendarmerie: 48% Police: 43% Target (2027):
Gendarmerie: 55% Police: 50% Output : Democratic processes, institutions, and
civil society strengthened for an inclusive and open public sphere with expanded
public engagement facilitated using digital solutions National Elections
Authority Constitutional Court Media network Line ministries CSOs Government of
the United States European Union UN-Women MINUSCA Indicators:  Number of new
registered voters (SP indicator ) Baseline (2022): Female: ; Male: Target
(2027): 840,000 Female: 420,000; Male: 420,000 Source: National Elections
Authority Frequency: annual  Number of people who participated in elections: (SP
indicator ) Baseline (2020): 655,000 Target (2025): ,600,000 Source:
Constitutional court Frequency: depending on the electoral calendar Output :
Effective and accountable governance systems enhanced to co-create and equip all
actors, including the private sector, with solutions to prevent and mitigate
corruption risks and accelerate the achievement of SDGs Line ministries High
Authority for Good Governance CSOs MINUSCA United Nations agencies Indicators:
Number of measures to strengthen accountability (including social
accountability), prevent and mitigate corruption risks, and integrate anti-
corruption in the management of public funds, service delivery and other sectors
(SP ): Baseline (2022): • National level:  • Local level:  • Sectoral level:
Target (2027): • National level:  • Local level:  11 DP/DCP/CAF/ • Sectoral
level:   Number of multi-stakeholder mechanisms, including social innovation or
digital platforms between governments, communities and the private sector to
strengthen public sector agility, collaboration, the co-design, public and
private financing and delivery of solutions for sustainable development at
national and sectoral level (SP ): Baseline (2022): • National level:  •
Sectoral level:  Target (2027): • National level:  • Sectoral level:  NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar : Renewing the social contract between the State
and the population; RCPCA Pillar : Promote economic recovery and the revival of
productive sectors UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP# : By 2027, people in Central
African Republic, including women, youth, refugees, returnees, IDPs and all
other vulnerable groups, have equitable and sustainable access to economic
opportunities that promote the creation of decent jobs, entrepreneurship,
innovation and digitalization RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural
transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transitions Source: Bank of Central African States Frequency: annual
Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ office Output : The 2030 Agenda, Paris
Agreement and other intergovernmentally-agreed frameworks integrated into
national and local development plans; measures to accelerate progress put in
place; and budgets and progress assessed using data-driven solutions (SP output
) Line ministries European Union MINUSCA United Nations agencies Regular:
$,662,000  Share of loans to the economy allocated to SMEs Baseline (2022): %
Target (2027): % Other: $51,000,000  Poverty rate Baseline (2021): % Target
(2027): 62% Indicators:  To what extent the country' development plans and
budgets integrate intergovernmentally-agreed frameworks across the whole- of-
government (SP indicator ) Baseline (2022): · 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development:  (Integration in progress) · Beijing Declaration and Platform for
Action:  (Integration in progress) Target (2027): · 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development:  (Integrated) · Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action:
(Integrated) Source: Reports line ministries 12 DP/DCP/CAF/ Frequency: annual
To what extent the country has studies, innovation results and relevant data and
data management systems in place to guide the formulation and monitor the
implementation of national development policies and programmes Baseline (2021):
(Work in progress) Target (2027):  (Work completed) Source: Reports line
ministries Frequency: annual  To what extent the country has an effective
national development financing framework (INFF) Baseline (2021):  (Work started)
Target (2027):  (Work almost complete) Source: Reports line ministries
Frequency: annual Output : Access to basic services and financial and non-
financial assets and services improved to support productive capacities for
sustainable livelihoods and jobs (SP ) Line ministries European Union MINUSCA
OCHA UNHCR Indicators:  Number of people, including women, youth, IDPs, ethnic
minorities, accessing basic services Baseline (2021): 32,0000 (47% women) Target
(2027): 57,000 (50% women) Source: Reports of Key Ministries Frequency: annual
Number of people, including women, youth, IDPs, ethnic minorities, accessing
financial services Baseline (2021): ,200 (49% women) Target (2027): 10,200 (50%
women) Source: Reports of Key Ministries Frequency: annual  Number of
Agriculture and mineral value chains for trade developed Baseline (2021):
Target (2027):  Source: Reports of key ministries 13 DP/DCP/CAF/ Frequency:
annual  Number of people, including women, youth, IDPs, ethnic minorities
benefiting from jobs and improved livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings
(SP indicator ) Baseline (2022): 22,000 Target (2027): 42000 (40% women) Source:
Reports of Key Ministries Frequency: annual Output : Equitable, resilient and
sustainable systems for health and pandemic preparedness strengthened to address
communicable and non-communicable diseases (SP1) Line ministries MINUSCA United
Nations agencies Indicators:  Number of health structures equipped with cold
chains powered by solar energy Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 20 Source:
Reports Ministry in charge of health Frequency: annual Output : Social
protection systems strengthened across public administrations, private and
informal sectors and non-governmental institutions Line ministries United
Nations agencies Indicators:  Existence of an inclusive and gender-sensitive
national social protection policy document Baseline (2022): No Target (2027):
Yes Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of labour and social protection
Frequency: annual  Number of participants covered by social protection services
(SP indicator ) Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 1500 (40% women) Source:
Reports from Ministry in charge of labour and social protection Frequency:
annual 14 DP/DCP/CAF/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar : Restoring peace,
security and social cohesion National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan UNSDCF
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP# : By 2027, people in Central African Republic live in an
environment where peacebuilding, national reconciliation and governance
mechanisms are inclusive, accountable and effective RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk  % of the
population who perceive  decrease in sociocultural tensions in the last 12
months Baseline (2020):88% Target (2027): 95% Source: Peace, justice and
security polls Frequency: annual Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ Office
Output : Decentralization, local development and governance are effective, risk-
informed to enable socio-economic development, inclusive delivery of basic
services, community security, disaster and conflict prevention Line ministries
European Union MINUSCA OCHA UNHCR FAO WFP Regular: $,875,000 Other: $39,400,000
Indicators:  Number of subnational administrations with  conflict and gender-
sensitive local development plan Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 15 Source:
Reports from Ministry in charge of territorial administration Frequency: annual
Number of subnational administrations that implement their development plan
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 10 Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of
territorial administration Frequency: annual  Number of key actors implementing
actions to prevent and respond to violent extremism Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027): 30 Source: Reports on the National Strategy for Prevention of
Radicalization and Extreme Violence Frequency: annual  Number of national and
subnational administration with multi- hazards contingency plans and/or disaster
risk prevention plans Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): national: (humanitarian
action, agriculture, health, housing); subnational :10 Source: Reports from
Ministry in charge of territorial administration Frequency: annual  % of the
population who indicate that the Central Source: Peace, justice and security
polls Output  Advancing gender equality, women’ leadership and participation,
including in crisis contexts, through the Line ministries CSOs 15 DP/DCP/CAF/
African Republic lives in peace Baseline (2020):16% Target (2027):30% Frequency:
annual Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ Office implementation of
affirmative measures, strengthening institutions and civil society, and
addressing structural barriers United Nations agencies Indicators:  Number of
partnerships with institutions and civil society to advance women’ leadership
and participation and gender equality Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 10
Source: Ministry in charge of gender Frequency: annual Office  Number of women
in decision-making bodies within institutions of the republic Baseline (2022):
194 Target (2027): 230 Source: Ministry in charge of gender Frequency: annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar : Promote economic recovery and the
revival of productive sectors UNSDCFCPD OUTCOME : By 2027, the resilience of the
State and populations is strengthened through the sustainable governance of
natural resources and the environment RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural
transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transitions Source: FAO Frequency: annual Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’
Office Output : Natural resources protected and managed equitably and in
participatory and inclusive manner to enhance adaptation, climate-informed
sustainable productivity, livelihoods and reduce sources of conflict Line
ministries CSOs United Nations agencies Regular: $,937,000  Area of deforested
and degraded land that has been developed / restored (UNSDCF) Baseline (2018):
591,000 ha Target (2027): 750,000 ha Other: $26,100,000 Indicators:  Number of
communities with strengthened capacities to manage protected area Baseline
(2022):  Target (2027):  Source: Reports Ministry in charge of the environment
Frequency: annual  Area of agricultural land developed and/or developed (UNSDCF)
Baseline (2020): 375,000 ha Target (2027): 750,000 ha  Number of communities
with strengthened capacities to promote eco-tourism Baseline (2022):  Target
(2027):  Source: Reports Ministry in charge of the environment Frequency: annual
16 DP/DCP/CAF/  Protected areas created or under improved management practices
(hectares) (SP indicator ) Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 1500 hectares
Source: Reports Ministry of environment Frequency: annual Source: FAO Frequency:
annual Responsibility: Resident Coordinator’ Office Output : Public and private
climate finance mobilized supporting enterprise and job creation through
sustainable use of water, forests and soils, promoting biodiversity, climate
solutions and the implementation of the Central African Republic NDC within
long-term sustainable risk-informed development pathways Line ministries CSOs
United Nations agencies Indicators:  Number of people directly benefiting from
mechanisms for biodiversity, water, forest, and climate solutions funded by
public resources (SP ): Baselines (2022):  Targets (2027): ,000 Source: Reports
in charge of the environment Frequency: annual  Proportion of prefectures that
have adopted and implemented disaster risk reduction strategies in their local
development plan Baseline (2022): % Target (2027): 50% Source: Ministry in
charge of territorial administration Frequency: annual Responsibility: Resident
Coordinator’ Office Output : Transition to renewable energy accelerated
capitalizing on technological gains, clean energy innovations and new financing
mechanisms to support green recovery (SP ) Line ministries CSOs United Nations
agencies Indicators:  Number of functional micro hydroelectric or solar power
station installed Baseline (2022): Small Hydroelectric:  Small Solar Power:
Target (2027): Small Hydroelectric:  Small Solar Power:  Source: Reports of the
Ministry in charge of energy Frequency: annual  Increase (in megawatt) in
installed renewable energy capacity per technology (SP indicator ) Baseline
(2022): Hydroelectric:  Solar Power: Target (2027): Hydroelectric:  MW Solar
Power:  MW Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of energy Frequency: annual
17 DP/DCP/CAF/  Number of independent green and vertical funds Baseline (2022):
Target (2027):  Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of the environment
Frequency: annual 18