Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/ECU/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The UNDP country programme is
aligned with National Development Plan of Ecuador, , the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022- 2025, and the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2022- Before the
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic, the economy of Ecuador experienced high levels
of indebtedness and  recession associated with declines in the price of oil and
other commodities Several social indicators showed regressive trends The
pandemic exacerbated socioeconomic inequalities, with   per cent decrease in the
gross domestic product in 2020, together with poverty and extreme poverty
indicators, which stood at per cent and per cent, respectively, as of December
Multidimensional poverty increased to per cent nationwide, and per cent in rural
areas, in The adequate employment rate4 is per cent (lower for women, youth and
rural sectors); 66 per cent of women in the labour force do not have social
security COVID-19 vaccination rates soared to 25 per cent for the population
over three years of age as of May 2022; representing  notable contribution to
socioeconomic recovery In fiscal terms, the recent rise in oil prices represents
an opportunity for the country to invest in socioeconomic development and  more
diversified, less fuel-dependent economy  Women constitute 39 per cent of
parliamentarians and only  per cent of local governments In addition to gender
inequities and the challenges facing youth, socioeconomic indicators reflect
inequalities for the indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian, and Montubio populations
compared to the mestizo majority People in situations of human mobility, mainly
from Venezuela, are estimated to exceed 510,000, and there are more than 70,000
refugees, mainly from Colombia  Violence and crime rates increased 80 per cent
between 2020 and 2021, and the homicide rate doubled over the same period The
increase in violence and citizen insecurity was associated with organized crime
and the incursion of drug cartels Six out of 10 women in Ecuador have suffered
some violence The protests that occurred in 2019, led by the indigenous
movement, laid bare the social unrest and polarization of the country,
situation that was repeated in Inequalities, social fractures, and the
exacerbation of racism must be addressed with pluralistic dialogues and policies
of inclusion, social cohesion, and reconciliation  Environmental challenges
include climate change, biodiversity loss, soil degradation, pollution, and
water resource management There has been progress in implementing the nationally
determined contribution, although adaptation remains  challenge The main
greenhouse gas-emitting sector is energy, followed by changes in land use
Although the deforestation rate decreased between 1990 and 2018, it has been
calculated at 82,529 ha/year for the  period, leading to loss of biodiversity
and the deterioration of ecosystem services10  The challenges faced by Ecuador
include improving social protection, increasing the coverage and quality of
public services, improving the quality of employment, and ensuring inclusive and
sustainable growth while guaranteeing the full enjoyment of human rights and
human security conditions  National Development Plan (NDP), 2021  Central Bank
of Ecuador, 2022 3National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), 2022
Earning minimum salary, working 40 hours or less  INEC, 2022  Ministry of Public
Health,2022  INEC, 2021  Refugee and Migration Working Group, Ministry of
Government, 10 Common country analysis, 2021 /14  DP/DCP/ECU/  In citizen
security, anti-corruption, and the promotion of citizen participation, UNDP has
worked to strengthen planning,11 public management and innovation, and
territorial articulation UNDP has worked with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) to foster transparency and integrity In the next cycle,
institutional and social capacities will be strengthened for social cohesion,
dialogue, reconciliation, and reduction of all forms of violence and threats to
human security  In economic development, UNDP has worked on inclusive, green
recovery and the socioeconomic inclusion of migrants and refugees, focusing on
digitalization in the context of the pandemic and promoting South-South
cooperation  Gender equality is mainstreamed throughout the UNDP programme As
participant in the United Nations-European Union Spotlight Initiative, which
addresses gender-based violence, UNDP helped develop the Single Registry of
Violence In the next cycle, UNDP will continue to advance policies,
institutional frameworks, and information management The country office received
the gender equality silver seal in UNDP supports the Government in exploring
financing framework for development, including monitoring social investment;
improving tax systems; promoting results-based budgeting; climate expenditure
reviews; and green financing UNDP works with the Government and other actors to
generate public policy instruments and strengthen capacities for climate action;
the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems; sustainable forest management;
circular economy; integral management of river basins and international waters;
and environmental quality, incorporating  gender approach and promoting South-
South cooperation UNDP supported the development of the nationally determined
contribution, its implementation plan – the National Adaptation Plan – and the
Zero Carbon Programme It is  key actor clearing the path of Ecuador towards
ecological transition; promoting sustainable and deforestation-free production;
fostering the bio- economy alongside local communities; promoting circular
economy practices; and generating partnerships with the private sector, as well
as with entities such as the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) Over ,000 emergencies and disasters occurred in , causing
socioeconomic disruption Working with multiple partners, UNDP rose to the
challenge and incorporated disaster risk reduction into development plans
Consultations with stakeholders the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework highlighted the need to strengthen public institutions,
increase capacities, improve information management, and promote better
articulation between levels of government and other sectors Sustainable and
innovative financing mechanisms are needed, together with  regulatory framework
and public policy instruments supporting poverty reduction, transformation,
comprehensive security, resilience, and ecological transition, defined as
national priorities in the National Development Plan12 to formulate
institutional The independent country programme evaluation, , indicated the
capacity of UNDP to respond to basic needs during the pandemic Its articulating
role with the United Nations and other partners allowed the Government to use
the socioeconomic and needs assessment methodology to guide the recovery UNDP
fund management and procurement efficiency have enabled it to serve the urgent
needs of vulnerable populations It has been  central partner for inclusive and
sustainable recovery13 Lessons learned include the importance of being prepared
to act in the face of uncertain scenarios and impacts, use 11 NDP, 2021 12
Common country analysis, 2021 13 Independent country programme evaluation, 2021
/14 DP/DCP/ECU/ forward-thinking, and seek strategic positioning with
authorities and partners, making catalytic use of resources UNDP is recognized
as an impartial and credible partner that can take advantage of multisectoral
partnerships on  wide range of issues with  comprehensive vision14 While it will
continue to mobilize technical assistance and resources and articulate responses
to development challenges, greater efforts must be made to guarantee the
sustainability of such interventions To that end, UNDP will work on
institutional strengthening to ensure better, more transparent public
management, including anchoring actions with local actors The UNDP Accelerator
Lab will continue to research, co-create and test innovative methods, promoting
transformative solutions It will seek opportunities for generating public
policies through digital technology, data use, and internet access to build
inclusive, ethical and sustainable digital societies in line with the Digital
Strategy, 2022-Under the commitment to “leave no one behind”, UNDP will work
with priority attention groups: women, to reduce gender gaps and reduce the
levels of gender-based violence; young people affected by unemployment and with
low levels of participation; indigenous people, Afro-descendant populations, and
Montubias, all of whom experience high levels of discrimination and racism and
are over-represented in poverty figures; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
queer people, who face high levels of discrimination and violence; people in
situations of human mobility, who have little access to employment and services
and are affected by xenophobia; and people with disabilities, who have limited
access to services and the labour market Partnerships with civil society and
volunteer organizations, including the United Nations Volunteer (UNV) programme,
will contribute to this commitment II Programme priorities and partnerships The
UNDP vision for Ecuador, in line with national priorities, is for the country to
achieve sustainable development; reduce poverty and inequality; improve people’
lives; foster sustainable production and consumption; and support ecological
transition for  more crisis-resilient society, with the overarching goal of
living in peace UNDP will leverage its comparative advantage and strengthen its
role as  strategic partner and provider of integrated solutions to help solve
development challenges by providing technical assistance for capacity-building,
awareness-raising, and public policy development, knowledge networks,
digitalization, and project management UNDP will undertake joint work with other
United Nations entities and mobilize resources to achieve sustainable
development The programme priorities consider the achievements of the previous
cycle and the challenges identified in the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework consultations carried out with the Government;
other state actors; decentralized autonomous governments; civil society;
academia; international cooperation agencies; the private sector; the media; and
international financial organizations  human-rights, gender equality, and
intercultural approach will be applied in all interventions South-South and
triangular cooperation will be mainstreamed The vision of the UNDP Strategic
Plan to accelerate achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals is
incorporated into the programme; to that end, it fosters skills that include
systemic thinking and  culture that accepts complexity The Accelerator Lab will
support UNDP strategies to transition from  project approach to  portfolio
rationale Solutions will be built and scaled collaboratively with third parties
The UNDP proposal to achieve the results expected in the cooperation framework
includes: 14 UNDP partnership survey, 2020 /14  DP/DCP/ECU/ Comprehensive social
protection and resilience The UNDP theory of change in this area is that if
public institutions of the social sector and local governments have strengthened
capacities, regulations, policies and instruments to provide inclusive social
services that are non-discriminatory and gender-sensitive, then the
implementation of social protection and risk management systems will allow
people, particularly vulnerable groups, to have access to quality benefits and
services so that they can exercise their rights, leaving no one behind,
promoting human development and making them more resilient To that end, UNDP
will promote continuity, improvement, evaluation, and greater articulation in
policies and programmes for social protection – incorporating differentiated and
innovative approaches – and will support national efforts to eradicate poverty
while reducing inequalities and exclusion It will strengthen partnerships with
the National Planning Secretariat, the Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion, the Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security, the Ministry of Economy
and Finance, the Social Registry Unit, the National Institute of Statistics and
Census, the Ministry of Labour, academia, civil society, and volunteer
organizations The 2022 census will provide inputs for this work  whole-of-
society and risk management approach will be promoted for territorial management
in collaboration with local governments and their associations, the National
Decentralized Risk Management System, and the National Risk and Emergency
Management Service Emphasis will be placed on groups that are over-represented
in figures related to inequality and discrimination, persons in human mobility,
indigenous people and nationalities, Montubio and Afro-descendant populations,
women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer people, young people, and
disabled persons UNDP will articulate its actions with United Nations system
partners, particularly with the International Labour Organization (ILO), UN-
Women, and the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), and will strengthen
relationships with strategic partners including the European Union, the World
Bank and the Latin American Development Bank Environmental management and
climate action towards an ecological, inclusive, and resilient transition The
UNDP theory of change in this area is that if public, private, and civil society
actors have the capacities, resources, regulatory frameworks and public policy
instruments to strengthen national and local governments, alongside the
promotion and application of sustainable production and consumption models that
revalue nature and strengthen the conservation of forests and biodiversity as
central element of development, then the country will be able to move towards an
ecological transition and  sustainable and inclusive economy that is
decarbonized and resilient to the effects of climate change This will result in
positive impact on people, nature, and ecosystems, addressing the three-fold
planetary crisis: climate change, loss of biodiversity, and pollution UNDP will
apply  whole-government approach for institutional strengthening to consolidate
environmental governance and ecological transition, moving towards  development
model that places nature at the centre of strategic decisions With the Ministry
of the Environment, Water and Ecological Transition and local governments, UNDP
will work on capacity-building; data generation and systematization, legal and
regulatory frameworks, and public policy; the consolidation and automation of
prevention, control, and monitoring mechanisms and systems; and actions aimed at
the conservation of biodiversity and marine and terrestrial ecosystems, climate
action, pollution reduction, inclusive circular economy, and integrated
management of water resources, including disaster risk management Ecuador is
signatory to 18 multilateral environmental agreements within which UNDP will
provide technical assistance to meet the commitments undertaken We will support
the creation and updating of instruments such as the nationally determined
contribution, assumed under the Paris Agreement UNDP will continue to support
the country in accessing resources from environmental funds and bilateral
cooperation,  /14 DP/DCP/ECU/ including the Global Environment Facility, the
Green Climate Fund, the European Union, and the UNDP Climate Promise With the
National Planning Secretariat, the Ministry of Economy and Finance,
decentralized autonomous governments, civil society and volunteer groups, UNDP
will foster the national decentralized participatory planning system to
integrate, implement, and finance environmental and climate policies With the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the Ministry of Production, Foreign
Trade, Investments and Fisheries, the Ministry of Energy and Mines and the
productive sectors, UNDP will foster production models and environmentally
responsible consumption with sustainable, efficient practices and technologies,
to support  more competitive industrial sector Collaborating with public and
private financial institutions and the Popular and Solidarity Economy
(cooperative sector), UNDP will enable the generation of financial instruments
and mechanisms that encourage conservation, sustainable production and use of
resources, and environmentally responsible value chains UNDP will continue to
foster coordinated work with indigenous communities, peoples and nations,
together with participatory processes for decision-making, all with  focus on
gender, inclusion and diversity, highlighting the contributions of indigenous
women UNDP will continue to facilitate opportunities for multi-stakeholder
discussions that promote better interinstitutional and intersectoral
articulation at the national and local levels, and transboundary ecosystems
governance, towards  just, ecological and sustainable transition It will
coordinate with other United Nations entities in institutional strengthening and
the generation of information This will include coordination with FAO, the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) To mainstream the gender,
intercultural, and diversity approach, UNDP will coordinate with UN-Women; to
integrate young people into decision-making processes, UNDP will work with
UNICEF In responsible production and consumption, UNDP will work with FAO, the
World Food Programme (WFP), and the United Nations Organization for Industrial
Development (UNIDO) Productivity, competitiveness, and inclusive, sustainable,
and innovative livelihoods The UNDP theory of change in this area is that if
public, private, civil society, and academic actors have  public policy,
capacities, instruments and mechanisms that promote sustainable economic
development and systemic competitiveness and digitalization processes then the
generation of livelihoods and decent work, access to financial resources,
production means, and economic services, along with the strengthening of value
chains and productive transformation with greater added value, inclusiveness,
and environmental sustainability will all be fostered This will lead to improved
redistribution, the closing of gaps, and  reduction in socioeconomic
inequalities, emphasizing priority attention groups To that end, UNDP will
deepen relationships with its partners, generating conditions to promote
inclusive and environmentally sustainable productive development; with its
partners being the Ministry of Production, Foreign Trade, Investments and
Fisheries, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the Ministry of Tourism,
the Ministry of Telecommunication, the Ministry of the Environment, Water and
Ecological Transition, the Secretariat of Higher Education, Science, Technology
and Innovation, the Ministry of Labour, economic development agencies,
decentralized autonomous governments, academia, chambers of commerce and guilds,
and actors from the Popular and Solidarity Economy Partnerships will be
maintained to mobilize resources with the European Union, Spanish and Italian
Cooperation, the United States Agency for International Development, the private
sector, and volunteer organizations UNDP will continue to promote market
insertion and the financial inclusion of economic units (farmers, enterprises,
micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises, Popular and Solidarity Economy
actors, and the industrial sector) The focus will be on gender equality, youth,
populations experiencing human mobility, indigenous people, and rural
populations, to improve their living conditions and reduce poverty rates The
systemic competitiveness of /14  DP/DCP/ECU/ Ecuador will be improved,
considering territorial potentialities and environmental sustainability
Interagency work with UN-Women, FAO, the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), ILO, UNIDO, and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) will be key to promoting socioeconomic equality, facilitating
sustainable, productive transformation by proposing innovative instruments,
standards and mechanisms Solid institutions guarantee rights, inclusion, social
cohesion, peace, and human security The UNDP theory of change in this area is
that if the institutional capacity to design and manage public policies is
strengthened, the processes of election and democratic representation are
reinforced, transparency, access to public information, justice, control and
accountability mechanisms are improved; if society, especially priority
attention groups and those in  situation of marginalization, are empowered,
participate, and influence decisions of public interest; if, concomitantly,
capacities for dialogue,  culture of peace, and conflict prevention are
strengthened, and threats to human security and all forms of violence,
especially gender-based violence, are reduced, then people will be able to
exercise their rights more fully and without discrimination, consolidating
democratic governance, trust, and social cohesion UNDP will work with entities
at the national and local levels in institutional reform and strengthening
processes It will work with the National Planning Secretariat, the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, decentralized autonomous governments, and civil society to
articulate planning, policies, and budgets aligned with the National Development
Plan and the 2030 Agenda UNDP will work with the Secretary of the Administration
to apply strategies focused on integrity and anti-corruption and implement its
open-government plan The National Public Procurement Service and other
institutions will be supported in improving and fostering transparency In
collaboration with the Human Rights Secretariat, the Judicial Branch, the
Electoral Branch, and women’ organizations, UNDP will work to eradicate gender-
based violence Alongside public agencies, academia, the media, social
organizations, and sex and gender diversity organizations, UNDP will promote
changes in the socio-cultural patterns that constitute the basis of violence
With the equality councils, UNDP will mainstream intercultural approaches, human
mobility, gender, and inclusion of people with disabilities Cooperation with the
National Electoral Council will continue to improve electoral processes and
women’ political participation and generate conditions for an inclusive
democratic representation system Threats to human security, social and criminal
violence, reinforcement of conflict prevention, and social dialogue will be
addressed with the Ministry of Interior On governance, planning, budgets, and
participation, UNDP will seek partnerships with UN-Women and UNICEF On electoral
issues, including disinformation threats, partnerships will be established with
UN-Women and UNESCO under the strategic guidance of the United Nations Electoral
Division UNDP will coordinate with UNODC on transparency and anti- corruption
Matters relating to security, prevention of and the fight against violence will
be coordinated with UN-Women, UNFPA, and UNODC Work on protecting human rights
will be undertaken with IOM, UNHCR, UN-Women, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and UNICEF Partnerships will be maintained
to mobilize resources with the European Union, Spanish and bilateral cooperation
III Programme and risk management This country programme document outlines UNDP
contributions to national results and serves as the main unit of accountability
to the Executive Board to align the outcomes and resources allocated to the
programme at the country level Accountabilities of managers at the country,
regional, and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the UNDP operations and programmes policies and procedures and the
internal control framework  /14 DP/DCP/ECU/ The programme will be executed
nationally If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution
for part or all of the programme to enable  response to force majeure The
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with other
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the respective projects The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Migration will
oversee the programme An Executive Committee composed of the Ministry and UNDP
will provide strategic orientation, monitor results and support resource
mobilization UNDP will participate in the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework Executive Committee The crisis caused by COVID-19 has
shown that societies must improve their response capacities and resilience to
threats Multidimensional risks could obstruct achievement of the expected
outcomes The programme is designed to be  flexible and adaptive tool to mitigate
risks and respond to emerging national priorities The slowdown in social
development is identified as  long-term risk UNDP will engage with national and
local authorities to position development priorities on the public agenda,
focusing on gender equality Support for emergency procurement processes and
accelerated social services will be provided In 2023, new sectional authorities
will be elected, generating uncertainty for territorial development UNDP has the
experience to encourage the authorities to use tools for local planning and
sustainable development The commitment of Ecuador to environmental and social
sustainability will be reflected in rigorously applied social and environmental
standards Capacities to avoid, minimize, mitigate, and manage possible adverse
impacts – including mechanisms to respond to grievances from people who could be
affected – will be reinforced, guaranteeing key players’ full and effective
participation Ecuador faces multiple disaster risks such as floods, landslides,
fires, volcanic activity, and earthquakes, which may require data analysis,
coordination, and the adjustment of regular programmes The risks emanating from
increased crime, political instability, conflict, and violence will require
ongoing analysis with the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations country
team, demanding the capacity to adapt and respond to conditions that may affect
operations UNDP will assist authorities in complying with international human
rights and development commitments and preventing the aggravation of conflict
and social polarization Likewise, UNDP will foster digitization and innovation
processes across the board and support the application of horizon-scanning tools
to identify signs of change, possible risks, and emerging trends The UNDP social
and environmental standards and accountability mechanism will ensure human
rights and sustainability Stakeholder mapping will guarantee that the grievance
mechanism reaches the most vulnerable The UNDP business continuity plan will
ensure continuity in case of interruptions Programming tools and the application
of risk management instruments will be used, including due diligence for
partnerships with the private sector IV Monitoring and evaluation Adhering to
UNDP policies, rules and procedures, the programme will be monitored and
evaluated, promoting accountability and transparency to ensure effective
execution and achieve the proposed results The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Migration will oversee the programme through the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework, be carried out with the support of the United
Nations interagency data management, monitoring and evaluation group /14
DP/DCP/ECU/ Proportionally to its projects, UNDP will allocate at least  per
cent of the programme budget to cover monitoring, evaluation, and communication
costs In agreement with the Government, an evaluation plan will be implemented
to ensure learning and accountability, following the UNDP evaluation policy and
the guidelines of the United Nations Evaluation Group, integrating values and
human rights and gender equality principles, and bolstering the commitment to
“leave no one behind” The UNDP gender marker will help identify gaps and ensure
achievement of the new Global Gender Strategy goal of investing at least 70 per
cent of total programme spending in gender At least 15 per cent of the regular
resources should be allocated to gender equality and women’ empowerment Gender
indicators will be integrated into the evaluation plan, and investment in GEN
and GEN  projects will be increased Results-based management will be applied as
continuous process, given the interconnected nature of planning, monitoring, and
evaluation UNDP will redouble its efforts to maintain positive results in its
audits, the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers plan, compliance with the
evaluation plan, and follow-up to the independent country programme evaluation
recommendations The National Information and Evaluation System of the National
Planning Secretariat will be strengthened through methodologies, analysis, and
determination of indicators for social programmes and the Human Development
Index, the use of various sources (mainly the 2022 National Census), and
monitoring the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its connection to the
National Development Plan Support will be provided to the Single Registry of
Violence on gender violence indicators; consolidating  monitoring system for
development financing and design of  tool to monitor social spending; climate
budgeting; and implementation of the REDD+ Measures and Actions Management
System and the Safeguards Information System These interventions are expected to
contribute to evidence-based decision-making to ensure compliance with the
National Development Plan, the 2030 Agenda, and the international commitments of
Ecuador  /14 DP/DCP/ECU/ Annex Results and resources framework for Ecuador ()
National priority or goal National Development Plan (NDP)  O5, O6, O7, O9
Sustainable Development Goals , , , , , 10, 11 Cooperation framework outcome
involving UNDP # In 2026, people, taking into consideration their age, sex,
gender identity, ethnic self-identification and diversity, particularly those in
vulnerable situations and in emergency contexts, increase their equal and
equitable access to social protection and quality social services, including
food, health, education, water, sanitation and hygiene, housing, care and
culture Related Strategic Plan outcome  No one left behind, centring on
equitable access to opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and
human development Estimated cost by outcome (in $ thousands) Data source,
frequency of data collection and responsibilities Major partners / partnerships
/ frameworks Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(), baseline(), target()
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines, targets)
IMF Staff report, National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), annual
Indicator  Percentage of families living in poverty (lowest  deciles of the
income distribution) that receive at least one non-contributory social
protection benefit Baseline (2020): 60 Target: 80 Regular Output  Public
institutions have strengthened capacities, regulations, policies, and
instruments to implement  system and appropriate social protection measures that
allow people, particularly targeted priority groups, to overcome poverty and
access quality social benefits and services, including for preventing disaster
risk Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Migration (MREMH) National Planning
Secretariat (SNP) Ministry of Labour (MDT) Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion (MIES) Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security Social Registry Unit
(URS) National Risk and Emergency Management Service (SNGRE) Ministry of Economy
and Finance (MEF) Decentralized autonomous governments (DAG) and their guilds
National Assembly Qatar, Germany European Union World Bank Latin American
Development Bank Academia Civil society organizations (CSOs) Volunteers Italian-
Ecuadorian Fund for Sustainable Development UNICEF Other ,562 Indicator  Number
of knowledge outputs on poverty, social investment, social protection, gender
and care that contribute to informed decision-making (IRRF) Baseline (2022):
Target (2026):  Source: UNDP, MIES, MEF annual Indicator  National average score
for adopting and implementing national and local disaster risk reduction
strategies in line with the Sendai Action Framework Baseline (2021): 55 Target:
75 United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR), annual Indicator
Number of public policy strategies, institutional strengthening interventions
and mechanisms supported to implement  social protection basis sensitive to
priority groups, gender and emergencies Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):
Source: UNDP, MIES, URS annual Indicator  Percentage of local governments that
adopt and implement policies, tools, and strategies for risk reduction, aligned
with the Sendai Framework Baseline (2021): 81 Target: 85 UNDRR, annual Output
Actors in the National Decentralized Risk Management System have strengthened
capacities and tools for multidimensional risk management, response
preparedness, recovery and resilience at national, local, and sectoral levels
Indicator  Number of strategies, plans, or public policy instruments developed
and/or implemented at the national or  10 DP/DCP/ECU/ local level for
institutional strengthening of disaster risk management and resilience Baseline
(2022): 30 Target (2026): 53 Source: UNDP, SNGRE, annual WFP ILO UNESCO IOM
UNHCR UN-Women National priority or goal: NDP  O11, O12, O13 Sustainable
Development Goals , , , , , , 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 Cooperation framework outcome
involving UNDP # In 2026, the State and society advance towards the ecological
transition and  sustainable and inclusive, decarbonized and resilient economy to
the effects of climate change, conserving biodiversity, avoiding land
degradation and the pollution of ecosystems, with  focus on gender, inclusion
and diversities Related Strategic Plan outcome  Structural transformation
accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions Indicator
Percentage of national territory under conservation or environmental management
Baseline: 45 Target: 45 (NDP) Ministry of the Environment, Water and Ecological
Transition (MAATE), annual Regular $Output  Public, private and civil society
actors have strengthened capacities and regulatory frameworks and gender-
sensitive public policy instruments generated at the national and local levels
to respond effectively to the challenges posed by the triple planetary crisis:
climate change, loss of biodiversity, and pollution MAATE and affiliated
agencies MAG MEM MPCEIP MEF MREMH SNGRE Electric sector Central Bank of Ecuador
Popular and Solidarity Economy actors BanEcuador National Finance Corporation
Inter-American Development Bank DAG and their guilds UN-Women UNIDO FAO UNEP
UNICEF UNOPS WFP UNV European Union German Agency for International Cooperation
World Wildlife Fund Conservation International The Nature Conservancy Other
$85,576 Indicator  Number of action plans or national strategies for sustainable
consumption and production incorporated as priorities or goals in national
policies Baseline(2019): 14 Target: Pending (SDG) Indicator  Number of
regulatory frameworks and public policy instruments generated that contribute to
climate action, sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems,
transboundary water management, coastal and marine resources, and pollution
reduction Baseline (2022): 203 Target (2026): 222 Source: UNDP, MAATE, annual
SNP, annual Indicator  Number of people with strengthened capacities to
contribute to climate action, sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity
and ecosystems, transboundary water management, coastal and marine resources,
and pollution reduction Baseline (2022): Total 10,169, focused on: Women ,051
Target (2026): Total 14,000, focused on: Women ,774 Source: UNDP, MAATE, annual
Output  Public, private, and civil society actors have adopted actions that
promote sustainable production and consumption models, focused on  green,
inclusive, and resilient recovery, resulting in the contribution and
participation of women and diverse populations 11  DP/DCP/ECU/ Wildlife
Conservation Society Private sector CSOs Volunteers Indicator  Number of
initiatives contributing to changes in consumption and production patterns in
the productive sectors (agriculture, mining, fishing, industries, energy, etc)
(IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target (2026): 21 Source: UNDP, Ministry of Agriculture
and Livestock (MAG), MPCEIP, Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM), annual
Indicator  Number of innovative financing mechanisms and instruments created
and/or strengthened to support green recovery (IRRF) Baseline (2022):  Target
(2026):  Source: UNDP, National Corporation of Popular and Solidarity Finance,
MEF, annual Indicator  Number of persons who have implemented sustainable
production systems to conserve the environment and reduce poverty Baseline
(2022): Total 33,000, focused on: Women ,900 Target (2026): Total 37,500,
focused on: Women 11,925 Source: UNDP, MAG, annual Indicator  Area managed under
conservation and sustainable use regime (IRRF) Baseline (2022): ,000,000
hectares Target (2026): ,866,037 hectares Source: UNDP, water funds, MAATE,
annual National priority or goal: NDP  O1, O2, O3, O4, O5 Sustainable
Development Goals , , , 12, 13, 14, 15 Cooperation framework outcome involving
UNDP # In 2026, the State and society have reduced socio-economic inequalities
and have promoted  sustainable and value-added productive transformation, the
generation of livelihoods and decent work, guaranteeing equal rights and
opportunities and equal access to resources for women and men Related Strategic
Plan outcome  No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities
and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development Indicator
Adequate employment rate Baseline (2021): National % Target: National 50% (PND)
INEC, annual Output  Institutions develop standards and instruments, and private
sector initiatives are strengthened to increase productivity, productive
transformation, innovation, digitization and competitiveness, with  territorial,
inclusive and sustainable approach MPCEIP MAG Ministry of Tourism MDT MAATE
Secretariat of Higher Education, Regular $Other $,076 UNIDO, annual  12
DP/DCP/ECU/ Science, Technology and Innovation MREMH MINTEL SNP EPS Actors DAG
European Union Economic Development Agencies Chambers and Guilds Clusters
Academia UN-Women UNICEF UNV IOM ILO UNHCR CSO Indicator  Number of public and
private policies supported to promote socio-economic inclusion, decent work,
competitiveness, productivity, innovation, digitalization, gender mainstreaming,
and environmental sustainability Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):  Source: UNDP,
MPCEIP, DAG, annual Indicator  Percentage of total value added of the industrial
sector corresponding to small industries Baseline (2018): 33 Target:  Output
Economic units have strengthened capacities to promote equitable access to
productive resources and markets, and business digitization, in  context of
adaptation, escalation, resilience, risk management, and environmental
sustainability formalization, productivity increased Indicator  Number of
persons accessing financial services (IRRF) Baseline (2022): Total 120, Women
60, Men 60 Target (2026): Total ,000, Women 500, Men 500 (Youth 100, Migrants
150, Ethnic minorities 50) Source: UNDP, MPCEIP, DAG, annual Indicator  Number
of persons accessing non-financial assets (IRRF) Baseline (2022): Total 650;
women 325, men 325 Target (2026): Total ,150; women ,075, men ,075, (youth 415,
migrants 623, ethnic minorities 208) Source: UNDP, MPCEIP, DAG, annual National
priority or goal: NDP  O9, O10, O14, O15, O16 Sustainable Development Goals , ,
, , 10, 11, 16 Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #: In 2026, the
State improves public management and increases the protection and guarantee of
rights, gender equality and social cohesion, while reducing threats to human
security and promoting the eradication of all forms of violence Related
Strategic Plan outcome  No one left behind, centring on equitable access to
opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Indicator  Index of perception of the quality of public services in general
Baseline (2021):  Target:  (NDP) National Employment, Unemployment and Sub-
employment Survey, INEC, annual Output  Public institutions carry out more
effective, efficient, transparent, representative, and participatory management
at national and local levels, and society achieves greater influence in
decision-making Regular $Institutions of the following branches of Government:
Executive, Legislative, Judicial, Electoral, Transparency and Social Control
Presidency of the Republic Ministry of Interior Ministry of Defence MEF MIES
Other $,459 Indicator  Political Participation Index Baseline (2021): 11 Target:
78 The Economist, annual Indicator  Number of institutions strengthened to
increase their effectiveness and transparency and their application of rights,
inclusion, gender and participation approaches (IRRF: , , , ) 13  DP/DCP/ECU/
MREMH INEC European Union Equality Councils DAG CSOs Volunteers Academia Private
sector Baseline (2022): () national institutions: 17, () local governments:
Target (2026): () 22, () Source: UNDP, annual Indicator  Number of civil society
organizations, including volunteers, that have increased their incidence and
application of rights, inclusion, gender, and participation approaches (IRRF: ,
) Baseline (2022): 10 Target (2026): 18 Source: UNDP, annual Output  With the
support of society, national and local institutions reduce threats to human
security while promoting social cohesion and conflict prevention, and
eradicating all types of violence (especially gender-based violence) Indicator
Number of measures implemented by national and local institutions that promote
human security, social cohesion, and eradication of violence (IRRF: , , )
Baseline (2022):  Target (2026): 12 Source: UNDP, annual  14