Bishkek October 30, 1996, # 56 THE LAW OF THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC Law on Energy This
Law determines the main principles of the organization and regulation of
activities in the Fuel-Energy Sector The provisions of the present law apply to
all enterprises of the Fuel-Energy Sector regardless of the form of ownership
Article  Fuel-Energy Sector The Fuel-Energy Sector in the Kyrgyz Republic is
composed of Energy sub-Sectors Each sub-Energy Sector and Energy Activity
performed within Energy sub-Sectors shall be governed by specific provisions of
this Law and by other legislative and normative acts of the Kyrgyz Republic
Article  Objectives of the Present Law The objectives of this Law are to
increase economic efficiency and reliability of the functioning of the Fuel-
Energy Sector and to protect the interests of consumers and producers Article
Definitions As used in this Law, the meaning of the terms listed below shall be
interpreted as follows: Renewable Energy Resources - naturally formed resources,
which are continuously renewed by nature and can be converted into energy,
including geothermal, solar, water and wind energy; Secondary Energy Resources -
resources, extracted through processing of primary energy resources, with the
loss of  portion of the primary energy during the processing; Energy Activities
- production, generation, transportation, transmission, distribution, storage,
refining, conversion, transformation, selling or trading of energy resources and
products; Energy sub-Sector -  component of the Fuel-Energy Sector (coal, oil
and gas, electricity and others); Primary Energy Resources - resources existing
in their natural state, that can be used as fuel (oil, natural gas, oil shale,
coal, peat) and for extraction of other kinds of energy (nuclear fuel, water,
solar, wind energy and energy of geothermal sources); Enterprises of the Fuel-
Energy Sector- those enterprises engaging in one or more Energy Activities,
including natural monopolies, regardless of the form of ownership; Performance
Agreement - an agreement between the State Steering Entity for Energy Sector
under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and  License Holder specifying
expected outcomes of efforts to improve the efficiency of performance of the
License Holder; Fuel-Energy Sector - the aggregate of interrelated branches of
the economy, including governmental and non- governmental structures, involved
in systems that supply or consume coal, oil, natural gas, electricity and
thermal energy, including territorial sub-systems; Energy Products - different
kinds of fuel, oil products, electricity and thermal energy produced from any
energy resource; Energy Savings - rational utilization of the energy and
reduction of the losses in the production, conversion, transportation and
consumption of energy; Energy Services - generation, transmission, distribution,
storage, transportation or sale of energy resources Article  State Ownership of
Primary Energy Resources All Primary Energy Resources located in the Kyrgyz
Republic are the exclusive property of the State, and, in accord with
legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic, may only be exploited on the basis of
License Article  Forms of Ownership and Operations of Enterprises of the Fuel-
Energy Sector Enterprises of the Fuel-Energy Sector may be of any organizational
and legal form of any type of ownership (state, communal and private) The
program of denationalization and privatization of the Fuel-Energy Sector shall
be developed by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic and approved by both
Assemblies of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic Article  Authorities of
the Government in the Fuel-Energy Sector The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic
defines the energy policy and conducts control over policy implementation in
accordance with the provisions of this Law and subsequent legislation and does
not interfere directly into operational activities of Enterprises of the Fuel-
Energy Sector The functions of the Kyrgyz Republic' Government in the Fuel-
Energy Sector include: Granting and transferring property rights and rights for
the use of water, mineral and other energy resources; Carrying out control over
exploitation of energy resources and their maintenance; Creating conditions
necessary for attracting investments into the Fuel-Energy Sector; Elaborating
and implementing the National Energy Program; Elaborating programs to protect
the environment from the negative impacts caused by activities in the sphere of
the Fuel and Energy industry; Elaborating and implementing of demonopolization
and privatization programs for the Energy sub-Sectors; Elaborating and
implementing energy savings programs; Conducting general policy on prices in the
Fuel-Energy Sector The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic may delegate some
specific functions to other government entities Article  Powers of Local State
Authorities in the Fuel-Energy Sector Interrelations between the Local State
Authorities and Enterprises of the Fuel-Energy Sector shall be governed by the
legislation and other normative acts of the Kyrgyz Republic Article  The State
Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic The State Energy
Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic is  permanently acting body
which functions independently from all Energy Enterprises and does not directly
interfere in their operational and economic activities The State Energy Agency
under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic conducts its activities in accord
with the following principles:  In order to avoid negative consequences of the
monopolistic activities in the Fuel-Energy Sector, the State Energy Agency under
the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall use the Performance Agreements  For
activities where competition is feasible, the State Energy Agency under the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall: () encourage the development of energy
markets and the emergence of competing producers; and () create favourable
conditions for competition The Provisions of the State Energy Agency under the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall be approved by the Decree of the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic Article  Functions of the State Energy Agency
under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic The present Law hereby empowers the
State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic with authorities
to:  Issue licenses for generation, transmission, distribution and sale of
electricity, thermal energy and natural gas in accord with legislation of the
Kyrgyz Republic;  Establish pricing and tariff mechanisms that are economically
justified and socially affordable;  Pursue the policy of demonopolization of
producers and encourage the development of competition, providing equal
opportunities and conditions to all competitors for access to transmission lines
and gas delivery systems;  Monitor the effectiveness of measures intended to
foster competition and notify the competent government entities with respect to
violation of the anti-monopoly laws of the Kyrgyz Republic;  Enforce standards
and normative documents on service delivery to the consumers of energy resources
in accord with legislation of the Kyrgyz Republic;  Encourage the efficient use
of electricity, thermal energy, natural gas, coal, oil and oil products and
promote Energy Savings;  Encourage the creation of favourable conditions for the
development of Renewable Energy Sources;  Coordinate standards in the energy
sector;  Establish mechanisms for resolving consumer complaints and settling
disputes between consumers and enterprises, providing energy services, as well
as among enterprises; Adopt, issue and monitor the proper implementation of
resolutions, rules, regulations, guidelines, instructions, and other acts of
normative nature necessary to carry out its activities; In conjunction with
other state bodies coordinate the program of technical assistance and attract
investments to the Fuel-Energy Sector; Order and enforce scientific and
technical programs that allow improved efficiency of the Fuel-Energy Sector; Set
tariffs on electricity, thermal energy and natural gas Article Composition of
the State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic The State
Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic consists of:  Three
Members of an Executive Board appointed by the Prime Minister of the Kyrgyz
Republic and confirmed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic;  Qualified
professional staff necessary to enable the State Energy Agency to carry out the
responsibilities, assigned by this Law The term of office for the Members of the
Executive Board is six years, except the initial terms for the Members of the
first composition will be defined differently: two years for the first Member of
the Board, four years for the second Member and six years for the third Member
of the Board of the first composition Members of the Executive Board are
eligible for  second term, but the total length of service should not exceed
twelve consecutive years Every two years, upon consultation with the Prime
Minister, the President will appoint one Executive Member to serve as the
Director of the State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic
Each Executive Member has equal rights while making decisions and voting Article
Funding the State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic
Expenses to finance the State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz
Republic shall be incorporated into the Republican Budget Article Access to
Information In order to carry out its functions and implement its tasks the
State Energy Agency under the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, within the
scope of its authority, possesses free access to all documents of Enterprises of
the Fuel- Energy Sector Article National Energy Program  National Energy Program
(NEP) shall be developed by the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, approved by
both Assemblies of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic and confirmed by
the President of the Kyrgyz Republic The purpose of the NEP is to outline the
main trends of development for each of the Energy sub-Sectors, including energy
conservation and efficient utilization of energy resources, increase of
efficiency of the fuel and energy supply systems, energy preservation,
utilization of ecologically clean fuels and protection of the environment,
implementation of the structural transformations, resolution of investment,
price, tax, and other issues in the energy and fuel industry and scientific
research works Article Environmental Protection All types of anticipated Energy
Activities shall be preliminary considered and evaluated by the competent State
Authorities in terms of the impact on the environment and shall be implemented
only after their positive conclusion Article Use of Land and Property The
License Holder has rights to carry out production and economic activities on the
allotment received using fixed assets which are the property of State,
Territorial Units, or other property, in accord with legislation of the Kyrgyz
Republic Article Responsibilities The License Holder shall be responsible for
the damages to the owners or users of the fixed assets, to other consumers of
energy resources, and to the environment and ecology, caused during the
implementation of Energy Activities, in accord with the Legislation of the
Kyrgyz Republic The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall be responsible for
making compensation payments for fuels to low income people, and it shall be
also responsible for those decisions of the State Energy Agency under the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic that worsen the social-economic situation of
the Republic Article General Principles The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic
shall encourage and create stable and favorable conditions for investments in
the Fuel-Energy Sector Article Attracting Investments in Fuel-Energy Sector
Activities In order to encourage the progress and development of energy
generation, transmission/transportation, distribution and supply of Energy
Products, the present Law recognizes the role to be played by private legal
entities or individuals in the given sub-Sectors and ensures to the maximum
possible extent that they are accorded favourable treatment commensurate with
their role and contribution Article Insurance Within the framework of
investments in the Fuel-Energy Sector, investors are allowed to place with local
or foreign insurance companies any insurance required for their investments The
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic shall not enact any restrictions, interfere or
influence the terms and other conditions of such insurance Article Effectiveness
of the Law This Law shall enter into force from the date of signing President of
the Kyrgyz Republic Akaev Adopted by the Legislative Assembly of the Jogorku
Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic October 17, 1996