©IRENA 2022 Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely
used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that
appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder
Material in this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject
to separate terms of use and restrictions, and appropriate permissions from
these third parties may need to be secured before any use of such material ISBN:
-- Citation: IRENA (2022), Renewables readiness assessment: The Kyrgyz Republic,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi About IRENA The International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) serves as the principal platform for
international co-operation,  centre of excellence,  repository of policy,
technology, resource and financial knowledge, and  driver of action on the
ground to advance the transformation of the global energy system An
intergovernmental organisation established in 2011, IRENA promotes the
widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in
the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-
carbon economic growth and prosperity  Acknowledgements IRENA wishes to thank
the Ministry of Energy and Industry of the Kyrgyz Republic and UNDP country
office for close cooperation in developing the report The report also benefitted
from the inputs of various experts including Ute Collier, Diala Hawila, Michael
Taylor, Zafar Samadov, Imen Gherboudj, Aleksandra Prodan, and Francis Field,
Stephanie Clarke also provided valuable input This report was prepared by under
the guidance of Gürbüz Gönül, Binu Parthan and Prasoon Agarwal (IRENA) and
authored by Arslan Khalid (consultant) and Tatiana Vedeneva (consultant)
Disclaimer This publication and the material herein are provided “as is” All
reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the
material in this publication However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials,
agents, data or other third-party content providers provides  warranty of any
kind, either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or
liability for any consequence of use of the publication or material herein The
information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of all
Members of IRENA The mention of specific companies or certain projects or
products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in
preference to others of  similar nature that are not mentioned The designations
employed, and the presentation of material herein, do not imply the expression
of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries FOREWORDS The Kyrgyz Republic, like many
countries in Central Asia and around the world, is striving to overcome the
enduring challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic As efforts to secure
comprehensive socio-economic recovery continue, there is  need to focus on far-
reaching measures that can help build  more resilient and diversified economy,
improve the energy sector’ viability, attract investments in clean energy
projects and propel the country towards its climate goals The Kyrgyz Republic
relies on large hydropower installations for its electricity needs However, the
demand in end use sectors ( heating and transportation) is predominantly
addressed through oil, coal and natural gas Overall, the energy sector is
central to the socio-economic development of the Republic As the country
continues to develop, the social, environmental, resource and climate concerns
linked to energy consumption are set to intensify Rising fossil fuel imports are
adding to the financial burdens of an energy sector undermined by ageing
infrastructure and low revenues The transition to renewable energy is therefore
key imperative for decision-makers of the country This Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA) presents  strong case for  greater share of renewables in the
broader energy sector (especially in transport and heating), coupled with
diversification toward dynamic technologies such as solar PV, wind and small
hydro in the power sector It identifies twelve concrete actions to help the
Government in addressing energy challenges, developing  more diverse energy
sector and improving the livelihoods of its citizens Decision-makers in the
Kyrgyz Republic are aware of the promising potential of renewables The
announcement of  more ambitious NDC, and ongoing reforms in renewable energy-
related laws and regulations, signify their clear intent to achieve  sustainable
energy future  sincerely appreciate the leadership and support provided by the
Ministry of Energy and Industry of the Kyrgyz Republic in the preparation of
this RRA, and the insights of the other partners that broadened the perspective
of the assessment IRENA looks forward to working with all of these stakeholders
to transform these recommendations into practical, on-the-ground initiatives
Francesco La Camera Director-General International Renewable Energy Agency This
renewables readiness assessment (RRA) represents an important step toward
establishing  secure, modern, diversified and clean energy system in the Kyrgyz
Republic This report, prepared by IRENA in collaboration with the Ministry of
Energy of the Kyrgyz Republic, reflects the unwavering resolve of the Cabinet of
Ministers to identify  trajectory for sustainable national growth in line with
international climate commitments, and the natural and environmental resources
of the country Having set  goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 44% by
2030 and to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, Kyrgyzstan recognises that
renewables – primarily hydropower – will be the driver of zero-carbon policies,
given their enormous potential in the country The Kyrgyz Republic has
significant potential across all renewable energy technologies, with hydropower
being the most promising The Cabinet of Ministers of the Kyrgyz Republic is
pursuing several initiatives to convert this potential into tangible and
significant renewables use In this context, the President of the Kyrgyz
Republic, Sadyr Zhaparov, signed the Law on Renewable Energy Sources, which was
then adopted by the Jogorku Kenesh [Supreme Council] of the Kyrgyz Republic The
Law covers regulation of relations linked to the use of renewables; the key
principles of national renewable energy policies; and economic, organisational
and legal mechanisms in the field of renewables It aims to improve the
attractiveness of the renewables sector for investments, and the Ministry of
Energy will continue to play  central role in championing cost-effective and
reliable renewable technologies in the country The expediency of accelerated
development of renewable energy sources in the Kyrgyz Republic stems from
current electricity shortages and the need to include renewable energy in the
economic development and fuel mix of the Republic In this regard,  critical
challenge today is the need to commission new capacities; namely both large and
small facilities for the production of energy based on renewables New renewables
technologies are able to provide competitive energy supply, while reducing
negative impacts on the environment and human health, bringing opportunities for
universal access to inexpensive, reliable, sustainable and modern energy sources
for various categories of consumers - one of the obligations of the Kyrgyz
Republic under the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The
Ministry of Energy of the Kyrgyz Republic acknowledges the valuable inputs
provided by all stakeholders and the insights gained during the preparation of
this renewables readiness assessment The RRA aims to achieve ambitious goals in
green energy development, and  am confident that it represents  positive
contribution to policy planning for the Kyrgyz Republic’ energy sector The
Ministry of Energy of the Kyrgyz Republic hopes that this cooperation with IRENA
will mark the beginning of  significant evolution in the promotion of renewable
energy development, supporting long-term planning and approaches as well as
further beneficial co-operation  Mr Sultanbekov Sabyrbek Vice-Minister of Energy
of the Kyrgyz Republic  FIGURES        05 TABLES 05 BOXES 05 ACRONYMS 06
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 07  strong rationale for diversification 07 08 Recommendations
for the deployment of renewable energy INTRODUCTION 01 10 Socio-economic
conditions   11 12 Renewables Readiness Assessment 02 ENERGY SECTOR CONTEXT 14
Energy consumption and production   Electricity sector  Heating sector
Transport sector  Energy sector policy framework 14 16 19 21 22 03 RENEWABLE
ENERGY 25 Renewable energy resources   Current status of renewable energy
deployment  Renewable energy policies and regulation   strong rationale for
renewables  Issues faced in the deployment of renewables 25 26 27 30 34 04
RECOMMENDATIONS 35 Legal and regulatory reform   Policy support mechanisms
Long-term energy planning  Facilitate financing and de-risk investments
Capacity development in the public and private sector 35 36 39 41 42 REFERENCES
44 Annex  Solar PV and wind potential in the Kyrgyz Republic 48 48 50 Approach
Provisional results   FIGURES              ,       Administrative regions of the
Kyrgyz Republic Figure  10 Figure  Comparison of GDP components (left) and
structure of the Kyrgyz labour 12 market (right), 2019 (%) Total final energy
consumption by sector, various years Figure  14 Figure  Total final energy
consumption by source, various years 15 Figure  Total primary energy supply by
fuel, various years 15 Figure  Electricity consumption by sector, various years
16 Figure  Electricity generation by source, various years 17 Zoning assessment
for solar PV Figure  25 Figure  Zoning assessment for wind power 26 Figure  Net
energy imports 30 Figure  Electricity production, consumption, imports and
exports,  31 Figure  Rainfall in the Kyrgyz Republic 33 Figure A1 Global
horizontal irradiation 49 Figure A2 Wind speed at 100  height 49 TABLES
Stakeholders responsible for district heating in urban areas Table  21 Emission
reduction targets under the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution Examples
of technology-specific targets Table  24 Table  41 Data requirements Table A1 48
Utility-scale solar photovoltaic zones Table A2 50 Table A3 Wind zones 51 BOXES
Solar-assisted district heating: The Gagarin, Orto-Say and Rotor boiler houses
Box  20   USDc        US cent EEU Eurasian Economic Union EHC Energy Holding
Company FIP feed-in premium FIT feed-in tariff GDP gross domestic product GHG
greenhouse gas GKPEN State Committee on Industry, Energy and Subsoil Use GoK
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic GWh gigawatt hour HOB heat-only boiler HPP
hydropower plant IEA International Energy Agency IMF International Monetary Fund
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution IPP independent power producer
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency JSC joint-stock company KGS Kyrgyz
Republic som km kilometre kWh kilowatt hour LCOE levelised cost of electricity
LUCF land-use change and forestry MOEI Ministry of Energy and Industry MtCO2e
metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent mtoe million tonnes of oil equivalent
MWh megawatt hour NDC Nationally Determined Contribution NSC National
Statistical Committee & operation and maintenance OECD Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development PPA power purchase agreement PPP public-private
partnership RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment SAEPF State Agency for
Environmental Protection and Forestry SARFEC State Agency for Regulation of the
Fuel and Energy Complex PV photovoltaic toe tonnes of oil equivalent TWh
terawatt hour UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNECE United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe USD US dollar WRI World Resources Institute
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The energy sector of the Kyrgyz Republic is central to the
country’ development and growth As the population continues to increase, living
standards improve and the economy grows, energy demand has been rising Domestic
consumption far exceeds local production, which leads to costly fuel imports,
and makes the transition to clean energy  key imperative for decision making in
the sector Balancing the objectives of sustainable growth while addressing the
challenges posed by climate change and energy sector dynamics is difficult
Cognisant of this, Kyrgyz decision makers are taking legislative strides towards
more sustainable energy sector, which can help address the rising demand through
clean energy sources  relative economic boom from 2010 onwards boosted energy
demand, with final energy consumption rising by about 54% in the  period The
main energy consumers include the residential, industry and transport sectors
Driven by improving living standards and rising demand for heating, energy
consumption in the residential sector quadrupled between 2010 and Demand for
energy is addressed by oil products, electricity, coal, natural gas and heat Oil
products account for around 37% of the primary energy supply, followed by
electricity (primarily hydropower) at 30% and coal at 26% Since 2000, the energy
mix has gradually shifted towards oil and coal as the production of hydropower
has stagnated Indeed,  very limited amount of hydroelectric capacity has been
put into operation in recent decades In addition to being used for heating, oil
products are primarily used to address rising demand for transport fuel Domestic
coal is being utilised for exports and local consumption in heating and other
sectors The Kyrgyz Republic is among the most energy- intensive countries in the
world, which gives rise to recurring energy shortages and reduces economic
productivity and competitiveness (World Bank, 2017a) The power sector now has
the challenging task of meeting the new level of electricity demand, which has
increased by about 75% since The bulk of power generation (92%) is supplied by
hydropower plants followed by small contributions from coal- and gas-fired power
plants The power sector also contributes to the socio-economic growth of the
region through electricity trade The dominant role of hydropower leads to strong
interlinkages between irrigation and power, creating challenges for decision
makers in the power and agricultural sectors Ageing infrastructure, power sector
entities’ lack of financial viability, energy losses and limited new generation
systems are other key challenges, which tend to reduce the quality and
reliability of electricity  strong rationale for diversification  more diverse
Kyrgyz energy sector that relies on various renewable energy technologies,
increased energy efficiency and accelerated electrification can help address
rising energy demand while creating economic opportunities While large
hydropower is set to retain its role as the backbone of the sector, the
introduction of renewables such as solar photovoltaic (PV), wind, bioenergy and
small hydropower can help meet demand and diversify the energy mix The rationale
for diversification towards renewables includes various social, economic and
environmental factors Rising energy demand and energy imports: As energy
consumption continues to rise, reliance on imported fossil fuels will increase
Excessive fossil fuel imports pose  significant burden on government budgets and
could create energy security issues Dependence on imported fossil fuels could
also make the Kyrgyz Republic more vulnerable to volatility in international and
regional fuel markets Renewable energy technologies can help cater to domestic
energy demand, thus helping to cut down the import bill Deteriorating
infrastructure: The deterioration of energy sector infrastructure coupled with
the financial crisis in the energy system will eventually lead either to
significant decrease in the quality of produced energy or to an increase in
energy prices Both of these impacts could increase demand for independent energy
production and pave the way for the deployment of reliable renewable energy
technologies Local air pollution: The Kyrgyz Republic is among those Central
Asian nations most affected by diseases linked to indoor air pollution In the
winter months, the city of Bishkek regularly features among the top polluted
cities in the world due to its air quality Renewables could help replace fossil
fuels (especially coal) in heating and power generation, thus reducing air
pollution Vehicular emissions can be reduced through greater adoption of public
transport and the uptake of electric vehicles Mitigating climate change: The
Kyrgyz Republic is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and national
decision makers understand the importance of addressing this impending challenge
They are initiating mitigation and adaptation plans and programmes to ward off
the impacts and to contribute to the international climate effort  Declining
renewable energy costs: Renewable energy technology prices, which are becoming
increasingly competitive with fossil fuel alternatives, further strengthen the
case for the uptake of non-hydro renewables The levelised costs of solar PV and
wind, for example, declined by 85% and 56%, respectively, between 2010 and Short
construction periods of renewables: The Kyrgyz Republic’ rising energy demand
needs to be met with rapid investments in sustainable and clean technologies
Renewables such as solar PV, wind and small hydropower tend to be modular and
can be constructed in  very short time In contrast, large hydropower projects
tend to require longer construction times and can be susceptible to delays
Seasonal variation in hydroelectricity generation: Hydropower in the Kyrgyz
Republic is influenced by several factors such as seasonal variability of river
flows, electricity demand and water demand for irrigation An energy system that
includes  diverse mix of complementary renewable energy technologies can be more
resilient to seasonal variations Environmental impacts of hydropower: Large
hydropower projects, just like many other large infrastructure projects, can
have negative environmental and social impacts such as displacement, habitat
destruction, loss of forest and disturbance to wildlife  shift towards small
hydropower projects can help avoid some of the impacts linked with large
projects Also, run-of-river hydropower installations can sidestep several of the
impacts associated with reservoirs Abundant renewable energy resources: The
country has significant renewable energy potential for solar, wind, bioenergy
and hydropower These resources can be utilised to create  diversified energy
system that is sustainable from financial, social, climatic and environmental
perspectives While the rationale for greater inclusion of renewables in the
energy sector is clear, wide-scale deployment has been held back by several
issues: • Average power and heat tariffs are well below cost recovery, which
holds back renewables at the retail level • Renewable energy targets have not
been effective as they are not enforced by law, or backed by concrete policies •
Renewable energy policies remain limited to the power sector, with little focus
on heating and transport Distributed generation policies such as net metering
and wheeling are also not in place • Feed-in tariffs have not been successful in
attracting investments, as the levels are low and the frameworks are not clear •
Auctions/tenders have not been successful in the past • Permitting procedures
require further clarification • Renewable energy capacity building is needed for
public and private stakeholders Recommendations for the deployment of renewable
energy The Renewables Readiness Assessment presents  set of short- to medium-
term recommended actions to address key challenges and support the country in
moving towards  diversified and climate-friendly energy system Create  level
playing field with energy tariff reforms Well-designed tariff reforms in the
energy sector can help generate revenue while lowering the barrier to market
entry for distributed renewable energy technologies To be sustainable, tariff
reforms should be designed in  way to minimise the economic impact on low-income
and marginalised parts of society Streamline the procedure for bringing
renewable energy projects online Permitting requirements and procedures should
be streamlined under an overarching renewable energy law, implemented through
concrete secondary regulations, which clearly articulate the process and
identify responsible government entities The design of the procedures should
focus on simplicity, flexibility and transparency Improve the feed-in tariffs
The feed-in tariffs scheme should be revised and improved based on factors such
as changing market conditions, competitive technology costs and clear resource
assessments The selection of an appropriate tariff is an extensive process that
should be led by the government with active and diverse representation from all
stakeholders Feed-in tariffs need to be supported by  conducive policy and clear
institutional responsibilities Implement auctions for large capacities Auctions
can be used to attract investment for relatively large-scale projects in
hydropower, solar and wind They need to be designed in  way that attracts
developers, enhances competition and enables price discovery while ensuring
project delivery  Enact policies to decarbonise end-use sectors The
decarbonisation of the heating sector needs  multifaceted approach that includes
renewables-based electrification, use of renewable heating (where available,
solar thermal, biomass, geothermal) and investments in efficient district
heating In the transport sector, more efficient public transport, electric
vehicles and support for alternative modes of transportation ( bicycle and
walking infrastructure) can help The introduction of net metering, wheeling and
other distributed generation policies can help unlock the small-scale market
segment Improve renewable energy resource mapping Zoning for solar PV and wind
should be prioritised An analysis of potential suitability, as conducted by the
IRENA, identifies suitable zones for solar PV and wind, and can serve as an
important initial step towards  complete zoning assessment Follow-up studies
could build on this exercise by performing detailed technical and economic
analyses and ground-based measurements within the identified solar and wind
zones Develop long-term energy scenarios  detailed long-term planning exercise
should be undertaken for energy demand in all sectors to identify the optimal
energy mix Scenario analyses that explore  host of different energy sector
futures can be used to inform policy making Energy sector planning needs to be
complemented by reforms in the collection and reporting of energy statistics
Establish comprehensive and ambitious renewable energy targets Renewable energy
targets should reflect the country’ strong renewable energy potential, declining
technology costs and rising energy demand They are best backed by strong
political commitment and legislation, to be defined at the level of the sector
and further disaggregated by subsector Adopt  standard power purchase agreement
Design elements of renewable energy power purchase agreements (PPAs) should be
devised in accordance with international best practices to de-risk investments
and facilitate financing This effort may be complemented by  thorough review of
contractual project document templates for renewables along with the development
of standardised PPAs Introduce public-private partnerships To be successful, the
introduction of public-private partnerships (PPPs) in the Kyrgyz energy sector
must be backed by strong political will, capable institutions and conducive
legislation Fair risk-sharing criteria must be established On the public side,
there should be an absolute commitment to the long-term payment for energy
production On the private side, penalties should be levied if services are not
delivered Enhance institutional capacities The technical and co-ordination
capabilities of public and private sector entities require improvement to
facilitate renewable energy deployment Topics to address include technology
costs, grid integration issues, economic management and the introduction of
flexibility mechanisms, regulatory aspects, policy design, etc Educate and train
skilled workforce Investment in the education and training of workers such as
engineers, technicians and other skilled personnel is very important
Universities, vocational training institutes and schools all have  role to play
Industry upgrade programmes, joint ventures and tax breaks can be used to
strengthen local industrial capabilities   INTRODUCTION The Kyrgyz Republic is
landlocked, mountainous country in the northeast of Central Asia The country
borders Uzbekistan to the west, Kazakhstan to the north, China to the east and
Tajikistan to the south The total area of the country is approximately 200 000
square kilometres (km2) (Energy Charter, 2018) About 80% of the country is
mountainous; the rest is valleys and basins The climate is continental, with
strongly defined seasons The rugged topography, with large differences in
altitude, determines the variety of climatic conditions and temperatures in
different regions of the country The annual average sunshine level, at  100- 900
hours/year, is similar to that of Türkiye and Greece (Energy Charter, 2018) The
country is divided into nine administrative areas, including seven provinces and
the two main cities of Bishkek and Osh (Figure ) Bishkek is the national capital
and the largest city with  population exceeding  million people ( 074 000 people
in 2020) Osh (322 000 people), Jalal-Abad (123 000) and Karakol (84 000) are
other major cities (NSC, 2021) The republic has significant water resources It
is the only Central Asian country where almost all the water resources originate
within national borders The Kyrgyz Republic’ lakes, glaciers and rivers are
significant part of the country’ hydrological resources The republic’  923 lakes
and reservoirs hold more than  745 cubic kilometres (km3) of water, most of
which is stored in lake Issyk-Kul Glaciers are estimated to hold 760 km3 of
water, but this water source has been decreasing in recent decades There are
more than 25 000 rivers, of which 73 are more than 50 km in length, and the
remaining are smaller Irrigated farming accounts for around 90% of water
consumption, followed by industrial purposes (%), household use (%) and other
uses (%) (DWRLI, 2021; Mamatkanov, Bazhanova and Romanovsky, 2006; Ratnaweera et
al, 2013) Figure  Administrative regions of the Kyrgyz Republic 44° 44° 70° 72°
74° 76° 78° 80°    KYRGYZSTAN Tyup Cholpon-Ata Bishkek Kara Balta Tokmak Talas
Karakol             ST' Ysyk Köl Talas Ysyk-Köl          ST'    Tunuk Enilchek
Barskoon      -  UL'          ST' 42° 42°   tk al DZHALAL-ABADSK Toktogul
Reservoir Shyirak Toktogul   Song-Kel' Kara-Kul'               ST' Kara-Say
Naryn    Tash-Kömür Naryn Ala-Buka   Ugyut  Ala-    -Art Kok-Yangak   ST'
Jalal-Abad Uzgen   Chatyr-Kel' Kek-Aigyp -Tal Kurs Osh  KYRGYZSTAN   Gul'cha
Alay-Kuu Kyzyl-Kiya 40° 40° Sulyukta Khaidarken National capital Oblast' center
Town, kishlak Major airport International boundary Oblast' boundary Main road
Secondary road Railroad Ravat             ST' Sary-Tash  yzyl-    Daraut-Korgan
25 50 75 100 125 150 km  25 50 75 100 mi The boundaries and names shown and the
designations used on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by
the United Nations 38° 38° 70° 72° 74° 76° 78° Source: UN Geospatial (2011)
Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only Boundaries and
names shown on this map do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part
of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area,
or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries
10  Socio-economic conditions The population of the Kyrgyz Republic stood at
around  million people at the beginning of One-third of the resident population
(34%) lived in urban settlements with the remaining living in rural areas The
population density averaged 33 people/km2 The average life expectancy was 68
years for the male population and 76 years for the female population The
inflation rate was % in 2019, and the unemployment rate in the country amounted
to % (NSC, 2021; World Bank, 2020) The poverty level in the country was 25% in
2020, which is the second highest in the Central Asia region after Tajikistan
(NSC, 2021; World Bank, 2021) Around  million people lived below the poverty
line in 2019, of which 74% were residents of rural settlements While  fourth of
the country’ population was poor, 58% were considered vulnerable (with per
capita income less than USD /day) Concerns about poverty have direct
implications for the energy sector, particularly when it comes to tariff setting
The current social safety net is not adequate to mitigate the potential impacts
of  tariff increase on the poor (IMF, 2019; NSC, 2021) An unstable political
situation and low level of economic development are considered to be
contributing factors to the three political crises of 2005, 2010 and Increases
in electricity tariffs and the obscure privatisation processes of energy
companies have also contributed to social unrest and instability in the Kyrgyz
Republic in recent decades The affordability and reliability of the energy
supply remain very sensitive issues (Energy Charter, 2018; Mallinson, 2020) The
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020 amounted to Kyrgyz Republic soms (KGS) 601
billion (USD  billion), following  contraction of % from 2019 due to social
unrest,  financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic Over the past couple
decades, GDP growth averaged at around 45%, compared to % in the other Caucasus
and Central Asia2 countries and % in emerging market developing economies3 (IMF,
2019; World Bank, 2021) In response to the pandemic, the Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic (GoK) introduced several socio-economic measures to encourage
economic growth in  more sustainable and climate-friendly direction (UNFCCC,
2021) National estimates show that between 2010 and 2020 GDP increased from USD
920 to USD  231 per capita (NSC, 2021) The International Monetary Fund (IMF)
estimated it at USD  330 in Income per capita has lagged behind that of
comparator countries over the last couple decades Meanwhile, the income gap with
emerging market countries has been increasing In 2019, the IMF estimated that at
its forecasted growth rate (% on average over 2020- 2023), GDP per capita in the
Kyrgyz Republic would require 23 years to reach middle-income GDP per capita
levels (USD  370) Achieving this benchmark may become more difficult due to the
COVID-19–related economic slowdown (IMF, 2019; SAEPF, 2020) The country has
considerable economic potential based on its resources, including pastures (48%)
and arable land (% of the country) along with substantial forests and minerals
(World Bank, 2020) According to data for 2019 (Figure ), trade accounts for
about 18% of GDP, followed by the industrial sector at 14% The basis of industry
is the country’ largest gold deposit at Kumtor The agriculture sector accounts
for 12% of GDP, the construction sector for about 10%, transport %, while other
services make up the rest Energy generation, transmission, distribution and
supply account for about % of GDP (NSC, 2021) The two largest sectors
contributing to the country’ GDP - domestic trade and industry - employ about
16% and 12%, respectively, of the working population The agriculture sector
employs the largest share of the working population, at 18%, though this sector
is only the third largest in terms of its contribution to GDP The significant
differences between these sectors in employment and their contribution to GDP is
explained by the presence of  large informal economy in the agriculture sector
and the comparatively low income of informal workers The added value received as
result of hidden and informal production (excluding agriculture) is estimated at
% of GDP The electricity, gas and steam generation, transmission, distribution
and supply subsectors employ % of the total working population of the country,
or about 13% of industrial workers (Energy Charter, 2018; NSC, 2021)  USD  = KGS
(as of 30 January 2021)  Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan
are oil importers, while Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are
oil exporters  Emerging market developing economies include 154 countries 11
Figure  Comparison of GDP components (left) and structure of the Kyrgyz labour
market (right), 2019 (%) Transport and storage % Transport and storage %
Education % Others 18% Others 21% Public administration % Education % Public
administration % Construction % Trade 18% Construction 12% Trade 16%
Agriculture, forestry and ﬁshing 12% Agriculture, forestry and ﬁshing 18% Taxes
13% Manufacturing 12% Manufacturing 15% Source: NSC (2021) Note: GDP = gross
domestic product The country’ economy relies on three highly volatile sources of
revenue including mineral resources, remittances and foreign aid, and loans
Around 31% of the country’ GDP in 2020 was through remittances The Kyrgyz
Republic is rich in mineral resources but has negligible oil and natural gas,
which it imports Substantial deposits of coal, gold, uranium, antimony and other
valuable metals are included in its mineral reserves (World Bank, 2021) This
reliance leads to vulnerability to external economic shocks Economic growth in
the past decade has been driven mainly by the service sector, including trade,
while the contribution of the industrial sector has been fluctuating given the
strong presence of natural resource processing activities (Rovenskaya et al,
2018)  Renewables Readiness Assessment  transition towards renewable energy in
all energy sector applications can help address energy demand while creating
economic opportunities and position the Kyrgyz Republic as  global example for
sustainable growth and well-being The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) aims
to support the GoK in this transition The RRA was initiated by the Ministry of
Energy and Industry (MOEI) in 2021 in co-operation with the IRENA, to support
the country’ efforts in enabling the greater adoption of various renewable
energy technologies in the energy sector IRENA developed the RRA as  tool for
carrying out  comprehensive evaluation of the conditions for renewable energy
deployment in  particular country The RRA is  country-led, consultative process
It provides  venue for multi-stakeholder dialogue to identify challenges to
renewable energy deployment and to devise solutions to existing barriers Short-
and medium-term recommendations are presented to governments to guide the
formation of new policies or the reform of existing policies to establish  more
conducive enabling environment for renewable energy The RRA also consolidates
existing efforts and mobilises resources for priority action Since 2011, the RRA
methodology has been used to conduct more than 30 country assessments, often
resulting in extensive stakeholder engagement and improvements in policies and
institutional frameworks (IRENA, 2013, 2022) The RRA of the Kyrgyz Republic
provides  rigorous assessment of ground conditions, including the enabling
environment and the potential for growth of the renewable energy market The
assessment determines that there is  strong case for diversification of the
country’ power mix towards medium-sized and small hydropower, and towards
renewables in end-use energy sectors such as transport and heating Finally, to
help the Kyrgyz Republic accelerate the deployment of renewables, it provides
range of recommendations including policy measures and initiatives, rooted in
extensive analysis and stakeholder input 12 The RRA has been enriched through
the guidance and inputs of the MOEI, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and other stakeholders An initial expert consultation workshop, co-
organised by the MOEI, IRENA and the UNDP in April 2021, helped lay the
foundations of the RRA The findings and recommendations of the RRA were
discussed in  validation workshop co-organised by IRENA, the MOEI and the UNDP
in February The RRA included three special objectives: contributing inputs to
the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) process; an assessment of the
potential of wind and solar photovoltaic (PV); and capacity building in the
setting of renewable energy targets IRENA prepared an NDC note in January 2021
to contribute to the NDC updating efforts of the UNDP and the GoK  detailed
assessment of the solar and wind energy potential of the country has been added
to the RRA Finally, an activity to build capacity in setting renewable energy
targets was carried out in March Yurt camping in Kyrgyzstan © Dave Primov /
Envatocom 13  ENERGY SECTOR CONTEXT The energy sector has played an important
role in the socio-economic development of the Kyrgyz Republic As the Kyrgyz
population continues to increase and the economy grows, energy consumption has
been increasing Kyrgyz energy consumption far exceeds domestic production, which
leads to costly fuel imports, and makes the transition towards clean fuels  key
imperative for decision making in the sector  Energy consumption and production
The  decade was characterised by an economic crisis and social unrest, which
slowed growth in energy demand  relative boom in economic growth from 2010
onwards has boosted energy demand Final energy consumption increased by 33% in
the  decade compared to growth of 54% in the  period Total final consumption
stood at  million tonnes of oil equivalent (mtoe) in 2019 (Figure ) Figure
Total final energy consumption by sector, various years  000 19  500 122 293 20
24 Agriculture / forestry 215 )     (                 000 388 Non-speciﬁed 483
500 925 97 Non-energy use  000 351 Commercial / public 92 74 162 172 149 735 35
271 Transport  500      670 369 508 Industry 2298  000 472 Residential 295 372
1251 500 444 549 546 179  2000 2005 2010 2015 2019 Source: IEA (2020b) Note:
ktoe = kilotonne of oil equivalent The main energy consumers include the
residential, industry and transport sectors, representing 66%, 14% and 11% of
consumption, respectively They are followed by the commercial/public sector,
agriculture/forestry and non-energy use, all with much smaller shares of
consumption Consumption in the industry and transport sectors has undergone
significant fluctuations, some of which could be explained through changes in
levels of economic activity, while others could be due to statistical
methodologies The energy consumed by the residential sector, however, has grown
consistently and rapidly, tripling during the  period and more than quadrupling
between 2010 and This increase can be attributed to improving living standards
coupled with the rising demand for heating Final energy consumption is composed
of oil products, electricity, coal, natural gas and heat Oil products account
for around 40% of consumption, followed by electricity at 30% Coal, heat and
natural gas account for 16%, % and %, respectively, of final demand  Includes
energy supplied for construction, installation and drilling works and for
communal and cultural needs  In 2019, for instance, new legislation restricted
fuel imports to only those for private use Thus, despite similar or greater
demand from the transport sector, consumption fell dramatically and the bulk of
it shifted to the residential sector (according to IEA data) 14 The fuel mix
seen in final demand (Figure ) has undergone  significant shift since 2000 when
electricity was the dominant contributor with 41%, followed by oil products at
24% and coal at 12%  very limited amount of hydroelectric capacity was put into
operation in recent decades, while the consumption of coal and mazut (heavy fuel
oil) increased for heat generation Consequently, coal’ market share increased to
16% in 2019 due to the availability of relatively cheap local coal reserves
while that of electricity declined to 30% Shares of natural gas also decreased
slightly from 10% to % between 2000 and 2019 due to reduced availability and
higher prices Simultaneously, the share of oil products in final consumption
increased to 41% by 2019 due to the country’ growing vehicle fleet Another
negative trend is the smaller share of heat energy in final consumption (14% to
%), revealing that the country did not fully utilise the potential of its two
combined heat and power plants in Bishkek and Osh and the district heating
systems in other small cities (Energy Charter, 2018; IEA, 2020b) The shift
towards oil is also evident in the mix of the total primary energy supply As
Figure  shows, the energy supplied by hydropower stagnated at around  mtoe,
while that from oil and coal more than doubled Consequently, the share of
hydropower declined from 43% to 30% between 2000 and 2019, whereas that of oil
increased from 16% to 37% The share of coal supply also increased from 18% to
26% due to domestic consumption and rising exports to neighbouring countries
(China, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) Overall, the total primary energy supply
increased by 13% during the  period, followed by  more rapid increase of 39%
from 2010 to 2019 – which is consistent with consumption and economic growth
patterns during these periods (Figure ) Oil, hydropower and coal were the key
sources in 2019 accounting for 37%, 30% and 26%, respectively (IEA, 2020b)
Figure  Total final energy consumption by source, various years  000  500 152
274 283 118 )     (                 000 Biofuels and waste 571 481 Heat  500 239
121 373 Natural gas 910  000 1062 Coal 280 237 163 204  500 300 Electricity 609
196  000 Oil products 1569 585 691 1439 500 927 475 407  2000 2005 2010 2015
2019 Figure  Total primary energy supply by fuel, various years  000  500 )
(                 271 229  000 Biofuels and waste 1059 1128  500 Natural gas 247
Coal  000 617 701 574 954 1192 Hydro 553  500 469    Oil 955       000 1100 1103
1619 1498 500 993 529 413  2000 2005 2010 2015 2019 Source: IEA (2020b) Note:
ktoe = kilotonne of oil equivalent 15 The Kyrgyz Republic is among the most
energy-intensive countries in the world According to the International Energy
Agency, in 2019 the energy intensity of GDP was 19 toe per USD  000, as compared
with  world average of 12 toe, 11 toe for the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries, 15 toe for China and 20 toe for
Eastern Europe and Eurasia as well as neighbouring Kazakhstan Energy intensity
leads to persistent energy shortages and also reduces economic productivity and
competitiveness (IEA, 2020b; World Bank, 2017b)  Electricity sector The power
sector faces the challenging task of meeting rising electricity demand The
sector also contributes to the socio-economic growth of the region through the
electricity trade The dominant role of hydropower leads to strong interlinkages
between water and power, posing challenges to decision makers in the power
sector Ageing infrastructure, power sector entities’ lack of financial
viability, energy losses and limited new generation are other key challenges,
which tend to reduce the quality and reliability of electricity Electricity
consumption Power consumption per capita, despite limitations imposed by power
shortages, grew by close to 45% from 2010, reaching  megawatt hours (MWh)/capita
in In the broader context of Central Asia, the per capita electricity
consumption of the country is slightly higher than neighbouring Tajikistan (
MWh/capita) and Uzbekistan ( MWh/capita) but lower than Kazakhstan ( MWh/capita)
and Turkmenistan ( MWh/capita) (IEA, 2020a, 2020b) The increasing per capita
electricity consumption can be attributed to several factors including increased
living standards and electrification of heating demand Electricity consumption
increased by around 75% between 2010 and 2019, reaching terawatt hours (TWh)
(Figure ) Demand from the residential sector increased by 152% between 2010 and
2019, reaching two-thirds of total electricity consumption in The increasing
demand for electric heating in the residential sector was  key driver of this
trend; other factors include improved living standards and subsidised tariff
structures The industrial sector with close to 18% of total demand was the
second-largest power consumer in Demand in the sector increased by 24% from 2010
due to ongoing economic recovery, but remained well below the levels seen in
Demand from the agricultural sector steadily declined, with the electricity
intensity of agricultural GDP falling by almost 93% from 2000, and 45% from 2010
(IEA, 2020b) Figure  Electricity consumption by sector, various years  000  500
271 229  000 )    (                       Non-speciﬁed 1059  500 1128 Transport
247 Agriculture / forestry  000 617 701 574 Commercial and public services 954
1192 553  500 469 Industry 955  000 Residential 1100 1103 1619 1498 500 993 529
413  2000 2005 2010 2015 2019 Source: IEA (2020b) Note: TWh = terawatt hour 16
Generation and trade Total electricity generation has been increasing to address
the rise in domestic demand and export requirements In 2019, total generation
was estimated at around 15 TWh, which is  24% increase over 2010 but only
slightly higher than in 2000 (Figure ) The bulk of this generation (92%) was
supplied by hydroelectric power plants followed by small contributions from
coal- and fuel-oil-fired power plants (% and %, respectively) While hydropower
has always been the dominant technology for electricity generation, fossil-fuel-
based generation has gradually shifted from gas to coal since This shift is due
to shortages in gas supply from Uzbekistan, starting in 2003 due to large debts
owed by the Kyrgyzgas company to Uzbek counterparts (Yusupkhanova, 2003) In
2014, Kyrgyzsgas was sold to Gazprom, after which some gas imports from
Uzbekistan were restored Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation and Uzbekistan are
the key sources of gas for the Kyrgyz Republic (Pirani, 2019; Vedomosti, 2014)
Figure  Electricity generation by source, various years 16 000 14 000 12 000 )
(                      10 000 Oil Natural gas  000 Coal  000 Hydro  000  000
2000 2005 2010 2015 2019 Source: IEA (2020b) Note: GWh = gigawatt hour The
installed capacity of the country stood at  982 megawatts (MW) in 2020 and
primarily comprised: • seven large hydropower plants ranging from 40 MW to  200
MW, at  combined capacity of  067 MW, located on the Naryn and Bashy rivers; •
nineteen small hydropower plants ranging from 26 to  MW, with  total capacity of
54 MW, located on the Alamedin, Chu and other small rivers; and • two combined
heat and power plants with  total capacity of 862 MW (Bishkek, 812 MW; Osh, 50
MW) The country’ hydropower production fluctuates seasonally, which
significantly affects power reliability Power supply is typically most reliable
in spring and summer, when it satisfies national energy demand and even provides
electricity for export During the autumn-winter period, the country stores water
in dams (instead of maximising power generation) to meet downstream irrigation
requirements in the spring season (Imanaliyeva, 2021; Zeng et al, 2017)
Moreover, rainfall and glacial meltwater tend to decline in the winter months
The resulting shortfall in power generation in autumn and winter is addressed
through imports of electricity (mainly from Kazakhstan) This seasonality coupled
with trends in domestic demand have  significant impact on the electricity trade
In 2013, for instance, all generation was used to fulfil domestic demand and in
2014 the country moved from being  net electricity exporter to  net electricity
importer In 2017 and 2018, however, high water levels meant that the country was
net exporter of power In 2021, severe drought resulted in significant challenges
to the food and energy security of the country and the broader region
Prospective plans include the construction of  cascades of 34 hydroelectric
power plants with  total installed capacity of  450 MW  During the Soviet era,
electricity was supplied to the Kyrgyz Soviet Republic by the Kazakh and Uzbek
Soviet Republics in autumn and winter In spring and summer, with reservoir gates
wide open, the Kyrgyz Soviet Republic supplied water and electricity to its
neighbours 17 As domestic electricity demand continues to increase and
investments in new generation capacity are lacking, exports of electricity are
likely to decline in future The Kyrgyz Republic is part of the Central Asian
Power System, which connects it with Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan
Future projects such as the Central Asia–South Asia power project (CASA-1000),
aim to take regional power sector integration further by connecting the
electricity-exporting Central Asian countries including the Kyrgyz Republic and
Tajikistan with Afghanistan and Pakistan to export surplus summer electricity
Project implementation started with the construction of generation and
transmission infrastructure in the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and
Pakistan (CASA-1000, 2021; USAID, 2021) Further investments in the Kyrgyz power
sector to increase generation capacity, while simultaneously decreasing the
intensity of domestic demand, could help ensure that the country benefits from
the power trade opportunities offered by the project Infrastructure and tariffs
The bulk of investment in the Kyrgyz power sector was carried out in the Soviet
era, which means that about 45% of available generation capacity is beyond its
useful service life, and transmission and distribution assets are also
deteriorating The largest power distributor in the country, Severelectro, for
instance, reported in 2016 that close to 40% of the underground cables in
Bishkek required urgent replacement Old assets and infrastructure, especially
when undermaintained, could put supply reliability and quality at risk (World
Bank, 2017b) In , around 43% of firms reported experiencing power outages, and
around 34% reported that they own or share  generator (World Bank, 2022) The
power system needs significant investment to maintain ageing equipment or
develop the capacity required to meet growing demand This is unlikely under
current conditions since the system is not viable from  financial standpoint and
is kept functioning through inputs from the government budget Subsidies on
retail prices are at the heart of the financial issues faced by the power and
energy sector (World Bank, 2017b) The retail tariffs for power in the Kyrgyz
Republic are among the lowest in the world This incentivises an inefficient
energy consumption pattern The resulting lack of revenue leads to
underinvestment in infrastructure and severe underspending on maintenance
Consequently, the reliability and quality of the power system suffers
(Holzhacker and Skakova, 2019) The decline in reliability is most evident in the
winter season, when the gap between the available generation capacity and rising
demand emerges (World Bank, 2017b) Large residential consumers (above 700
kilowatt- hour [kWh] consumption) and non-residential consumers pay tariffs (16
and 52 KGS/kWh [ and  US cents (USDc)/kWh], respectively) that are above cost-
recovery levels (97 and 55 KGS/kWh [ and  USDc/kWh], respectively) and cross-
subsidise small residential consumers, who pay tariffs (77 KGS/kWh [ USDc/kWh])
that are below cost-recovery levels Small residential consumers account for more
than half of total consumption, which means that the average tariff remains
below cost recovery and the sector’ revenue continues to be offset by the cost
of power production and delivery (Rosenthal, Gassner and Hankinson, 2017)
Several tariff reforms have been designed in recent years Concerns about poverty
and affordability have repeatedly held back implementation (Holzhacker and
Skakova, 2019) The latest of such reforms has increased tariffs for non-
residential customers by  USDc/kWh to  USDc/kWh, but has decreased the tariff
for low-income families receiving  monthly allowance for needy citizens
(families) with children under 16, down to  KGS/kWh (59 USDc/kWh) in October
2021 (SARFEC, 2021) Governance of the power sector Until 2001, the Kyrgyz
electricity system was operated by  vertically integrated state-owned company,
Kyrgyzenergo, which was responsible for all power generation, transportation,
distribution and supply From 2001, the Kyrgyz electricity sector was legally
unbundled to create two generating companies (called Electric Power Stations and
the Chakan Hydropower Plant); one transmission company responsible for dispatch
and market operations (the National Electric Grid of Kyrgyzstan); and four
distribution and supply companies (Severelectro, Vostokelectro, Oshelectro and
Jalal-Abadelectro) (Energy Charter, 2018) All were formed as joint-stock
companies (JSCs) In 2016, the sector underwent  new reform aiming to increase
the operational efficiency of the power system The government established  new
company, the Energy Holding Company (EHC), an open JSC, which became responsible
for the efficient operation of all electricity producers and transmission and
distribution companies At the time of writing, all the above-mentioned eight
companies, created as part of the unbundling reforms during the period 1997-
2001, still exist and operate Their stocks, however, belong to the EHC, which is
now  part of the Ministry of Energy  USD  = KGS (as of 30 January 2021) 18
Electricity tariffs are set by the regulator, the State Agency for Regulation of
the Fuel and Energy Complex (SARFEC), now also  part of the Ministry of Energy
The Kyrgyz Energy Settlement Center, an open JSC, provides paid services to
participants in the electrical energy market The centre uses an analytical
system to collect, process, verify and analyse data on power flows, electricity
losses and reliability It develops electricity balances, and monitors
settlements for all participants in the electricity market (UNECE, 2018)
Heating sector Given the cold climate, access to reliable heat supply is
important for the well-being of the Kyrgyz population Heating demand is
fulfilled by various fuels and technologies ranging from large, centralised
district heating systems to large and small heat-only boilers (HOBs, or boiler
houses) to individual heating systems The nature of heating demand varies  lot
across large cities (Bishkek and Osh) and smaller cities and rural areas Stoves,
often fuelled by dried dung, wood and coal, are the main sources of heating for
rural households and urban households outside large cities Low-income households
often use coal with wood or dung (in rural settings) Higher- income households
typically use coal with electricity or wood (World Bank, 2020) These stoves
often tend to be inefficient (with efficiency rates of 25% to 40% as opposed to
60% to 80% for high-efficiency models) and lead to significant indoor air
pollution As  result, the Kyrgyz Republic is among the European and Central
Asian nations most affected by diseases resulting from indoor air pollution In
urban households outside Bishkek, stoves (50%) are followed by electric heating
(37%) and district heating (%) in popularity In Bishkek, close to 43% of
households rely on district heating as  main source of heating, followed by
electricity (21%) and stoves (22%) (Balabanyan et al, 2015) Small HOBs provide
heat for buildings that are not linked to the district heating systems Nearly
300 HOBs are operated by district heating companies, half of which are fuelled
by coal, and around  further  500 small HOBs are owned and operated by public
institutions and used to heat public buildings These are largely fuelled by coal
and electricity in fairly equal shares (Balabanyan et al, 2015) About 95% of the
heat energy provided by the country’ district heating systems is consumed for
household and municipal needs The remaining heat is supplied to the industrial
sector The total consumption of heat energy supplied by district heating systems
decreased by about 10% in the past decade, which is primarily due to the
decreasing demand of industrial consumers, driven by the unreliability of the
deteriorating district heating network (Energy Charter, 2018) Fuel consumption
in the heating sector Heat production from combined heat and power plants and
boiler houses remained unchanged from 2010 to Combined heat and power plants in
Bishkek and Osh (Bishkekteplosetj and the Osh municipal company Teplosnabjenie)
account for three-quarters of heat production Most of the district heating
systems and HOBs in the Kyrgyz Republic were originally designed for natural gas
The collapse of the Soviet Union led to gas becoming scarcer and more expensive
Therefore, district heating systems and HOBs were converted to run on coal,
mazut or electricity The district heating companies are initiating several
projects to switch fuels from coal, mazut and electricity to natural gas
Overall, four types of fuels are used by the district heating systems: coal,
mazut (heavy, low-quality fuel oil), electricity and natural gas (Energy
Charter, 2018) Renewables such as solar thermal and biomass are also viable
candidates for fuelling heat generation The Gagarin, Orto-Say and Rotor boiler
houses’ solar pilot projects in Bishkek have shown that solar thermal can be
successfully incorporated into existing heating infrastructure to reduce fossil
fuel consumption and emissions (see Box  for details) (SAEPF, 2020) The combined
heat and power plant in Bishkek is primarily fuelled by coal, whereas the one
based in Osh has been performing as an HOB since The boiler houses (HOBs) are
primarily fuelled by coal and electricity, but some also use gas and fuel
oil/mazut (SAEPF, 2020) Households not connected to the district heating system
started to increase their reliance on electricity for heating as gas became
increasingly expensive and scarce after the collapse of the Soviet Union
Households connected to district heating also use electricity as  supplementary
source of heat The resulting increase in power demand strains the grid and
decreases the reliability of supply during the winter months (Balabanyan et al,
2015) 19 Box  Solar-assisted district heating: The Gagarin, Orto-Say and Rotor
boiler houses Bishkekteploenergo began operating  combined solar and natural gas
pilot project as part of the refurbishment of the Gagarin, Orto-Say and Rotor
boiler houses The Gagarin pilot project involved the substitution of two old
coal-fired boilers with modern oil- and gas-fired units combined with an
installation of 800 square metres (364 panels at  megawatt thermal [MWth]) of
solar thermal panels on the roof of  boiler house and hot water storage capacity
of 40 cubic metres (m3) The Orto-Say and Rotor boiler houses received 120 and
396 panels (168 MWth and  MWth, respectively) The renovation of the boiler
houses significantly decreased gas consumption resulting in savings of trillion
m3 and 10 trillion m3 in Gagarin and Orto-Say, respectively Source: SAEPF (2020)
Infrastructure and tariffs Access to reliable and affordable heat is critical to
the good health and well-being of the people of the Kyrgyz Republic The heating
sector suffers from  host of interlinked issues including  significant supply-
demand gap, insufficient and unreliable supply, ageing infrastructure, lack of
financial viability and inefficiencies in both generation and end use The
centralised infrastructure used for heating in urban areas is deteriorating Most
of the district heating assets (combined heat and power plants, boilers and
distribution networks) were built more than 20 years ago As in the power sector,
inadequate investments in replacement and maintenance mean that this
infrastructure is deteriorating Consequently, assets often end up operating at
20% to 50% of their name-plate capacity, with losses exceeding  quarter of
generation Service quality has also declined In 2013, district heating customers
in Bishkek suffered more than 300 outages (Rosenthal, Gassner and Hankinson,
2017) The demand side also suffers from significant efficiency issues The
building stock is old and has low energy performance Around half of the
residential building stock in the country was built before 1980, and around
three-quarters was built before The inefficiency of the building stock is
compounded by subsidised tariffs leading to excessive energy consumption in the
sector (Energy Charter, 2018) The lack of cost-reflective tariffs is one of the
root causes of the above-mentioned challenges,  ageing infrastructure and
inefficiencies on the demand side Heat tariffs are below cost-recovery levels,
which means that most suppliers lack the necessary funds for proper maintenance
– leading to decaying infrastructure Residential heating tariffs are estimated
at around 13% to 50% (based on the source of heat) of the supply cost Only 25%
of heat consumption is metered, and the billing for consumers without meters is
based on parameters that are not linked to energy consumption Thus, the system
fails to provide price signals for efficient energy use (Balabanyan et al, 2015;
Energy Charter, 2018) In metered systems, the heating price is set at  76
KGS/gigacalorie (143 USD/toe), which is  fraction of the cost of delivery The
cost of heat generation in Bishkek in 2017, for instance, was  KGS/gigacalorie
(472 USD/toe) The cost differential is borne by the city and government budget
(SAEPF, 2020) In 2021, the tariffs for non-residential customers of the Bishkek
heating system were increased to  802 KGS/gigacalorie to account for inflation
20 Governance of the heating sector The State Agency for Regulation of the Fuel
and Energy Complex (SARFEC) under the GoK’ Ministry of Energy and Industry is
the energy regulator of the country and is also responsible for setting tariffs
for the electricity, natural gas and district heating sectors The Kyrgyz
Republic’ district heating sector is mainly owned and governed by state and
municipally owned enterprises operating in the capital and other big cities (see
Table ) Municipal governments own the district heating infrastructure in Osh,
Tokmok and the western part of Bishkek Combined heat and power plants that
provide district heating in eastern Bishkek and Osh are owned by the EHC
Kyrgyzteploenergo, which are state enterprises under the State Committee, are
responsible for district heat in Tokmok, Kyzyl-Kiya, Karakol and other small
cities (Energy Charter, 2018) Overall, heat supply enterprises (such as
Kyrgyzteploenergo, Bishkekteploenergo and Osh MP) operate around 277 HOBs, local
self-government bodies own 398 HOBs and public institutions and departments own
around 2013 HOBs, which are primarily used for public buildings (Energy Charter,
2018; SAEPF, 2020) Table  Stakeholders responsible for district heating in urban
areas Cities Generation and distribution infrastructure and ownership Generation
is provided by the Bishkek combined heat and power plant (owned by the Energy
Holding Company) and the NUR heat-only boiler house (privately owned), while
distribution is by Bishkekteploset ( joint stock company with mixed public and
private ownership) Bishkek (east) Municipal enterprise Bishkekteploenergo (owned
by the Bishkek City Council) Bishkek (west) Generation is provided by the Osh
combined heat and power plant (owned by the Energy Holding Company) and
distribution by the Osh communal heat supply (owned by the Osh City Council) Osh
Tokmok communal heat supply (which belongs to the Tokmok City Council) and
Kyrgyzteplo- energo ( state enterprise under the State Committee) Tokmok Kyzyl-
Kiya Kyrgyzteploenergo ( state enterprise under the State Committee) Karakol
Other small cities Source: Based on Energy Charter (2018)  Transport sector
While the transport sector involves various modes (rail, road, air and water),
roads dominate The transport sector is one of the main sources of energy
consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the country The sector
accounted for around  quarter of final energy consumption in The sector
accounted for around 31% of energy sector emissions in the country (SAEPF, 2016)
Nearly all the fuel consumed by the sector is either gasoline or diesel, with
the share of gasoline being slightly larger than that of diesel Gasoline is
primarily used in private cars, whereas diesel is the fuel of choice for
vehicles engaged in agriculture, construction, freight and public transport More
recently, the demand for liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) in the transport sector
is also rising (Kabar, 2022a) The growth in vehicle ownership and population
means that the consumption of transport fuels continues to rise Between 2015 and
2018, the consumption of gasoline and diesel increased by 20% and 40% reaching
792 000 and 750 000 tonnes, respectively (SAEPF, 2020) Given the lack of
significant domestic reserves of hydrocarbons, fuel consumption in the transport
sector leads to almost complete dependence on energy imports The transition
towards more sustainable means of transportation is  key focus of the Kyrgyz
government In this context, greater adoption of public transport and electric
vehicles offer  way to reduce wasteful fuel consumption and local pollution The
Kyrgyz Republic already has  zero customs duty on the import of electric
vehicles and is also introducing tax and customs incentives on vehicles with
hybrid engines (SAEPF, 2020) As of now, there are no initiatives by the
government to develop charging stations 21  Energy sector policy framework The
State Committee on Industry, Energy and Subsoil Use (GKPEN) was charged to
design and implement  holistic state policy for the energy sector, covering the
sector’ linkages with the water-food nexus, fuel resources, renewable energy
sources and the potential for industrial value creation In 2016, the committee
was replaced by the Ministry of Energy and Industry in 2020, renamed the
Ministry of Energy in 2021 (IEA, 2020a) Strategic framework The main policy
documents of the Kyrgyz Republic that regulate the energy sector include the Law
of the Kyrgyz Republic on “Energy”, “Electric Power Industry” and “Energy
Conservation” The following documents collectively create the strategic
framework of the Kyrgyz energy sector: • National Energy Programme of the Kyrgyz
Republic for  and the Fuel and Energy Complex Development Strategy until • • •
Mid-Term Power Sector Development Strategy for 2012-• National Sustainable
Development Strategy for 2013-• National Development Strategy for 2018-• Concept
of the Green Economy of the Kyrgyz Republic • Green Economy Development Program
in the Kyrgyz Republic for 2019-• National Development Program of the Kyrgyz
Republic until Law on Renewable Energy, Law on Energy Efficiency of Buildings,
The National Development Strategy in particular sets out the strategic vision
for  sustainable energy sector (GoK, 2018): • The Kyrgyz Republic aims to
comprise  major regional power producer that sustainably develops its energy
sector, promotes energy efficiency and ensures reliable delivery of energy to
all consumers • Activities related to the CASA-1000 project will be prioritised
• Environmentally friendly energy sources (small hydropower, solar PV and wind
energy, solar collectors, biogas, heat pumps, etc) were targeted at more than
10% of the total national energy mix • • • Mandatory requirements will be used
to increase efficiency of power facilities • Indicators for energy generation
and consumption will be improved to approach those of the OECD countries
Investment in the construction and reconstruction of large hydropower plants
will be prioritised Subsidies will be targeted to reduce consumption while
improving quality of life The strategy sets out  goal for clean energy sources
to be 10% of the total energy mix without specifying  target date It is
important to note that this does not include large hydropower As noted in
section , hydropower already accounts for 30% of the primary energy supply, but
this is overwhelmingly large hydropower Small hydropower contributed only about
% of the total Therefore, the target of 10% will require significant investments
in small hydro as well as solar and wind energy technologies The Law on
Renewable Energy establishes the legal, organisational, economic and financial
foundations and mechanisms for promoting the development and use of renewable
energy sources in the country The Law on Energy Efficiency of Buildings No 137
sets out the legal framework for reducing energy consumption in the building
sector, and regulates the legal and organisational relations between building
owners, certified professionals and government executive authorities  concept
note on the green economy in the Kyrgyz Republic establishes the overarching
guidelines for the clean energy sector’ development and energy conservation
(Ministry of Justice, 2018b)  green economy aims to decrease losses in the
energy sector, reduce subsidies, cut reliance on coal and promote the
development of technologies such as hydropower, solar, wind and bioenergy Given
the national obligations under the Sustainable Development Goals, the concept
note establishes  vision for the energy sector until 2040, with  target of
increasing the renewable energy share (small hydropower, solar, wind and biogas)
to 10% of total power generation 22 As part of the implementation of the concept
note, the Green Economy Development Program in the Kyrgyz Republic for  was
developed and accepted in 2019, together with an action plan and indicators for
2020-The goal by 2023 is to reduce the energy intensity of GDP while increasing
the access of citizens and economic entities to reliable and modern energy
supply Achieving this will be contingent on: () improving the system for
assessing and monitoring the state of the energy sector; () strengthening energy
policy; () increasing the transparency of fuel and energy prices and ensuring
that energy companies break even; () improving the efficiency of energy
consumption; () improving energy efficiency in buildings; () increasing the
share of renewable energy sources in the total volume of final energy
consumption; and () raising people’ awareness of energy savings and renewable
energy sources The National Development Program of the Kyrgyz Republic until
2026 briefly outlines short-term priorities in the implementation of the
following projects: • Construction of large hydropower facilities Kambarata
HPP-, Upper Naryn HPP cascade, Suusamyr-Kokomeren HPP cascade, Kazarman HPP
cascade, etc • Construction of small hydropower plants • Implementation of the
CASA-1000 project • • • Development of alternative energy sources (solar and
wind energy) Phased transition of the state motor transport fleet to electric
vehicles Implementation of  project on the energy efficiency of buildings
Climate change The Kyrgyz Republic is among the most vulnerable countries to
climate change Increasing temperatures are already resulting in the greater
duration and frequency of heatwaves Changing temperatures and rainfall patterns
could have severe impacts on the sensitive water and agricultural systems, with
significant implications for the water-energy-food nexus Decision makers of the
country understand the importance of addressing these challenges and are making
every effort to ensure that relevant initiatives are successful The country
remains committed to addressing the global challenge of climate change The
Kyrgyz Republic’ total GHG emissions (including land-use change and forestry
[LUCF]) stood at metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2eq) in 2017
compared to  MtCO2eq in 2000 and 30 MtCO2eq in While emissions have been
increasing gradually since 2000, they remain well below the levels in 1990,
which reflects the trends in the macroeconomic indicators as well as changes in
the economy The Kyrgyz Republic’ GHG emissions are relatively low as the country
contributed just 035% of total global GHG emissions (excluding LUCF) in 2017,
while its population was 083% of the world’ total population The per capita GHG
emissions were less than one-third of the world average in GHG emissions in
2017, excluding LUCF, were mainly from the energy sector (59%), followed by
agriculture (32%), industrial processes (%) and waste (%) The transport and the
electricity/heating sectors are included in the energy sector and account for
11% and % of total GHG emissions, respectively (OECD, 2019; WRI, 2020) The
Kyrgyz Republic has signed and ratified 13 international environmental
conventions It ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in January 2000 and the Kyoto Protocol in January The country partnered
with Tajikistan and Turkmenistan in 2006 to further the regional climate effort
by signing the Framework Convention on Environmental Protection for Sustainable
Development in Central Asia (OECD, 2019) It signed the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change in September 2016, followed by formal ratification in February In
2015, the Kyrgyz Republic submitted its Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC), outlining both adaptation and mitigation targets and
actions As part of mitigation targets, the country plans to reduce GHG gas
emissions by up to % by 2030 compared to the business-as-usual scenario If
international support is forthcoming,  more ambitious goal aims to cut emissions
by up to 31% by 2030 (Table ) Agriculture, energy, water, emergencies ( disaster
risk management), health care, and forest and biodiversity have been identified
as the key sectors for adaptation (OECD, 2019) 23 Table  Emission reduction
targets under the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution Cities
Unconditional Conditional All emission reduction scenarios are with respect to
business as usual Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 2030 -%* GHG
emissions 29-% GHG emissions 2050 -% GHG emissions -% GHG emissions Updated
Nationally Determined Contribution 2025 % GHG emissions % GHG emissions 2030 97%
GHG emissions % GHG emissions Source: UNFCCC (2015, 2021) Note: *Ranges for
emission reductions refer to scenarios with low, medium and high population
growth scenarios GHG = greenhouse gas In 2021, the Kyrgyz Republic adopted an
updated NDC, outlining plans to reduce GHG emissions across different economic
sectors The second NDC provides more ambitious targets for emissions reductions
(Table ) and identifies energy and agriculture as the key sectors for mitigation
and adaptation measures Interventions in the energy sector could focus on
greater energy conservation, improved efficiency, and investments in renewables
and natural gas (UNFCCC, 2021) Energy efficiency The Law on Energy Conservation,
enacted in 1998, sets out to increase the efficiency of the energy sector It
includes several important guidelines for establishing effective institutional
and regulatory frameworks for energy efficiency Most of those guidelines,
however, have not been enforced or adopted in the form of secondary legislative
acts (Dikambaev, 2019) The Law on Energy Efficiency in Buildings is  relatively
new and progressive legislative act that was developed with the technical
assistance of the UNDP and Global Environment Facility and came into force in
February The law is aligned with the European Union’ best practices and based on
the key requirements of the Union’ Energy Performance in Building Directive It
contains many important provisions for establishing effective institutional and
regulatory frameworks Despite the adoption of the secondary legislation required
by this law, its requirements have not been implemented or enforced effectively
There are currently no laws or minimum energy performance standards and energy
labelling schemes for household appliances in the Kyrgyz Republic That said,
there are some Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) standards on energy efficiency and
minimum energy performance standards for industrial energy-consuming appliances,
such as motors and pumps These standards were adopted by the Centre for
Standardisation and Metrology under the Ministry of Economy (Kyrgyzstandard)
before the Kyrgyz Republic acceded to the EEU in August Following the country’
official accession to the EEU, all EEU standards became applicable in the
territory of the Kyrgyz Republic The State Programme on Energy Savings and
Energy Efficiency Policy for  introduced energy efficiency criteria for public
procurement However, provisions of the programme were not implemented 24
RENEWABLE ENERGY Large hydropower is the backbone of the renewable energy
landscape in the country and is responsible for meeting the bulk of domestic
demand and electricity exports (see Section ) Other renewables such as solar,
wind and bioenergy are at the preliminary stages of deployment – often limited
to relatively small applications (see Section  and Box ) Going forward, these
renewable energy technologies could play  more prominent role in addressing
energy demand and increasing the resilience of the sector  Renewable energy
resources The Kyrgyz Republic has considerable and diverse renewable energy
resources While some of its hydropower resources have been utilised, those for
other renewables such as solar PV, wind and bioenergy remain largely untapped It
is estimated that small hydropower can generate - TWh/year; wind, gigawatt hours
(GWh)/year; solar, 490 million GWh/year and biomass power,  TWh/year (UNECE,
2018) Hydropower According to  GoK concept note on developing small hydropower,
the hydropower resources of the Kyrgyz Republic consist of 268 rivers, 97 large
canals and 18 reservoirs, with  total electricity generation potential of 143
TWh per year Today, about 10% of the potential is used The hydropower potential
of small rivers and waterways is about - TWh/year, of which the republic uses
less than % (Ministry of Justice, 2018a) There is significant room for
development in the Kyrgyz hydropower sector; some countries have been seen to
tap over 30% of their hydropower potential (IMF, 2019) Solar IRENA’ preliminary
assessment of solar PV resources in the country shows that more than  645 km2 of
the area in the country has good suitability for solar PV (meaning that it has
suitability score of greater than 50%) The analysis further identifies three
ideal zones (with  suitability score of greater than 75%) spanning  total of 26
km2, which can be used to deploy around 650 MW of utility-scale solar PV
projects (see Annex Table A2 for details) The assessment reveals that the most
suitable solar PV zones are clustered in the southern region of Osh along the
river Kyzyl-Suu (Figure ) These zones are close to the city of Osh, which would
allow them to help address urban demand (IRENA, 2021b) Figure  Zoning assessment
for solar PV Solar PV suitable areas and zones Scores (%) Zones 20 30 40 50 60
70 80 Source: Global Atlas (2022); IRENA (2021b) Map data: United Nations
administrative boundaries Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration
purposes only Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the expression
of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries  The assessment combines renewable
resource data with technical (electrical grid network, slope), and socio-
environmental (protected areas, land features and population growth) criteria to
determine suitable zones 25 Wind IRENA’ preliminary assessment indicates
promising wind resources Around 94 000 km2 have  suitability score higher than
50% for onshore wind The analysis further identifies 77 ideal wind zones (more
than 83% suitability score) spanning  total of  304 km2, which can be used to
deploy around  GW of wind energy projects (see Annex Table A3 for details) Wind
zones are clustered in the southern region of Osh along the border with
Tajikistan, the northern and southern regions in Naryn and the southern region
of Issyk-Kul Other, sparse clusters are found in western Batken and southern
Chuy (Figure ) (IRENA, 2021b) Figure  Zoning assessment for wind power Wind
suitable areas and zones Scores (%) Zones 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Source:
Global Atlas (2022); IRENA (2021b) Map data: United Nations administrative
boundaries Disclaimer: This map is provided for illustration purposes only
Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of
frontiers or boundaries Geothermal The Issyk-Kul region is home to the country’
main geothermal sources, with other resources in the Chui province In areas with
touristic resorts, these resources are occasionally used for heating and hot
water supply In other spots, they are primarily used as spas or for medicinal
purposes The geothermal resources have relatively low temperatures (of not more
than °) and are characterised by high mineral content, which leads to scaling
and corrosion of materials – thus limiting their use (Baybagyshov and
Degembaeva, 2019)  Current status of renewable energy deployment Renewable
energy, in the form of large hydropower, dominates the power sector of the
country Other renewables such as solar PV, wind and bioenergy are virtually non-
existent in the electricity mix The transport and heating sectors are dominated
by fossil fuels Electricity generation is driven by large hydropower, which
accounts for 92% of the total production The large hydropower fleet, which
consists of seven large dam hydropower plants ranging from 40 MW to  200 MW,
account for most of this generation Almost all of these dams are located on the
Naryn river Small hydropower constitutes below % of total electricity
generation, produced by 19 small hydroelectric power plants with  total capacity
of 54 MW (total generation of 54 GWh) These small power plants are located on
the Alamedin, Chu and other small rivers (Vedeneva, 2020) Developing small
hydropower plants is one of the Kyrgyz government’ top priorities due to the
potential to cut down emissions as well as fuel imports Greater adoption of
small hydropower also represents  move back to the past, when small hydropower
was  more significant generation technology According to statistics, in 1960
more than 100 small hydroelectric power plants were operating in the Kyrgyz
Republic with annual electricity generation of about 26 285 GWh (as opposed to
just 54 GWh) This was around  third of the total electricity generation in the
country It is estimated that the energy potential of small rivers in all regions
allows for the construction of about 87 new small hydroelectric power plants
with  total capacity of about 180 MW and average annual electricity generation
of up to  TWh (Ministry of Justice, 2018a; UNIDO, 2018)  decree on  tendering
process for the right to build small hydropower plants in the Kyrgyz Republic
was announced in Shortly after,  tender for the right to construct 14 small
hydropower plants was announced While some tender results for these plants were
announced, they have since been cancelled As of now, there are no large solar
power plants in the Kyrgyz Republic Solar panels are used mainly in small
enterprises and households Some pilot solar projects have been carried out by
development partners and donors Under the United Nations’ Industrial Development
Organization project “Reliable Energy Supply of Rural Health Post,” together
with UNDP and the World Health Organization, solar installations ranging from
kW to  kW were set up at 19 rural health facilities in the country to support
the provision of reliable medical services (UNECE, 2018) Plans are set to
construct   000 MW solar power plant in the Issyk-Kul region, with investment
agreements signed between the government and Chinese investors (Kudryavtseva,
2022) Solar energy technologies are also being used in pilot district heating
projects The Republican Fund for Environmental Protection and the State Agency
for Environmental Protection and Forestry provided co-financing at the request
of KP Bishkekteploenergo for the installation of solar collectors in 2017-In
2017, 364 solar thermal panels with  total capacity of  megawatt thermal (MWth)
were installed on the administrative territory of KP Bishkekteploenergo In 2017,
120 panels with  total capacity of 168 MWth were installed in the Orto-Say
boiler house, and in 2019 396 solar thermal panels with  total capacity of  MWth
were put into operation in the Rotor boiler house (SAEPF, 2020; UN ESCAP,
forthcoming) The UNDP’ Small and Medium Business Development Project on Energy
Access, implemented by the Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Development, has also helped start 11 renewable energy and energy efficiency
projects This includes the installation of PV systems for  kindergarten in
Isfana, heat pumps in health facilities in Sulukta and Zhin-Zhigen (UNDP, 2021a,
2021b) and solar water heaters in several schools across the country (UNDP,
2020) Commercial installation of renewable energy systems includes off-grid PV,
solar water heating systems and biogas plants, but is limited to  installations
of small capacity per year  Renewable energy policies and regulation Legislation
governing the management of the system for provision of electricity services
using renewable energy sources in the Kyrgyz Republic includes the Law of the
Kyrgyz Republic on Energy (1996), the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Electricity,
the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Renewable Energy Sources and several other
legal acts including the Civil, Land, Water Codes of the Kyrgyz Republic These
last acts regulate aspects of system management for the provision of electricity
services using renewable energy sources The Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Energy
defined the general principles of organising and regulating the activities of
entities in the fuel and energy complex The law defines renewable energy
resources as “resources that arise naturally, are constantly renewed by nature
and can be converted into energy, including geothermal, solar, water and wind
energy” In 1997, the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Electrical Energy was
adopted, aimed at ensuring  reliable, safe and uninterrupted supply of
electricity and heat; improving the quality of service; creating  competitive
environment; forming an energy market; encouraging private sector development
and attracting investment This law is aimed at regulating the activities of
generating, supplying and distributing companies (with any form of ownership) to
the end consumer Article  of the law states that the production of renewables-
based electricity as well as the production of electricity (from any energy
source) for own use with  capacity of up to  MW is not licensed At the same
time, the sale of electricity, including import and export, is carried out based
on  license issued by the authorised body for regulating the fuel and energy
complex, for any person, regardless of the organisational legal form and type of
ownership (Article 18 of the law) Special regulation in the field of renewables
is carried out through the Law of the Kyrgyz Republic on Renewable Energy
Sources (2008) According to the preamble, the law defines the legal,
organisational, economic and financial framework; the mechanisms governing the
relations between the state, generators, suppliers and consumers of renewable
energy; as well as the production equipment for the use of renewables It also
contains the definition of renewable energy sources (UNECE, 2018) 27 By the
order of the State Agency for Regulation of the Fuel and Energy Complex under
the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic dated  August 2015, No ,  methodology for
calculating tariffs for electricity supplied by stations generating it from
renewable energy sources was adopted It is also worth noting that the
development of renewables was included in the National Energy Program of the
Kyrgyz Republic for  and the Strategy for the Development of the Fuel and Energy
Complex until 2025 as one of the most important measures for ensuring energy
security These documents proposed to complete the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of existing small hydropower stations and to build new, small
hydropower plants totalling 178 MW of installed capacity by The annual average
production from renewables was to reach  billion kWh/year, which could be
achieved through increasing yearly production by local manufacturers of solar
collectors (up to 100  000 m2), the addition of micro hydropower plants up to -
MW/year, PV modules up to - MW/year and cumulative installation of wind power
stations up to 250 MW The overall costs of these projects were estimated at
around KGS  billion (USD  billion) Planned growth of the electricity tariff was
supposed to ensure the competitiveness of planned small hydropower plants and
renewable energy According to another policy document, the Program of
Development of Small and Medium Power Plants up to 2012, accepted in October
2008,  wind farm with  capacity of 22 MW was to be built near Balykchy city in
Issyk-Kul oblast, and small hydropower plants totalling 25 MW were to be
reconstructed and built Unfortunately, none of the policy documents accepted in
2008 were implemented, as there was no development of secondary legislation,
needed to provide implementation mechanisms Measures for the implementation of
the Medium-Term Strategy for the Development of the Power Sector () were
accepted in May These included plans for the construction of four small
hydropower plants by 2017 within the framework of  European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development project Also in 2012, much-needed amendments to
the Law on Renewable Energy were introduced Producers of renewable energy were
to gain several important advantages, creating favourable conditions for
attracting investments These amendments included: • Guaranteed connection to the
grid for installations producing renewable energy • Guaranteed purchase of all
renewable electricity produced by distribution companies throughout the project
• Tariffs for energy equivalent to the maximum amount fixed by the retail
tariffs, with increasing coefficients, differentiated by the type of renewable
energy (introduced by amending the law in 2012) •  preferential fixed rate for
up to  years from the date of plant commissioning • • The removal of licensing
requirements for renewable energy projects Import duties set at % for renewable-
energy-related equipment (introduced by amending the law in 2012) In 2015, the
Concept of Small Hydropower Development of the Kyrgyz Republic until 2017 was
accepted The development of the Concept was planned within the framework of the
Program for the Transition of the Republic to Sustainable Development for
2013-However, secondary legislation to support implementation was not
forthcoming In 2018, the next developmental phase of renewable energy
legislation started The National Development Strategy  indicates  target of 10%
for renewables (excluding large hydropower) in the energy mix The target is not
time bound and does not seem to be legally binding Given that renewables’ share
of the energy mix (excluding large hydropower) is negligible (<% of electric
generation), the target would remain elusive in the absence of concrete policies
and regulations The following main changes addressing several issues were
introduced to the Renewable Energy Law in July 2019: • Compensation for
additional costs of distributing companies for the purchase of electricity
generated using renewable energy sources will be considered when calculating and
approving the national electricity tariff for consumers, which reduces the
financial load on distribution companies • The feed-in tariffs (FITs) for
renewable electricity were defined Renewable electricity will be compensated at
times the highest consumer tariff • Quotas for renewable energy capacities were
introduced for each region The preferential tariffs ( using the coefficient of
times the highest consumer tariff) could be availed by those who were registered
under these quotas 28 In 2020, the regulation “On conditions and procedure of
generation and supply of energy with the use of renewable energy sources” was
introduced The new document determines the rules of the renewable energy market
(Kudaiberdieva, 2020): • The responsibilities of the stakeholders are identified
GKPEN determines the policy in the renewable energy sector, the State Agency for
Fuel and Energy Complex regulates tariffs, while local governments address
issues related to the allocation of land • The regulation described the
procedures and requirements to be fulfilled by  “green” energy producer or
supplier in order to become  market player, eligible for all preferences
provided by the state • It introduces the concept of  register of renewable
energy entities, which will be used to develop an official list of market
players and their annual renewable energy generation • Green energy production
will be controlled through quotas Electricity production through the allotted
quotas will be eligible for  preferential tariff ( using the coefficient of
times the highest consumer tariff) •  standard contract for the supply of green
energy demanded by the banks for the loan issue procedure was developed • The
regulation instructs distribution companies to procure green energy from
producers at 034 USD/kWh (or   24 KGS/kWh [   USDc/kWh]) With the acceptance of
the new medium-term tariff policy for electricity and heat for , the FIT would
be increased with the tariff to 0386 USD/kWh (or   52 KGS/kWh [  97 USDc/kWh])
While the policy and regulatory structures seem to be in place, practical
implementation of the regulation is still lagging due to the following: • 86
USDc/kWh is not enough for most renewable energy technologies Solar projects
have just started touching  USDc/kWh in locations with perfect conditions (in
terms of resources, financing and regulation); it would be difficult to
replicate those results in  new market with significant financial constraints •
The institutional responsibilities are still not clear The quotas have not been
defined yet, therefore relevant authorities, having registered the first two
batches of total of 63 developers, have proposed some changes to the newly
accepted regulation to overcome dependence on quota definition by National
Energy Holding Acceptance of the regulation “On conditions and procedure of
generation and supply of energy with the use of renewable energy sources” led to
an increase of interest in renewable energy generation from the private sector,
and the Ministry of Energy has already issued certificates for being  green
energy producer to: • 20 companies on 15 November 2021, which received 48
certificates for renewable energy entities, for  total planned capacity of MW
(of which solar stations comprise 300 MW; floating PV power plants,  MW; wind
stations, 10 MW; and small hydroelectric power plants, 45 MW) (Kabar, 2022b) •
43 companies on 28 February 2022, which received 61 certificates for renewable
energy entities, for  total planned capacity of  MW (of which solar stations
compose 298 MW; wind stations, 50 MW; geothermal stations, 300 MW; and small
hydropower plants, MW) These companies will be included in the state register of
renewable energy entities Renewable energy auctions/tenders were identified by
the World Bank (2017c) as an alternative to the FIT-based approach for the
deployment of small hydropower in the Kyrgyz Republic It was suggested that the
incentive mechanism can be based on the size of projects, for example, ()
tenders/auctions for larger projects; () registration/approval based on
screening criteria for medium-sized projects and ()  simplified regime for
micro-hydropower plants In June 2017, the GKPEN officially conducted  tender for
the construction of 14 small hydropower plants from  to 20 MW The tender was
open to both national and foreign companies interested in investing in small
hydropower, whereas the GKPEN assumed responsibility for facilitating the
obtaining of the necessary permits and licences, including land permits The land
for the project was to be allocated by the state, and the land was to remain
under state ownership As  result of the tender, GKPEN selected winners for 11
small hydropower projects However, the official announcement of the winners was
followed by  request from members of parliament that the government annul the
results of the tender (Asanov, 2017; Energy Charter, 2018) The projects have not
been implemented While distributed renewables that produce electricity are
supported by the Law on Renewable Energy, the current tariff regime of the
Kyrgyz Republic means that distributed renewables will struggle to compete
financially with cheap electricity from the national grid (or cheap diesel-based
power generators) at the retail level The introduction of 29 net metering with
the current tariff regime is unlikely to generate significant interest The
introduction of wheeling regulations, coupled with easy licensing for self-
consumption, can allow large users to use renewables to complement power from
the national grid (which could be less reliable) Moreover, the current energy
legislation does not allow for the sale of electricity at unregulated rates to
household consumers In regions with unreliable power, this prohibition stops
private institutions from setting up mini-grids to supply power to consumers The
Cabinet of Ministers is reviewing all legislation, including for the energy
sector Therefore, the above-mentioned laws and regulations could undergo major
changes As  part of this effort, the Ministry of Energy has formulated  draft
Renewable Energy Law, which is expected to abolish the quotas, allow the sale of
renewable electricity to customers at unregulated prices, increase the term of
FITs up to 15 years and include statutes governing thermal energy and gas fuel,
along with renewable electricity production As of July 2022, the Law was
approved by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic   strong rationale for
renewables This section analyses numerous factors that promise to boost the
adoption of renewable energy technologies such as solar PV, wind, bioenergy and
small hydropower Rising domestic demand and fuel imports Energy consumption in
the country has been growing rapidly About half of this demand is met with
imported fossil fuels, which poses  substantial and growing economic burden,
with implications for energy security Final energy consumption increased by 54%
between 2010 and 2019, to reach  mtoe (Figure ) Electricity consumption,
meanwhile, increased by about 75%, reaching TWh (Figure ) Residential
electricity demand, the main driver behind consumption growth, increased by 152%
after 2010 to account for two-thirds of electricity consumption in As living
standards continue to improve and other sectors of the economy also pick up,
growth in energy consumption is expected to continue If the country does not
invest in more sustainable energy sources the dependence on coal and oil is
likely to increase, leading to more pollution from the burning of coal and
transport fuels, and more imports of oil products The Kyrgyz Republic’ energy
consumption outstrips local production, leading to expensive energy imports This
makes the transition towards clean fuels  key imperative for the country The
Kyrgyz Republic exploits local reserves of coal and some oil and gas, but most
fossil fuels are imported In fact, more than half of its energy demand is met
through oil and gas imports More than 90% of oil products (primarily diesel and
motor gasoline) and natural gas are also imported (IEA, 2020a) Net energy
imports increased from 94 mtoe in 2000 to around 56 mtoe in 2019 (Figure ) This
increase was driven by rising net imports of oil products (mainly diesel and
gasoline), which increased four-fold from just  mtoe to  mtoe in Net imports of
crude oil also increased, as did domestic refining capacity Net imports of coal
have declined in recent years as the utilisation of local reserves increased
While local coal may reduce import dependence, it results in harmful impacts on
air quality, health and the climate Figure  Net energy imports    )      Oil
Products (       Natural Gas  Crude Oil      Coal    2000 2005 2010 2015 2019
Source: IEA (2020b) Note: mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent 30 The imports
and exports of electricity fluctuate in response to seasonal weather conditions
and domestic demand From 2014 to 2016, the country was  net electricity importer
due to rising electricity demand and declining flow in rivers (Figure ) In 2017
and 2018, the Kyrgyz Republic was again  net electricity exporter due to high
water levels in reservoirs As electricity demand continues to increase, and
production remains unchanged, exports are expected to decline (SAEPF, 2020)
Figure  Electricity production, consumption, imports and exports,   20 )    (
)    (                  15  Imports Exports 10  Production Consumption
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Source: NSC (2021) Note:
TWh = terawatt hour As energy consumption continues to rise, reliance on
imported fossil fuels will increase Dependence on imports of fossil fuels can be
an energy security issue and is  significant burden on government budgets
Furthermore, dependence on imported fossil fuels could also make the Kyrgyz
Republic more vulnerable to volatility in the international and regional fuel
markets Renewable energy solutions can help cater to the domestic demand for
electricity and heating, thus helping cut down the import bill Deteriorating
infrastructure The assets and infrastructure of the Kyrgyz Republic’ energy and
power sector are old and not well maintained (see Sections  and  for details)
The deterioration of the infrastructure coupled with the financial crisis of the
energy system, at some point, will eventually lead either to  significant
decrease in the quality of produced energy or an increase in energy prices, both
of which will increase demand for independent energy production and support the
development of renewable energy Old and undermaintained assets and
infrastructure undermine reliability and supply quality The issue of reliability
becomes more pressing in the winter season, as the demand for heating grows and
the winter generation capacity cannot keep up (World Bank, 2017b) The power
system (and the Kyrgyz Republic’ energy system in general) needs significant
investments to maintain ageing equipment or develop the capacity required to
meet growing demand Such investments are unlikely under current conditions since
the system is losing money and is kept afloat through significant support from
the government budget Tariffs that do not reflect generation costs have
significant financial ramifications and are at the heart of the financial issues
faced by the power and energy sector (World Bank, 2017b) Reducing local air
pollution The Kyrgyz Republic is among the European and Central Asian countries
most affected by diseases linked to indoor air pollution (Balabanyan et al,
2015; World Bank, 2020) Thermal power plants, coal-fired heating units,
emissions from road vehicles and the construction and mining industries are some
of the key sources of air pollution The burning of coal for heating and power
generation is one of the main reasons for local air pollution, especially during
the colder, winter months Household heating with coal also leads to indoor and
outdoor air pollution resulting in significant health problems The transport
sector is  key contributor to air pollution throughout the year In the winter
season, traffic often slows down or comes to  halt on the icy roads Drivers
often do not turn off engines because they need heat Their idling engines add to
the already polluted atmosphere New high-rise buildings in cities like Bishkek
act as barriers to the flow of wind, which would normally carry these pollutants
out of the city 31 Renewable energy technologies coupled with energy efficiency
could help replace fossil fuels (especially coal) in heating and power
generation, thus reducing air pollution Vehicular emissions can be reduced
through greater adoption of public transport and the uptake of electric
vehicles, which are powered by an electric grid with high shares of renewables
Climate change mitigation and adaptation The Kyrgyz Republic has identified the
water, energy, agriculture and infrastructure sectors as the most vulnerable to
climate change Projections indicate that the country could experience
temperature rises significantly above the global average, reaching ° by 2090
under the highest emission pathways Climate change could lead to impacts such as
heat stress, increased arid land cover, erratic water flows and drying
watersheds – all with significant implications for the country’ population,
especially the poorest and marginalised groups (World Bank Group and ADB, 2021)
Decision makers in the country understand the importance of addressing the
challenge and are making every effort to ensure that these initiatives are
successful Despite low emission levels, the Kyrgyz Republic remains committed to
addressing the global challenge of climate change The latest available national
estimates (see Section  for details) show that GHG emissions in 2017 (excluding
LUCF) were mainly from the energy sector (59%), followed by agriculture (32%),
industrial processes (%) and waste (%) The transport and the electricity/heating
sectors are included in the energy sector and account for 11% and % of total GHG
emissions, respectively (OECD, 2019; WRI, 2020)  greater role of renewable
energy and energy efficiency could help reduce the carbon footprint of the
country’ energy sector Renewables can also contribute to adaptation by providing
reliable, affordable and modern energy services Well-designed hydropower
projects could be coupled with watershed restoration efforts leading to more
climate-resilient water systems As the decision makers of the Kyrgyz Republic
move towards  clean energy transition signified by  more ambitious NDC, they can
make  strong case for securing  sizable share of climate finance to support
renewable energy deployments In this context, the government could also approach
multilateral financing institutions and other intermediary development financing
institutions created to channel public funds from developed countries to
climate- relevant projects in developing countries (IRENA, 2016; IRENA and CPI,
2020) Declining renewable energy costs The increasing competitiveness of
renewable energy technology prices further strengthens the case for the uptake
of non-hydro renewables Falling prices are especially evident for solar PV and
wind The global weighted average levelised cost of energy (LCOE) for utility-
scale solar PV fell by 85% between 2010 and 2020 to reach 057 USD/kWh Meanwhile,
the weighted average levelised cost of onshore wind energy decreased by around
56% over the same period to reach 039 USD/kWh (IRENA, 2021a) Recent supply chain
constraints and commodity price increases are likely to result in increased
costs for projects commissioned over the next two years, but to what extent
these will be offset by technology improvements and cost savings elsewhere is
not yet clear What is clear is that despite the potential increase in renewable
equipment costs, the competitiveness of renewable power has actually improved,
given the roughly five-fold increase in gas and coal prices over the past year
Hydropower also remains  very competitive option, where undeveloped economic
resources exist, although lead times are longer than for solar and wind projects
The global weighted average LCOE of newly commissioned hydropower projects in
2020 was around 044 USD/kWh (around 18% higher than  decade ago) The increase in
average LCOE is due to  range of factors but is likely to have been
predominantly driven by  shift towards the exploitation of sites with more
challenging civil engineering conditions Still, hydropower is competitive with
fossil-fuel-based generation It was estimated that nine-tenths of all hydropower
capacity commissioned in 2020 was producing power for less than the cheapest new
fossil-fuel-fired projects (IRENA, 2021a) The decreasing renewable energy costs
are facilitated through  conducive financing environment and innovative
financing schemes As the competitiveness of renewable power continues to
improve, the case for greater integration of renewables in the Kyrgyz Republic’
energy sector becomes stronger  Data are based on API2 Rotterdam Coal Futures
and Dutch TTF futures contracts for northwest Europe benchmark prices 32
Abundant renewable energy resources The country has significant renewable energy
potential for technologies such as solar PV, wind, bioenergy and hydropower As
shown in Section , the preliminary findings of IRENA’ resource assessment study
reveal that vast areas in the Kyrgyz Republic are suitable for utility-scale
solar and wind power Considering the overall technical potential, solar and wind
resources can be successfully used to address part of the future energy demands
of the country The assessment combines renewable resource data with technical
(electrical grid network, elevation and slope), and socio-environmental
(protected areas, land features and population growth) criteria to determine
suitable zones It reveals that solar PV zones are located in the southern part
of the Osh region along the river Kyzyl-Suu (Figure ) Wind zones are clustered
in the southern region of Osh along the border with Tajikistan, the northern and
southern regions in Naryn and the southern region of Issyk-Kul Other sparse
clusters are found in western Batken and southern Chuy (Figure ) Short
construction periods of solar and wind energy The challenge of the Kyrgyz
Republic’ rising energy demand needs to be met with investments in sustainable
and clean technologies Renewable energy technologies such as solar PV, wind and
small hydropower tend to be modular and can be constructed in  very short time
Large solar PV projects (around 100 MW) can be completed in less than one year
and construction times of six months have been reported for 50 MW wind parks In
contrast, large hydropower projects tend to require longer construction times
and can be susceptible to delays and cost overruns According to Sovacool,
Gilbert and Nugent (2014), more than two-thirds of hydropower projects suffer
from cost and time overruns, whereas less than 10% of solar and wind energy
projects suffer from  similar fate Renewable energy technologies such as solar
PV and wind can provide  quick way of fulfilling rising domestic demand
sustainably Seasonal variation in hydroelectricity generation Hydropower
generation in the Kyrgyz Republic is influenced by several factors such as the
state of river flows, the demand for electricity (especially in winter) and the
demand for water for irrigation (especially in the irrigation season,  summer)
Seasonal weather patterns and weather extremes can adversely affect the supply
of hydropower Rainfall in the Kyrgyz Republic tends to decline in the winter
months (Figure ), which, coupled with reduced meltwater from glaciers, decreases
river flows Low river flows combine with high electricity demand for heating in
winters leading to imports of electricity from neighbouring Kazakhstan (around
KGS/kWh or  USDc/kWh) and Tajikistan (around - KGS/kWh or - USDc/kWh) Figure
Rainfall in the Kyrgyz Republic 60 50 40 )   ( 30         20 34 10    Feb Mar
Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Source: Weather Atlas () Note: mm =
millimetre 33 Several renewable energy technologies such as solar PV, wind,
hydropower and bioenergy have diverse daily and seasonal generation profiles
This allows them to complement one another in  diversified system In the winter
season, wind, for instance, can potentially complement hydropower An energy
system that includes  balanced mix of renewables can therefore be more resilient
to seasonal variations Environmental impacts of hydropower Hydropower projects
should be developed and operated sustainably according to international best
practices As with any other large infrastructure project, large hydropower
plants can lead to several negative environmental and social impacts during
their construction and operation These may include habitat destruction,
population displacement, loss of forest, disturbance to wildlife, damage to
water bodies such as streams and ponds, stress on water resources, heavy dust
pollution and equipment noise pollution Environmental impact assessments of
several Kyrgyz hydropower projects report that environmental benefits outweigh
impacts The construction of Kambarata-, for instance, has had  mainly beneficial
impact in the Syr Darya river basin, improving the management of the Central
Asian water-energy-food nexus It can provide the Kyrgyz Republic with
electricity during winters, and allow the Toktogul reservoir to store water
during the winter, thereby reducing the risk of flooding in the lower reaches of
the river and providing sufficient water for irrigation of the downstream
countries in spring and summer (Tazabek, 2014) Some studies ( World Bank, 1995)
have cautioned that new hydropower projects may create environmental problems
such as loss of farmland, resettlement, downstream loss of nutrients due to
deposition of silt and impacts on fauna and flora Natural disasters such as
earthquakes and/or landslides could create hazards for downstream populations as
the existing Toktogul dam and the planned Kambarata project are located near
major fault in an active seismic area  shift towards small hydropower projects
can help avoid some of the impacts linked with large projects Run-of-river
hydropower installations can sidestep several impacts associated with reservoirs
However, deployment should still aim to minimise environmental implications for
land use, water flow and ecosystems Operation and maintenance (&) of small
hydropower projects can help improve their long-term sustainability, while
ensuring that they continue to meet the demand for clean and reliable
electricity  Issues faced in the deployment of renewables As technology costs
continue to decline and the challenges of climate change, air pollution and
rising demand intensify, the case for greater adoption of renewables is growing
stronger That said, wide-scale deployment of renewables in the Kyrgyz Republic
has been held back by several issues discussed in Section : • The lack of  level
playing field hinders renewable energy deployment at the retail level Average
power and heat tariffs are well below the levels needed to recover costs
(Sections  and ) • Renewable energy targets have not been effective as they are
not enforced by law, nor backed by concrete policies Responsible entities are
not identified Given the significant renewable energy resources, targets are not
ambitious Moreover, there are no clear targets for heating and transport
(Section ) • So far, renewable energy policies remain limited to the electrical
power sector Policies such as mandates, fiscal and financial incentives and
demonstration projects could encourage renewable heating (Section ) • Feed-in
tariffs have not been successful in attracting investments The current level of
27 KGS/kWh (USD 39/kWh)10 (   52 KGS/kWh – the highest consumer tariff) is too
low The institutional responsibilities are still not clear, quotas remain
undefined While certificates of registration as renewable energy producer have
been awarded to over 70 companies, they have not been offered FITs (Section ) •
Auctions/tenders have not been successful in the past While winners were
selected, projects have not been implemented due to due to various disagreements
(Section ) • Distributed generation policies such as net metering and wheeling
are not in place Even if they were enacted/ implemented, the tariff regime is
not conducive The sale of electricity at  rate exceeding 52 KGS/kWh (USD /kWh)
is hindered (Section ) • Permitting procedures require further clarification
Location of renewable energy plants is permitted on some categories and types of
land, with some categories requiring transformation to other categories of land,
which is difficult • Renewable energy capacity building is needed for both
public and private stakeholders Lack of adequate skills and know-how is
hindering all stages of renewable energy deployment starting from policy making
and going all the way to project construction and operation 10 USD  = KGS (as of
30 January 2021) 34  RECOMMENDATIONS  smooth transition towards  sustainable
energy system that addresses the various energy sector challenges by utilising
the extensive renewable energy resources in the Kyrgyz Republic requires
conducive policy and regulatory environment that is well designed and
implemented This section presents  set of short- to medium-term recommended
actions to address key challenges and support the country in moving towards
diversified and climate-friendly energy system These recommendations and actions
focus on creating  more conducive environment for renewable energy investments
and project development  Legal and regulatory reform Scaling up the deployment
of non-hydropower renewables in the Kyrgyz Republic requires an extensive reform
of the policy and regulatory framework  shift towards overarching policy
frameworks, complemented by strong institutions, laws and regulations is vital
in catalysing change in the energy sector status quo  substantive reform of
energy pricing structures and streamlining of regulatory procedures for
renewable energy deployment can help create  favourable regulatory environment
for renewables The Kyrgyz Republic has one of the lowest electricity tariffs in
the world Tariffs for heat and electricity are well below cost-recovery levels
(Energy Charter, 2018; Rosenthal, Gassner and Hankinson, 2017) As discussed in
Section , this contributes to the inefficient use of energy and severe
underspending on maintenance and new investments, while making renewables
uncompetitive in comparison with easily and universally available cheaper grid
energy Concerns about poverty and affordability have meant that planned tariff
reforms have not been implemented (Holzhacker and Skakova, 2019) Renewable
energy deployment in the Kyrgyz Republic has also been held back in the past by
the lack of  streamlined process for bringing the projects online Despite the
presence of an approved FIT (see Action ), projects were often held back for
several reasons including  lack of clear institutional responsibilities
governing the implementation and operation phases The lack of comprehensive
legislation governing land allocation had also been  key hindrance to the
development of renewable energy sources Action : Create  level playing field
with energy tariff reforms Well-designed tariff reforms in the energy sector can
help generate revenue for investments in clean and modern infrastructure They
can also help lower the barrier to market entry for distributed renewable energy
technologies such as small-scale solar PV and solar water heating Appropriate
retail tariffs can stimulate the emergence of alternative suppliers of
electricity and heat supported by regulations encouraging net metering and
wheeling Political instability, an incomprehensive energy sector structure and
lack of energy sector management transparency have resulted in  loss of trust
and extremely low awareness of the population about the energy sector crisis
Over 65% of respondents to household surveys said that electricity tariffs are
too high and should be reduced (World Bank, 2017a) To be sustainable, tariff
reforms need to be designed in  way to minimise the economic impact on low-
income and marginalised parts of society Moreover, reforms should be coupled
with awareness campaigns that provide more clarity about subsidies and the
financial condition of the energy sector to help reduce the social and political
opposition to increasing tariffs Countries such as India, Indonesia, Morocco,
Pakistan and Zimbabwe are using tariff reforms to generate funds to make their
energy sectors more sustainable while creating  level playing field for
renewables In Pakistan, retail tariffs have been increased gradually to improve
the financial viability of the power sector The higher tariffs have fuelled the
growth of the domestic solar industry, which installed around 60 MW of net-
metered residential and commercial rooftops in the  financial year (The News,
2020) Current status: The government has recently (2021) indicated that an
increase in tariffs is needed to help address the financial issues faced by the
energy sector (Eurasianet, 2021) The tariffs for non-residential customers were
increased by %; however, the tariffs for residential customers have been left
unchanged, and were even lowered for low- income families due to the high
political sensitivity of the issue (SARFEC, 2021) It is expected that the
tariffs will be raised each year by  percentage to account for inflation in
accordance with the medium-term tariff policy for electricity and heat for ,
accepted in October 2021 (GoK, 2021) 35 Action : Streamline the procedure for
bringing renewable energy projects online Permitting requirements and procedures
should be streamlined under an overarching renewable energy law to provide
clear direction for deployment The overarching law should be implemented through
concrete secondary regulations that clearly articulate the process and identify
responsible government entities to facilitate the renewable energy sector The
stability of the governance structure and well-defined responsibilities of each
involved government body can increase investor confidence, reduce barriers to
entry and lead to more efficient project deployment The overarching principles
for the design of the procedures should focus on simplicity, transparency and
the flexibility to adapt to evolving market and regulatory conditions As
starting point, land for renewable energy project development could be allocated
by the government in zones with adequate accessibility to infrastructure, such
as the electricity grid, water and roads The amendments and additions to the
legislation on the “provision of land plots”, accepted in July 2021 could help
ease the process of land allocation for renewable energy projects Further
amendments to the Land Code, Water Code and the secondary legislation governing
the provision of land plots are needed to enable the building of renewable
energy plants on additional categories of land Furthermore,  one-stop-shop
system for renewable energy projects could be set up to streamline the
permitting process and enable better coordination of internal administrative
processes This system should be equipped with the necessary decision-making
abilities to enable the different stages of project development Publishing
procedures online, with clear guidance on the necessary steps including the
documentation, timelines and the relevant government institutions could give
much-needed transparency to developers Current status: The procedures for
renewable energy project development are outlined in Regulation No 525 (October
2020) At the moment, the energy sector permitting processes are under revision
as part of  wider reform of the sector’ governance structure  Policy support
mechanisms The current policy support framework for renewables has not been
successful in encouraging private sector participation Strengthening the
confidence of the private sector to invest in renewables would require the
implementation of well- designed support mechanisms that are attuned to specific
national and local contexts While long-term stability of policies is the key,
policies must continuously adapt to changing market conditions to promote cost-
competitiveness There is  need to identify support mechanisms that would
facilitate the transition towards  functioning renewable energy market FITs are
instrumental in the initial development of  national market for renewables
However, as the market matures, auctions, especially for large-scale
installations, could help procure renewables at more competitive prices through
price discovery Furthermore, support mechanisms should also address the
decarbonisation of the end uses, with  special focus on heating and transport
The GoK has introduced several policy support mechanisms such as FITs, tenders
and end-use sector-specific policies with limited success FIT schemes have not
yet been deployed due to factors such as unclear institutional responsibilities,
low tariffs and concerns about the long-term certainty of FITs So far, tenders
have not led to project implementation While winners were selected, projects
have not been completed due to various disagreements Finally, the transport and
heating sectors are very important from the perspective of energy consumption
and energy-sector-related emissions Coal, natural gas and oil are heavily used
for district heating and stand-alone heating systems leading to significant
emissions11 and local air pollution (IEA, 2020b) Simultaneously, the demand for
diesel and gasoline has been increasing as more vehicles are added to the
transport fleet Cities such as Bishkek and Osh are suffering from local air
pollution, which can be partly attributed to transport emissions Policy support
for the introduction of renewables and energy efficiency in the heating and
transport sectors offers  promising opportunity to reduce air pollution and
mitigate GHG emissions, with significant co-benefits 11 While actual emissions
are not known, energy production (power and heat) accounted for around 24% of
total energy-related emissions in 2010 (SAEPF, 2016) Since most of the
electricity comes from hydropower, heating likely accounts for the bulk of the
energy production emissions 36 Action : Improve the feed-in tariffs The FIT
scheme should be revised and improved based on factors such as changing market
conditions, competitive renewable energy costs and clearer resource assessments
The selection of an appropriate tariff is an extensive process that should be
led by the government with active and diverse representation from all
stakeholders (government institutions, private sector, academia and development
partners) Any reform of FITs needs to be supported by  clear demarcation of
institutional responsibilities Moreover, FITs, just like any other policy
mechanism, need to be supported by  conducive policy, regulatory and
institutional landscape to ensure rapid uptake of renewables FITs (and feed-in
premiums, FIPs) have been adopted by more than 80 countries around the world
Globally, some of the leading solar PV installation markets around the world
such as China (49 GW), Viet Nam (11 GW) and Japan ( GW) have achieved their
levels of deployment in great part due to their FITs (IRENA, IEA and REN21,
2018) As their sectors matured, and with their growing need for  policy scheme
that better reflects the falling technology costs, most of these countries are
using auctions, at least for their large-size projects The main challenge of
FIT relates to setting the right tariff or premium level, and adjusting it as
needed FITs that are too high can lead to windfall profits, strain the
government budget and possibly lead to high consumer tariffs and the development
of surplus capacity, which may need to be curtailed Countries have addressed
these issues using several approaches France, Germany and the United Kingdom,
for instance, used degression mechanisms that lower the FITs as the level of
deployment increases and costs decline (IRENA, 2014) China combines FITs with
regional quotas to limit solar PV deployment to target levels (Ye, Rodrigues and
Lin, 2017) While many countries are moving towards auctions (Action ) to curb
deployment costs, some are choosing to implement both For example, Germany,
Italy and Malaysia have simultaneously used auctions for large-scale projects
and FITs/FIPs for smaller projects (IRENA, IEA and REN21 2018) Finally, it
should be noted that tariff setting alone may not be the only determining factor
and  more comprehensive reform of the policy, regulatory and institutional
landscape might be in order The current FIT regime provides  FIT of 27 KGS/kWh (
using  coefficient of  times the highest consumer tariff) (86 USDc/kWh) for all
electricity, produced by renewable plants This FIT is deemed too low by sector
stakeholders However, it should be noted that the coefficient for solar plants
used to be as high as  up until 12 Current status: The FITs and their
implementation mechanism are under review by the MOEI In late 2021 and early
2022, 63 companies were registered as renewable energy producers, marking their
intention to develop over  700 MW renewable capacity across solar, wind and
small hydro The new Renewable Energy Law, adopted in July 2022, offers  FIT with
coefficient of  times the highest consumer tariff It is not clear if the FIT
will be offered to all stakeholders who have already registered as renewable
energy producers Action : Implement auctions for large capacities Renewable
energy auctions need to be designed in  way that attracts investors and
encourages competition, while also ensuring that the projects are delivered
Auctions can be used to attract investment for relatively large-scale projects
in all technologies including hydropower, solar and wind IRENA’ report
“Renewable Energy Auctions:  Guide to Design” offers an overview of auction
design options and their resulting policy trade-offs (IRENA, 2015) While it is
important to have  developed renewable energy market that can ensure the
required level of competition, it should be noted that several countries with
nascent renewable energy markets are also using auctions to attract investments
Countries such as Madagascar, Senegal, Togo, Zambia and neighbouring Uzbekistan
are using the World Bank’ Scaling Solar Program, which is  package of technical
support, document templates, pre-approved financing, insurance products and
guarantees targeted towards large-scale solar project development facilitated
through auctions and private financing (or from the International Finance
Corporation) Uzbekistan awarded  100 MW plant in the Navoi region to the United
Arab Emirates’ Masdar through auctions for 27 USD/MWh The plant was commissioned
in 2021 (Ellichipuram, 2021; IRENA, 2019) Elsewhere in the region, Kazakhstan
has used auctions to award more than  GW of renewable energy projects including
600 MW of wind, 350 MW of solar PV and around 100 MW of small hydro The success
of renewable energy auctions in countries with relatively new renewable energy
markets demonstrates that the design of the auctions and overarching regulatory
landscape can be very important factors Current status: There are no officially
confirmed plans in place to conduct any renewable energy auctions in the near
future Stakeholders have suggested that the EEU integration of the energy market
in 2025 could be an opportune time for the introduction of auctions It should
also be noted that wind and solar were much more expensive at that point in time
12 37 Action : Enact policies to decarbonise end-use sectors (heating and
transport) The decarbonisation of the heating sector requires  multifaceted
approach, which includes renewables-based electrification, use of renewable
heating (solar thermal, biomass, geothermal) and investments in efficiency and
infrastructure including for district heating (IRENA, IEA and REN21, 2020)
According to the ° Scenario in IRENA’ World Energy Transitions Outlook,
electrification will supply more than half of global energy demand, including
for heating and cooling As such, the electrification of heating and cooling will
play an important role in the decarbonisation of the energy sector Heat pumps
are becoming popular globally and incentives such as tax exemptions and rebates
can be considered to promote them in the Kyrgyz Republic China, for instance,
offers  10% rebate, approximately, on the purchase of air source heat pumps
Powered by the Kyrgyz hydroelectricity-based grid, heat pumps present  practical
solution for increasing the share of renewable energy in heating end uses
Financial and fiscal incentives can be important near- term mechanisms to
encourage the switch to solar water heaters in buildings These incentives may
include  range of grants, low-interest loans and tax incentives The
electrification of heating requirements needs to be complemented by the
strengthening of current generation and distribution capabilities Due to
shortages of water and related low flow to large hydropower dams, household use
of electricity for heating has been restricted in the past several years
Moreover, the authorities should continue to develop and pilot innovative
solutions ( solar-assisted district heating, heat meters) to increase efficiency
and reduce fuel consumption Lessons learnt from pilot projects should be used to
implement extensive decarbonisation projects in the sector In the transport
sector, more efficient public transport, electric vehicles and support for
alternative modes ( cycling and walking infrastructure) can help In the long
term, the introduction of electric vehicles can be significant in reducing local
pollution and GHG emissions This, and the electrification of end-use sectors in
general, needs to be coupled with investments in the infrastructure needed for
power generation, transmission and distribution Public procurement of electric
vehicles, supported by investments in charging infrastructure, and related
expertise, can help stimulate their roll-out in the Kyrgyz Republic by making
them more visible in the public space Buses, government-owned vehicles and taxis
are attractive early targets on the road towards -mobility While the global
electric bus market continues to be dominated by large economies like China,
India and the United States, other governments in the developing world are also
working to add them to their public transportation fleets – often in
collaboration with international development partners The city of Santiago,
Chile, is home to the largest fleet of electric buses outside China (776 buses)
Chile’ federal government has set  goal of electrifying the country’ entire bus
fleet by Similarly, Bogotá (Colombia) and Mexico City (Mexico) increased their
electric bus fleet with the acquisition of 406 buses and 193 trolleybuses,
respectively, in 2020 (Bnamericas, 2021) The penetration of electric vehicles in
private transport demands  broader set of policies, including financial
incentives to facilitate their acquisition and cut their usage costs In the
short term, greater adoption of public transport offers the most effective
solution The decarbonisation of end-use sectors can be complemented through
measures to encourage renewable generation by consumers The government could use
incentive schemes to encourage individual consumers and mini-grids to provide
low-cost renewable generation to the grid (and to other consumers) The
introduction of net metering, wheeling and other distributed generation policies
can help unlock the small-scale market segment Current status: The Kyrgyz
Republic had  zero customs duty on the import of electric vehicles for several
years The government is also planning to introduce tax and customs incentives on
vehicles with hybrid engines (SAEPF, 2020) The new Tax Code was introduced on 18
January 2022 and the new incentives are not yet clear As of now, there are no
government initiatives to develop charging stations 38  Long-term energy
planning The Kyrgyz energy sector needs long-term vision and planning that is
cognisant of domestic and international trends and aims to ensure an affordable,
sustainable, secure and reliable supply of energy to meet the country’
development requirements  better assessment of certain renewable energy
resources can help pave the way for renewable energy deployment in the Kyrgyz
Republic Given the country’ extensive experience in large hydropower, the
potential for hydro has been analysed in the past; however, more needs to be
done to account for the planning challenges posed by erratic hydrological
patterns due to climate change For solar and wind resources, there is  lack of
comprehensive economic potential analysis and zoning  comprehensive plan for the
development of the energy sector to address the challenges of rising demand,
ageing infrastructure and increasing climate impacts is yet to be developed
Electricity and energy consumption in the Kyrgyz Republic has been increasing
rapidly The ageing energy infrastructure requires significant investments to
meet growing demand The country’ production from hydropower exhibits seasonal
and annual variability, which significantly affects power reliability Kyrgyz
energy sector trends must be seen against the backdrop of the long-term impacts
of climate change and an evolving global market in which renewable technology
costs have been declining rapidly Successful national energy sector planning
demands  thorough analysis that incorporates all these dynamic factors Energy
planning can contribute to the process of setting comprehensive and ambitious
renewable energy targets The existing targets are not specific and not ambitious
enough to capitalise on the rich renewable energy resources of the country or to
account for the rapidly increasing energy demand As existing generation
capacities cannot cope with growing demand, the choice would be to either import
more electricity - which is limited by the technical capacities of the power
lines connecting the Kyrgyz Republic with Kazakhstan and other neighbouring
countries or support the development of local renewables, facilitating local
energy sector and economic growth Renewable energy technologies such as solar
PV, wind and bioenergy tend to be modular and can be deployed rapidly, which
makes them ideal candidates for meeting rising demand, while contributing to the
diversification of energy sources, enhancing energy security and climate
resilience Action : Improve renewable energy resource mapping As the Kyrgyz
Republic aims to achieve  more diversified power generation mix, zoning for
solar PV and wind generation projects should be prioritised Renewable energy
zones can be defined as areas with high-quality resource potential where
deployment is viable from  technical, economic and environmental standpoint
These areas satisfy various criteria such as proximity to grid infrastructure,
load centres, road networks and other generation projects The zoning exercise
can assist future planning, target setting and policy development The
characteristics of each zone, such as annual generation and estimated LCOE, can
help policy makers in planning Moreover, an enhanced mapping exercise can also
be  very useful basis for project developers, with the potential for reducing
development and transactional costs IRENA’ potential suitability analysis
(Section ), which identifies suitable zones for solar PV and wind, can serve as
an important initial step towards  complete zoning assessment The assessment
identifies three suitable solar PV zones clustered in the southern region of Osh
along the river Kyzyl-Suu (Annex Table A2) It also found 77 wind zones clustered
in the southern region of Osh along the border with Tajikistan, the northern and
southern regions in Naryn and the southern region of Issyk-Kul Other sparse
clusters were found in western Batken and southern Chuy (Annex Table A3) Follow-
up studies could build on IRENA’ zoning exercise by performing  detailed
analysis of the technical and economic potential within the identified solar and
wind zones As  next step, these analyses can be strengthened by ground-based
measurements Current status: There is an active initiative focusing on renewable
energy resource assessment, mapping and zoning, supported by USAID 39 Action :
Develop long-term energy scenarios  detailed long-term planning exercise should
be undertaken for energy demand and supply in all sectors to identify the
optimal energy mix and inform policy decisions accordingly Given the strong
share of the Kyrgyz Republic’ non-electrified end-use sectors in energy
consumption and emissions,  deeper focus on sectors such as heating and
transport is needed, which should fully assess the potential for
electrification, and energy efficiency and renewable energy penetration Given
the extensive linkages between the power and water sector of the country, the
dynamics of seasonal and climatic patterns in water requirement for energy and
food production should be  cornerstone of any national energy sector planning
exercise The long-term integrated energy plans can be essential for efficient
investment in infrastructure which avoids duplications and stranded assets It
should be noted that the demand for electricity (and energy in general) is
relatively hard to predict Scenario analyses that explore  host of different
energy sector futures with their underlying assumptions can be used to develop
better understanding of the consequences of energy sector decisions These
scenarios can provide useful insights about the sector and can serve as
essential inputs for setting targets and enacting policies for transitioning
towards sustainability Accurate and timely data and information are crucial for
the formulation and revision of energy plans Therefore, energy sector planning
needs to be complemented by reforms in the collection and reporting of energy
statistics IRENA’ report, Planning for the Renewable Future: Long-Term Modelling
and Tools to Expand Variable Renewable Power in Emerging Economies, provides
insight for planning greater renewable energy integration in the power sector
The report emphasises the need to adequately address variability, uncertainty
and the location-dependency of variable renewable energy in long-term generation
expansion models, and to integrate stronger feedback loops between planning
stages (IRENA, 2017) The formulation of energy sector plans and scenarios can be
an essential step in developing investment trajectories for the sector Once the
funding requirements for the energy scenario are determined, the government (and
other stakeholders) could plan for accessing different funding sources The
funding could come from various revenue sources, including tariff reforms, taxes
( on transport fuels), as well as contributions from donor organisations
Additionally, the government could also target international climate funds and
climate finance institutions such as the Global Environment Facility, the
Climate Investment Funds and the Green Climate Fund (IRENA, 2016; IRENA and CPI,
2020) The Climate Investment Platform,  joint initiative by IRENA, UNDP and
SE4All, which is helping developers in preparing bankable projects and
matchmaking with financing partners could provide another avenue for accessing
renewable energy finance Current status: The Kyrgyz Republic has finalised the
development of the National Expert Sustainable Development Goals Tool for Energy
Planning (NEXSTEP) with the support of the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, which aims to help policy makers make
informed policy decisions to achieve their Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
and NDC targets by creating several energy sector development scenarios up to
The scenarios will be used in the development of  national SDG  roadmap, which
would be  good starting point to develop enabling policies to achieve SDG  and
NDC targets Action : Establish comprehensive and ambitious renewable energy
targets The GoK can send strong signals to all sector stakeholders by
establishing renewable energy targets that are representative of the country’
strong renewable energy potential, declining technology costs, rising demand for
energy and socio-economic development goals These targets should have  direct
connection to national high-level priorities and be backed by strong political
commitment and legislation They must to be rooted in long-term energy plans and
rigorous scenario analysis involving all generation technologies They also need
to be directly linked to the country’ NDC, long-term strategies and broader
climate objectives Furthermore, they should be defined at the level of the
energy sector and disaggregated by sector (transport, heating, electricity, etc)
Within the electricity sector they could be divided by specific technologies
(see examples in Table ) Stakeholder engagement during the design of the process
could strengthen credibility and feasibility The targets should be clearly
defined and the responsible entities identified Finally, targets need to be
backed by specific policies and measures that would expedite renewable
deployment in the country IRENA is already contributing to this effort to help
build capacity in the local public and private sectors, with dissemination
activities focusing on target setting and auction design Current status: The
Green Billion Plan, which aims to stimulate the production of  billion kWh from
renewable energy technologies, has been discussed on and off for over  year by
the government but has not yet been offered for open discussion 40 Table
Examples of technology-specific targets Country Technology Target Hydropower GW
by 2030 Viet Nam Wind  GW by 2030 Solar 12 GW by 2030 Wind 20% of capacity by
2030 Morocco Solar 20% of capacity by 2030 Hydropower 12% of capacity by 2030
Solar PV 300 GW by 2030 India Wind 140 GW by 2030 Note: GW = gigawatt; PV =
photovoltaic  Facilitate financing and de-risk investments  large share of
energy investments in the Kyrgyz Republic has been through foreign direct
investment (FDI) The domestic banking sector does not have significant
experience financing non-hydro renewables Meanwhile,  lack of bankable renewable
energy project proposals is  major deterrent to renewable energy financing in
the sector In this context, improved power purchase agreements (PPAs) and the
greater adoption of public-private partnerships (PPPs) could de-risk investments
and help leverage the financial and technical capabilities of the private sector
PPAs have  high degree of relevance in facilitating renewable energy investments
PPAs are very important to renewables, given that before investing in
independent power producer (IPP) plants, private entities and lenders want to be
sure that there is  secure market for the output of their production facilities
In the Kyrgyz Republic, the duration of  PPA for renewables is set to  maximum
of 10 years, and current draft changes to the Law on Renewable Energy sets the
PPA duration at 15 years The contract parties are responsible for monitoring the
PPA implementation In the past, there have been some issues of non-payment to
small hydropower plants by distribution companies PPPs are projects in the field
of infrastructure development that introduce private sector funds, expertise and
motivation into areas that are normally the responsibility of the government
Globally, PPP arrangements have become widespread in the field of renewable
energy They have been used in developed and developing countries in conjunction
with several policy mechanisms ranging from quotas in the United States to FITs
and auctions in Europe and the rest of the world In the region, the government
of Uzbekistan recently entered  PPP arrangement with Masdar Clean Energy for the
development of  competitively tendered 100 MW PV solar power plant Horses
grazing near  lake in Song kul, Kyrgyzstan © Mint_Images / Envatocom 41 Action :
Adopt  standard power purchase agreement The key design elements of current
renewable energy PPAs should be reviewed in accordance with international best
practices Where possible, this effort should be complemented by  thorough review
of contractual project document templates for renewables along with the
development of standardised PPAs In this context, the Open Solar Contracts
initiative, jointly launched by IRENA and the Terrawatt Initiative, can be  very
useful resource for contractual templates to be included in solar power
procurement The initiative’ contract templates are the result of  rigorous
collaboration involving key stakeholders at the intersection of the solar energy
and legal sectors The contracts are primarily designed for small- and medium-
sized, on-grid solar PV projects and include agreement templates for power
purchase, implementation, & agreement, supply, installation and finance term
sheets (IRENA and TWI, 2019) Variable renewable energy technologies such as
wind, solar and small hydropower have some distinct characteristics, which need
to be accounted for in their PPAs These characteristics include variability (how
much generation and at what time), uncertainty (predictability of the
generation) and location constraints (co-ordination between grid and generation)
These characteristics should be adequately accommodated through PPA design
features governing supply and purchase commitments, curtailment clauses and
requirements for dispatch procedures Price uncertainty and the fear of non-
payment can have  significant influence on investment decisions and financing
costs This makes the role of PPAs even more important These agreements need to
be backed by strong legal regulation that helps improve the credibility of the
sector, lowers capital costs and attracts investors and project developers
Current status: The government is in the process of approving  standard PPA for
specific renewable energy technologies Action 10: Introduce public-private
partnerships To be successful, the introduction of PPPs in the Kyrgyz energy
sector needs to be backed by strong political will, capable institutions and
conducive legislation Fair risk-sharing criteria must be established that
support profitable returns for the private sector If the services are not
delivered at the required level the private sector must be penalised On the
public side, there must be acceptance of the principle of whole-life costing,
and an absolute commitment to the government’ long-term ( year) payment for
power generation Overall, the responsibilities of all stakeholders should be
clearly defined to ensure smooth operation and delivery of essential public
services Well-designed PPPs allow for several advantages such as on-time/budget
delivery; optimal risk management; efficiencies from the integration of design,
construction, financing and &; competition and greater participation; and
accountability for the provision of renewable energy By bringing in  more
experienced private developer backed by  credible off-taker, PPPs can help de-
risk investments and lower deployment costs PPPs transfer several risks such as
cost overruns (construction, &) and forecast errors ( overestimation of
resources) from the public to the private sector, thereby creating value for the
government (UNECE, 2013) Investors are increasingly becoming risk averse and
before lending to IPPs, they expect that formalities such as planning consents,
grid connection offers, PPAs (Action ) and construction contracts are in place
Therefore, governments should seek to facilitate the IPP in arranging these
formalities Moreover, the government should also ensure that the whole process
is carried out transparently to develop credibility among developers and lenders
Current status: While no PPPs have been announced in the renewable energy
sector,  memorandum of understanding has been signed between the Ministry of
Energy and private companies such as Masdar and EcoEner to develop solar and
hydropower projects (AKIpress, 2022; Skopljak, 2022)  Capacity development in
the public and private sectors For the Kyrgyz Republic to achieve ambitious
targets for renewables and energy efficiency, the country will need concerted
capacity-building efforts on several fronts The Kyrgyz Republic’ renewable
energy sector has historically focused on the deployment and maintenance of
hydropower, which means that know-how and familiarity with other clean
technologies (renewables and energy efficiency) are scarce in both the public
and private sectors Lack of awareness of renewable energy is  key challenge in
many government departments and ministries, which often end up blocking policy
development and delaying approvals and funding for projects Institutional
stakeholders need to ensure adequate co-operation and co-ordination among
themselves to respond promptly to the dynamics of the renewable energy sector 42
The private sector could also benefit from extensive capacity building to help
develop  capable renewable energy workforce and  thriving domestic renewable
energy value chain Several universities in the Kyrgyz Republic offer education
with  specialisation in renewable energies, including the Kyrgyz State Technical
University, Kyrgyz-Russian Slavic University and the Kyrgyz-Uzbek University
Some of these institutions are co-operating with international scientists on
research projects focusing on different areas of the clean energy landscape That
said, the renewable energy market remains small, and it is not able to absorb
the students graduating from universities Action 11: Enhance institutional
capacities The technical and co-ordination capabilities of public and private
sector entities require improvement to facilitate renewable energy deployment
Capacity needs assessment studies aimed at different stakeholders, such as
public institutions, private sector, academia, the general public, etc, could be
an important preliminary step in this direction Support from international
donors and development banks could be sought to set up periodic capacity-
building efforts in relevant government entities Capacity building in the public
power sector institutions, for instance, could focus on areas such as cost
competitiveness of renewables, technical issues in the integration of variable
renewables in the grid, management of  system with substantial shares of
renewables and introduction of flexibility mechanisms such as storage and
demand-response Capacity building in the public institutions involved in policy
making can focus on areas such as the design of renewable energy targets,
renewable energy auctions, design and implementation of FITs, net metering, etc
IRENA is already contributing to this effort to help build capacity in the local
public and private sectors with dissemination activities that could potentially
focus on target setting, auction design and resource assessments In this
context,  lot can be learned from the experiences of countries at different
stages of deployment In solar deployment, the Kyrgyz Republic can learn from the
experiences of  wide variety of countries including established markets ( China,
India, etc), as well as markets that are only now starting to make strides in
the sector ( Kazakhstan, Türkiye, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Zambia, etc) Furthermore,
awareness of renewable energy’ benefits and competitiveness can also encourage
adoption among people in the private sector Current status: Several projects are
already striving to create awareness in the tourism and agricultural sectors The
SWITCH-Asia project, for instance, aims to promote energy efficiency and
renewable energy in the community-based tourism sector in Central Asia, while
the PERETO project is aimed at promoting energy security and sustainable growth
by promoting sustainable production and consumption and energy and resource
efficiency practices among small- and medium-sized enterprises in the tourism
sector of the Kyrgyz Republic Action 12: Educate and train  skilled workforce
Investment in the education and training of workers such as engineers,
technicians and other skilled personnel is very important Universities,
vocational training institutes and schools all have  role to play As such, the
government authorities in charge of energy, training and education should
collectively work towards the introduction of renewable energy training
curricula The creation of renewable-energy-related skills is best seen in the
context of an ongoing global transition that has transformational impacts on the
energy sector workforce Fossil-fuel-based jobs are already facing several
challenges due to variations and fluctuations in demand IRENA’ analysis foresees
that by 2050, 42 million people could be working globally in the renewable
energy sector with an additional 21 million people employed in energy efficiency
and almost 15 million in the power grid and energy flexibility Undoubtedly, the
skill requirements for jobs related to renewables and energy efficiency are set
to increase The Kyrgyz Republic can benefit from this trend by investing in
capable renewable energy workforce The development of  skilled workforce needs
to go hand in hand with investments and policy support for the relevant
industries Industrial upgrade programmes can help strengthen the capabilities of
local firms These programmes should aim to enhance the technological
capabilities of domestic industries by enabling them to derive value from
renewable energy investments and to facilitate closer linkages with business
partners Joint ventures and tax breaks can also be used to strengthen local
capabilities Some countries,  India, Morocco and South Africa, have also used
domestic content requirements to strengthen local industry Current status: While
universities in the Kyrgyz Republic are offering courses in topics related to
renewable energy, the lack of opportunities in the sector is  major problem for
youth with specialisation in renewables 43 REFERENCES AKIpress (2022),
“Kyrgyzstan, Spanish energy company sign MoU on construction of 260 MW solar
power plant and hydropower plant in Issyk-Kul”,
power_plant_and_hydropower_plant_in_Issyk-Kul/ Asanov,  (2017), “Кыргызстан
надежде на малые ГЭС” [Kyrgyzstan Hoping for small hydropower plants], Radio
Azattyk [Kyrgyz Service of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty],  Balabanyan, ,
Hofer, , Finn,  and Hankinson,   (2015), Keeping Warm: Urban Heating Options in
the Kyrgyz Republic: Summary Report, World Bank, Washington, DC,
Box391503B-PUBLIC-Heating-Assessment-for-Kyrgyz-P133058-Finalpdf Baybagyshov, ,
and Degembaeva,  (2019), “Analysis of usage of the renewable energy in
Kyrgyzstan”, IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, Vol 249/,
article 012021,  Bnamericas (2021), “Electric mobility advances in Latin
America”, Bnamericascom, 29 July,  mobility-advances-in-latin-america-and-the-
caribbean-in-the-context-of-the-pandemic---new-unep-report CASA-1000 (2021),
“News and events”,  Dikambaev,  (2019), Draft: National Sustainable Energy
Action Plan of the Kyrgyz Republic, United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe, Bishkek,  DWRLI (2021), “Water resources and water management
infrastructure of Kyrgyzstan”, Department of Water Resources and Land
Improvement, Kyrgyz Republic,  Ellichipuram,  (2021), “Masdar inaugurates 100 MW
solar power project in Uzbekistan”, Power Technology, 30 August,  Energy Charter
(2018), In-Depth Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of Kyrgyzstan (2017),
Energy Charter, Brussels, Belgium,  and-programmes/in-depth-review-of-the-
energy-efficiency-policy-of-kyrgyzstan-2017/ Eurasianet (2021), “Kyrgyzstan:
President talks of raising electricity tariffs”, Eurasianet, 21 April,  Global
Atlas (2022), “The Global Atlas”,  GoK (2021), “Approved medium-term tariff
policy for electricity and heat for ”, Government of the Kyrgyz Republic,
Bishek,  GoK (2018), National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for ,
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, Bishkek,  , and Skakova,  (2019), Kyrgyz
Republic Diagnostic, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, London
IEA (2020a), Kyrgyzstan Energy Profile, International Energy Agency, Paris,  IEA
(2020b), “World energy balances: Kyrgyzstan”,  Imanaliyeva,  (2021), “‘Expect
less water next year’, Kyrgyzstan warns downstream neighbors”, Eurasianet,
November,  IMF (2019), Kyrgyz Republic—Selected Issues, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC,  IRENA (2022), “Completed RRAs”, International Renewable
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA (2021a), Renewable Power Generation Costs in
2020, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  (2021b), “Solar PV and
wind potential in the Kyrgyz Republic” (internal document), International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2019), Renewable Energy Auctions:
Status and Trends beyond Price, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu
Dhabi,  IRENA (2017), Planning for the Renewable Future: Long-Term Modelling and
Tools to Expand Variable Renewable Power in Emerging Economies, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  Long-term-modelling-and-tools-to-expand-
variable-renewable-power IRENA (2016), Unlocking Renewable Energy Investment:
The Role of Risk Mitigation and Structured Finance, International Renewable
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  44 IRENA (2015), Renewable Energy Auctions:  Guide to
Design, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA (2014),
Adapting Renewable Energy Policies to Dynamic Market Conditions, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  IRENA (2013), Renewable Readiness
Assessment: Design to Action, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,
IRENA and CPI (2020), Global Landscape of Renewable Energy Finance 2020,
International Renewable Energy Agency and Climate Policy Initiative, Abu Dhabi,
IRENA and TWI (2019), “Open solar contracts”, International Renewable Energy
Agency and Terrawatt Initiative,   IRENA, IEA and REN21 (2020), Renewable Energy
Policies in  Time of Transition: Heating and Cooling, International Renewable
Energy Agency, International Energy Agency and Renewable Energy Policy Network
for the 21st Century,  IRENA, IEA and REN21 (2018), Renewable Energy Policies in
Time of Transition, International Renewable Energy Agency, International Energy
Agency and Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century,  Kabar (2022a),
“Monthly demand for liquefied gas in Kyrgyzstan is more than  thsd tons”,
Информационное Агентство Кабар [Information agency, Kabar],  Kabar (2022b), “
Минэнерго вручили свидетельства регистрации субъектам возобновляемых источников
энергии, (Ministry of Energy handed registration certificates to subjects of
renewable energy sources) News of Kyrgyzstan - KNIA “Kabar”,  Kudaiberdieva,
(2020) “‘Green’ energy in Kyrgyzstan: New game rules for market players”,
Central Asian Bureau for Analytical Reporting,  December,  Kudryavtseva,
(2022), “Agreement on construction of solar station in Issyk-Kul region signed”,
kg,  April,  Mallinson,  (2020), “Kyrgyzstan’ protracted political and economic
crisis”, Chatham House, 26 October,  Mamatkanov,  , Bazhanova,  , and
Romanovsky,   (2006), Water Resources of Kyrgyzstan at the Present Stage, Ilim,
Bishkek Ministry of Justice, Kyrgyz Republic (2018a), “Concept for the
development of small hydropower in the Kyrgyz Republic until 2017” (testimony of
GoK),  of Justice, Kyrgyz Republic (2018b), “Concept of  green economy in the
Kyrgyz Republic ‘Kyrgyzstan – the country of green economy’” [In Russian],
Approved by the Resolution of the Jogorku Kenesh of the Kyrgyz Republic dated 28
June 2018, No 2532-VI (testimony of GoK),  NSC (2021), “Official statistics –
Statistics of Kyrgyzstan”, National Statistical Committee of the Kyrgyz
Republic,  OECD (2019), Promoting Clean Urban Public Transportation and Green
Investment in Kyrgyzstan, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, Paris,  Pirani,  (2019), “Central Asian gas: Prospects for the
2020s”, Oxford Institute for Energy Studies,  , Valentini, , Vashneva, ,
Choitonbaeva, , Iversen,  and Orolbaev,  (2013), National Policy Dialogue on
Integrated Water Resources Management: Process and Results for the Period of ,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,  Rosenthal, , Gassner,
, and Hankinson,   (2017), Analysis of the Kyrgyz Republic’ Energy Sector, World
Bank, Washington, ,  Rovenskaya, , Sedighi, , Komendantova, , Strelkovskii, ,
Sizov, , Karabashov, , Atakanov, , Chekirbaev, , Zheenaliev, , Stepanova, ,
Ekenberg, , and Rodriguez,   (2018), “Industrial development of Kyrgyzstan:
Background”, United Nations Industrial Development Organization and
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis,  SAEPF (2020), The
National Report on the State of the Environment of the Kyrgyz Republic for  [in
Russian], State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry,  SAEPF (2016),
Third National Communication of the Kyrgyz Republic under the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change, State Agency on Environment Protection and
Forestry, Bishkek,  SARFEC (2021), “Electricity tariffs” [in Russian], State
Agency for Regulation of the Fuel and Energy Complex under the Ministry of
Energy and Industry of the Kyrgyz Republic,   (2022), “Masdar targets floating
solar projects in Kyrgyzstan under new MoU”, Offshore Energy, 20 April,  45
Sovacool,  , Gilbert, , and Nugent,  (2014), “An international comparative
assessment of construction cost overruns for electricity infrastructure”, Energy
Research & Social Science, Vol , pp ,  Tazabek (2014), “How and where will the
construction site for the Kambar-Ata HPP- be located?” [in Russian],  The News
(2020), “NEPRA issues ,334 net metering licenses in FY20”,  UN ESCAP
(forthcoming), SDG7 Progress Report for the Countries of Central Asia and the
Caucasus, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
UN Geospatial (2011), “Kyrgyzstan | Geospatial, location data for  better
world”,  UNDP (2021a), “Heat pumps on guard of villagers’ health”, United
Nations Development Programme, Kyrgyz Republic,  UNDP (2021b), “Sanitary
epidemiological service in Sulukta switched to an eco-friendly heating system”,
United Nations Development Programme, Kyrgyz Republic,  service-in-sulukta-
switched-to-an-eco-html UNDP (2020), “ rural school in the Issyk-Kul oblast
takes advantage of  helioplant”, United Nations Development Programme, Kyrgyz
Republic,  the-issyk-kulhtml UNECE (2018), “The Kyrgyz Republic: Energy sector
review in 2018”, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva,  UNECE
(2013), UNECE National PPP Readiness Assessment Report: Kyrgyzstan, United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva,  UNFCCC (2021), “The Kyrgyz
Republic – Updated Nationally Determined Contribution 2021”, United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change,  ENG%20%D0%BE%D1%82%pdf UNFCCC (2015),
“The Kyrgyz Republic – Intended Nationally Determined Contribution”, United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,  UNIDO (2018), Diagnostic for
the Programme for Country Partnership (PCP): The Kyrgyz Republic, United Nations
Industrial Development Organization,  USAID (2021), “The USAID CASA-1000
Secretariat Activity Fact Sheet”, Central Asia Regional, US Agency for
International Development,  Blooming valley with green mountains Kyrgyzstan ©
Anton Petrus / Envatocom 46 Vedeneva,  (2020), “Change for the better in Kyrgyz
Republic’ renewable energy sector”, United Nations Development Programme, Kyrgyz
Republic,  Vedomosti (2014), “‘Газпром’ купил за $ активы газового оператора
Киргизии,  Weather Atlas (), “Naryn, Kyrgyzstan—January weather forecast and
climate information”,  World Bank (2022), “Enterprise Surveys”,  World Bank
(2021), “World Development Indicators”,  World Bank (2020), Fueling Kyrgyzstan’
Transition to Clean Household Heating Solutions, World Bank, Washington, DC,
worldbankorg/curated/en/pdf/Fueling-Kyrgyzstan--Transition-to-Clean-Household-
Heating-Solutionspdf World Bank (2017a), Kyrgyz Republic:  Resilient Economy… on
Slow Growth Trajectory, World Bank, Washington, DC,
org/en/country/kyrgyzrepublic/publication/economic-update-spring-World Bank
(2017b), “Kyrgyz Republic:  resilient economy… on  slow growth trajectory: With
special focus on Kyrgyzstan’ ailing energy sector”, Kyrgyz Republic Economic
Update No , World Bank, Washington, DC,  en/pdf-WP-PUBLIC-add-series-
SpringKGZBEUFinalpdf World Bank (2017c), Small Hydro Power Plant in the Kyrgyz
Republic: Assessment of Potential and Development Challenges, World Bank,
Washington, DC,  velopmentinKYREngSeptpdf World Bank (1995), Kyrgyz Republic
Energy Sector Review, World Bank, Washington, DC,  World Bank Group and ADB
(Asian Development Bank) (2021), “Climate risk country profile: Kyrgyz
Republic”,  (2020), “Climate Watch: Kyrgyzstan”, World Resources Institute,  Ye,
-, Rodrigues,    and Lin,   (2017), “Analysis of feed-in tariff policies for
solar photovoltaic in China ”, Applied Energy, Vol 203, pp ,   (2003),
Uzbekistan stopped supplying gas to Kyrgyzstan”, Deutsche Welle, 22 May,  Zeng,
, Cai, , Ringler, , and Zhu,  (2017), “Hydropower versus irrigation—An analysis
of global patterns”, Environmental Research Letters, Vol 12/, article 034006,
47 ANNEX  Solar PV and wind potential in the Kyrgyz Republic This report
presents the results of an assessment conducted by the International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA) to identify promising land areas in the Kyrgyz Republic
for utility-scale solar and wind power development Zoning assessments are
generally conducted to support transmission planning Specifically, they allow: •
• analysis of the quality of the solar and wind resources across the country
(theoretical potential); identification of most suitable areas for solar
photovoltaic (PV) and onshore wind development by considering renewable
resources alongside technical, financial and socio-environmental criteria; • • •
identification of potential sites for solar PV and onshore wind farms;
identification of suitable zones for grid integration; and examination of
opportunities for cost-effective solar PV and onshore wind development Approach
The suggested approach to conducting the zoning assessment is outlined below
Data setting The required input data to conduct the zoning assessment for solar
PV and onshore wind development relate to renewable resources, infrastructure,
land and terrain features (Table A1) Such data are of great importance in
mapping the suitability index and defining suitable zones for each technology
The annual solar and wind data – specifically the global horizontal irradiation
or wind speed – is the most important dataset in evaluating the theoretical
potential of an area for developing renewable energy projects (Figures A1 and
A2) The required data also include infrastructure and socio-environmental
datasets – on transmission lines, topography, protected areas, land use and
population growth – which help in determining the technical potential Table A1
Data requirements Date setting Solar resource Yearly global horizontal
irradiation (GHI) ESMAP Hourly global horizontal irradiation (GHI) MERRA2 Wind
resources - meteorology Yearly 100  wind speed (WS) Technical University of
Denmark (DTU) Weather variables ERA5 Technical, financial and socio-
environmental data Electrical network OpenStreetMap Road network Global roads
inventory project (GRIP) Topography Shuttle radar topography mission (STRM)
Population density Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Protected areas World
Database on Protected Areas ((WDPA) Land cover Global Land Cover map (GlobCover)
Note: ERA5 = European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts’ fifth
generation atmospheric reanalysis; ESMAP = Energy Sector Management Assistance
Program; MERRA2 = Modern-Era Retrospective analysis for Research and
Applications, Version  48 Figure A1 Global horizontal irradiation Global
horizontal irradiation Annual average kWh/m2 < = 900 900 -  000  000 -  100  100
-  200  200 -  300  300 -  400  400 -  500  500 -  600  600 -  700 >  700
Source: IRENA (2021b); Global Atlas (2022) Map data: World Bank; ESMAP 2021;
United Nations administrative boundaries Disclaimer: This map is provided for
illustration purposes only Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply
the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any
region, country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning
the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries Note: kWh/m2 = kilowatt hour per
square metre Figure A2 Wind speed at 100  height Wind speed at 100m height
Annual average / < =   -   -   -   -   - 10 > 10 Source: IRENA (2021b); Global
Atlas (2022) Map data: Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 2021; United
Nations administrative boundaries Disclaimer: This map is provided for
illustration purposes only Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply
the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any
region, country, territory, city or area, or of its authorities, or concerning
the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries Note: / = metre per second 49
Suitability assessment The suitability assessment is  multicriteria decision
analysis based on  geographic information system (GIS) that establishes the
technical potential13 of an area to host utility-scale renewable energy projects
These areas are assessed by combining renewable theoretical potential14 with
technical (electrical grid network, slope), and socio-environmental (protected
areas, land features and population growth) criteria, using  weighted linear
combination approach The output of this assessment is  suitability map for every
square kilometre (km2) of land in the country (wherein highly suitable areas
have high suitability index values) (Figures  and ) The calculation of this map
requires: • specifying the lower bound (lowest score % for the least favourable
area) and upper bound (highest score 100% for the most favourable area) values
for each criterion; • defining hypothetical weights for each criterion (38
resource, 33 grid distance, 13 distance to the road, 11 population density, 05
slope); • • scoring every kilometre of the considered criteria following the
assumption and thresholds set; aggregating all criteria using  weighted linear
combination to calculate the suitability index for every square kilometre; and •
excluding protected areas and land cover to refine suitable areas complying with
national legislation Clustering assessment  clustering technique has been used
to create defined zones around the country to host utility-scale projects The
output of this clustering is  zone map showing prospective areas of sizes
varying from  km2 to 10 km2 for solar and  km2 to 215 km2 for wind (Figures  and
, respectively) The extraction of this map requires various assumptions to
define the resulting zones (Table A2) The steps completed are as follows: •
specifying the cut-off suitability values for solar PV (%) and wind (83%) as
well as the maximum concentration capacity ( 000 megawatts) and land discount
factor (%); • • identifying adjacent areas with  suitability index higher than
the cut-off value; and grouping adjacent suitable cells into definitive clusters
or prospective development zones Provisional results Based on public datasets
and reasonable assumptions, the provisional results obtained suggest the
following: • • Wind zones are clustered in the southern region of Osh along the
border with Tajikistan, northern and southern regions of Naryn and the southern
region of Issyk-Kul Other sparse clusters are found in western Batken and
southern Chuy (Table A3) Solar PV zones are clustered in the southern region of
Osh along the river Kyzyl-Suu (Table A2) Table A2 Utility-scale solar
photovoltaic zones Latitude (°) Longitude (°) Capacity (MW) Distance to grid
(km) Distance to road (km) Mean suitability Area (km2) Zone  56 45 10 250 99 57
73  56 40  225 99 90 73  62 66  175 11 11 73 Note: km2 = square kilometre; MW =
megawatt 13 Potential considering theoretical and supplementary information
considering technical constraints to deploy projects 14 Resource availability
sufficient to deploy projects 50 Table A3 Wind zones Latitude (°) Longitude (°)
Capacity (MW) Distance to grid (km) Distance to road (km) Mean suitability Area
(km2) Zone  91 73  18 98 63 84  29 96 17 43 83 50 84  28 07 12 30 22 99 85 11 89
20 30 98 84  93 05  18 98 12 84  86 04 35 88 51 81 84  65 55 42 105 97 98 85  64
39 15 38 57 40 84  60 36 102 255 79 62 85  58 55  15 79 48 83 10 51 25 10 25 51
52 84 11 49 42 20 50 33 83 84 12 97 26  20 01 13 84 13 84 18  18 73 00 83 14 75
14 42 105 79 52 85 15 70 73  23 22 64 84 16 65 63 23 58 14 14 86 17 58 62 59 148
28 28 84 18 50 86 17 43 18 38 84 19 78 25 18 45 49 05 85 20 78 35 27 68 08 20 84
21 74 57 44 110 18 18 85 22 72 20  15 90 99 85 23 02 44  18 79 57 83 24 00 50 20
50 83 47 85 25 97 61  20 07 99 84 26 72 90 12 30 24 11 85 27 68 86 10 25 63 99
84 28 66 92 12 30 06 05 85 29 00 93 10 25 95 47 84 30 85 08  18 51 11 85 31 84
18  23 98 40 85 32 81 09  18 29 29 86 33 82 16  20 05 05 86 34 67 11 138 345 28
01 86 35 63 99 64 160 81 90 85 36 52 13 215 538 58 47 86 37 Note: km2 = square
kilometre; MW = megawatt 51 83 65 23 58 93 21 84 38 85 55 18 45 27 83 85 39 73
69  18 47 47 84 40 71 49 12 30 06 92 84 41 68 46 29 73 11 90 85 42 63 48 39 98
53 99 86 43 61 39 20 50 79 11 88 44 53 33 14 35 98 98 86 45 20 37 40 100 45 45
84 46 15 50 100 250 97 69 85 47 11 39 89 223 82 25 85 48 05 66 11 28 67 40 84 49
99 56 44 110 08 08 85 50 00 67 24 60 68 31 85 51 92 74 62 155 10 45 85 52 93 59
15 40 40 84 53 87 61 60 150 08 58 85 54 80 81 36 90 49 33 86 55 76 71 76 190 25
58 86 56 61 68  15 51 17 83 57 80 91 108 270 58 55 85 58 84 15  18 55 57 83 59
66 13 14 35 98 42 84 60 65 00 17 43 12 90 84 61 64 82  20 57 22 84 62 60 82 59
148 28 88 86 63 62 95 30 75 68 71 86 64 57 10 71 178 62 73 84 65 62 71  18 81 55
84 66 51 95 20 50 89 98 84 67 51 82 16 40 98 49 84 68 08 11 12 30 21 22 84 69 02
01  20 61 72 83 70 96 96 45 113 48 75 85 71 90 93 19 48 72 30 84 72 89 84 11 28
99 24 84 73 88 72  20 99 32 84 74 61 26 24 60 81 80 84 75 56 26 16 40 90 86 83
76 02 14 20 50 12 38 84 77 Note: km2 = square kilometre; MW = megawatt 52 53