Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/ERI/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  In 1991 Eritrea emerged from
nearly 30 years of armed struggle for independence from Ethiopia; its
independence was formalized in  1993 referendum The country enjoyed  short
period of state consolidation and development before plunging into  border war
with Ethiopia that lasted from May 1998 to June Even after the formal end of the
war through the Algiers Peace Agreement, Eritrea experienced  tense 18-year
period, described as  time of ‘no war, no peace’, in  period of imposed
international sanctions These events delayed the process of nation-building  The
socioeconomic and political challenges were aggravated as focus shifted away
from the pursuit of  sustainable development agenda to security and sovereignty
concerns Within this historical context, Eritrea is pursuing its current
national priorities, which include reducing poverty, ensuring food security,
addressing environmental degradation, strengthening disaster risk management,
conserving biodiversity, enhancing capacity for competent public service
delivery, empowering women and mobilizing required resources Responding to these
national priorities is critical for the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals  Achieving the priorities requires sustained economic growth
However, between 2000 and 2020, gross domestic product growth rates averaged
about 93 per cent1 with  record low of –17 per cent in The highest rates were
recorded in 2001 (76 per cent) and 2011 (68 per cent) The country registered
growth rate of  per cent in 2019, which dropped to  per cent in 2020, but there
is  positive projection of  per cent for About 58 per cent of the population is
currently living below the poverty line The poverty is accentuated by the fact
that 65 per cent of the population lives in rural areas and depends
predominantly on rainfed agriculture for livelihood  The country is ranked 180
out of 189 countries in the 2020 Human Development Report, with  Human
Development Index score of It is off-track to achieve the Goals by The gender
equality score is low, at , and exemplified by  high maternal mortality ratio of
480 per 100,000 live births6, though the government contest that according to
“estimates” from the Ministry of Health of Eritrea, the maternal mortality ratio
stood at 258 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2018 and 184 per 100,000 live
births in  Relations with Ethiopia began to thaw in July 2018, following the
signing of the Joint Declaration of Peace and Friendship7 and subsequent lifting
of international sanctions This raised the prospect that Eritrea could once
again resume its quest for sustainable peace and development  The improved
relations with Ethiopia also provide an unprecedented opportunity for regional
integration, investment and trade However, while Eritrea forges ahead to improve
ties with Ethiopia and other countries in the region, events in Ethiopia have
implications for Eritrea’ stated interest in improving regional peace, security,
trade and integration These events include the conflict in Tigray, the border
tension between Ethiopia and Sudan, and the unresolved dispute on the use of the
Nile waters among Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt  Furthermore, allegations of
involvement by Eritrea in the Tigray conflict could have implications for its
international re-engagement and partnership building and the financing
environment for the Goals Though there are opportunities within the emerging
context, Eritrea faces daunting systemic challenges that impede its development
pathway These   accessed 22 April  accessed 22 April  accessed 22 April   IIAG
Index, Human Development Report  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ include the limited capacity of
institutions to fulfil their mandates and lagging formulation and implementation
of policies and regulations The coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) has had severe
socioeconomic impacts, especially in the informal sector It has stressed social
safety nets and added to the complexity of the country’ development challenges,
namely: () Lack of requisite institutions with the capacities to lead and
sustain development in the medium to long term () Environmental degradation and
climate change, which have undermined ecosystem resilience, hampering food
security and livelihoods among households and communities dependent on natural
resources Unpredictable weather hampers the ability of ecosystems to support
resilient and sustainable livelihoods It also contributes to water scarcity,
land degradation, natural hazards and disasters, exacerbating human
vulnerabilities and social, economic and gender disparities () Lack of
inclusive, diversified and sustainable economic growth The macroeconomic outlook
has been constrained by  tight fiscal space, worsened by limited development
assistance and foreign direct investment The economy has relied on the
monetization of debt, contributing to significant debt overhang and inflationary
pressures The estimated debt-to-gross domestic product ratio is about 267 per
cent, making Eritrea one of the most heavily indebted countries Eritrea also
faces supply-side constraints due to dependence on exports of  few commodities
and agricultural raw materials, which are susceptible to external shocks While
the national unemployment rate stands at  per cent, close to per cent of the
population has vulnerable employment, and the informal economy accounts for per
cent of total employment Youth unemployment, at  per cent, is above the national
average () The commendable strategy of self-reliance, which heavily influences
the Eritrea approach to external development support and engagement with
development partners, and which took root during the independence struggle and
subsequent period of isolation This history underpins its hesitancy in accepting
partners and development support, making the country particularly susceptible to
oscillating relations with development partners The challenge for UNDP remains
how to continue  healthy dialogue and build trust with the Government to ensure
sufficient support for the Goals in  manner that respects Eritrean dignity and
aspirations () The critical need for relevant, current data to inform policy-
and decision-making The lack of high-quality sex-disaggregated data continues to
affect the monitoring and reporting of the Goals Due to repurposing and
reprioritization of programme funds prompted by COVID-19, there was  shortfall
in implementation of the big data agenda10 in the previous programme cycle The
planned update of the Eritrea Population and Health Survey was deferred The last
one was produced in 2010 with UNDP support and is the only government-
recognized reference available for development planning  Enhancing the
capacities of key institutions to address these challenges will have  catalytic
impact on the country’ ability to ensure service delivery and realize its
national vision In the context of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF ), UNDP is strategically positioned to offer
policy, operational and programme support for nation-building, targeting
priority areas jointly identified with the Government: Pillar , on human
development and well-being, and Pillar II, on an inclusive, diversified, green
and climate-resilient economy Of the four outcomes in the UNSDCF the UNDP
country programme will prioritize three outcomes, one under Pillar  and two
under Pillar II  See IMF Article IV Consultations in 2019  International Labour
Organization, 2019, 10 Country programme document output : National institutions
are able to collect, analyse and use data for planning and decision-making,
including for Goals implementation (Joint Programme: UNFPA is the lead agency,
and UNDP, UNICEF, WHO and ILO are participating agencies)  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ The
priority areas are also aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan (),11 the  Africa
Agenda 2063, Agenda 2030, the UNDP Gender Strategy  and the renewed UNDP Africa
Offer, which prioritizes six impact areas12 and six associated critical
foundational enablers13 UNDP will exploit its comparative advantage and its
integrator role as the leading development agency to support implementation of
the UNSDCF Specifically, the country office will harness UNDP corporate tools
and instruments — among others, the UNDP Africa Promise, the renewed COVID
Response , the Global Policy Network and the regional thematic hubs — to work
with partners in providing tangible development solutions The country office
will also support mainstreaming, localization and financing of the Goals; invest
in data and statistics for tracking, monitoring and reporting development
results; and establish support platforms to accelerate implementation of the
Goals This will draw on collaboration with United Nations organizations through
Delivering as One and implementation of global collaborative compacts Building
on the experience of the  country programme and the findings of its terminal
evaluation, UNDP will work to ensure the relevance, coherence, effectiveness,
efficiency and sustainability of the country programme Lessons from the previous
programme demonstrate the imperative of balancing upstream and downstream
support, avoiding fragmentation and expansion of interventions, enacting
national monitoring and evaluation framework, and addressing delays in programme
delivery The new country programme also takes into consideration the long-term
socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 as outlined in the assessment study by the
United Nations country team and within the context of ‘ UN framework for the
immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19’14 In contributing to the response
and recovery, UNDP will aim to build forward better by working to broadly engage
society and the government It will implement ‘digital by default’ and seek new
solutions, applying the principle of leave no one behind and the United Nations
Common Guidance on Helping Build Resilient Societies to strengthen coherence in
resilience-building efforts in support of governments' sustainable development
objectives II Programme priorities and partnerships The  country programme is
aligned with the national priorities (2021); guided by the signature solutions
in the UNDP Strategic Plan () and the renewed Africa Offer; and committed to the
principles of gender equality, leave no one behind and reaching those furthest
behind first Based on the comparative advantage of UNDP and the broad strengths
of the United Nations agencies, and cognizant of the partnerships and donor
landscape in Eritrea, the country programme will support efforts to build strong
and resilient governance institutions, structures and systems that deliver more
effective, efficient and accountable public services It will aim towards  more
inclusive, sustainable and resilient society that can cope with climate change,
disasters and shocks, including COVID-The objective will be to strengthen
systems to address the challenges In working to achieve programme outcomes and
outputs, the focus will be on stronger evidence-based, data-driven programming
and integration across the governance, environment, energy and climate change
sectors The programme will strengthen partnerships with diverse stakeholders
across the Goals, focusing investments in areas that have the potential to
accelerate progress across multiple Goals The programme will support government
efforts to promote regional integration, brokering knowledge and technology
through South-South and triangular cooperation to 11 UNDP Strategic Plan () and
the successor Strategic Plan  The six impact areas: () Natural resource
governance; () structural transformation; () youth and women employment and
empowerment; () climate change mitigation and adaptation; () affordable and
sustainable energy; and () peace and security 13 The six foundational enablers:
() Governance of things; () digital transformation; () sustainable/innovative
financing; () strategic communications and partnerships; () South-South
cooperation; and () development intelligence 14  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ mobilize
domestic resources, exploit alternative financing mechanisms and boost new
sources of financing (public, private, domestic, international) The theory of
change of the country programme is based on the expectation that by the end of
the cycle the people of Eritrea will experience improvements in the delivery of
public services,  more inclusive society and greater resilience to the impacts
of disasters and climate change This will lead to improved well-being among the
citizens and an inclusive, diversified, green and climate-resilient economy
Pillar : Human development and well-being Pillar  concentrates on strengthening
inclusive governance and institutions for development effectiveness and
accountability; improving service provision, civic participation, innovation,
gender equality and respect for human rights and the rule of law; and
consolidating peace It also addresses strengthening the capacity of oversight
institutions and systems to fulfil international commitments and increase
engagement with the regional and international development community The pillar
will drive transformation in public service delivery by targeting key government
institutions, benefiting the Eritrean population at large but focusing more on
youth, women and vulnerable groups UNDP will continue to support the Government
in its efforts to ensure more effective, transparent and accountable governance
for all Eritreans It will collaborate with national and local governments to
link implementation of policies and ensure greater ownership and sustainability
of interventions The country programme prioritizes enablers for successful
including deploying digital solutions, mainly by implementation of
interventions, strengthening the capacity of selected institutions15 The
programme will support development of national statistical capacity to improve
data management This includes making use of new methods for data generation
(disaggregated by sex, gender, age, disability), including ‘big data’ The
programme will promote the establishment of  civil registration system and
gender-sensitive economic indicators and national accounts It will work to
strengthen capacities to adapt the indicator framework of the Sustainable
Development Goals to the national context This will be complemented by efforts
to improve citizen access to data for feedback and learning UNDP will work with
United Nations organizations and other development partners to address data gaps
crucial for national development planning UNDP will promote inclusive access to
timely and effective justice through support to -justice systems, community
courts and paralegal services More emphasis will be given to strengthening the
technical and financial capabilities of the office of the Attorney General and
law enforcement institutions to improve transparency and accountability UNDP
will continue to support national efforts to implement the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and prepare the
Universal Periodic Review report, including by developing implementation plans
and strengthening coordination These are important anchors to advance human
rights In line with the Gender Equality Strategy (, and its successor), UNDP
will support the Government to produce baseline data on gender, designate and
train gender focal points in government offices, and advocate for gender
equality and mainstreaming UNDP will contribute to the Eritrea regional
integration agenda through trade facilitation, to maximize efficiency and
competitiveness in customs clearance and improve the quality of international
trade data UNDP will partner with the International Organization for Migration
(IOM) to support the development of  diaspora policy/strategy and  policy
framework on diaspora investments, bonds and remittances This will harness the
knowledge of Eritrean professionals around the logistics support and capacity-
building 15 National Statistics Office, Office of Auditor General, Ministry of
Justice, Ministry of Information, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of
Finance and National Development, and National Confederation of Eritrean Workers
/12 DP/DCP/ERI/ world to strengthen capacities in ministries and public
institutions, including mobilization of financial resources for development
Pillar II: Inclusive, diversified, green and climate-resilient economy UNDP’
contribution in Pillar II will be to help strengthen public sector institutions
for inclusive, diversified and green growth that is responsive to climate change
It will help public sector institutions in developing investment policies and
strategies to support micro, small and medium-scale enterprises (MSMEs), and
within the context of green recovery from COVID-The interventions will also
ensure that people have the capacity to adopt technologies and practices that
support economic growth and livelihoods at local and national levels Such
support will aid the identification of robust value chains and market access for
MSMEs With the goal of inclusive and diversified growth, UNDP will work to
enable rural men and women of all ages to equitably access and sustainably
utilize natural resources to improve their livelihoods Protecting natural
resources will be  crucial element of this pillar UNDP will provide policy and
programmatic support for improving access to equitable, affordable and efficient
renewable and clean energy, enabling communities to respond and adapt to risks
and shocks induced by climate change Collaborating with United Nations and other
development entities, UNDP will work to remove barriers and provide support to
build robust, diversified and integrated value chains in agriculture, focusing
on MSMEs, especially those involving youth and women Improving agricultural
value chains will lead to better market linkages for farmers Smallholder farmers
and the agriculture sector as  whole will benefit from the virtuous circle of
improvements in value chains and productivity Partnering with civil society
organizations, relevant United Nations entities, the private sector and
financial institutions, UNDP will support young entrepreneurs to build and
diversify their enterprises and adopt new and inclusive business models It will
also facilitate the creation of more productive green jobs for women and youth
in formal and informal businesses UNDP will foster establishment of platforms to
help young women and men to improve their vocational, business and financial
literacy UNDP will support the Government and communities in building resilience
to shocks and crises induced by natural hazards and other events, such as
droughts, epidemics, conflicts and economic crises As part of COVID-19 recovery,
UNDP will partner with the Government to aid in managing these risks by
strengthening the social safety net to help people to cope with transitory
poverty UNDP will strengthen national capacities for crisis response and post-
crisis recovery, evidence-based climate change adaptation, early warning,
disaster risk reduction and social protection UNDP will address biodiversity
loss in  gender-based and sustainable way by tackling market, policy and
governance failures that have led to ecosystem degradation and loss of
livelihoods UNDP will collaborate with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO), United Nations Environment Programme, International
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), IOM and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs It will also strengthen its partnership
with the Global Environment Facility and Green Climate Fund, the Poverty-
Environment Initiative and the United Nations Collaborative Programme on
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing
Countries UNDP will advocate for gender-responsive, pro-poor economic growth and
environmental sustainability in all economic policies, planning systems and
institutions for managing natural resources and maintaining ecosystems UNDP will
promote access to clean and affordable energy by rural and poor urban people for
sustainable development that is responsive to their needs, consistent with Goal
aspirations UNDP will also support promotion of innovations in renewable, clean
and  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ affordable energy for economic and social development In
delivering this solution, UNDP will work closely with relevant United Nations
entities under the UN energy framework and the Sustainable Energy for All
initiative The transition to efficient, clean and affordable energy will also
help the country to reduce consumption of biomass and diesel fuels, thereby
reducing the harmful impacts of indoor and outdoor air pollution, particularly
for women and children III Programme and risk management This country programme
document outlines UNDP’ contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountability for managers
at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country
programmes is prescribed in the organization’ Programme and Operations Policies
and Procedures and Internal Control Framework The programme will be nationally
executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution
for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The
harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in coordination with other
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects New implementing partners will be assessed for their
capacity to execute projects, which will inform cash transfer modality
Identified risks will be mitigated through training and implementation of robust
assurance measures such as spot checks, field visits and joint monitoring From
the 2019 audit by the Office of Audit and Investigation and the  country
programme terminal evaluation, potential risks were identified that could pose
threat to the smooth implementation of the programme They include () limited
absorptive capacity of national institutions and human capacity to deliver on
results, () changing government priorities and institutional arrangements in the
course of implementation, () limited access to resources, () regional conflict
and () ongoing restrictions due to COVID-The country office will work to
strengthen enterprise risk management including through conducting social and
environmental impact assessments for all projects, strengthening capacities (of
both people and institutions), and seeking new financing sources and programming
in new areas such as social protection and regional integration Though hampered
by limited internet penetration in Eritrea and the digital focus of service
delivery platforms, the country office will strive to implement the digital by
default tools to enhance service delivery The SCF-country programme Partnerships
and Communications Action Plan will be designed in collaboration with the United
Nations country team, emphasizing results-oriented communication to mobilize
resources The country office will make use of the capacities of UNDP regional
and headquarters bureaux and collaborate with the Government to mobilize
resources jointly The country office will further explore partnerships with
regional and international financial institutions, the private sector,
multilateral and bilateral organizations, funding windows, emerging donors,
foundations and the African Union to expand the programme portfolio Recognizing
the limited donor landscape in Eritrea, the midterm evaluation of the country
programme and regular tracking of the programme’ resource mobilization pipeline
will provide evidence for needed adjustments Implementation of the office’
financial sustainability plan will be monitored in line with Executive Board
Decision 2013/ UN joint programming instruments and UNDP costs incurred in
implementing development activities will be charged to the relevant projects
/12 DP/DCP/ERI/ IV Monitoring and evaluation In alignment with the UNSDCF
monitoring and evaluation framework, UNDP will make investments to invigorate
the contribution of the country programme to big data, national development and
the Goals The Ministry of Finance and National Development (MFND) and UNDP will
co-lead selected working groups for the outcomes under this programme and will
undertake more inclusive and gender-sensitive monitoring, assurance and progress
reviews to inform evidence-based decision-making Considering the paucity of data
in the country, UNDP will support development of national capacity and efforts
to produce quality country data and studies Sources of information will include
the Human Development Report and Goals reports; thematic studies on youth and
employment and climatic change adaptation; and establishment of monitoring
baselines for relevant Goals UNDP will take an active role in the United Nations
Monitoring and Evaluation Working Group in collaboration with multilateral and
bilateral development partners The aim will be to strengthen national monitoring
and evaluation systems to gradually build up data collection and analysis
Indicators, baselines and targets will be established that are specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time- based Missing baseline data will be
collected during the first quarter of Project evaluations in the evaluation plan
meet all established criteria The UNDP Gender Marker will be used to improve
planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality At least  per cent of
programme resources will be earmarked for monitoring, evaluation and
assessments/research Outcome-level monitoring, assurance and evaluation will be
undertaken in partnership with other United Nations organizations and
development partners Performance will be tracked regularly; data and evidence
will be analysed to inform decision-making Regular monitoring activities will
take place, including periodic field visits, quarterly progress and financial
reports, quarterly output progress reviews, joint annual reviews and bi-annual
outcome progress reviews The midterm review and independent country programme
evaluation will be conducted to inform the contribution of the programme to
development goals and outcomes, and to shape policy, strategies, programme
design and implementation The costed evaluation plan includes project and
portfolio evaluations as well as the midterm review and the SCF terminal
evaluation The goal is to capture lessons learned in the course of the country
programme and inform the next programme cycle  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ Annex Results and
resources framework for Eritrea () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: To become  country
where peace, justice, democracy and prosperity prevail To eliminate hunger,
poverty and illiteracy from Eritrea For Eritrea to preserve its identity and
uniqueness UN Vision:  peaceful, prosperous, resilient, inclusive and socially
just society by  SCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, Eritrea’ public sector
institutions are more accountable and efficient, and more people enjoy the right
to development RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE, FREQUENCY, RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNER/SHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED
COST BY OUTCOME ($) Output  Technical capacity of data-producing institutions
increased to collect, manage, analyse, package and utilize data to improve
learning, monitoring and evaluation and for decision-making • Indicative
indicator  Number of sectors with data collection/analysis mechanisms providing
disaggregated (sex, age, disability) data to monitor progress towards Goals and
other international frameworks with direct bearing on achievement of Goals,
including financing-related data Baseline (2010): ; Target (year):   Indicator
Dollar value of all resources spent to strengthen statistical • Data sources:
Annual reports, National Statistics Office report institutions (Goal ) Baseline
(2018): $130,775; Target (2023): ≥ 262,000 Indicator  Per cent of the population
satisfied with their last experience of public services (Goal ) Baseline (2010):
To be confirmed (TBC) Target (2023): > 50% MFND, United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), International Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa, European Union • • • Indicative indicator  National
accounts established, disaggregated (sex, age, disability) Baseline (2021): No;
Target (2026): Yes Responsibility: Ministries of Finance and National
Development, Gender, and Industry, Information and Auditor General Office
Regular: 13,500,000 Other: ,744,000 Output  Public institutions have
strengthened processes and systems for equitable, efficient, effective and
accountable service delivery Trade  Indicator  Per cent of governance
institutions perceived as of high integrity and performance (IIAG index)
Baseline (2019): % Target (2026): 52% Indicator  Number of new functional
systems/tools/procedures successfully developed/implemented for accountable
service delivery Baseline (2021):  – Automated System for Customs Data
(ASYCUDA); Target (2026):  - ASYCUDA world Frequency: Annual Indicator  Level of
audit compliance with international standards Baseline (2021): ; Target ():
Indicator  Per cent of ministry audits with performance-based assessment
Baseline (2021): 30%; Target (2026): 45% Indicator : Level of awareness of Goals
and civic participation in national development process Baseline (2021): low ()
Target (2026): adequate ()  /12 DP/DCP/ERI/ Output  Justice and legislative
institutions have technical and financial capacity to deliver inclusive, gender-
responsive, accountable and equitable services including international
commitments Indicator  Implementation rate of frameworks and instruments (legal
etc) in place to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence at all
levels (under-age marriage, female genital mutilation etc; Strategic Plan
Indicator ) Baseline (2020): /100 (IIAG Index); Target >25  Indicator  Per cent
of the population felt reporting having • discriminated against or harassed
within the previous 12 months based on  form of discrimination prohibited under
international human rights law personally Data sources; Ministry (MOJ), of
Universal Periodic Review report, National Union of Eritrean Women Justice MOJ,
UNFPA, United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Indicator : Number of backlogged court cases heard Baseline
(2021): ,415; Target (2026): 500 Baseline (2020):  (IIAG Index; TBC) • Target
(2023): > 25% • As above Responsibility: MOJ Indicative indicator : Existence of
an operational and gender-responsive case flow management information system
Baseline (2021): No; Target (2026): Yes  Indicator  Gender Equality Index
Frequency: Annual & Biennial (Goal )  Baseline (2020): (IIAG Index)  Target
(2023): > Indicator  Per cent of accepted Universal Periodic Review
recommendations implemented Baseline (2021): 87%; Target (2026): 95% Indicators
: Number of CEDAW recommendations implemented Baseline (2021): ; Target (2026):
SCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, Eritreans, especially disadvantaged
populations, have increased livelihoods as economic growth becomes more
inclusive and diversified RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance
poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions Output  Capacity of public
sector institutions strengthened to develop gender-responsive investment
policies and strategies to support MSMEs  Indicator  Per cent of population
below the national and international poverty line, by sex, age, employment
status location (urban/rural) (Goal , ) Baseline: TBC; Targets: TBC MFND,
Ministries of Agriculture, Trade and, Industry, Marine Resources, Justice, Land,
Water and Environment, Local Government; Office of Auditor General; National
Confederation of Eritrean Workers, National Union of Eritrean Youth and Students
and National Union of Eritrean Women Indicator  Number of gender-responsive
investment policies and strategies developed and implemented at national and
subnational levels Baseline17 (2021): ; Target (2026):  sources: Sector Data
ministry reports geographic and Responsibility: Ministries of Finance and
National Development, Agriculture, Marine Resources, Trade and National
Industry; Confederation of Eritrean Workers; and others Output  Capacity of
institutions and people strengthened to adopt and use integrated, new
technologies and practices that support economic growth and livelihoods
Indicator  Unemployment rate by sex, age and persons with disability (Goal )
Baseline: 14 (Goals Index16 2020) Target:  Regular: 10,695,000 Other: ,200,000 •
Indicator  Number of smallholders’ MSMEs supported with new technology and
financing solutions to enhance their livelihoods (Integrated results and
resources framework: ) Baseline (2020): ; Target: 200 (100 female-led)
Indicator  Per cent of productive areas under sustainable agriculture and marine
resources (Goal ) Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC • • Frequency: Annual Indicator
Number of new decent jobs (formal and informal) generated, disaggregated by sex
(Goal ) Baseline: 604 (Country programme document terminal evaluation, 2020);
Target: 10,000 (,000 female, ,000 male) 16  17 , not established; , initiated; ,
low functional; , high functional; , fully functional  10 DP/DCP/ERI/ Output
Skills and capacity of people, especially those with disabilities, women and
youth, enhanced to access diversified livelihoods and employability options
Indicator  Average income of small-scale businesses, by sex and geographic area
(SDG ) • Indicator  Number of vulnerable persons with disabilities, women and
youth who acquire new skills for entrepreneurship development Baseline: ,617
(2019 progress reports/country programme document terminal evaluation 2020)
Target:10,000 (,000 female, 5000 male)  Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC   Indicator
Per cent of population covered protection floors/systems, by sex, distinguishing
children, unemployed persons, older persons, persons with disabilities, pregnant
women, newborns, work- injury victims and poor and vulnerable people (Goal )
Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC UNDP, United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO), UNICEF, UNFPA, FAO, ILO, UN-Women and others by social
Output  Technical and operational capacities of the Government and associations
of MSMEs enhanced to develop inclusive value chains and market access in
agriculture As above As above • • Indicator  Extent18 to which agricultural
value chain systems are developed and functional Baseline (2020): ; Target
(2024):    Indicator  National response rate to socioeconomic impact of COVID-19
Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC • Indicator  Number of strategies developed and
implemented to access markets by MSMEs Baseline (2020): ; Target (2023):   SCF
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, people in Eritrea have benefited from
climate-resilient, sustainable environment and natural resources management
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty eradication in all
its forms and dimensions Output  Capacity of national, subnational and
community-level institutions is strengthened to sustainably manage and use
biodiversity, environmental and natural resources and reduce disaster risks and
their impacts  Indicator  Per cent of population negatively impacted by natural
and human-caused disasters Baseline: TBC Target: TBC sources: Sector Data
ministry reports MFND, Ministries of Agriculture, Trade and Industry, Marine
Resources, Land, Water and Environment, Local Government; National Union of
Eritrean Youth and Students and National Union of Eritrean Women • Indicator :
Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas Baseline (2021):
hectares; Target (2026): 880,000 hectares Responsibility: Ministries of Finance
and National Development, Land, Water and Environment, Agriculture, Trade and
Industry • Indicator : Area under sustainable forest management Baseline (2021):
574,000 hectares; Target (2026): 674,000 hectares Regular: ,556,000 Other:
21,500,000  Indicator  Proportion of terrestrial, marine and inland resources
conserved for biodiversity and ecosystem services by forest cover (Goal and )
Baseline: 34 (2018) Target: > 00 Output  Men, women and youth in rural areas are
enabled to manage and utilize natural resources equitably and sustainably to
improve livelihoods • • Frequency: Annually Indicator : Total number of
additional men, women and youth of all ages benefiting from strengthened
livelihoods through solutions for management of natural resources, ecosystems
Baseline (2021): 152,280; Target (2026): 325,000 (equal proportions of male,
female and youth) • 18 , not established; , initiated; , low functional; , high
functional; , fully functional  11 DP/DCP/ERI/ • Indicator : Per cent of women
participating in local decision-making processes related to natural resources
management (disaggregated by age and disability) Baseline (2021): 10%; Target
(2026): 30% Output  Capacities of public institutions and communities are
enhanced to mitigate, adapt to and mainstream climate change and disaster risks
into development programmes Indicator : Number of key public institutions with
integrated climate adaptation and climate-related disaster risk reduction
strategies and action plans Baseline (2021): ; Target (2026):  Data sources:
Sector ministry reports, Human Development Report, Goals reports Indicator :
Number of key public institutions enabled to integrate mitigation, adaptation
and disaster risk reduction into sector strategies and programmes Baseline
(2021): ; Target (2026):   Indicator  Prevalent vulnerability and Risk
Management Index (Red List Index) Baseline: 893 Target: 900 (TBC) UNDP, Global
Environment Facility, FAO, IFAD, African Development Bank, UNIDO, UNICEF, UNFPA,
FAO, ILO, UN-Women, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization Responsibility: Ministries of Finance and National Development,
Land, Water and Environment, Agriculture, Trade and Industry Indicator : Number
of communities with operational development plans that explicitly address
climate-related hazards and disaster risk Baseline (2021): 20; Target (2026):50
As above  Indicator  Share of total energy (renewable and non- consumption
renewable) (Goal ) Baseline: 42 (2020)19 Target: > 60% Indicator : Number of
targeted communities that have operational and effective integrated water
resources management systems in place Baseline (2021): 30; Target (2026): 50
Frequency: Annually • Output  Access to modern, renewable and affordable clean
energy sources and services increased Indicator : Per cent of population with
access to clean fuels and technology for cooking Baseline: 32% (Goals 2020)
Target:> 50% • • Indicator : Per cent of population with access to electricity
Baseline (201620): 42%; Target (2026): >50% 19  20 Ibid  12