/ICEF//10 United Nations Economic and Social Council Distr: Limited 19 December
2022 Original: English English, French and Spanish only For decision United
Nations Children’ Fund Executive Board First regular session 2023 –10 February
2023 Item  () of the provisional agenda* Country programme document Lebanon
Summary The country programme document (CPD) for Lebanon is presented to the
Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, on  no-
objection basis The CPD includes  proposed aggregate indicative budget of
$,586,000 from regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and
$766,479,000 in other resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose
contributions, for the period March 2023 to December * /ICEF/  () 211222
*2228306* /ICEF//10 Programme rationale  Children living in Lebanon find
themselves at  precarious juncture after  series of shocks, including economic
collapse, political instability, the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic, as well as the devastating explosions at the Port of Beirut in August
2020, which caused losses of more than $ billion The national gross domestic
product plummeted from $52 billion in 2019 to $22 billion in The country is now
classified as “lower-middle income” after 27 years as part of the upper-middle-
income group  Currency devaluation contributed to hyperinflation, forecast at
181 per cent in The availability and quality of social services has
substantially deteriorated International support, including  $ billion package
from the International Monetary Fund, is contingent on Lebanon implementing key
reforms required for  sustainable recovery  Children, people with disabilities,
girls and women are among those most affected by these crises Hard-won progress
in the realization of their rights is being rapidly reversed While no recent
national data on poverty are available, models suggest that the proportion of
the population living in multidimensional poverty may have doubled from 39 per
cent in 2019 to 81 per cent in 2021, affecting  million children Social
protection interventions are limited in coverage and benefits, with just  per
cent of the Lebanese population receiving any type of non-contributory transfer,
exacerbating deprivations The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities, expected to be ratified soon in Lebanon, will provide  basis
for strengthening the national legal framework Lebanon ranks ninety-sixth on the
gender inequality index Few data sources provide gendered analysis, particularly
for younger populations  In addition to Palestinian refugees, some  million
Syrian refugees live in Lebanon Refugees are among the most vulnerable groups,
with an estimated 90 per cent of refugee families living in extreme poverty,
substantial increase from 55 per cent in  The national health system is
fragmented, and 80 per cent of hospitals are privately owned Primary health care
is not prioritized: 71 per cent of state funding is allocated to secondary and
tertiary care The national health system has been heavily impacted by the crises
and faces major financial and operational challenges Forty per cent of doctors
have left the country,10 including specialists in maternal and newborn
__________________  World Bank, Beirut Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment –
August 2020, World Bank, Lebanon Economic Monitor, Fall 2021: The Great Denial,
World Bank, “World Bank Country and Lending Groups”, Country classification,
July Available at  country-and-lending-groups  Economist Intelligence Unit,
Lebanon country report, August United Nations Economic Commission for West Asia,
Multidimensional poverty in Lebanon (2019–2021), Painful reality and uncertain
prospects, September United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and International
Labour Organization (ILO), Towards  Social Protection Floor for Lebanon, Policy
options and costs for core life-cycle social grants, providing concrete
recommendations for an integrated crisis resp onse in Lebanon  Lebanon and
United Nations, Lebanon Crisis Response Plan 2022–2023, January Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF and World Food Programme,
VASyR 2021, Vulnerability assessment of Syrian refugees in Lebanon; VASyR
Institute of Health Management and Social Protection, World Health Organization
(WHO) and Lebanon Ministry of Public Health, National Health Statistics Report
in Lebanon, Beirut, 10 WHO, September 2021, Joint statement by WHO Director-
General and Regional Director for Eastern Mediterranean Region on Lebanon,
September Available at  director-general-and-dr-ahmed-al-mandhari-regional-
director-for-the-eastern-mediterranean- on-lebanonhtml /17  /ICEF//10 care One
in three children, irrespective of nationality, does not receiv  the required
three doses of the diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus (DPT) vaccine11  Lebanon is
experiencing  growing triple burden of malnutrition (stunting, micronutrient
deficiencies, and obesity) among children and adolescents and high rates of
undernutrition among women The prevalence of stunting for children aged –59
months is  per cent nationally,12 compared with 25 per cent among Syrian
refugees in informal settlements,13 an increase from 17 per cent in 14 In camps
hosting Palestinian populations, the prevalence of acute malnutrition among
children under  years of age is  per cent, compared with  per cent among
Lebanese children15 Acute malnutrition among pregnant and lactating women is
also highest in Palestinian camps ( per cent) and among Syrian refugees in
settlements ( per cent) More than 40 per cent of women of reproductive age and
children aged –59 months have anaemia  study of children 12–18 years old found
higher prevalence of overweight and obesity among boys (per cent) compared to
per cent among girls16 Some 94 per cent of children –23 months old are not fed
the minimum diet they need to grow and develop healthily, and 70 per cent of
children under  months of age are not exclusively breastfed17  Access to safely
managed water and sanitation remains low, at 48 per cent and 16 per cent,
respectively, in 18 Recent progress is being reversed due to the reduced
capacity of establishments responsible for water and wastewater systems In 2017,
the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommended improving access to water
and sanitation for disadvantaged communities Residents of informal settlements
remain largely dependent on humanitarian agencies for access to water and
sanitation The impact of climate change poses increasing challenges; annual
precipitation is forecast to decrease by 25 per cent by the end of the century19
Twenty-two per cent of the school-age population in Lebanon were not in school
in 2021,20 while the percentage of out-of-school Syrian children aged ‒18 years
rose from 55 per cent to 63 per cent between 2020 and The severe economic crisis
makes it difficult for the most marginalized children to afford basic costs
including transportation to get to school The lack of good quality provision at
pre-primary level as well as violence in schools, including corporal punishment,
are also key constraints  Only very limited public services are available to
address the needs of children with disabilities, who face challenges integrating
at school The quality of education __________________ 11 WHO and UNICEF,
“Immunization Dashboard Lebanon”, Available at  12 Lebanon Nutrition Sector,
Lebanon National SMART Survey Report, Aug–Sep Available at  rt%pdf 13 Ibid 14
UNICEF, “Joint Nutrition Assessment: Syrian Refugees in Lebanon 2013” (SMART
2013) Available at  lebanon 15 Ibid 16 WHO, Global school-based Student Health
Survey, Available at  17 SMART 18 WHO and UNICEF, Joint Monitoring Programme for
Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene, Lebanon Available at  19 WHO and United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Health and Climate Change:
country profile 2021 – Lebanon, 20 Ministry of Education and Higher Education,
Lebanon General Education -Year Plan (2021– 2025), /17  /ICEF//10 is declining
due to deteriorating learning environments and outdated curricula21 The economic
crisis has had  negative impact on teachers’ salaries and led to  reliance
across the public education system on less-qualified substitute teachers
Overall, teachers in the public formal school system lack an adequate knowledge
of modern pedagogy, especially related to building foundational literacy,
numeracy and transferable skills, including digital literacy  The recent crisis
has heightened protection risks for children and women, including those of
violence, abuse, neglect, exploitation, gender-based violence and harmful
practices During 2021, the share of children aged –17 years who were sent to
work more than doubled, from  per cent to 12 per cent In early 2022, the rate
was at  per cent22  recent survey shows that  per cent of girls aged 15–19 years
were married at the time of the survey23 One in four young people reported often
feeling depressed24 At least 20,000 children live in residential homes, and
institutionalization is likely to increase as families struggle with
deteriorating economic conditions25 Twenty-nine per cent of adolescents and
youth aged 15‒24 years are neither in school, in training nor employed 26
Outdated curricula 27 contribute to  limited acquisition of market-relevant and
future-oriented skills Unemployment among youth aged 15‒24 years has risen from
23 per cent in 2019 to 48 per cent in 28 Young people and adolescents also lack
adequate opportunities for participation and engagement on issues that affect
their lives at home, at school, in their communities and nationally Their
participation is constrained by negative social and gender norms, as well as
limited number of safe spaces Mental health issues are rising and more than half
of young people and adolescents reported that their lives had worsened in the
past year29 Mental health services are either unavailable or unaffordable The
current country programme benefits from lessons learned from the previous one,
including two recommendations concerning the need for UNICEF to achieve long-
term results while adapting to  rapidly changing environment and to continue
efforts to build the capacity of subnational government institutions to deliver
and monitor results Programme priorities and partnerships The programme’ main
aim is supporting the country to address the rapidly deteriorating situation and
the increasing vulnerability of all children, and which is reversing earlier
gains in development outcomes for children and young people The programme also
maintains  longer-term perspective supporting national institutions and other
duty-bearers to build  more sustainable future in which they are increasingly
able to meet their commitments to respect, protect and fulfil the rights of all
children and young people in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child
__________________ 21 Ministry of Education and Higher Education, Reaching All
Children with Education: RACE II (2017–2021), August 22 UNICEF Lebanon, “Violent
beginnings” and “Surviving without the basics”, 23 UNICEF Lebanon,
“Understanding the root causes of violence against children and women in
Lebanon”, July 24 UNICEF, Youth Focused Rapid Assessment (YFRA) 25 Lebanon
Ministry of Social Affairs, “Lebanon State Party Report to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child 2017” 26 Lebanon, Central Administration of Statistics and
ILO, “Lebanon Follow-up Labour Force Survey – January 2022”, Fact Sheet,
Available at  arabstates/---ro-beirut/documents/publication/wcms_844837pdf 27
Ministry of Education and Higher Education, Reaching All Children with
Education: RACE II (2017–2021) 28 ILO, Labour Force Survey, 2019,  “Lebanon
Follow-up Labour Force Survey – January 2022, Fact Sheet” 29 UNICEF Lebanon,
“Searching for Hope”, /17  /ICEF//10 and other national and international
obligations The present CPD complements UNICEF humanitarian interventions as
outlined in the 2022 Lebanon Crisis Response Plan and Lebanon Emergency Response
Plan30 The programme contributes to the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2022–2025 and is
derived from the national United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF) Programme priorities were selected on the basis of balancing
humanitarian and development interventions, while also aligning with the
priorities of relevant national policies and plans and maximizing UNICEF’
comparative advantage and synergies within the UNSDCF The programme was further
guided by consultations with national counterparts, United Nations agencies,
major development partners and young people The programme will sharpen its focus
on decreasing equity gaps for the most vulnerable children living in Lebanon
UNICEF will focus on promoting capacities, funding and support for policies and
programmes that tackle geographic and other disparities It will enhance
partnerships with local institutions and strengthen capacity to deliver
services, focusing on the most vulnerable Evidence-based advocacy will be
prioritized to leverage resources and commitments for children, including in the
state budget, and to build public-private partnerships that rally support for
child rights The programme is based on the theory that if: () The most
vulnerable boys, girls and women demand, have access to and can afford
integrated, quality health and nutrition services; () The most marginalized boys
and girls have access to good quality and inclusive learning, which prepares
them for life, including work; () Girls, boys and women increasingly live  safe,
dignified and empowered life, protected from violence, abuse, neglect,
exploitation, harmful practices and gender-based violence; () Children and youth
have adequate quantities of clean and safe water and safely managed sanitation,
and enjoy  sustainable clean and safe environment ; () Young people, especially
the most vulnerable, have increased access to learning, decent income-generating
and civic engagement opportunities to enable them to successfully transition
from learning to earning while improving their well- being; and () The rise in
multidimensional poverty and vulnerability of girls, boys and youth is slowed
through more progressive policies, supported by improved social sector
allocation, accountability and social protection, then, children and young
people, especially the most disadvantaged, will have their rights increasingly
respected, protected and fulfilled and will develop to their full potential in
an inclusive and healthy society The main underlying assumption is that the
Government will take the necessary action to address the current crisis, thus
preventing the further deterioration of the economic and social situation The
country programme will have the following components: Survive and thrive This
component, developed with the Ministry of Public Health and partners, aims to
improve the access, quality and equity of health, nutrition and early childhood
__________________ 30 Lebanon and United Nations, Lebanon Crisis Response Plan,
/17  /ICEF//10 development (ECD) services, and to enhance positive health-
seeking behaviours It contributes to the achievement of UNSDCF Goal , Outcomes
and  UNICEF will support the delivery of accessible, affordable, climate-
resilient and gender-responsive maternal, neonatal, child and adolescent health,
nutrition and ECD services by strengthening primary health care and other
delivery systems It will improve vaccine logistics and cold chain management
(including through the use of renewable energy) and will utilize immunization as
an entry point for offering integrated health and nutrition interventions for
the most vulnerable children The programme will focus on antenatal and
preventive care for mothers and children It will also focus on, with the World
Health Organization, the integration of mental health and psychosocial support
into primary health care and community-based outreach and midwifery services
UNICEF will also work with multiple sectors to deliver services for prevention,
early detection, referral and management of all forms of malnutrition and
developmental delays UNICEF will support communities to demand good quality
health services It will strengthen the capacity of community health workers to
promote health  behaviours and tackle barriers faced by adolescent girls
Community engagement will bring services closer to communities and reduce
financial barriers UNICEF will protect and promote adequate diets, practices and
nutrition and ECD services This will be done by strengthening evidence-informed
social behaviour-change strategies and community-based solutions This component
will strengthen capacity across multiple sectors and systems by generating
evidence, supporting policies, legislation and community-based solutions and
services, to protect, promote and support adequate diets, feeding and nurturing
care practices, and essential services for children to grow and develop to their
full potential and to prevent all forms of malnutrition UNICEF will also support
national efforts to reform health and nutrition financing, the strengthening of
supply chains through digital solutions, and the establishment of  maternal and
perinatal death surveillance system Learning and skills This component
contributes to the achievement of UNSDCF Goal , Outcome  by supporting the
Ministry of Education and Higher Education and partners to ensure that the most
marginalized boys and girls aged ‒18 years have access to good - quality,
gender-responsive and inclusive learning, in close alignment with the Lebanon
Five-Year General Education Plan 2021–To increase access to education, UNICEF
and the Ministry of Education and Higher Education jointly established the
Transition Resilience Education Fund, which will include the following: ()
Provide financial support for marginalized children and funds to enable schools
to provide  safe and inclusive environment; () Identify and tackle the barriers
and needs of adolescent girls; () Construct and rehabilitate schools; () Ensure
the climate resilience of infrastructure and the presence of basic facilities
The programme will also: () Improve the accessibility of public schools and
availability of learning materials for children with disabilities; /17
/ICEF//10 () Increase access by out-of-school children to education and multiple
flexible learning pathways; () Seek to overcome barriers limiting the access of
refugee children to education and accelerate delivery of gender-responsive
pedagogy; () teachers Improve school connectivity and build digital literacy
among children and This component will build teachers’ knowledge and capacity to
deliver learning recovery and catch-up programmes to build the foundational
literacy, numeracy and transferable skills of children and adolescents, in
partnership with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization To increase demand for quality and inclusive education, UNICEF will
provide incentives to attract and retain children in learning and to strengthen
positive parenting and parent-child relationships To strengthen the education
system, UNICEF will: () Support education reform focused on equity, quality and
inclusion; () Define procedures for accreditation, certification and validation
of learning achievements against national curriculum benchmarks; () Support
teaching and learning practices consistent with active learning ; () Promote
practices that strengthen formal and non-formal education UNICEF will support
national authorities to develop policy frameworks and procedures designed to
integrate out-of-school children and strengthen inclusive information management
systems Protection from violence, exploitation, abuse, neglect and harmful
practices This component will contribute to UNSDCF Goal , Outcomes ,  and  It
will also support national efforts to develop  stronger child rights governance
system, mobilizing actors to commit to  call to action for children, and
strengthen inclusive systems for preventing and responding to child protection
violations ‒ including in humanitarian contexts UNICEF will work with the
relevant ministries and parliament to address gaps in the legal and policy
framework, including efforts to strengthen child-friendly justice and birth
registration systems in Lebanon UNICEF will support advocacy to increase
domestic financing of child protection services UNICEF will focus on prevention
and early intervention strategies, support efforts to address child marriage,
school violence, child labour, harmful social norms around gender and disability
through community mobilization, cross-sectoral referral mechanisms and services;
and roll out positive parenting programmes It will support the Ministry of
Public Health, the Ministry of Education and Higher Education and the Ministry
of Social Affairs to roll out the national mental health and psychosocial
support strategy for children through the provision of cross-sectoral services
UNICEF will also monitor the well-being of women and at-risk children and
survivors of violence, including children involved in armed conflict, through
community -based mechanisms, and will ensure their access to specialized
services This component will strengthen the social welfare workforce, including
support for the reporting on grave violations against children through the
integrated case and information management system /17  /ICEF//10 Water,
sanitation and hygiene, climate and environment This component contributes to
the achievement of the UNSDCF Goal , Outcome  and Goal , Outcome  by supporting
the national water sector recovery plan and preventing the further deterioration
of water supply and wastewater treatment services UNICEF will support the
operation and maintenance of water and wastewater treatment facilities to ensure
the continuity of the water supply and reduce the discharge of raw sewage into
the environment UNICEF will support improvements to water supply infrastructure,
through the construction of spring catchments and reservoirs for gravity-flow
systems and the conversion of pumping stations to renewable energy Public water
points providing  regulated supply will be promoted UNICEF will improve the
cost-efficiency of providing water and wastewater services in informal
settlements while protecting the environment and ensuring that vulnerable
populations continue to have full access to services UNICEF will increase its
emphasis on community involvement and stakeholder engagement in local management
of water and wastewater services, increasing accountability and decreasing the
potential for conflict Social and behaviour-change and community engagement will
enhance the capacity of marginalized communities to access and demand water,
sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services Innovative management models enhancing
the role of municipalities will be scaled up Women, girls and young people will
be supported to play  greater role in managing services, including initiatives
addressing water scarcity and climate change UNICEF will work with Government
partners such as the Ministry of Energy and Water and the Ministry of
Environment to improve the country' water resource management, including
reducing non-revenue water (which does not produce income because of leaks or
illegal connections) and wastewater discharges UNICEF will also support the
capacity of the Ministry of Environment to conduct environmental impact
assessments and monitor wastewater treatment plant discharges Adolescents and
youth This component will support young people with second-chance education,
supporting youth to acquire gender-transformative skills and provide them with
increased access to decent income-generating and civic engagement opportunities,
thus enabling them to successfully transition from learning to earning while
improving their well-being UNICEF will work with national institutions and, UN
agencies to support the implementation of the 2022–2024 National Youth Policy
Action Plan and the National Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET)
Strategic Framework Both the action plan and the strategic framework aim to
foster policies that support education, economic and social empowerment and
meaningful participation for adolescents and young girls and boys aged 15‒24
years, especially the most vulnerable UNICEF, with the International Labour
Organization (ILO), will increase access for young people to inclusive
foundational, transferable and twenty-first century skills, linking to green
jobs and improving access to workplace-based learning and entrepreneurial
opportunities by: () Fostering private sector engagement; () Advancing girls’
employment; () Mainstreaming life skills, mental health and participation in
schools, community centres and workplaces /17  /ICEF//10 UNICEF will also
increase the engagement of young people in emergency response, disaster risk
reduction and risk communication and community engagement This component will
empower vulnerable children, adolescents and youth aged 10–24 years to
meaningfully participate socially and civically on issues that affect their
well-being Social and behaviour-change interventions will be prioritized, as
will advocacy to support young people’ priorities, such as civic engagement,
mental health and climate change Inclusive social policy and social protection
This component supports national efforts to address the rise in multidimensional
poverty and vulnerability of children and young people through more progressive,
gender-responsive and disability-inclusive policymaking, supported by improved
social sector budgets and spending, accountability and shock-responsive social
protection for vulnerable groups This component contributes to the UNSDCF Goal ,
Outcome  UNICEF will collaborate with partners to conduct policy and budget
analyses and advocate on ‘high-value’ policy and resource issues that are child-
focused and crisis-relevant, including social protection, taxation, health,
education, water and sanitation, climate, nutrition, child protection and local
governance It will promote transparency with regard to national resources and
rights, to enhance inclusion by and accountability of basic services UNICEF will
engage  wide range of audiences through multiple channels and generate analysis,
advocacy and  national dialogue on child poverty and the impact of crises These
efforts will build on the launch of  national child poverty advocacy plan, using
gender and disability lens With the ILO, the programme will support the Ministry
of Social Affairs and other bodies to strengthen social protection ‒ including
through the implementation of the new national social protection strategy ‒ and
support the development of system components, including data systems, referrals
and linkages with social services UNICEF will promote social protection that is
shock-responsive and tailored to address gender barriers, leveraging resources
with partners including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
Building on the existing emergency child grant, UNICEF will support the
establishment of national social grants, and  national disability allowance
Programme effectiveness This component will provide cross-cutting support to all
programmes and ensure that country programme planning, monitoring, evaluation,
financing and management meet quality standards It also includes overall UNICEF
coordination in social and behaviour-change communication to ensure that
communities know about child rights, practise positive behaviours and demand
essential services The component also includes external communication, advocacy
and partnerships to support UNICEF It will seek to ensure coordination of UNICEF
engagement in key cross- sectoral issues, including climate change, ECD,
disability, gender, GBV and the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
Lastly, this outcome will strengthen the capacity of local actors to identify
vulnerable children and communities, engage in disaster risk reduction and
emergency preparedness and response, and demand equitable access to services /17
/ICEF//10 Summary budget tablea (In thousands of United States dollars)
Programme component Regular resources Other resources Total Survive and thrive -
49 419 49 419 Learning and skills 150 403 155 403 305 Protection from violence,
exploitation, abuse, neglect and harmful practices 255 40 003 40 258 WASH,
climate and environment - 130 050 130 050 Adolescents and youth 450 64 591 65
041 Inclusive social policy and social protection 180 22 485 22 665 Programme
effectiveness  551 56 776 58 327  586 Total 766 479 769 065 () The requirement
for other resources (emergency) is estimated at $636 million Programme and risk
management This country programme document outlines UNICEF contributions to
national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
the country level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the
organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures The Prime
Minister’ office coordinates overall implementation of the country programme
steering committee, including representatives of the Government, United Nations
and other partners, provides oversight to the UNSDCF The United Nations Country
Team is the main mechanism for inter-agency coordination, while the Lebanon
Crisis Response Plan, led by the Government, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Development Programme,
oversees the humanitarian response Risk-control and mitigation measures will be
based on analyses of risks and vulnerabilities UNICEF has taken measures to
mitigate the risks related to the country’ fragile economy and the devaluation
of its currency, by using cash to pay beneficiaries and civil servants directly
UNICEF will assess the opportunities and risks related to expanding this scheme
UNICEF will seek to mitigate risks posed by the nationwide scale of the
programme by establishing an internal coordination unit to support the large
number of direct payments for services This will increase value for money with
system of third-party monitoring, grievance and redress mechanisms, spot-checks
and  robust monitoring and reporting structure, including reinforcement of the
prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse and anti-fraud activities Financial
and non-financial resources will be mobilized to mitigate the risk of
insufficient funding This will include widening the pool of existing donors and
substantially increasing engagement with the private sector 10  /ICEF//10 UNICEF
has improved its ability to collect feedback as part of the overall strategy of
ensuring accountability to affected populations  national hotline will also be
set up to manage information requests and share information about UNICEF
programmes with affected populations Monitoring, learning and evaluation UNICEF,
with other agencies, will support the ability of the Government to generate data
and evidence to inform programmes, advocacy, policies and budgeting for children
It will also enhance the capacity of the Government to report progress on the
Sustainable Development Goals by helping to it carry out household surveys, such
as the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, and providing data disaggregated by
sex, age, location, migratory and disability status In UNICEF workplans, results
indicator disaggregation by gender, age, disability, nationality, geography, etc
will be improved Progress towards programme results will be assessed through
annual reviews with the Government and partners, contributing to UNSDCF reviews
Programme implementation will be monitored through regular field visits with
partners and by systematic third-party monitoring The monitoring of humanitarian
performance will be used to ensure  clear alignment of results with the UNICEF
Core Commitments for Children in Humanitarian Action UNICEF will conduct
evaluations to learn and adapt programmes and ensure accountability to
stakeholders, while strengthening national evaluation systems Throughout the
programme implementation period, UNICEF will support the Government and non-
governmental partners reporting to the Committee on the Rights of the Child and
other human rights bodies, based on the country’ reporting calendar 11   /
/   Annex Results and resources framework /     / Lebanon – UNICEF country
programme of cooperation, March 2023–December 2025  /     Convention on the
Rights of the Child: –, , , –10, 12–13, 15, 17–19, 20, 23–24, 26–29, 31, 34,
36–37, 39–40 National priorities: Sustainable Development Goals –, , 10, 13 and
16 UNSDCF outcomes involving UNICEF: • Goal : Improved lives and well-being for
all people in Lebanon Outcome : Enhanced inclusive, equitable, comprehensive,
and sustainable social protection systems and programmes Outcome : Strengthened
provision of and equitable access to quality services including basic services
Outcome : Enhanced protection for the most vulnerable • Goal : Improved
resilient and competitive productive sectors for enhanced and inclusive income
-generating livelihood opportunities Outcome : Strengthened diversified income
opportunities to promote social and economic inclusion • Goal : Restored rich
nature and ecosystem of Lebanon for inclusive green recovery Outcome :
Strengthened stabilization and green recovery to reduce vulnerabilities and
environmental risks Related UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2022–2025 Goal Areas: –
Indicative resources by country programme outcome: regular resources (RR), other
resources (OR) (In thousands of United States dollars) OR Major partners,
partnership frameworks UNSDCF outcomes Key progress indicators, baselines () and
targets () Means of verification Indicative country programme outputs RR UNICEF
outcomes Total Goal , Outcomes  and ; Goal , Outcome   The most vulnerable
Lebanese newborns, children and adolescents, especially girls, have equitable
access to and utilization of good-quality health and nutrition services % of
children aged –23 months receiving minimum acceptable diet : % (2021) : 15%
National surveys Parents and 49 419 49 419 Ministry of Public Health (MOPH),
Ministry of Social Affairs (MOSA), Ministry of Education and Higher Education
(MEHE), Ministry of Energy and Water (MOEW), WHO, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Development Programme communities
supported to adopt health-seeking behaviours, and to demand good quality health
services Operational capacity of primary health-care centres and other delivery
systems enhanced to provide equitable, quality health and nutrition services %
of surviving infants who have received three doses of DPT vaccine : 67% (2021) :
80% National surveys National immunization coverage World Health Organization
(WHO)/UNICEF estimates National health system has enhanced capacity to develop
and implement   -      % of children who have received early Multiple Indicator
Cluster   -      Indicative resources by country programme outcome: regular
resources (RR), other resources (OR) (In thousands of United States dollars) OR
Major partners, partnership frameworks UNSDCF outcomes Key progress indicators,
baselines () and targets () Means of verification Indicative country programme
outputs RR Total UNICEF outcomes (UNDP), World Food Programme, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), academia stimulation and responsive care from their
parents or caregivers Survey (MICS)/other surveys evidence-based policies and
programmes for the realization of children’ rights : boys/girls / : boys/girls /
Institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders enhanced to promote adequate
diets, nurturing care practices, essential nutrition and care services for
children to grow and develop to their full potential % of pregnant women
attending at least four antenatal visits at primary health-care (PHC) centres :
% : 50% MICS % of mothers receiving postnatal care at PHC centres : 18% : 50%
Goal , Outcome ; Goal , Outcome  The most marginalized boys and girls aged –18
years have access to quality and inclusive learning, including foundational
literacy, numeracy and Number of children aged – years attending pre-primary
education : /Aa : / MICS, Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees (VASyR)
MEHE, NGOs, United Nations agencies, media 150 403 155 403 305 Increased demand
for formal and non-formal education and ECD opportunities for the most
marginalized children Out-of-school rate for girls and boys, of primary and
lower secondary school age : 12% : % MICS and information management system
National capacity improved, resulting in marginalized girls, boys and
adolescents, in and  /     /     /  /   /        /       /   Indicative
resources by country programme outcome: regular resources (RR), other resources
(OR) (In thousands of United States dollars) OR /     / Major partners,
partnership frameworks UNSDCF outcomes Key progress indicators, baselines () and
targets () Means of verification Indicative country programme outputs  RR Total
UNICEF outcomes /     transferable skills to prepare them for work and for life
Primary education completion rates : 90% : 92% (boys and girls) MICS,
administrative data out of school, having increased access to quality education
in  gender-responsive and inclusive learning environment Education system
strengthened through evidence-based planning, policy development, data
management and monitoring 255 40 003 40 258 Goal , Outcomes , ,  Children,
adolescents and women at risk are empowered and protected from all forms of
violence, including gender- based violence, the prevention of sexual
exploitation and abuse and neglect The child rights governance system has
increased capacity to implement child- friendly policies and procedures in line
with international standards : No : Yes Governance system qualitative assessment
Child rights governance system strengthened at all levels and new national
action plan for children approved Prime Minister’ office, Parliament, diplomatic
community, municipalities, NGOs, High Council of Childhood, Ministry of Justice,
MOSA, Ministry of Interior and Municipalities (MOIM), MEHE, MOPH, Ministry of
Youth and Sports (MOYS), private sector, United Nations agencies Children and
women have increased resilience and caregivers and communities are empowered to
prevent harmful practices and create  safer, more nurturing care environment %
of child survivors of violence supported by UNICEF to access justice/redress :
80% ( 300) : 90% Partners reports, Ministry of Justice database % of children
‒14 years who experience violent disciplinary practices by an adult member of
the household : 60% : 40% Children with disability: % MICS, VASyR Improved
equitable access to, and quality of, comprehensive response services for
children, women and caregivers % of women (20‒24 years) married before MICS /
VASyR   -        -      Indicative resources by country programme outcome:
regular resources (RR), other resources (OR) (In thousands of United States
dollars) OR Major partners, partnership frameworks UNSDCF outcomes Key progress
indicators, baselines () and targets () Means of verification Indicative country
programme outputs RR UNICEF outcomes Total age 18 : %; Syrian women: 22% : %;
Syrian women: 15% MICS/VASyR % of children (– 17 years) engaged in child labour
: %; Syrian children: 20% : %; Syrian children: 15% % of households using safely
managed drinking water : % : 50% Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) Water
establishments recover and extend their capacity to deliver good quality and
climate- resilient services for water and wastewater Water establishments, MOEW,
municipalities, NGOs 130 050 130 050 Goal , Outcome ; Goal , Outcomes  and
Girls, boys and families, especially the most vulnerable have increased use of
clean and safe water, safely managed sanitation and adopt appropriate hygiene
practices and behaviours Poor and marginalized communities have increased
capacity to access cost-effective gender-responsive and disability-inclusive
WASH services and practise appropriate behaviours JMP % of households using
safely managed sanitation service : % : 20% Government has improved capacity to
develop relevant policies, regulations and  /     /     /  /   /        /
/   Indicative resources by country programme outcome: regular resources (RR),
other resources (OR) (In thousands of United States dollars) OR /     / Major
partners, partnership frameworks UNSDCF outcomes Key progress indicators,
baselines () and targets () Means of verification Indicative country programme
outputs  RR UNICEF outcomes Total /     Number of new or updated child climate
policies and programmes developed, financed and implemented :  :  mechanisms to
support climate-resilient financially viable, people-centred water sector
recovery LVAPb MICS % of children living in multidimensional poverty : / : /
National partnerships, civil society organizations, think-tanks, academia
Government of Lebanon, International Labour Organization (ILO), MOSA Goal ,
Outcome ; Goal , Outcome  The rise in multidimensional poverty and vulnerability
of girls, boys and youth is slowed as  result of  more progressive policymaking
environment, supported by improved resource allocation, governance and social
protection coverage 180 22 485 22 665 National and subnational dialogue,
policies, plans, budgets, governance and accountability designed to address
child and youth poverty and vulnerability Number of children and youth reached
through national social grant programmes :  : 170 000 National coordination
structures reports Lebanese national social protection system is strengthened to
facilitate access to, and utilization of, gender and disability responsive
services Number of adolescent- and youth-inclusive and gender-responsive
policies (reform/legislation, system/mechanisms) initiated/engaged by the
Government :  :  Assessment of policy documents MOYS, MEHE, Ministry of
Agriculture, MOSA, Ministry of Labour, MOPH, MOIM, municipalities, United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNDP, United Goal ,
Outcomes  and ; Goal , Outcome ; Goal , Outcome  More vulnerable adolescents and
young women and men are empowered to optimize their well-being, engaged as
agents of change and equipped with learning, foundational, vocational and
employability skills and 450 64 591 65 041 National system strengthened to
design and implement inclusive and gender-responsive policies enabling
supportive environment allowing the economic and social empowerment and
meaningful participation of vulnerable adolescents and youth to improve their
well-being % of adolescents and young girls and boys (aged 15–24 years) not in
education, employment and/or ILO Labour Force Survey, MICS   -        -
Indicative resources by country programme outcome: regular resources (RR), other
resources (OR) (In thousands of United States dollars) OR Major partners,
partnership frameworks Key progress indicators, baselines () and targets ()
Means of verification Indicative country programme outputs UNSDCF outcomes RR
UNICEF outcomes Total opportunities to enable their social and economic progress
training : % : % (for girls and boys) Nations Population Fund, universities and
syndicates, parliament, private sector, young people Vulnerable adolescents and
young women and men have access to inclusive and gender- sensitive quality
learning of skills supported by work- based opportunities % of adolescents and
young girls and boys (aged 15‒24 years) who access programmes (PHC, school and
digital platforms) that improve their mental health : / : / National household
survey Vulnerable adolescents and young people are empowered to engage in
meaningful civic participation ‒ at home, in schools and communities and
nationally ‒ on issues that affect their well- being Annual UNICEF InSight
reports Performance scorecards meet organizational benchmarks, including cross-
cutting issues (disability, gender, accountability to affected populations) The
country programme is efficiently designed, coordinated, managed and supported to
meet good quality programming standards for achieving results for children
Programme coordination, monitoring, evaluation, evidence generation,
communication, advocacy, partnerships and operations support  551 56 776 58 327
MICS survey report MICS finalized Total resources  586 766 479 769 065  /     /
/  Data that are currently / will be collected through the MICS Lebanon
vulnerability assessment panel – High Frequency Monitoring Survey  /   /