Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/CHN/ /  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework Country context  Over the past 40 years, China has
developed rapidly, becoming the world’ second-largest economy and an upper-
middle-income country It is the only nation to move from low to high human
development since 1990, ranking eighty-fifth globally The country’ growth has
been inclusive, with  strong reduction in absolute rural poverty (per cent in
1978, versus below  per cent by end-2019) On  December 2020, China announced
achievement of its goal of eradicating extreme rural poverty by China has
advanced steadily in science and technology, with its global innovation ranking
climbing It has made strides to address climate change: in 2018, one third of
global renewable energy investment came from China (valued at $billion) and it
was the top offshore and onshore market for wind5 and solar energy  The Chinese
economy “has been transitioning from  phase of  rapid growth to  stage of high-
quality development,” which will remain  priority in the 14th Five-Year Plan for
Economic and Social Development The rate of growth of its gross domestic product
(GDP) in 20198 ̶  per cent ̶ was high globally, but below the 10 per cent
average for the period 1978-Changing economic conditions, along with worsening
environmental and inequality problems, an ageing society and technological
transformation, led China to pursue “innovative, coordinated, green, open and
shared development (…),”10 as articulated in the country’ National Plan of
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Going forward, as
for countries around the globe, the main challenge in achieving key Sustainable
Development Goals will be to ensure that no one is left behind  The Government
sees 2020 as  landmark year in achieving its 40-year goal of  “Xiaokang Society”
(meaning “moderately prosperous in all aspects”) and setting new long-term goals
This includes realizing the goals "for achieving socialist modernization in
China,”11 with  leading position in technological innovation,  strong economy,
larger middle-income group, equitable access to basic public services for all
and  fundamentally improved environment The Government is building on these
achievements to partner with other countries including through the Belt and Road
Initiative, which China proposes as  means to achieve economic integration,
interconnected development and contribute to the 2030 Agenda  China is
formulating its 14th Five-Year Plan (), which reflects its vision for inclusive
development, shifting towards  green economy, further reducing poverty and
increasing people’ well-being, using reforms and innovation to overcome
development challenges The UNDP country programme, within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) ), will support these
objectives      National Bureau of Statistics, China        President Xi
Jinping’ Report at the 19th CPC National Congress on  November 2017,   National
Bureau of Statistics, China   10  mlError! Hyperlink reference not valid 11  /15
DP/DCP/CHN/ Key development challenges  China remains the most populous
developing country, grappling with “unbalanced and inadequate development and
the peoples’ ever-growing need for  better life” 12 The economy faces further
risk of  slowdown, with  deteriorating global environment amid the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) outbreak This has immediate impact on achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, especially preventing  relapse into extreme
poverty and addressing multidimensional poverty  China is one of the world’ most
rapidly ageing societies, due to declining fertility and growing life
expectancy; those over age 60 will account for per cent of the population by 13
This has profound consequences for the Goals Productivity must increase to
maintain growth with  smaller workforce, while pension and social assistance
systems must adapt to ensure decent living standards for the elderly  Despite
significant achievements in reducing maternal and neonatal mortality, and in
improving women’ life expectancy and enrolment of girls in all levels of public
education, gender equality is  challenge to leaving no one behind The impact of
gender inequality is seen throughout the life cycle, from the skewed sex ratio
at birth to lower female participation in the labour market (per cent for women
versus per cent for men) 14 and an increasing wage gap15 The GDP per capita for
men is 53 per cent higher than for women16  The economy is evolving towards
innovation and productivity-based growth, supported by new technologies However,
the labour market is showing signs of polarization due to education, skills and
other gaps17 The tech sector is creating jobs but employment in other sectors is
decreasing The growing gig economy consists of flexible workers including
migrant workers (per cent of total employment)18 Some can voluntarily
participate in basic insurance schemes as flexible employees, but  considerable
number still remain outside of these schemes  China has announced that it will
scale up its intended nationally determined contributions by adopting more
vigorous policies and measures and that it aims to have carbon dioxide emissions
peak before 2030 and to achieve carbon neutrality before The challenges of
carbon-intensive economy, pollution and unsustainable resource management remain
daunting In 2016, the annual median exposure to particulate matter  micrometres
or less in diameter was more than four times higher than World Health
Organization recommendations19 Some per cent of the population were urbanized by
2019, with 848 million people migrating from rural areas20 This deepens other
challenges: from the 1950s to the beginning of this century, China lost about 60
per cent of its coastal wetlands; the mangrove area decreased from 50,000
hectares to 22,000 hectares, with significant losses in estuarine and bay
wetland areas, ecosystems in coral reefs and other large areas21 Farmland has
shrunk annually in recent years; soil erosion is  challenge to sustainable
agriculture and 12  13  14  15
content/china/en/home/library/human_development/national-human-development-
report-special- editionhtml 16  17  Chinapdf 18 National Bureau of Statistics,
China 19  -progress-but-more-attention- needed-to-avoid-dangerously-high-levels-
of-air-pollution 20 National Bureau of Statistics, China 21 Ministry of Natural
Resources, China /15  DP/DCP/CHN/ livelihoods The volume of municipal waste
jumped almost sevenfold between 1979 and 22 Leaving no one behind and targeting
The programme targets groups most at risk of being left behind: all vulnerable
groups in underdeveloped regions; persons with disabilities; the elderly;
smallholder farmers; youth, especially not in education, employment or training;
people living with HIV; and women, many of whom face biases despite gender-
neutral legislation There are multiple overlaps between these groups with their
vulnerabilities being further exacerbated by climate change, environmental
degradation and medical shocks The people of rural communities, for instance,
are increasingly older and less educated: per cent of the labourers engaged in
farming are above age 55 and received only primary education or are illiterate
23 The challenges facing the transitioning economy, including slowing growth,
widening inequality and environmental degradation, have comparatively greater
effects on the people left behind Multidimensional poverty fell less than income
poverty24 Official data show unequal development across provinces Beijing,
Shanghai and Tianjin have the highest levels of human development and Xizang,
Yunnan, Guizhou, Qinghai and Gansu have the lowest25 The UNDP comparative
advantage Due to the magnitude and speed of change, the development challenges
facing China for comprehensive solutions and require working across systems and
sectors transformational interventions UNDP has four advantages enabling this
approach: () it is the only agency supporting all three development pillars:
economic, social and environmental; () UNDP has  trusted relationship with the
Government across ministries and sectors, enabling integrated analysis and
solutions; () UNDP can leverage its strong global networks, including the Global
Policy Network, accelerator labs and country office networks, to mobilize
international and technical expertise on advanced development challenges, while
sharing innovative Chinese experiences; and () UNDP can work at the national
policy level and the local and community levels with pilots and directly with
the most vulnerable, each catalysing transformation of the others The United
Nations and UNDP offer distinct strengths in their approaches to development,
including focusing on the most vulnerable groups, gender equality, environmental
sustainability, the values and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, and transparency and accountability As custodians of the 2030 Agenda
and the United Nations Charter, the United Nations and UNDP are well placed to
align the Government’ international engagements with the Sustainable Development
Goals, through fact-based, impartial analysis and support Lessons learned The
evaluation of the previous programme26 acknowledged UNDP as  facilitator of the
Sustainable Development Goals, with results contributing to the delivery of
developmental priorities in China Key results included testing new ideas,
boosting technical expertise and strengthening and promoting international best
practices, while enabling transformational change and future reforms UNDP
provided  platform for information-sharing, allowing China to share its
experience internationally Aligning UNDP support with Chinese priorities 22
Chinapdf 23 Third National Agricultural Census by the National Bureau of
Statistics, China Error! Hyperlink reference not valid 24 Nearly  per cent of
Chinese are multidimensionally poor, while around 17 per cent are vulnerable to
multidimensional poverty  25
content/china/en/home/library/human_development/national-human-development-
report-special- editionhtml 26 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office, Independent
Country Programme Evaluation: China, /15  DP/DCP/CHN/ and the long-standing
engagement with government institutions were key to reaching and at times
beating targets while boosting impact Successful advocacy was based on positive
experiences from pilots and collaboration with Chinese institutions Both the
evaluation and internal reports found challenges, including difficulties in
moving from project to portfolio approaches to maximize impact and accelerate
systematic change Uneven commitments and capacities across local governments and
communities sometimes required greater UNDP support and coordination  need to
further strengthen gender aspects was identified In some cases, UNDP priorities
did not sufficiently reflect ministerial efforts, with more engagement needed in
sustainable development demonstration zones Going forward, UNDP is to strengthen
international and South-South cooperation with China in support of the
Sustainable Development Goals and to remain agile and nimble, adapting to
changing environment UNDP contribution to the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework The programme is fully aligned with the
Government’ national priorities and the Sustainable Development Goal commitments
It derives from the UNSDCF vision of  country where people live with well-being
and dignity, experiencing sustainable, innovative, inclusive development, while
supporting such development in partner countries Leveraging its technical,
coordination and governance strengths, UNDP will provide integrated policy
advice and evidence-based solutions and support implementation nationally and
locally to enable three key transitions: () accelerating the country’
“transitioning from  phase of rapid growth to  stage of high-quality
development,”27 benefiting everyone; () accelerating its transition towards
low-carbon economy and growth that reduces environmental pressures; and ()
supporting Chinese international development cooperation to align with the
Sustainable Development Goals, including mutual sharing of knowledge and best
practices II Programme priorities and partnerships Pillar  High-quality
development centred on people UNDP will provide integrated signature development
solutions to understand and address multidimensional poverty, including
interventions targeting groups at risk of sliding back into poverty and
expanding poverty measures beyond monetary thresholds This involves concretizing
green development concepts and introducing green technologies into the
Government’ rural revitalization campaign, while supporting the innovative
development of rural cooperatives and improving basic social security and
services, through exploring innovative insurance models The focus will be on
strengthening resilience to climate change, natural disasters and public health
emergencies such as COVID-19 by developing early warning, response and recovery
capacities, reducing the risk of anyone returning to poverty UNDP will focus on
women and youth in underdeveloped locations, building skills and pilots in
communities to develop gender-responsive, sustainable livelihood systems that
address workplace gender gaps, the issue of unpaid care work and the digital
divide UNDP will build capacities and pilot transformative schemes to contribute
to coordinated development between different geographical, rural and urban areas
Key partners include the National Development and Reform Commission, Ministry of
Rural Affairs and Agriculture, Ministry of Commerce, the State Council Leading
Group Office of Poverty Alleviation and Development, Ministry of Science and
Technology, 27 Ibid, see footnote  /15  DP/DCP/CHN/ Ministry of Emergency
Management, the National Health Commission, the International Poverty Reduction
Center in China and local governments To support innovation-driven development
to address urban poverty, UNDP will introduce innovative data sources and
technologies to map and measure urban livelihoods and support evidence-based
policies, particularly in innovation demonstration zones for the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, under the leadership of the
Ministry of Science and Technology It will address social protection for
flexible and migrant workers, raising awareness through evidence-based research
in collaboration with relevant stakeholders UNDP will cooperate with the
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology to strengthen resilience of
small and medium-sized enterprises to better respond to crises, such as
COVID-19, through digital solutions and new technologies UNDP will encourage
digitalization and data governance, to more efficiently respond to population
inflows and disaster risk mitigation Environmentally, UNDP will strengthen
cities’ resilience by promoting low-carbon and smart technologies in
urbanization As the country’ demographics evolve, UNDP will apply  life-cycle
approach, embracing the future of work Together with government and other
agencies including the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, civil society and the private sector, when appropriate, UNDP will
focus on workers’ skills and technological disruptions UNDP will raise senior
citizens’ quality of life through elderly care, recreation and improved social
protection Ageing has  gendered impact, physiologically, psychologically,
economically and socially28 Interventions will be tailored to the different
needs of men and women UNDP will foster life-cycle education targeting the
generational digital divide Preparing for the fourth industrial revolution, UNDP
will work with the Government to: () Pilot inclusive, technical solutions,
including skilling, reskilling and upskilling; lifelong learning; training
trainers and increasing access to jobs in emerging occupations, including
sustainable goods; the circular economy; low-carbon technologies; rural
revitalization; urbanization; gender-related bias/social norms; and elderly
support; () Help China gear education towards jobs of the future, coordinating
across government, industries, training institutions, industrial associations,
etc; () Guide policy updates on technology for development, focusing on bridging
income and gender gaps, while empowering those disadvantaged by technological
change It will explore concepts such as universal basic income UNDP will work
with the All-China Youth Federation to support youth entrepreneurship, building
capacities and exchanging best practices across the Asia-Pacific region UNDP
will work with government counterparts, United Nations agencies including the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-
Women) and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, and when appropriate,
the private sector and the general public, towards an enabling environment for
vulnerable groups to include them in the country’ sustainable development, by
reducing stigma and discrimination This will include advocacy, awareness-raising
and community-based pilots To facilitate the above interventions and leave no
one behind, UNDP will support introducing, designing and implementing
Sustainable Development Goal-centred planning and financing policies To harness
public and private financing, UNDP will leverage its financing platform for the
Goals and promote digital and innovative financing solutions involving
multilateral development banks, the People’ Bank of China, the private sector
when appropriate, UNFPA, UNICEF and academia This will facilitate new impact 28
/15  DP/DCP/CHN/ management measures to finance and incubate socially focused,
bankable investments or enterprises for the country’ domestic development UNDP
will continue to leverage volunteers as an integral means of implementation,
working with the United Nations Volunteers programme, with the consent of the
Government, in supporting the recognition, facilitation and integration of
volunteer actions across the range of partners Pillar   healthier planet and
resilient environment To stay within planetary boundaries for global well-being,
UNDP, drawing on the Global Environment Facility, will continue promoting
signature “nature-based solutions” that protect, sustainably manage and restore
ecosystems, and support Chinese engagement in international environmental
protocols while addressing social and economic challenges UNDP will work with
relevant ministries to improve the management of protected areas, wetlands and
endangered species It will inform policies to minimize industrial impacts on
fragile ecosystems by offsetting biodiversity implications and carbon
sequestration UNDP will work to reduce land degradation, improve desertification
control and drought response, increasing productivity and food security while
further strengthening and concretizing cooperation with the National Forestry
and Grassland Administration to improve environmental sustainability It will
address unsustainable agricultural practices to reduce soil and water pollution,
improve water environment protection and water utilization levels Support will
be provided to phase out harmful fertilizers and chemicals by encouraging
production and use of organic substitutes, strengthening soil health while
reducing emissions Healthy ecosystems provide clear benefits to human well-
being, while environmental shocks harm lives and livelihoods, particularly of
those left behind UNDP will apply gender- responsive nature-based solutions that
raise resilience of the poor to environmental shocks; reduce negative effects of
climate change; and protect biodiversity UNDP will work with the Government and
businesses on creating eco-friendly livelihoods, piloting innovative insurance
models and equitable social security systems It will provide technical support
based on the UNDP Biodiversity Finance Initiative and present best practices and
solutions for green finance initiatives in China To accelerate the country’
shift to  low-carbon economy and resilient society, UNDP will provide support
focused on carbon pricing, emissions trading, reducing fossil fuel subsidies and
strengthening resilience against climate change The aim is to accelerate energy
transitions, reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve capacities in coping
with climate change UNDP will target four areas with high greenhouse gas
footprints on both the demand and supply sides, , mobility, energy,
manufacturing and food systems UNDP will support government efforts to adapt to
climate change through demonstration pilots and experience sharing, to improve
climate resilience The key partners will be the National Development and Reform
Commission, Ministry of Ecology and Environment, Ministry of Finance, Ministry
of Natural Resources, National Forestry and Grassland Administration, Ministry
of Rural Affairs and Agriculture, Ministry of Water Resources, Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology, Ministry of Science and Technology,
Ministry of House, Urban and Rural Development, the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Building on over 15 years of promoting hydrogen for renewable transport, UNDP
will continue supporting fuel-cell vehicle policies, infrastructure and value
chains It will make further efforts in green logistics, including sustainable
packaging, to cut solid waste and reduce weight while recycling materials and
batteries UNDP will introduce low-carbon, off- grid, renewable energy solutions
for businesses and urban and rural communities through pilots, supporting
energy-saving and increasing energy efficiency In manufacturing, UNDP will help
to develop and apply advanced technologies to phase out hydrochlorofluorocarbons
/15  DP/DCP/CHN/ (HCFCs), expand efficient and energy-saving motor systems and
reduce or eliminate persistent organic pollutants (POPs), in addition to
encouraging policies banning HCFCs and reducing POPs and promoting the
application of mercury-free thermometers and blood pressure monitors UNDP will
advocate with the Government for the ratification and implementation of the
Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
Layer UNDP will work with the National Development and Reform Commission,
Ministry of Science and Technology and others to advance the commitments to
multilateral environmental agreements and promote green technologies and
innovation, through research and development and pilot applications with  view
to enhancing green industry technology equipment and services To decouple
economic growth from environmental impact, UNDP will promote  circular economy
to eliminate waste and enable continual use of resources UNDP will promote
sustainable consumption through behavioural changes, advocacy and education, and
regulatory changes for solid waste management, including recycling, waste
prevention and reduction, specifically in packaging UNDP will support China in
the enforcement of the law on the prevention and control of environmental
pollution of solid waste, building “waste-free cities”; in the classification of
urban household waste and other improvements of waste management capacities; and
in the reduction of marine plastic pollution UNDP will support the Government in
enhancing reduction of emissions through energy-efficient technologies in
energy-intensive sectors while promoting other low-carbon solutions UNDP will
support China in accelerating green and low-carbon development and developing
renewable energy Pillar  China as  partner for global development and South-
South cooperation Since the reform and opening in 1978, China has made
unparalleled progress, lifting 750 million people29 out of poverty and making
significant contribution to the Millennium Development Goals In the Sustainable
Development Goal era, China in its global engagement through multilateral
institutions and bilaterally with partner countries, continues to contribute on
range of thematic global common issues that would advance the 2030 Agenda This
includes scientific discoveries, technological breakthroughs, new social
protection mechanisms, infrastructure, rapid data diagnostics and global
knowledge and solutions in areas such as poverty reduction, clean energy and
waste management UNDP aims to help achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
globally It will partner with relevant Chinese institutions that work on
interconnected sustainable development and poverty reduction where it can have
positive impact on implementing the 2030 Agenda UNDP will inform Chinese
international cooperation engagement including financing and investments by
providing advice on environmental, social and governance and transparency and
accountability principles to support government actors, development banks and
other Chinese entities to consistently uphold and apply international best
practices As one of the first agencies to engage on South-South cooperation with
China and  development actor with more than five decades of experience, UNDP
will deepen its relationship with the Ministry of Commerce, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, the China International Development Cooperation Agency, the
National Development and Reform Commission and other related ministries and
institutions to further support the Government’ engagement in South-South
cooperation in response to development or humanitarian demands In this context,
UNDP will facilitate sharing of international experience, analytics and global
best practice with China to enhance results in its development cooperation In
the post-COVID-19 era, UNDP will strengthen contributions to building resilience
including promoting inclusive growth and creating jobs UNDP will also support
international cooperation on disaster risk reduction and emergency management to
strengthen development results towards the Sustainable Development Goals and
leaving no one behind 29   /15  DP/DCP/CHN/ UNDP will deepen cooperation with
China and relevant parties on strengthening capacities and support Chinese
participation and cooperation in responding to global crises including through
international coordination, information-sharing and emergency response and
recovery Engagement across the United Nations development system, including with
the United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation, will be strengthened III
Programme and risk management This country programme document, designed with the
engagement of national partners, outlines the UNDP contributions to national
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board
for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels
with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework The
programme will be nationally executed, through the guidance of the Ministry of
Commerce as the government counterpart If necessary, national execution may be
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to
force majeure for specific cases, in consultation with the Ministry Relevant
information on implementation modalities will be shared with the Ministry on
regular basis The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in
coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks
Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness
will be charged to the concerned projects Project management with the China
International Centre for Economic and Technical Exchanges shall be in accordance
with the UNDP national execution manual This programme will adopt  five-tier
risk framework: () programmatic risks: in case of an economic downturn, policy
priorities may shift to accelerating growth, rather than its quality UNDP must
maintain agility and high-level capacities to adapt and help ensure that growth
does not come at the expense of sustainable development; () operational risks:
delays due to evolving situations or emergencies call for contingency planning,
early warning systems, remote working capacities and  strong business continuity
plan Project compliance, including risk logs, will also manage operational
risks; () resource risks: in the upper- middle-income country context – with
minimal regular resources – financing is  challenge UNDP must diversify funding
from different sectors and partners using innovative modalities, with consent of
the Government This is especially important as any slowdown may reduce social
and environmental spending; () reputational risks: triggers include partnerships
and fundraising UNDP will strengthen due diligence with regard to partnerships
and the private sector and headquarters coordination for third-country delivery
Audits and spot checks will be conducted to ensure quality; and () social and
environmental risks: UNDP will undertake thorough analysis on possible risks,
based on the social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism IV
Monitoring and evaluation UNDP outcome and output indicators were selected with
government and national partners Country programme and national indicators are
aligned with the 14th Five-Year Plan and sectoral strategies, the Sustainable
Development Goals, UNSDCF indicators and the UNDP Strategic Plan,
2018-Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out through UNSDCF participatory
mechanisms In response to the independent country programme evaluation, UNDP
will intensify process-tracking to collect high-quality data disaggregated by
sex, age, rural/urban, disability, etc, focusing on impacts and unintended
consequences using dedicated monitoring and /15  DP/DCP/CHN/ evaluation budgets
The share of programmes specifically supporting gender equality and women’
empowerment will be increased as per UNDP programming polices30 Innovative
methods (mobile applications, big data) will help UNDP to collect, analyse and
communicate statistics to  wider audience In collaboration with the Government
and United Nations partners, UNDP will promote national ownership of Sustainable
Development Goal-aligned indicators and further support the Government in
contextualizing and integrating the indicators and targets for the Goals into
national systems Participatory approaches like beneficiary assessments will
involve all stakeholders, enhancing credibility and transparency 30 Fifteen per
cent as measured by the UNDP gender marker UNDP Gender Equality Strategy
DP/DCP/CHN/ Annex Results and resources framework for China () NATIONAL PRIORITY
OR GOAL: People and Prosperity: High-quality, inclusive and equitable economic,
social and human development for all throughout the life-course COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : Relative
poverty and multi-dimensional poverty are reduced, and more coordinated
development leads to reduction in gaps between rural and urban areas and among
regions, as more people in China, including left-behind groups, benefit from
sustainable, innovation-driven and shared high-quality economic development,
with enhanced access to economic opportunities arising through innovation,
entrepreneurship and rural revitalization, enjoying decent work, sustainable
livelihoods, and the right to development equally for both women and men RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms
and dimensions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET()
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE
COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) MAJOR
PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) Indicative
Indicator : Proportion of population living below the national poverty line by
sex and age (SDG1) (linked to UNSDCF Indicator ) Data source: Output : Public
and private solutions developed, financed and applied to reduce multidimensional
poverty/increase population access to income and build resilience, in selected
areas (linked to UNSDCF Output , Strategic Plan Output ) Ministry of Commerce,
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security, United
Nations agencies, Global Compact, Academia, Corporate sector Regular: $250,000
Other: $57,730,000 National Health Commission; National Bureau of Statistics;
State Council Leading Group Office of Poverty Alleviation and Development;
International Poverty Reduction Centre of China Ministry of Commerce; Ministry
of Science and Technology; Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security;
Ministry of Education; Ministerial reports; State Council’ Annual Government
Work Report; National Human Development Report; UNDP Baseline: % (2019) Target:
(2025) Indicative Indicator : Human Development Index of China (linked to UNSDCF
Indicator ) • Indicative Indicator 1a: Amount of equitable and gender-responsive
public and private investment leveraged for improving access to multiple
opportunities and services for elderly people, women and youth Baseline: 758
(2018) Target: 775 (2025) Baseline:  (2020) Target: $ million (2025) •
Indicative Indicator 1b: Number of people (disaggregated by sex and age)
benefiting from pilot SDG projects invested through public-private partnerships
Frequency: Annually Baseline:  (2020) Target: 10 million (at least 40% women;
20% youth; 20% elderly) (2025) Output : Capacities, functions and financing of
target government and civil society organizations strengthened to reduce stigma
and discrimination of marginalized groups (linked to UNSDCF Output , Strategic
Plan Output ) 11  DP/DCP/CHN/ • Indicative Indicator : Number of people
(disaggregated by: persons with disabilities; persons living with HIV; migrant
workers; elderly and youth reached by sensitization campaigns on equality of
opportunities, rights and entitlements Baseline:  (2020) Target:  million (at
least 40% women; 20% youth; 20% elderly) (2025) Output : Capacities of target
governments strengthened to facilitate gender-responsive demographic transition
through  life-cycle approach and preparedness for the future of work (linked to
UNSDCF shared Outputs , ) • Indicative Indicator : Number of people
(disaggregated by sex and age) benefiting through gender-responsive skilling,
reskilling and upskilling policies and programmes focused on life-cycle approach
and future of work Baseline:  (2020) Target: 50,000 (at least 40% women; 20%
youth; 20% elderly) (2025) Output : Urban poor population in target areas has
access to inclusive social protection mechanisms and services (linked to UNSDCF
Output , Strategic Plan Output ) • Indicative Indicator : Number of people
(disaggregated by sex and age) benefiting from pilots on innovative insurance
models and equitable social security systems Baseline:  (2020) Target: 10,000
(at least 40% women; 20% youth; 20% elderly) (2025) 12  DP/DCP/CHN/ NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Planet: China transitions towards  more sustainable and
resilient environment COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : People in China and the region benefit from  healthier
and more resilient environment RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  –
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development Indicative
Indicator : Energy consumption per unit of GDP Data source: Output : Adaptive
policies developed at target level (subnational), financed and applied for
nature-based systems to align with multilateral agreements and transboundary
platforms (linked to UNSDCF Output , Strategic Plan Output ) Government,
Academia, Private sector (tech companies, traditional energy industries,
investors), Think tanks, NGOs, CSOs, United Nations agencies Regular: $250,000
Other: $145,065,000 Ministry of Ecology and Environment; National Forestry and
Grassland Administration; Ministry of Industry and Information Technology;
National Development and Reform Commission; National Energy Administration;
Ministerial reports; UNDP Baseline: 56 tons (2018) Target: TBD (2025) Indicative
Indicator : Renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption (linked
to UNSDCF Indicator ) (SDG ) • Indicative Indicator : Level of alignment of new
polices and regulations to promote gender-responsive climate change adaption and
mitigation, and biodiversity conservation, with the needs to fulfil
international commitments (on  scale of  to ) Baseline: % (2018) Target: 16%
(2025) Frequency: Annually Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2025) Output : Reduction
at (subnational level) in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions In- phase reduction in
consuming of ozone- depleting substance (ODS) (linked to UNSDCF Output ,
Strategic Plan ) • Indicative Indicator : GHG/ODS emissions in target areas
Baseline: ,10 Ozone-depletion potential (ODP) tons (2020) Target: ,73 ODP tons
(2025)31 • Indicative Indicator : Size of protected areas and other effective
area- based conservation measures (hectares) 31 The baseline and target set
under this indicator are derived from the ongoing and planned projects of UNDP
implemented in China, which shall ultimately contribute to the country’ efforts
in achieving its overall target of ,464 ODP tons (for production) and ,131 (for
consumption) by 2025 upon the baseline as of 2020 at 18,929 ODP tons (for
production) and 12,262 ODP tons (for consumption) respectively 13  DP/DCP/CHN/
Baseline: tbd32 (2020) Target: tbd (2025) Output : Capacities of select pilots
strengthened to adopt sustainable biodiversity policies (linked to UNSDCF Output
, Strategic Plan Output ) • Indicative Indicator : Number of pilots with adopted
sustainable and gender-sensitive biodiversity-friendly approaches and practices
Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2025) Output : Capacity of target government bodies
enhanced to reduce environmental footprint at targeted areas (linked to UNSDCF
Output , Strategic Plan Output ) • Indicative Indicator : Number of public-
private partnerships at targeted areas to advance sustainable low-carbon
practices Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2025) NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Partnerships: Harnessing China’ potential for engagement and partnerships
towards achievement of the SDGs across the world COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR
EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : Through South-South
cooperation and humanitarian cooperation, China makes greater contributions to
SDG attainment and the principles of the 2030 Agenda, including leaving no one
behind RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty eradication in
all its forms and dimensions Data source: Output : China’ collaboration and
partnerships with United Nations and other international partners, including in
South- South and triangular cooperation, strengthened (linked to UNSDCF output ,
Strategic Plan Output ) Government, IFIs, civil societies in China and partner
countries, international actors in Beijing, including embassies, media, United
Nations agencies Regular: $250,000 Indicative Indicator : Availability of
regular evidence-based reporting on China’ development cooperation contribution
to SDG attainment and impact (linked to UNSDCF Indicator ) Other: $,000,000
Government; International financial institutions (IFIs); Multilateral
development banks; CSOs in China; United Nations agencies; UNDP • Indicative
Indicator : Number of new partnerships developed between the 32 Baseline and
target will be determined upon completion of  government survey on protected
areas 14  DP/DCP/CHN/ United Nations/UNDP and the Chinese public sector for
South-South and triangular cooperation Baseline: no (2020) Target: yes (2025)
Frequency: Annually Baseline:  (2020) Target: 16 (2025) • Indicative Indicator :
Number of joint research products published and improved guidelines/tools to
integrate SDG achievement in south couth cooperation Baseline:  (2020) Target:
(2025) • Indicative Indicator : Number of women and men directly benefiting in
China and in partnering countries from Chinese South-South and triangular
cooperation projects, contributing to leaving no one behind (disaggregated by
age) Baseline: 661,363 (not disaggregated by age) (2019) Target: ,300,000 (at
least 50% women) (2025) Output : National capacities strengthened to design and
deliver evidence- informed development and humanitarian assistance (linked to
UNSDCF output , Strategic Plan Output ) • Indicative Indicator : Number of
United Nations/UNDP comprehensive capacity development initiatives with China in
line with United Nations best practices Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2025) Total:
$204,545,000 Regular: $750,000 Other: $203,795,000 15