 EU-China Roadmap on energy cooperation () Against the background of multiple
challenges related to addressing climate change, environmental degradation and
energy security and changing market conditions, China and the European Union
have  mutual interest and role to promote low-carbon development, protect the
environment, address climate change and encourage clean energy development
Therefore, having agreed that the goals of future cooperation between the EU and
China in the field of energy should be to: • Ensure that energy cooperation
makes  key contribution to the comprehensive strategic partnership between China
and the EU; • Enhance mutual trust in energy cooperation; • Streamline the
coordination of cooperation in the field of energy; • Build mutual trust on
market-related energy issues; • Contribute to the transformation of the energy
system, to the sustainable development of the global energy system and to energy
and climate resilient investment; China and the EU intend to enhance
collaboration in areas of mutual interest related to the management of the
energy system – on both the supply and the demand sides - as well as other
relevant crosscutting issues  Energy Supply: Sourcing, Production and
Distribution Both China and the EU are highly dependent on imports of fossil
energy sources and together represent approximately  third of total global
consumption This creates common interests in the pursuit of energy security,
cleaner technologies and renewable energy sources Future cooperation related to
the Supply of Energy should focus on three sectors: renewable energies, fossil
fuels and nuclear power  Renewable energy sources  Foster trade and investment
in renewable energy, thereby reducing costs by improving competition  Develop
distributed generation and Combined Heat and Power (CHP): • Jointly promote the
development and the implementation of distributed energy resource systems as
well as cogeneration of electricity based on renewable energy sources, in
particular in less developed regions; • Share best practices the promotion,
development and implementation of CHP production from renewable energy sources;
in • Facilitate the construction of infrastructure and the development of the
market for district heating and cooling and for CHP  Expand the bio-gas sector:
• Exchange insights on bio-gas technologies, markets and policies; • Further the
production of methane and bio-gas, encourage the uptake of new technologies and
equipment in this sector  Power grid sector: • Explore opportunities of
distributed energy generation; • Promote the further development of intelligent,
flexible and more reliable distribution networks, in particular smart grids
Fossil fuels  Energy Crisis Prevention and Management: • Establish  joint
platform for managing (potential) energy supply disruptions; • Promote mutual
understanding and strategy coordination for energy crisis management  Technical
exchanges on the flexibility of thermal power generation and CHP;  Technical and
policy cooperation on efficient electricity generation from clean coal and gas
Nuclear safety • Exchange of ideas and experiences and cooperation among
concerned actors in industry, civil society and different levels of government
in the EU and China  Energy Demand: Consumption Energy demand continues to
increase in the EU and China, with considerable economic, environmental and
technical implications This creates common interests in improving the management
of the energy system on the consumption side, as well as in using energy more
efficiently Future cooperation related to energy demand will focus on demand
side management and on increasing energy efficiency  Demand side management
Management of the energy system: • Share information on energy demand/supply
analysis and management methods to keep the energy system in balance; • Share
calculation methodologies for determining the appropriate energy mix  Management
of the electric energy system: • Explore Demand Side Management policies related
to electricity; • Grid structure design; • Cross-border and regional power
transmission infrastructure development; • Optimisation of grid system and
measures to expand the application of renewable energy  Energy efficiency
Promote appliances: the production and consumption of energy-efficient • Work
towards harmonising energy labels of appliances, equipment and buildings
Develop energy standards in consumer goods: • Strengthen the cooperation on
energy consumption standards for consumer goods, aiming at mutual recognition of
existing and future schemes; • Increase business cooperation in eco-design,
systemic design and circular economy planning at the industrial level
(manufacturing, transportation, energy, food, land use)  Develop  market-
oriented Energy Performance Contracting (EPC) system  Cross-cutting Issues
Energy regulation and pricing  Share best practices on energy regulation: •
Build  cooperation platform on energy regulation  Enhancing coordination in
regulatory policies: • Work towards harmonising regulatory policies on grid
development, including dispatching policies; • Promote transparent regulation of
oil and gas pipeline infrastructure  Reform energy supply prices and support
policies: • Share experiences on the reform of energy pricing and support
policies, especially in terms of pricing policies of renewable energy,
electricity market and natural gas markets  Energy and the environment  Promote
the mobilisation of market mechanisms for environmental protection: • Endeavour
to develop market mechanisms that incite cleaner production; • Encourage the
development of  market for green goods that reduce energy consumption  Link
energy conservation and environmental protection policies: • Give priority to
environmental cooperation projects, including those with  strong emphasis on
energy efficiency; • Include energy efficiency in environmental policy
guidelines  International cooperation  Improve trade and investment conditions
in the energy sector  Engage in international energy institutions: • Support
China' increased involvement in international energy institutions; • Cooperate
within the framework of the Energy Charter Treaty (ECT) Both sides envisage
establishing cooperation inter alia through: • Dialogues and policy discussions
on regulatory frameworks, market developments, trade, investment and the global
energy architecture, as well as an energy research platform for exchange of
views on technical and technological developments; • Business-to-business fora
in the energy sector; • Cooperation projects that develop and implement energy
efficient, clean and low-carbon technologies Progress in the aforementioned
priority areas should be reviewed no later than in 2018 on the basis of  report
that will be drawn up by the relevant services This EU-China Roadmap on Energy
Cooperation does not constitute an agreement under international law European
Union Government of  Commissioner for Climate Action and Energy National Energy
Administrator Miguel Arias Cañete Nur Bekri ___________________________
_____________________________