RENEWABLE ENERGY PROSPECTS: CHINA November 2014 Copyright © IRENA 2014 Unless
otherwise indicated, material in this publication may be used freely, shared or
reprinted, so long as IRENA is acknowledged as the source About IRENA The
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental
organisation that sup- ports countries in their transition to  sustainable
energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international
cooperation,  centre of excellence, and  repository of policy, technology,
resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the
widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in
the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-
carbon economic growth and prosperity Acknowledgements The report has benefited
from valuable comments and guidance provided by the National Energy Ad-
ministration (Shi Lishan) and the China National Renewable Energy Centre (CNREC)
(Wang Zhongying, Kaare Sandholt, Ren Dongming, Gao Hu, Zhao Yongqiang, Xuxuan
Xie, Liu Jian) Additional external review was provided by Asia Europe Clean
Energy (Solar) Advisory Co (Frank Haugwitz), the China Renewable Energy Industry
Association (CREIA) (Li Junfeng), the Energy Research Institute (Jiang Ke- jun,
Yang Yufeng), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (David Fridley) and
Technical University of Denmark (Peggy Mischke) IRENA colleagues Rabia
Ferroukhi, Diala Hawila, Ruud Kempener, Shunichi Nakada, Elizabeth Press and
Frank Wouters also provided valuable comments This report was also reviewed at
the China REmap workshop in Beijing co-organised with CNREC on 15 July 2014, as
well as the two-day China Solar PV Summit in Beijing co-organised with CREIA on
September Digby Lidstone was the technical editor of this report IRENA is
grateful for the generous support of the Chinese and German governments, which
made the publication of this report  reality Authors: Dolf Gielen (IRENA), Deger
Saygin (IRENA), Nicholas Wagner (IRENA) and Yong Chen (IRENA) Special thanks are
due to Sven Teske For further information or to provide feedback, please contact
the REmap team -mail: REmap@irenaorg Report citation IRENA (2014), Renewable
Energy Prospects: China, REmap 2030 analysis IRENA, Abu Dhabi  Disclaimer While
this publication promotes the adoption and use of renewable energy, IRENA does
not endorse any particular project, product or service provider The designations
employed and the presentation of materials herein do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the IRENA concerning the legal status of
any country, territory city or area or of its authorities, or concerning their
authorities or the delimitation of their frontiers or boundaries Renewable
Energy Prospects: China REmap 2030 analysis November 2014 FOREWORD REmap 2030 –
the global roadmap prepared by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
– assesses how countries can work together to double the share of renewable
energy in the global energy mix by It represents an unprecedented international
effort that brings together the work of more than 90 national experts in nearly
60 countries, who continue to collaborate through global web discussions,
regional meetings and national workshops involving technology experts, industry
bodies and policy makers Following the global REmap report released in January
2014, IRENA is producing  series of country-specific reports built on the same
detailed analyses As the largest energy consumer in the world, China must play
pivotal role in the global transition to  sustainable energy future in an
increasingly ‘carbon-constrained’ world The country is already  global leader in
renewable energy, with massive potential to harness  diverse range of renewable
sources and technologies, both for power generation and for end-use sectors
Compared to energy systems based on fossil fuel, renewable energy offers broader
participation, enhances energy security, creates more jobs and provides an
effective route to reducing atmospheric pollution and carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions –  goal that becomes increasingly urgent by the day Renewable energy
technologies now provide the most cost-effective option for delivery of energy
services in  growing range of locations and conditions, while innovation and
increasing deployment continue to drive costs down even more Under current
policies and investment patterns, the share of renewables in China’ energy mix
is projected to only reach 17% by 2030 compared to 13% in REmap analysis,
however, shows that the country could realistically achieve scaling up modern
renewables to 26% The required investment of USD 145 billion could potentially
save China more than USD 200 billion, factoring in the benefits of improved
health and lower CO2 emissions While countries must make energy decisions based
on their own circumstances, each decision needs to be based upon the most
comprehensive and transparent data available China has demonstrated that it
possesses the technical and human resources, as well as the dynamism, to
spearhead  transformation of global energy use REmap 2030 suggests concrete
pathways to be considered to meet this generational challenge: to attain  clean
and secure energy system in China and for the world Adnan  Amin Director-General
International Renewable Energy Agency    enewable  nergy Prospects: China
CONTENTS FOREWORD  III LIST OF FIGURES VII LIST OF TABLES VIII LIST OF BOXES IX
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  HIGHLIGHTS   INTRODUCTION   METHODOLOGY AND DATA SOURCES
RECENT TRENDS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND THE PRESENT ENERGY SITUATION 10   Status
of renewable energy development 10 Base year renewable energy situation  15
REFERENCE CASE DEVELOPMENTS TO 2030  31  CURRENT POLICY FRAMEWORK 34 Airborne
Pollution Prevention and Control Action Plan 34  Renewable energy policy of
China 36  Transport sector related policies  40  Solar water heating policy for
buildings 41  Industrial policies for renewable energy 41  Carbon policy 43
Electricity pricing 45  RENEWABLES POTENTIALS 47  REMAP OPTIONS 49
Renewable energy technologies 50 Roadmap table and implications for renewable
energy  52 Renewable energy technology cost projections 58 Summary of REmap
Options: cost-supply curves  60 Discussion of REmap 2030 Options 67  BARRIERS
AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY TRANSITION  73    Barriers and
opportunities in the power sector  73 Power market reform  76 Barriers and
opportunities in end-use sectors  76  SUGGESTIONS FOR ACCELERATED RENEWABLE
ENERGY UPTAKE  78 REFERENCES 80 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS  87 Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina vi  ANNEX : 89 Technology cost and performance data
assumptions 89 ANNEX : 91 Energy price assumptions 91 ANNEX : 92 Details of
REmap cost methodology 92 ANNEX : 93 Reference Case 93 ANNEX : 94 Data for cost-
supply curve, from the business perspective and the government perspective 94
ANNEX : 96 Levelised costs of renewable and conventional technologies in end-use
sectors in 2030 96 ANNEX :  97 Resource maps  97 ANNEX : 98 Detailed roadmap
table 98 ANNEX : 100 Traditional use of biomass in China 100  iii  enewable
nergy Prospects: China List of Figures Figure : Contribution of individual
countries to total global renewable energy use in REmap 2030   Figure :
Cumulative renewable power plant capacity in China  11 Figure : China wind power
capacity growth,   12 Figure : China TFEC breakdown, 2010 16 Figure : Renewable
power capacity and generation, 2012 18 Figure : China coal, crude oil and
natural gas production,   21 Figure : Installed capacity and peak load of State
Grid Corporation of China  27 Figure : Growth of the total primary energy supply
in China,   31 Figure : Reference Case power generation growth  32 Figure 10:
Reference Case growth of renewable energy in end-use sectors  32 Figure 11:
China Reference Case – Renewable energy in TFEC  33 Figure 12: Interactions
between renewable energy policy and renewable energy industrial policy 42 Figure
13: Expected average carbon price – China carbon trading 45 Figure 14: Primary
biomass demand by sector with REmap Options, 2030  51 Figure 15: Increases in
renewable energy consumption in TFEC by resource 52 Figure 16: Breakdown of
renewable energy use by application and sector, 2010 and REmap 2030  53 Figure
17: Changes in total primary energy supply in REmap 2030  55 Figure 18: Power
capacity by renewable energy technology  57 Figure 19: REmap Options cost supply
curve, national, by resource  60 Figure 20: REmap Options cost supply curve,
national, by sector 61 Figure 21: REmap Options cost supply curve,
international, by resource 62 Figure 22: REmap Options cost supply curve,
international, by sector 62 Figure 23: Renewable energy technology options in
the cases of REmap 2030, REmap- and REmap-, 2030 70 Figure 24: Comparison of
REmap 2030 with the findings of other studies for power sector, 2030  71 Renewa
ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina ix List of Tables Table : Summary of biomass use in
China based on different sources 20 Table : Largest pellet mills in China  22
Table : Five largest ethanol plants in China  23 Table : Regional power
generation capacities and peak demand of the State Grid Corporation of China 26
Table : Installed and under construction pumped hydroelectricity 29 Table :
Operating performance of pumped hydro plants, 2008 and 2012 29 Table : China’
three stage smart grid plan 30 Table : China’ estimated annual CO2 reductions
from strong, smart grid 30 Table : Renewable energy targets overview 38 Table
10: Overview of the current feed-in-tariffs in China by technology and resource
39 Table 11: Overview of carbon trading systems in seven provinces of China44
Table 12: China’ ETS pilots and performance 44 Table 13: Renewable energy
resource potentials of China  47 Table 14: Breakdown of total biomass supply in
48 Table 15: Breakdown of renewable energy share by sector 54 Table 16: China
REmap 2030 overview  55 Table 17: Comparison of LCOE for power sector
technologies 58 Table 18: Overview of the average cost of substitution of REmap
Options for the China 63 Table 19: Development of China CO2 emissions,  65 Table
20: Financial indicators of REmap Options, based on government perspective 66
enewable  nergy Prospects: China List of Boxes Box : Rural grids and mini-grids
28 Box : Implications of changes in coal-based power production on water demand
35 Box : Renewable energy targets in China  37 Box : Distributed solar PV in
China and new policy developments  40 Box : China´ “push & pull” strategy to
expand the renewable energy industry42 Box : Inner Mongolia case study: The need
for connection  74 Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina    ii  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China EXECUTIVE SUMMARY HIGHLIGHTS ● China has become  global leader
in renewable en- ergy It has vast resources and great potential for future
development In 2013, China installed more new renewable energy capacity than all
of Europe and the rest of the Asia Pacific region ● Reaching  26% share for
modern renewable en- ergy would require investments of USD 145 billion per year
between 2014 and Accounting for improved health and reduced carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions, renewables would bring savings of between USD 55 and USD 228 billion
per year to China’ economy ● The main drivers for this shift are the increasing
cost-competitiveness of renewable energy tech- nologies and other benefits such
as improved energy security and decreased air pollution ● Under REmap 2030, the
share of renewables in the power sector would increase from 20% to nearly 40% by
This assumes accelerated growth in wind and solar PV, and full deployment of
hydroelectricity To achieve this requires significant growth in grid and
transmission capacity, and power market reform ● The share of renewables in
China’ energy mix was 13% in 2010, including an estimated % tradi- tional use of
biomass, and % modern renewables Hydroelectricity (%) and solar thermal (%)
accounted for most of China’ modern renewable energy use ● Significant potential
exists for renewable energy in end-use sectors Industry can achieve  10%
renewable energy share, compared to almost none at present The building sector
can transform its fuel mix to two-thirds renewables Solar thermal heat and
electrification can help, as can modern biomass for process heating and
space/water heating ● Under current policies and investment patterns, the share
of modern renewables in China’ energy mix will rise to 16% by REmap 2030 esti-
mates that it would be both technically and eco- nomically feasible to increase
the share of modern renewables to 26% The case for renewable energy in China
water consumption compounding water scarcity) have prompted  shift in policy As
result, China is turning to renewable energy It already has the world’ largest
installed capacity of wind and hydroelectric power, as well as the vast majority
of solar heating and biogas installations In 2013 China installed more solar
photovoltaic (PV) capacity than the whole of Europe China’ energy policy matters
globally The country is the world’ largest energy user, accounting for one fifth
of all global energy consumption By 2030, China’ energy consumption is expected
to increase by 60% China’ energy choices will be  major influence on the world’
ability to curb climate change There are rising concerns over energy security As
of 2014, about 30% of China’ natural gas supply is imported, but this could
increase substantially China imports more than half of its crude oil supply, and
this will also increase Shale gas was considered as an alter- native, but local
exploration proved challenging Until recently, China has been meeting most of
its energy demand with coal However, growing concerns over the environmental
impacts of coal (severe air pollution that caused  million premature deaths in
2010, high This strategy is bringing substantial economic returns China has
become  major exporter of renewable energy technology, accounting for two-thirds
of global solar PV module production Its renewable energy sector employed
million people in And it has the financial ability to invest further Under
business-as-usual scenario, China could fall far short of its full renewable
energy potential However, given the implementation of the right mix of policies,
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina  the country has the resources and the
dynamism to lead  transformation of the global energy system to 500 GWe by 2030
(twice the current installed capac- ity worldwide) and an additional 60 GWe
capacity in offshore wind For this to occur, the realisable resource potential
by 2030 in northern China would need to be deployed, and the early retirement of
some coal capac- ity would be necessary (mainly in western China) New grid and
transmission capacity (including 100 new DC power lines) will be needed to link
wind power with demand in southern and eastern China REmap 2030: China’
renewable potential REmap 2030 shows how the share of renewable en- ergy in the
global energy mix can be doubled by China’ role is crucial for it to succeed
Using projections from the Chinese Renewable Energy Centre (CNREC), IRENA
calculates that the share of modern renewables (which excludes traditional uses
of biomass) in China’ energy mix will rise from about % in 2010 to 16% by 2030
under the business-as-usual scenario (the Reference Case in this study) Solar
PV: China installed 13 GWe of solar PV capacity in 2013,  substantial increase
which resulted in  total installed capacity of 20 GWe  GWe came from distributed
projects, such as rooftop solar PV on residential or commercial buildings China
aims to raise the total to 70 GWe by 2017, with equal contributions from
utility-scale and distributed projects REmap 2030 envisages  total installed
capacity of 308 GW by 2030e which is twice the current installed capacity
worldwide Nearly 40% of this would be distributed Under REmap 2030, however,
with the right policies and support, the share of renewables in the energy mix
could quadruple to 26% with technologies currently available That would make
China the world’ largest user of renewable energy, accounting for about 20% of
global use Hydroelectricity, wind power, solar PV, solar thermal and modern
biomass would constitute most of the renewable energy mix of the country
Challenges and solutions: — Costs and externalities: Wind and solar PV cannot
compete with the low cost of coal power generation, based on today’ market
prices They do become cost-competitive, however, when accounting for coal’
significant externalities, such as air pollution and its impact on human health
China would need  nationwide price of about USD 50 per tonne of carbon dioxide
(CO2) to raise the cost of coal power generation sufficiently to make
distributed solar PV cost-competitive Prices closer to USD  per tonne CO2 would
ensure that wind and solar PV could compete with coal at utility scale  strategy
for  diverse mix of renewables in the power sector China has massive potential
to harness renewable ener- gy for power Currently, 20% of the country’
electricity comes from renewables Under the business-as-usual scenario, this
rises to 30% in With REmap 2030 options, it approaches 40% Hydroelectricity
would be the largest type, as is the case today, but wind and solar PV would see
the largest growth and would play an es- sential role — Grids and transmission:
Power generation from both utility scale solar PV and wind in China has been
curtailed by  lack of sufficient grid infrastructure, and because coal power
plants are given priority dispatching This is improving as preferential policies
for renewables are introduced Grid and transmission capacity issues will gain
more importance in the future, as an important share of China’ wind and solar PV
will need to be built far from population centres Better regional coordination
is needed to create power exchange and new interconnectors between provinces,
and power trading with neighbouring countries (, hydroelectricity from Siberia
and Southeast Asia, or wind from Mongolia) Hydro: China’ hydroelectricity
potential by 2030 is 400 gigawatts-electric (GWe) Already envisaged in the
business-as-usual scenario, this will require significant cross-boundary
coordination, as well as enhanced river and water management Total pumped hydro
capacity, crucial for energy storage, should reach 100 GWe Wind: Wind became
China’ second largest source of renewable power in 2013 and has potential to
grow further The best wind resources are found in the north- west and northeast
REmap 2030 envisages  fivefold increase in onshore wind capacity, from 91 GWe in
2013   enewable  nergy Prospects: China — Distributed solar PV offers another
solution For this to be successful, business models need to be developed that
result in higher rates of return, uncertainties in ownership should be resolved,
and capacity growth needs to be accelerated — Industry: Biomass in Chinese
industry is currently limited to pulp and paper making, and only in small
amounts By 2030, biomass and waste could ac- count for up to one-fifth of the
process energy needed to produce clinker, one of the production processes that
account for the largest share of en- ergy use in China’ manufacturing industry
Biomass could also be used in industrial combined heat and power (CHP) plants
and heaters to generate process heat (, steam), but would still meet less than %
of the industry sector’ total fuel demand To utilize these potentials from
limited use today requires sig- nificant efforts from the industry sector —
Power market design and infrastructure planning: The current electricity grid is
not designed to handle high shares of variable renewable power In order to
accommodate this, accelerated power market re- form will be needed, including
establishing an elec- tricity retail market segment, which would not only
encourage competition on electricity retail prices, but also innovation in
creating business models for applications of distributed generation renewable
electricity In parallel, China should expand the study on its future grid,
particularly incorporating smart technologies to cope with large-scale variable
re- newables located in Northern and Western China, far away from the centers of
the demand — Transport: The government is promoting the pro- duction of advanced
biofuels from sustainable feed- stocks REmap 2030 envisages production rising
from  billion to 37 billion litres Already today around 200 million electric two
and three-wheelers are on the road in China, by 2030 this could reach 500
million The magnitude of growth in advanced biofuels production represents
challenge The role of biomass in the renewable energy transition Under REmap
2030, modern biomass would account for  quarter of all China’ renewable energy
use, primarily for end-uses such as fuel and heating Reaching this po- tential
poses significant challenges for data collection, substituting modern for
traditional use of biomass, and transport logistics Renewable energy options
other than biomass: Re- alising the biomass potential in REmap 2030 would
require at least two-thirds of China’ total biomass sup- ply potential to be
utilized Solar thermal for heating and different forms of electric transport are
renewable energy technology options other than biomass China is  global leader
in solar thermal, and could increase its installed capacity six-fold under REmap
2030: 30% in manufacturing, and 70% in residential and commercial buildings
Electric vehicles already carry hundreds of millions of passengers every year,
and could meet up to 20% of projected car demand by 2030, and as China’ power
system becomes more renewable, so will the electricity these technologies
consume Challenges and solutions: — Biomass feedstock: China has abundant
biomass resources, but utilising them sustainably and af- fordably will require
carefully crafted policies The main forms of biomass are straw (concentrated in
the northeast and the lower Yangtze River) and fuel-wood (in the southeast and
northeast) There is also potential from forestry residues Transport of biomass
feedstock from areas that are scattered across the country to specific centres
of demand is  major challenge The cost of REmap 2030 The investment needed to
achieve REmap 2030 would average USD 145 billion per year, between now and This
is an increase of USD 54 billion per year in investments in renewable energy
technologies over current projections — Cooking/heating/power generation: Nearly
all biomass today is used in traditional forms,  for cooking The share of the
population that relies on traditional use of biomass is decreasing, and the use
of modern cooking stoves is increasing But the num- bers are uncertain, and data
collection needs to im- prove to assess the challenge ahead Power produc- tion
from biomass and waste could account for 10% of the total renewable power
generation by REmap quantifies costs from two perspectives: those of businesses,
and those of governments ● From the business perspective, which includes end-
user tax and subsidies, REmap Options could be deployed at an average
incremental cost of USD Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina  per megawatt-hour
(MWh), or USD  per gigajoule (GJ) ● Assess the socio-economic, energy security,
health, land and water use impact of various technologies ● Set targets for
renewables in manufacturing, build- ● From the government perspective, which
excludes energy tax and subsidies, the cost would rise to USD per MWh (USD  per
GJ) This translates to  bottom line additional cost of USD 58 billion per year
for the entire energy system ings and transport Power supply system and market
design: ● When externalities are taken into account, such as human health and
CO2 emission reductions, REmap 2030 results in net savings of USD  billion per
year ● Establish the national power market, creating eco- nomic incentives for
flexible operation, and bringing in new investors ● Develop the grid to better
integrate renewable en- ergy, enhance trade and deal with variability Reducing
CO2 emissions Technology focused policies: China is the world’ largest emitter
of CO2, driven by its use of coal Its power and end-use sectors produce around
Gt of CO2 per year in 2012, and under business as usual scenario, this will grow
by 50% by REmap 2030 shows that it is possible to limit this growth to 25% by
substituting coal, mainly in the power sector ● Enhance government support for
innovation, re- search and development to reduce renewable en- ergy costs ●
Support development of next-generation renewable energy technologies ● Improve
knowledge and data collection on biomass and develop  working biomass feedstock
market However, even with the potential of renewables esti- mated in this study,
China’ coal use by 2030 will be very similar to its current levels China will
need to continue to deploy renewables beyond 2030, and improve en- ergy
efficiency in end-use sectors, in order to transition to  sustainable energy
system China’ energy use has grown rapidly in recent years, and by 2030 it will
increase by another 60% In  business as usual scenario, the country will not
only be the world’ largest energy consumer by far, but also emit over twice the
quantity of CO2 of the next largest emitter Without increased deployment of
renewable energy, China’ energy system will continue to result in high levels of
air pollution, negatively affecting health, economic growth and the environment
Without the diversification of its energy system and  transition towards
renewable energy, the country will become increasingly reliant on imported
fossil fuels, affecting its national energy security and economic growth If
REmap Options were achieved worldwide, coupled with higher energy efficiency,
atmospheric CO2 concen- tration would stay below 450 parts per million (ppm) of
CO2 helping to prevent average global temperatures from rising more than two
degrees Celsius above pre- industrial levels Policy needs REmap 2030 provides
several recommendations to accelerate the transition to renewable energy They
include: China can choose  different path by accelerating the shift to renewable
energy There are challenges, transmission including enhancing grid and
infrastructure, as well as biomass collection and logistics These challenges can
be overcome through effective planning and by creating mechanisms that value the
external benefits of renewable energy If China acts decisively to increase the
role of renewables in its energy system, it can significantly reduce the
pollution of its environment, enhance its energy security, benefit its economy
and play  leading role in mitigating climate change Renewable energy policy: ●
Develop  comprehensive national energy plan that accounts for the needed
infrastructure for transmis- sion and distribution of electricity, heat and gas
● Introduce taxation, caps, and/or CO2 trading systems to account for the damage
of CO2 emission and other air pollution from coal combustion   enewable  nergy
Prospects: China  INTRODUCTION REmap 2030 is the global renewable energy roadmap
of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) that shows how accelerated
penetration of renewable energy in individual countries could contribute to dou-
bling the share of renewables in the global energy mix by Renewable Energy
Centre (CNREC) estimates, China’ share of modern renewables in the TFEC will
grow from just % in 2010 to only 16% in 2030 (excluding traditional uses of
biomass3) China has significant potential to go beyond its Refer- ence Case if
all the potential renewable energy tech- nologies identified in REmap are
deployed in addition to the Reference Case (IRENA, 2014a) The deployment of
technologies required to fill this gap are called the REmap Options Given the
size of the country, renew- able energy technologies and their related
potentials vary by region and include geothermal, wind and vari- ous forms of
solar and biomass Annex  provides maps of the distribution of various energy
sources and their potential Key factors in achieving  doubling are the use of
biomass for heating, power generation and biofuels, as well as wind and solar
technologies and greater elec- trification of the energy sector Based on the
analysis of 26 countries, REmap 2030 suggests that existing and future renewable
energy expansion, as currently planned, will result in  21% share of renewables
world- wide in 2030 (IRENA, 2014a) This leaves  15 percent- age-point gap to
achieve the doubling – 36% renewable energy share in the global total final
energy consump- tion (The World Bank, 2013) This national potential is of global
importance Figure  provides  breakdown of total renewable energy use across the
26 countries that have developed REmap Options Six of these countries account
for three-quar- ters of the total additional renewable energy potential and more
than half of the worldwide REmap Options China has the largest renewable energy
potential world- wide, accounting for 20% of the total global potential The
engagement of China is essential if the goal of doubling the share of global
renewable energy use is to be achieved REmap 2030 is the result of
collaborative process between IRENA, national REmap experts within the
individual countries and other stakeholders The cur- rent report focuses on the
actual and potential role of renewable energy in China,  major energy producer
and consumer, and  major contributor of carbon di- oxide (CO2) emissions In
2010, China was the largest energy consumer in the world with  total final
energy consumption (TFEC) of 57 exajoules (EJ) per year (or ,950 million tonnes
of coal equivalent, Mtce), equiva- lent to 18% of the global TFEC (IEA, 2012a)
The objective of this report is to provide detailed back- ground data and the
results of the China REmap country analysis, as well as to make suggestions as
to how these results could be translated into action China’ TFEC is projected to
grow by 60% in the pe- riod between 2010 and 2030, according to the New Policies
Scenario in the International Energy Agency’ World Energy Outlook (WEO) 2012
(IEA, 2012a) In the same time period, according to IEA and China National The
report starts with  brief description of the REmap 2030 methodology (Section )
It continues by explaining the present energy situation and recent trends for
renewable energy use (Section ) Section  provides details of the China Reference
Case find-   tce is equivalent to GJ  EJ is equivalent to 109 GJ or Mtce  The
Reference Case of China has been prepared based on the IEA’ WEO 2012 which
projects % lower TFC compared with the IEA’ WEO 2013 projection of 103 EJ in
2030 (IEA, 2013a) However, the growth rates for  and  are similar in both
projections, estimated at approximately % per year  Estimates for traditional
uses of biomass vary widely depending on the source For  detailed breakdown of
the information available, see Section  and Annex  Renewa ble  nergy Prospects:
Ch ina  Figure : Contribution of individual countries to total global renewable
energy use in REmap 2030 10% Rest of the World (traditional uses of biomass) Six
countries (Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Russia and the United States)
account for half of global potential and 75% of the estimated scale-up through
REmap Options in 26 countries ings – the business-as-usual Section  discusses
the current policy framework Section  discusses the potential of different
renewable energy resources in China Section , the heart of the report,
quantifies the REmap Options – the potential to go beyond the uptake of
renewable energy sources outlined in the Reference Case This is followed by
discussion of the opportunities and barriers for renewable energy use in China
(Section ) Section  provides policy recommendations for an accelerated renewable
energy uptake for China   enewable  nergy Prospects: China  METHODOLOGY AND DATA
SOURCES This section explains the REmap 2030 methodology and provides
information about the background data used for the analysis of China Annexes -
provide the data and background assumptions in greater detail 2030 is an
exploratory study, not  target-setting ex- ercise The sources of the REmap
Options for China originate from  range of research that includes: REmap is an
analytical approach for assessing the gap between current national renewable
energy plans, ad- ditional renewable technology options potentially avail- able
in 2030 and Sustainable Energy for All’ (SE4All) objective of doubling the share
of global renewable energy by ● For power sector: CNREC estimates, historical
trends, IEA China Wind Energy roadmap (IEA, 2011a) and IRENA renewable energy
industry roadmap and its accompanying data were used (IRENA, 2014b) For
transport sector: IRENA estimates were used For industry sector:  recent IRENA
renewable energy in industry roadmap (IRENA, 2014b) and its accompanying data
was used For building sector: an internal analysis of Refer- ence Case
developments and REmap Options was used in addition to the draft “Roadmap
Research of China Solar Thermal Development” (Ruicheng, Tao and Xuan, 2014) ● ●
REmap 2030 assesses 26 countries: Australia, Brazil, Canada, China (in the
present study), Denmark, Ec- uador, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy,
Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Russia, Saudi Ara- bia, South Africa,
South Korea, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America ● The analysis starts with national-
level data covering both end-use (buildings, industry and transport) and the
power and district heat sectors Current national plans using 2010 as the base
year of this analysis are the starting point4 The Reference Case represents
poli- cies in place or under consideration, including energy efficiency
improvements if they are contained in these projections The Reference Case
includes the TFEC of each end-use sector and the total generation of power and
district heat sectors, with  breakdown by energy carrier for the period 2010–The
Reference Case for China was based on CNREC estimates and the IEA’ WEO 2012 New
Policies Scenario Where necessary, 2010 IEA energy balance for China has been
updated with information originating from other national sources or own
estimates This was the case in particular for the traditional use of biomass in
the residential sector IRENA developed  REmap tool that allows staff and
external experts to input data in an energy balance for 2010, 2020 and 2030, and
then assess technology options that could be deployed by 2030 consistent with an
accelerated deployment of renewable energy In addition to what is provided in
the Annexes of this report,  detailed list of these technologies and the related
background data are provided online The tool includes the cost (capital,
operation and maintenance) and technical performance (reference capacity of
installation, capacity factor and conversion efficiency) of renewable and
conventional (fossil fuel, nuclear and traditional use of biomass) technologies
for each sector analysed: industry, buildings, transport, power and district
heat Each renewable energy technology is characterized by its costs and the cost
of each REmap Option is represented by its substitution cost Substitution costs
are the difference between the annualised cost of the REmap Option and of
conventional technology used to produce the same amount of energy, divided by
the total renewable energy use in final energy terms (in 2010 real US Dollar
(USD) per gigajoule (GJ) of final re- Once the Reference Case was prepared, then
additional technology options were identified These are defined as REmap Options
The choice of an options approach instead of  scenarios approach is deliberate:
REmap  To the extent data availability allows, information for more recent years
(, 2012, 2013) is provided where relevant Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
newable energy) This indicator provides  comparable metric for all renewable
energy technologies identified in each sector use sectors of China or for each
of its end-use sectors (with and without the contribution of renewable elec-
tricity and district heat) The share of renewable power and district heat
generation is also calculated Further details of the REmap 2030 methodology can
be found online in IRENA’ REmap webpage at:  remap Substitution costs are the
key indicators for assessing the economic viability of REmap Options They depend
on the type of conventional technology substituted, energy prices and the
characteristics of the REmap Option The cost can be positive (incremental) or
nega- tive (savings), as many renewable energy technologies are already or could
be cost-effective compared with conventional technologies by 2030 as  result of
tech- nological learning and economies of scale This report also discusses the
finance needs and avoid- ed externalities related to renewable energy Three fi-
nancial indicators are developed, namely net incremen- tal system costs, net
incremental investment needs and subsidy needs These indicators are briefly
defined as: Based on the substitution cost and the potential of each REmap
Option, country cost supply curves were developed from two perspectives for the
year 2030: government and business In the government perspec- tive, costs
exclude energy taxes and subsidies, and  standard 10% discount rate was used,
which allows comparison across countries Estimating  government perspective
allows for  comparison of the 26 REmap countries with each other and for
country cost-benefit analysis; the government perspective shows the cost of
doubling the global renewable energy share as govern- ments would calculate it )
Net incremental system costs: This is the sum of the differences between the
total capital (in USD/ year) and operating expenditures (in USD/year) of all
energy technologies based on their deploy- ment in REmap 2030 and the Reference
Case in the period  for each year Net incremental investment needs: This is the
difference between the annual investment needs of all REmap Options and the
investment needs of the substituted conventional technologies which would
otherwise be invested in Invest- ment needs for renewable energy capacity are
estimated for each technology by multiplying its total deployment (in gigawatts,
GW) to deliver the same energy service as conventional capac- ity and the
investment costs (in USD per kilowatt, kW) for the period 2010-This total is
then annualized by dividing the number of years cov- ered in the analysis (, 20
years between 2010 and 2030) Subsidy needs: Total subsidy requirements for
renewables are estimated as the difference in the delivered energy service costs
for the REmap Option (in USD/GJ final energy) relative to its conventional
counterpart multiplied by its de- ployment in  given year (in petajoules (PJ)
per year) ) For the business perspective, the process was repeated to include
national prices (including, for example, en- ergy taxes, subsidies and  national
cost of capital of % for China in order to generate  national cost curve This
approach shows the cost of the transition as businesses and investors would
calculate it Assessment of all ad- ditional costs related to complementary
infrastructure, such as transmission lines, reserve power needs, energy storage
or fuel stations, are excluded from this study However, where relevant we
discuss the implications of infrastructure needs on total system costs based on
review of comparable literature ) Throughout this study, renewable energy share
is esti- mated related to TFEC6 Based on TFEC, the renewable energy share can be
estimated for the total of all end- In addition to the investment and subsidy
needs, exter- nal effects related to greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions as
well as improvements in outdoor and indoor air pollution from the decreased use
of fossil fuels have been estimated As  first step, GHG emis- sions from fossil
fuel combustion are estimated for each sector and energy carrier For this
purpose, the energy content of each type of fossil fuel was multiplied by its
Chinese Yuan Renminbi was equivalent to  US Dollars in Renewable energy share is
estimated by dividing the total final renewable energy use by the TFEC Total
final renewable energy use includes: () total fuel use in end-use sectors to
generate heat (process heat, space/water heating, cooking, etc); (ii) motor
fuels in the transport sector; and (iii) total power and district heat con-
sumption generated from renewable sources   enewable  nergy Prospects: China
default emission factors (based on lower heating val- ues, LHV) as provided by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Eggleston et al, 2006) Emissions
were estimated separately for the Reference Case and REmap The difference
between the two estimates yields the total net GHG emission reduction from
fossil fuel combustion due to increased renewable energy use To evaluate the
related external costs related to carbon emissions,  carbon price range of USD
20 to 80 per tonne of CO2 is assumed (IPCC, 2007) This range was applied only to
CO2 emissions, but not other greenhouse gases According to the IPCC (2007), the
carbon price should reflect the social cost of mitigating one tonne of CO2
equivalent GHG emissions sulphur dioxide (SO2), mono-nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
particulate matter of less than  micrometres (PM2) from fossil fuel-based power
plant operation, and ) outdoor emissions of NOx, and PM2 from road vehicles To
evaluate the external costs related to outdoor emis- sion of SO2, NOx and PM2
from fossil power plant opera- tion, the following parameters for respective
pollutants were used: () emission factor (, tonne per kWh for 2010 and 2030
taken from the IIASA GAINS database ECRIPSE scenario (IIASA, 2014)), and () unit
external costs (, Euro-per-tonne average for the European Union (EU), adapted
for China from the EU CAFE pro- ject (AEA, 2005)) Values for the potential
differences in external effects between the EU and China are ac- counted for
based on the difference in gross domestic product (GDP) The external costs
related to human health are esti- mated in  separate step, which excludes any
effect related to GHG emissions Outdoor air pollution is evalu- ated from the
following sources: ) outdoor emission of An extended version of the methodology
of the REmap analysis can be found online7   Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
RECENT TRENDS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND THE PRESENT ENERGY SITUATION expected to
continue, mainly in eastern parts of China Biomass, depending on the type of
feed- stock, agricultural residues and waste available, is concentrated in
central and northern parts of the country and residual forested areas in various
parts of China Key points ● The renewable energy share in China’ total final
energy consumption stood at 13% in 2010, the base year of REmap 2030 analysis
Hydroelectric (hydro) accounted for 85% of total renewable power generation in
China in 2013,  share that has fallen as other forms of power generation have
been rolled out Wind power is growing significantly and in 2013 China had 77
gigawatts-electric (GWe) of installed wind ca- pacity As  result, wind now
accounts for nearly  quarter of total renewable power generation in 2013 in
China Modern and traditional uses of biomass are es- timated to account,
together, for more than half of China’ total renewable energy use today However,
there are large uncertainties around the actual consumption of traditional forms
of bio- mass Based on the review of existing literature and bottom-up analysis,
this study adopted the mean value of the estimated range of  EJ- EJ,   EJ (136
Mtce) China has  long history of developing biogas for households that stretches
back to the 1960s, with total investments reaching nearly USD 15 billion between
2003 and About 50 million house- holds use  total of 16 billion cubic metres of
biogas per year today China has the largest solar thermal capacity in the world,
accounting for two-thirds of the total global capacity of 270 gigawatts-thermal
(GWth) in All of this capacity is located in the build- ing sector There are
important regional differences Wind generation is concentrated in the northwest
and northeast Utility-scale solar photovoltaic (PV) generation is concentrated
in the northern and western parts of China Distributed solar PV is picking up,
with  shift that started in 2013 and is ● This section discusses the current
energy situation of China at the level of sector and energy carriers It also
provides  brief overview of the latest renewable energy development and capacity
additions  Status of renewable energy development ● Power sector By 2013, China
exceeded the United States in terms of total electric power generation capacity
In 2013 alone, overall capacity grew by % on the previous year, to ,234
gigawatt-electric (GWe) China’ power generation capacity is expected to more
than double by 2030 or even before ● Renewable energy projects have taken an
increasingly important share of this total Figure  shows the in- crease in total
renewable energy power plant capacities in China between 2005 and Total
installed renew- able capacity reached 380 GWe in Installed ca- pacity has more
than tripled since ● With an installed hydroelectricity generating capacity of
at the end of 2013, China remains the world’ 280 GWe leading investor in hydro
(CNREC, 2014) As  result, ●  Excluding 20 GWe pumped hydro  This includes more
than 50,000 small-scale hydroelectricity facilities with  total installed
capacity of around 67 gigawatts 10  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Figure :
Cumulative renewable power plant capacity in China 400 350 )    (
300                   250 200 150 100 50  2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 Hydro Wind on-grid Solar PV (on-grid) Biomass Geothermal & Ocean
Source: IRENA analysis based on CNREC (2013a,;2014) Note: Excludes distributed
solar PV capacity which reached  gigawatts in 2013 (CNREC, 2014) Since 2013,
China has the largest total electric power production capacity worldwide which
is expected to more than double by 2030 Installed capacity today accounts for
only around 40% of its technical potential, well below the average across the
developed countries It was planned for hydro to reach 420 GWe by 2020, including
70 GWe of pump storage (WRI, 2014) Realizing this target would require the
construction of more than 50 large-scale dams on the Jinsha, Yalong, Dadu,
Lancang and Yarlung Tsangpo rivers hydro accounted for nearly three-quarters of
the total installed renewable power generation capacity in China Ten provinces
account for more than 70% of total power production from hydro (CNREC, 2013a)
One third of all provinces and  quarter of the population relies on small
hydroelectricity for power supply China’ capacity of small-scale hydro is also
the world’ largest In 2012, China had GWe of distributed energy capacity, of
which small hydro accounted for GWe (not all small hydro is considered
distributed energy) Distributed energy is also viewed as  way to improve rural
incomes and supply irrigation Hydroelectricity is followed by wind Wind power
in- vestments have accelerated in recent years, as shown in Figure  As of the
end of 2013, total installed capacity had reached GWe; making China the world’
leading user of wind energy (GWEC, 2014a) The gap between newly installed
capacity and new additions to the grid has also narrowed in the past three
years, with GWe of the total installed capacity now connected to electric- ity
distribution grids Most major Chinese hydroelectricity developers are state-
owned enterprises: Sino Hydro Group has devel- oped 65% of China’
hydroelectricity projects Private companies have thus far had difficulty
entering this market However, Hanergy,  private company focused on
hydroelectricity, wind and solar development, is the builder of the Jin’anqiao,
Mujing, Huangtian, Wulanghe and Kunlong hydroelectricity plants After the six-
fold growth of total generation capacity between 2008 and 2013, wind power had
become the third largest source of Chinese power production after Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Wind power is the third largest source of electricity
in China, although it still only accounts for % of the total thermal and hydro,
albeit accounting for only % of the total This suggests there is considerable
room for the industry to grow Between 2010 and 2012, newly added capacity
averaged 15 GWe per year The size of wind parks is also increasing In 2012,
average unit capacity had reached  megawatts-electric (MWe), double the figure
in 2005 (CNREC, 2013a) China had installed 390 MWe of offshore wind power by the
end of 2012, with the majority in Jiangsu Province and Shanghai City, where all
facilities have been con- nected to the grid Two-thirds of the total capacity
was located in intertidal zones where Donghai Bridge (close to Shanghai) is the
largest single location with the larg- est capacity (102 MWe) The remaining
projects mostly consist of small prototypes for demonstration and test- ing
purposes (Carbontrust, 2014) The biggest offshore demonstration project in China
had  total capacity of 150 MWe in Jiangsu Rudong Other installations are the
second phase of the MWe Donghai Bridge project, with  MWe installed in 2011
(GWEC, 2014b; WP, 2013) As of 2013, the total number of wind turbine projects in
the pipeline were equivalent to GWe of additional capacity If these can be
completed and connected to the grid in the next - years, it is expected to
nearly double China’ total installed on-grid wind power gen- eration capacity
(CREIA, 2014a) Private and foreign ownership in the sector remains limited,
accounting for % and % of total wind capac- ity, respectively About 80% of the
total is state-owned, while 14% is accounted for by Sino-foreign joint ventures
(CNREC, 2013a) There are also an increasing number of solar PV pro- jects in
China Installed generation capacity based on solar PV has increased considerably
in recent years The period from 2010 to 2012 saw  nearly tenfold increase, from
GWe to  GWe In 2012 alone, about  GWe – more than the total installed over the
previous five years – was added North China accounts for about 70% of the total
in- stalled wind capacity Hebei and Gansu provinces also have high installed
capacities:  GWe and  GWe, respectively (CNREC, 2013a; Perera, 2014) Figure :
China wind power capacity growth,  20 100 18 90 16 80 14 70 12 60       10 50
40  30  20  10 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 New installed (connected to the
grid) (left-axis) New installed (left-axis) Cumulative installed (right-axis)
Source: CWEA (2014); CHPDI (2014) 12  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Driven by
new target of 35 GWe by 2015 – an increase of 40% from its previous target of 21
GWe – announced at the very beginning of 2013, and partly by the ending of  16
US cents per kWh feed-in tariff (FiT) for large grid-connected PV projects, the
record of the annual new addition of installed capacity was reset at nearly 13
GWe by This makes the total installed capacity GWe including GWe of ground-
mounted solar PV systems and  GWe of distributed solar Two CSP projects, each
with  capacity of 50 MWe, re- ceived total lending of USD 250 million (RMB
billion) from the Asia Development Bank One of them was in Qinghai, which
received USD 150 million (estimated to produce 197 GWh annually); the other was
in Gansu, which received USD 100 million (parabolic) The loans were made in 2013
and 2014, respectively (Lee, 2014) In August 2014, NDRC set  tariff of USD cents
per kWh for the first CSP project, the Delingha installation operated by SUPCON
Group, which has  designed capacity of 50 MWe Phase , worth 10 MWe, has been in
commercial operation since early The nearly two-year-long operation has provided
data for policy makers to set future tariffs The current tariff is not as high
as the CSP industry had expected, suggesting that future FiTs for CSP will be
differentiated from those for PV projects This would be of great significance
for the CSP industry as the previous prevailing wisdom was that the same level
of tariffs would be applied to both forms of solar power plant It is estimated
that  universal tariff structure for CSP will not likely be issued until  few
projects are up and running and generating sufficient amounts of operational
data on which to base  judgement Following the strong momentum seen in 2013,
new target was set in May 2014 of 70 GWe by 2017 in the con- text of the Action
Plan on Prevention and Control of Air Pollution This target indicates that the
record growth of 13 GWe  year would have to be sustained for the next four years
(SolarServer, 2014) Although the addition of distributed solar PV generation
capacity in 2013 was about 800 MWe, the new goal set for 2014 is to install  GWe
of distributed solar PV as opposed to  GWe ground-mounted utility-scale solar PV
farms (CREIA, 2014b) It highlights the importance of distributed solar PV as
well as the development of utility-scale solar PV in western China (Haugwitz,
2014), in the context that distributed solar PV accounts for about 38% of the
total installed However, in the first half of 2014 only  GWe of ground-mounted
utility scale capacity was installed while about  GWe of distributed generation
solar PV was installed, but with another  GWe at least commis- sioned in the
same time period If the targets set for 2014 are to be achieved, considerable
efforts need to be made in the near future The relatively low tariffs for the
pilot CSP projects might also reflect an attempt to encourage the use of local
components Currently, the two biggest challenges facing the Chinese CSP industry
include resource as- sessment and system optimisation It has been widely
acknowledged that the levelised cost of energy (LCOE) would be decreased
dramatically if and when Chinese manufacturing capacities in CSP increase This
might bring the technology back to the table Qinghai, Xinjiang, Tibet, Inner
Mongolia, Sichuan and Gansu Provinces account for the largest share of in-
stalled solar PV capacities, given they represent more than two thirds of the
national solar energy resource potential (CNREC, 2013a) The first CSP pilot
project was subject to  comparatively low feed-in tariff, indicating that policy
makers are keen to encourage investment in the sector Concentrated solar power
(CSP) has only recently been introduced in China In 2011, there were five
approved projects under construction Their total capacity is MWe and all of them
use parabolic trough tech- nology Plants are located across Gansu, Inner Mongo-
lia, Ningxia and Qinghai (Eurobserv’er, 2014; ESTELA, 2012) Expected installed
capacity growth to 2018 is  GWe, mainly driven by the 12th five-year plan (FYP)
() (for which the target is  GWe), the ample availability of low-cost financing
and flexibility from hybridisation with coal or storage (IEA, 2013c) By 2020,
China aims to have  GWe of installed CSP capacity Installed biomass power
generation capacity increased from  GWe in 2006 to  GWe in After hydro it was
the second largest form of renewable capacity in- stalled until 2007, before
wind caught up The majority of biomass capacity is in eastern China, with
Shandong alone accounting for 14% of the total Henan, Jiangsu, Heilongjiang and
Hubei each have around 500 MWe capacity installed as well (CNREC, 2013a) Renewa
ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Investments in biomass have increased steadily,
aided by European technology and reduced engineering, procurement and
construction costs Biomass installed capacity numbers vary by source Half of the
total installed capacity ( GWe) today is ac- counted for by agriculture and
forestry biomass direct combustion power generation plants At the end of 2012
there were 100 such steam cycle plants in operation, most with  unit capacity of
12 MWe but some with up to 50 MWe  quarter ( GWe) of this capacity comes from
waste incineration, around  GWe is from biogas  GWe from sludge and biomass
gasification power generation, and  GWe from bagasse power plants10 (CNREC,
2014) Biomass co-firing is limited Govern- ment has set  target of 30 GWe for
biomass-based power by With extensive but low-temperature geothermal resources
(30-90o  in most locations), China has since 1999 been the world’ largest user
of geothermal energy for non-electric applications such as space heating and
recreation  few locations have the potential for high-temperature geothermal
use, notably in southern Tibet, western Yunnan and western Sichuan, located on
the Himalayan Geothermal Belt However, it remains uncertain whether these
resources could be exploited in an economically viable and environmentally
benign manner As  result, China’ geothermal power generation capacity has
hovered around 27 MWe for many years (CNREC, 2014) The largest project,
Yangbajing Geothermal Power Plant, is located in Tibet with  total capacity of
MWe and has been in operation since 1977 (built between 1977 and 1991, starting
with   MWe capacity) Many other plants with much smaller capacities existed in
Tibet, Guangdon and Hunan but have since ceased operation Power generation from
modern biomass was about 34 TWh in 2012 (using around  EJ biomass) Solid bi-
omass use for power generation is projected to increase to  EJ in 2015, while
biogas will grow to  EJ, solid biomass for heating to 18 EJ and biofuels to 18
EJ (total  EJ) The target for biomass power generation is 13 GWe by This
includes  GWe agricultural/forestry residues,  GWe municipal solid waste and
GWe biogas This could double power generation from 2012 levels of 34 TWh/year No
major developments in the sector have taken place in China since 1992
(Worldview, 2012) However, geo- thermal potential for power generation is
estimated at between 50 MWe and 90 MWe in Yangbajain (Bertani, 2010) and China
aims to arrive at  total installed capac- ity of 60 MWe by 2015 (GEA, 2012)
European high-pressure, high-temperature technology has been adapted to the
Chinese market Such boilers can achieve efficiencies of up to 32% China has
mature combustion technologies There are plants with up to 50 MWe capacity in
operation Three high temperature and ultra-high pressure circulating fluid bed
boilers have been in operation since 2012 (Van Sambeek et al, 2013)
Manufacturing in China has reduced engineering, pro- curement and construction
(EPC) costs from USD ,500 per kW in Europe to USD ,000 to ,200 per kW for the
same base technology Special attention is needed for fuel handling and fuel
feeding, combustion, boiler and flue gas cleaning (Brendstrup, 2012) Transport
sector In the transport sector, two main technology options are liquid biofuels
and electric mobility Fuel ethanol production in China doubled between 2005 and
2012, reaching  total of  billion litres (CNREC, 2013a) Bio- diesel production
in China is rather limited, with about  million tonnes from  total production
capacity of  million tonnes in 2009, and production levels remain- ing stagnant
today (Qiu et al, 2012; USDA, 2012; CNREC, 2013a) 10 Bagasse is  by-product of
the sugar cane industry Sugar cane production of China amounted to about 110
Mt/year in This yields approximately 36 Mt/year bagasse (with % moisture
content) This is equivalent to 300 PJ per year bagasse genera- tion This is used
for on-site power generation in  total installed capacity of 800-,700 MWe today;
that is equivalent to about  PJ/year bagasse demand which means only % of the
actual amount generated was utilised Cane, sweet sorghum and cassava can be used
for etha- nol production However, the government is concerned about food versus
fuel competition For this reason, ambitious plans for transportation biofuel
production based on food crops have been abandoned; instead at- 14  enewable
nergy Prospects: China  Base year renewable energy situation tention has focused
on advanced biofuels Of 100 such projects worldwide, 18 of are located in China,
which accounts for 40% of the potential capacity (an annual production capacity
of  billion litres per year) (IFPEN, 2013) Sector-level breakdown In 2010, China
consumed 100 EJ of total primary energy (,410 Mtce) (excluding non-energy use of
around  EJ) (IEA, 2013a)11, In final energy terms, China’ total en- ergy demand
in 2010 was 57 EJ (,950 Mtce) of which 59% was consumed by industry, 21% by the
building sector and 13% by the transport sector (Figure ) Elec- tricity
accounted for 20% of the TFEC of which 75% was consumed in the industrial
sector, with the remainder used mainly in buildings District heat is also
important for China Its production had increased to  EJ in It provides about %
of the TFEC in each of the industry and building sectors About 70% of the total
district heat demand was consumed in the industrial sector The first cassava
ethanol plant in the world was built in Guangxi in The plant has an annual
production capacity of 250 million litres per year Another ethanol plant using
sweet sorghum as feedstock was completed in 2012 in Inner Mongolia with  total
capacity of 64 million litres per year (USDA, 2013) COFCO/Sinopec with Novozymes
as partner is investing in Zhaodong to produce ethanol from agricultural
residues with  total capacity of 64 million litres per year There are also two
other projects, one in Shanghai and another in Caofeidian, each with an annual
capacity of  million litres, which aim to produce ethanol from waste carbon
monoxide from steel mills The plant in Shanghai is expected to expand its
production to 120 million litres per year (AEC, 2013; E2, 2013) There is  plant
in Shengguan based on corn cob residues available onsite (originally  corn to
furfural company) with 22 million litres per year capacity Another plant with 56
million litre capacity in Longlif (originally  conventional biofuel company)
also uses corn cobs as feedstock  smaller plant with 11 million litre-per-year
capacity runs in Hennan Shengguan Finally, another plan in the Anhui province is
to invest in  biorefinery for the production of ethanol, bioglycols and power
from  mix of wheat straw, corn storver and lignin co-products (Biomass Magazine,
2013) The breakdown of TFEC at  sector level has changed in the past three
decades (IEA, 2013a) In the 1980s building energy demand accounted for more than
half of TFEC and the transport sector had  share of around only -% The industry
sector’ share was about 40% In comparison, today industrial energy use accounts
for more than half of China’ total energy demand, while the share of the
transport sector has tripled to 15% at the expense of the building sector, which
now only ac- counts for 30% Modern and traditional forms of renewable energy ac-
counted for 13% of the TFEC in It is not easy to make  distinction between the
amount of biomass used in its traditional and modern forms – depending on the
sources used, the traditional use of biomass in China ranges anywhere from  EJ
to  EJ (see Annex  for further details) When this amount is excluded from the
mix, modern renewables account for % of TFEC (IEA, 2013a) In addition,  shift in
transport modes, such as the use of high-speed trains with renewable power
instead of diesel-based trucks or city trams for passenger cars, are other
options for the transport sector Other end-use sectors Renewable energy use is
concentrated in the end-use sectors When excluding electricity and district heat
In buildings and the manufacturing industry, conven- tional fuels used to
generate space and water heating, cooking and process heating can be substituted
with  range of technologies These include solar thermal, geothermal heat, heat
pumps and biomass-based heat All of these technologies are already deployed in
China and have significant further potential The main chal- lenge is the
substitution of traditional uses of biomass in China with modern forms of
bioenergy and other renewables 11 According to CNREC (2013a), the total primary
energy consump- tion of China in 2012 was ,620 Mtce, which is approximately 106
EJ 12 Primary energy consumption refers to the direct use or supply of all
energy carriers (, crude oil) without being converted or transformed to another
form of energy (, heat) It is therefore higher than TFEC, which only looks at
the consumption of energy carriers such as fuels for the transport sector or
electricity for ap- pliances (see footnote ) Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
Figure : China TFEC breakdown, 2010 % 21% 47% 12% 15% Industry fuels Industry
electricity Transport fuels Transport electricity Buildings fuels Buildings
electricity Source: IRENA estimates based on IEA (2013a) consumption, this
amounted to 16% in the building sec- tor By comparison, renewable energy use is
negligible in the industry and transport sectors13 When it comes to power
generation, 19% of electricity sources were renewable, while in the district
heat sector the share of renewable energy was only % in compared with other
sectors is  specific feature of the Chinese energy system The iron and steel
sector was the largest industrial energy user, accounting for 40% of China’ TFEC
Other large industrial energy uses include non-metallic minerals (18%),
chemicals and petrochemi- cals (12%) and machinery (%) (IEA, 2013a) Industry
accounts for 62% of China’ total final energy consumption, the highest share
amongst large economies, but industry sector has the least share of renewables
in its fuel mix Industry has  high demand for steam for different pro- cesses
However, the share of industrial combined heat and power (CHP) is rather low,
with much of the process heat production coming from boilers (IEA, 2009) In
China most existing CHP production is based on coal It is often integrated with
municipal or industrial district heating systems or tied to power plants selling
steam to nearby industrial sites or district heating loops With in- vestments in
new capacity the overall efficiency of these systems are improving, but there
are many industrial systems that are based on old, inefficient coal boilers and
heating loops (average district heating boiler ef- ficiency in China is 60 to
65%, while the heat loss from district heating pipelines is estimated to be
between 20% and as much as 50%) (IEA, 2009) The industrial sector is by far the
largest energy user in China, accounting for 62% of its TFEC It is projected
that its share will fall slightly below current levels to be- tween 50% and 55%
by Today, for nearly all bulk materials, such as cement, steel and textile
fibres, China accounts for the largest share of production worldwide The high
importance of industry 13 Providing the renewable energy share excluding power
and district heat demand provides the contribution of renewable technologies in
the sector’ total fuel use only This is important to know to ex- clude the
effect of renewable power and district heating which are often outside the
boundaries of end-use sectors Besides their comparative lack of energy
efficiency, these older forms of CHP also make the reduction 16  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China of pollution and GHG emissions  challenge How- ever, there is
an opportunity for major GHG reductions through the use of localised, customer-
based CHP at individual industrial facilities and in new commercial and
residential developments – utilising more efficient and clean systems based on
natural gas and renewable and waste fuels increase from 23% to 33%, and highways
share to 48% (Ma et al, 2012) After industry and transport, the building sector
is the third largest user of energy Residential energy use accounts for 86% of
the total with the remainder accounted for by the commercial sector Building
energy consumption can be distinguished between urban residential, rural
residential and the commercial sector The application of cleaner forms of CHP at
the local level could increase energy efficiency and help reduce air pollution
Based on literature review, space heating accounts for about 30% of the total
residential energy demand (in- cluding electricity use), with that share rising
to at least 50% for commercial buildings More than half of the total energy
demand is for cooking in rural areas (Zhou et al, 2007; PNNL, 2012; Xia, 2013;
CPI, 2013) However, the breakdown of the data is largely dependent on how
biomass is accounted for More than three quarters of the transport sector’ ener-
gy use is related to road transport Domestic navigation accounts for another %
Rail transport, pipeline trans- port and domestic aviation together account for
13% of the transport sector’ TFEC (IEA, 2013a) More than half of the traffic is
on highways (,676 billion passenger- kilometres out of the total of ,098 in
2011) Aviation accounts for about 15% of the total passenger transport Railways
are increasingly gaining importance, with their share of total passenger
transport reaching 30% in Nearly half of total freight movements were via
naviga- tion in 2011, with road transport accounting for  third and railways
about 20% of the total (LBNL, 2013) China has more than 20 billion square metres
(m2) of ru- ral residential building area The urban residential build- ing area
is about 15 billion m2, while the total area for commercial buildings is about
billion m2 (CPI, 2013) Besides these total figures, attention should also be
paid to China’ changing demographics and building use On the one hand, the
household size in China is decreasing: in 1980 the average size of  household
was five people; in 2004, the figure was fewer than four On the other hand, the
dwelling area is increasing For example, the period between 1980 and 2004
experienced  more than tripling of the area of the average household, from 35 m2
to 100 m2 (Zhou et al, 2007) In 2011, the number of vehicles (excluding
motorcycles and tractors) on the road has reached million, of which million are
categorised as passenger vehi- cles Trucks represented million of the total
civil- ian motor vehicle stock (LBNL, 2013) The demand for transportation is
growing rapidly In 2011, million vehicles were sold Further growth is expected
but pro- jections are uncertain, amounting to anywhere between 25 million and 75
million cars in the long term (Econo- mist, 2012) By 2030, the vehicle stock
will have reached  million vehicles, according to some estimates (Wang et al,
2013) Ma et al (2012) project that the ve- hicle population in China will
increase to 294 million in 2030, with an average annual growth rate of 11% More
than half of the energy use in buildings in rural areas is for cooking, while
nearly half of the total energy use in commercial buildings is for space heating
China has varying climate zones The heating period in cold areas such as the
northeast and west of the country can last for as long as 200 days In other
areas, it might be as few as 90 days (IEA, 2009) Total energy consumption for
heating accounts for nearly  quarter of the total building sector energy demand
The total building heating area in China was about  billion m2 in About 38% of
this is met by CHP central heat- ing ( billion m2), and another 36% by gas/coal
boiler- based central heating ( billion m2) The remaining For intercity
passenger transportation, the total traffic volume in 2030 will be around
trillion passenger- km, nearly three times the volume in The share of aviation
in total passenger transportation is expected to double In 2030, freight traffic
volume could double compared to The share of railways could decrease from 30% to
19% the share of water transport could Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   26%
is provided by distributed systems which also include heat pumps and electric
heating ( billion m2) (Xia, 2013) By the end of 2010, China had some million
house- hold-scale digesters, and around 27,500 large- and medium-scaled biogas
plants for agricultural waste (Chen et al, 2012) Installations continue to grow
apace As of the end of 2012, China had nearly 50 million biogas cooking systems
in place in rural areas District heating for hot water is an important
technology in China Half of all major cities in China are connected to district
heating systems According to DEA (), district heating floor space has reached
nearly  billion m2 This is more than triple the total area in This increase was
result of national policies and regulations as well as the use of surplus heat
from the industrial sector CHP is gaining  market share in district heat sys-
tems and today it accounts for more than half of the to- tal district heating
(DEA, ; Euroheat & Power, 2013) Half of all major cities in China are connected
to district heating systems, many of which are designed to use surplus heat from
industry Coal still plays  leading role in the energy industry of China Around
half of all coal is used for power generation, accounting for nearly 80% of the
total of ,980 TWh/year generated in Total generation from natural gas and oil
products was less than %, while nuclear accounted for % Overall, installed
fossil fuel and nuclear generation capacities in 2012 were equivalent to 840
GWe, which is 71% of the total generation capacity of ,144 GWe (CNREC, 2013a) As
discussed earlier, renewable energy sources account for about 20% of power
production, with hydro by far the biggest form of renewable, followed by wind
and biomass District heating capacity has increased by about  half in recent
years, from 224 GWth in 2007 to 339 GWth in The increase in the length of
heating pipelines grew by about the same percentage in the same period, from
102,000 kms to 147,400 kms The vast majority of all pipelines are used for hot
water The total heat supplied reached about  EJ in 2011, and can be split into
EJ hot water and  EJ steam Hot water demand is in- creasing whereas the use of
steam is slowly decreasing (Euroheat & Power, 2013) Figure : Renewable power
capacity and generation, 2012 300 1000 900 )     /    (                250 800 )
(                  700 200 600 150 500 400 100 300 200 50 100   Solar PV
Hydroelectricity Wind onshore Bioenergy Geothermal GWe capacity (left-axis) TWh
generation (right-axis) Source: IRENA analysis based on CNREC (2013a) 18
enewable  nergy Prospects: China Hydroelectricity accounts for 85% of the total
renewable electricity generation today population, still rely on traditional
uses of biomass (IEA, 2013a) According to other sources (, Zhang, Wata- nabe and
Lin, 2010), the share of the total rural popula- tion relying on traditional
uses of biomass in  was % In the residential sector, traditional and modern uses
of biomass as  source of heating and cooking made up nearly all renewable energy
used in Next to biomass, total installed solar thermal capacity for heat- ing in
the building sector in 2010 was 130 GWth (CNREC, 2013a) Excluding traditional
uses of biomass, the mod- ern share of renewables was 16% of the sector’ total
energy demand In terms of fossil fuel products, 32% of the sector’ total energy
demand was provided by similar amounts of coal and oil products Natural gas
accounted for % of demand (IEA, 2013b) In China, between 1983 and 1996, improved
cooking stoves were distributed to 177 million households The energy efficiency
of improved fuel wood stoves is be- tween 20% and 30% Although some studies
suggest that these stoves are still mostly in use, it is unclear what their
status and acceptability is (Pachauri et al, 2012) Comparison of the literature
shows that there is an im- portant issue regarding the actual value of solid
biomass used in China in traditional forms for cooking and heat- ing in
households While there is no lack of information, the data vary widely from
about  EJ to  EJ (see Table  and Annex ) Oil products are the main sources of
energy in the trans- port sector, accounting for more than 90% of the total
demand, with smaller amounts of natural gas and coal providing the remainder
Around  billion litres of biofu- els were consumed, which is less than % of the
sector’ total energy demand While traditional uses of biomass are key in China’
energy mix, consistent and reliable data for the sector are still lacking Total
biomass use in the industrial sector was limited to black liquor combustion of
around 100 PJ per year This quantity, which was excluded from the IEA energy
statistics, is estimated based on total chemical pulp production of around  Mt
per year The sector relies heavily on coal to meet demand from energy-intensive
industries such as steel and cement production In addition to the statistical
data, there is also literature which provides estimates for per capita
consumption of energy in China Based on the literature, and the share of the
rural population relying on traditional use of bio- mass, total demand could
range from between  EJ and  EJ (see Annex ) Traditional uses of biomass The
traditional use of biomass in China deserves special attention because of its
size as well as the difficulty in establishing reliable data due to the wide
range of sources and variety of estimates Worldwide, the num- ber of people
using solid fuels for cooking and heating has increased over the last decade to
billion, with about  billion using traditional biomass Roughly 800 million today
use improved cooking stoves, partly due to efforts in the last two decades in
China (Pachauri et al, 2012) Based on the comparison of various sources above,
we assume that in the rural residential sector,  EJ (65 Mtce) of fuel wood and
about  EJ (68 Mtce) of straw14 are used for cooking and heating today Of this
total amount of around  EJ (135 Mtce), we assumed that about  EJ (17 Mtce) is
modern biomass used in efficient cookstoves15 However, this is certainly an area
which requires further research and data collection Biomass is the main source
of energy in most provinces of rural China for space heating, cooking and water
heating (An et al, 2014) In comparison,  negligible amount of biomass is used by
the urban population in China According to the IEA (based on World Health
Organisation estimates), about 445 million people in China, who represent three-
quarters of the total rural 14 According to Xiajiao (2012), 18% of the 700 Mt of
total straw generated is used for energy purposes ( EJ) According to Yishui and
Liying (2011), 215 Mt is used for energy generation ( EJ) According to Zhang
(2014), 40% of  total of 350 Mt straw available for energy is already used ( EJ)
15 The status of the 180 million modern cookstoves is unknown As- suming that
about  million are still in use with an average capacity of - kWth, total demand
for modern biomass would be about 500 PJ/year on average in Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   Table : Summary of biomass use in China based on different
sources Chen, Yao and Li (2010) 2008 (EJ/year)   IEA (2013b) FAOSTAT (2014) LBNL
(2013) Xia (2013) CNREC 2011 (EJ/year)   2011 (EJ/year)  2011 (EJ/year)   2007
(EJ/year)  ,   2012 (EJ/year)  Year data refers to Solid biomass Residential
Fuel wood Crop stalk Briquette Power & DH generation Liquid biofuels Biogas
Total       05         Data converted from m3 to EJ assuming  density of 450
kg/m3 for coniferous and 700 kg/m3 for non-coniferous wood, and  LHV of GJ/
Conventional fuel markets In the same period, natural gas production has in-
creased by % per year on average Compared with two decades ago, when production
was mainly used for meeting the demand from industry and the construc- tion
sector, today demand from the residential, com- mercial and transport sectors is
also high (IEA, 2012b) China aims to increase its production from conventional
and unconventional resources even further to improve gas security The majority
of production originates from western provinces including Xinjiang and Sichuan
(LBNL, 2012) The same national companies which con- trol the oil industry also
dominate upstream natural gas production in China China’ economy is growing
rapidly; its urbanisation rates have increased substantially in recent years and
are expected to increase even further Fossil fuels, and in particular coal, play
an important role in meeting this energy demand In 2012, total coal production
reached  billion tonnes (nearly 80 EJ), which was sufficient to meet domestic
demand (CNREC, 2013a) China also produces oil and natural gas In 2010, its crude
oil production exceeded  million barrels per day (mb/), which is around  EJ
Natural gas production reached billion cubic me- tres in 2010 ( EJ) (see Figure
) China’ coal production increased by an average of about % per year between
1990 and In the period between 2000 and 2006 in particular, production accel-
erated, reaching 10% per year growth Inner Mongolia, Shanxi and Shaanxi
provinces account for more than half of the total production (LBNL, 2012) Crude
oil production has shown  steady increase be- tween 1990 and 2012, growing at
about % per year Northern and western parts of China account for the majority of
the output Heilongjiang, Tianji and Shaanxi provinces contribute  half of the
country’ total pro- duction (LBNL, 2012) The oil market is dominated by four
national companies, namely China National Petro- leum Corporation (CNPC),
Sinopec, China National Off shore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) and Sinochem In an
attempt to meet the surging demand for oil products, China has also invested in
refining capacity, pipelines and also port infrastructure Total oil storage
capacity reached 103 million barrels (under the first phase of the Strategic
Petroleum Reserve, or SPR) As new phases of the SPR are completed by 2020,
combined storage ca- pacity will further increase by  factor of  (IEA, 2012b) In
addition to fossil fuel production trends, the increase in demand for oil
products, natural gas and electricity over the past two decades is striking Coal
use has been increasing steadily since the late 1990s, averaging more than %
annual growth, mainly as  result of the grow- ing demand in the power generation
and manufacturing industry sectors While coal still predominates, oil and gas
demand has been growing rapidly Though much smaller in volume, the growth in oil
products of -%  year outpaced coal growth as  result of the grow- 20  enewable
nergy Prospects: China Figure : China coal, crude oil and natural gas
production,  100 90 )     /   (           80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10  1990 1995
2000 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Crude oil Natural gas Coal Source: IRENA
analysis based on IEA (2012a;2013a); CNREC (2013a) ing demand in the transport
sector Finally, demand for natural gas, particularly over the past decade, has
reached more than 20% annual growth The State Coun- cil of China has approved
coal consumption target to keep it below  billion tonnes of coal equivalent by
and others China has the largest technically recoverable shale gas resources in
the world, amounting to some trillion cubic metres (IEA, 2012b) The country has
specific shale gas production targets to 2015 of  bil- lion cubic metres per
year with 990 horizontal wells drilled By 2020, China aims to produce some 80
billion cubic metres annually, however, this target has been recently halved due
to technical challenges (Reuters, 2014a) Water scarcity is the main obstacle to
meeting these targets Although the million cubic metres  year of water which
would be required by the industry in 2014 is less than % of total industrial
water demand, it may be  challenge to supply this for hydraulic fractur- ing, or
fracking, in some provinces where  substantial share of the water is not
recoverable (Forbes, 2013) Growth from China is accounting for an increasing
share of the global demand for oil products and will continue to account for an
even larger proportion in the short term due to higher car ownership The IEA
projects overall growth of nearly 70% between 2010 and 2030, which is somewhat
lower than the current trends but still significant (IEA, 2012a) Demand for coal
is expected to increase by 25% in the same period Natural gas sup- ply in
comparison is projected to increase by at least  factor of four, higher than the
growth of both oil and coal, though still accounting for  relatively small pro-
portion of the total Trade is an important component of China’ conven- tional
energy market China is  net importer of crude oil and in 2010 crude oil imports
reached more than 10 EJ 55% of the oil consumed is imported,  share which will
continue to rise in the future Half of this total originated from Saudi Arabia
(19%), Angola (17%), Iran (%) and Oman (%) (LBNL, 2012) Demand for oil products
has grown rapidly in the past decade, driven by  marked increase in car
ownership Demand for natural gas will be met partly by shale gas production,
partly by imports by pipeline and in the form of liquefied natural gas (LNG), as
well as from do- mestic sources including tight gas, coal-bed methane With
increasing demand for natural gas, China also started importing LNG in By 2010,
total imports had reached  billion cubic metres (equivalent to Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   355 PJ) Australia (48%) and Indonesia (18%) account for the
majority of LNG supply Pipelines also play an impor- tant role for the natural
gas trade of China Turkmeni- stan is the largest supplier of natural gas,
accounting for more than half of total imports The most recent devel- opment is
the new agreement China signed with Russia in May 2014, to import natural gas
worth USD 400 billion over  period of 30 years (to deliver about 40 billion
cubic metres of gas per year from 2018)  memoran- dum of understanding was
signed on  November 2014 to develop  second route between Russia and China for
natural gas supply (Al-Jazeerah, 2014) China also continues to invest in gas
storage facilities, interregional gas pipelines and LNG terminals as part of its
strategy to ensure security of gas supply (IEA, 2012b) Table : Largest pellet
mills in China Production capacity (kt/year) 200 150 120 120 100 100 100 100 100
Location Linyi, Shandong Guangzhou, Guangdong Yangzhong, Jiangsu Taicang,
Jiangsu Shenyang, Liaoning Feicheng, Shandong Nanyang, Henan Xuzhou, Jiangsu
Foshan, Guangdong Source: Vakkilainen, Kuparinen and Heinimoe (2013) In 2010,
pulp production in China was 20 Mt/year which is equivalent to 10% of total
global production (including mechanical pulp making) (FAOSTAT, 2014) Chemical
wood pulp production yields an organic residue called black liquor which is
combusted in recovery boilers to generate energy The total production of
chemical pulp is about  Mt/year This would yield about 100 PJ of black liquor
(based on 22 GJ per tonne of pulp) Some of the largest recovery boilers are
located in China; two of which have total production capacity of ,000 and ,000
tonnes black liquor dry solids (BLDS) per day, equivalent to 29 PJ and 21 PJ per
year, respectively An- other large-scale recovery boiler is under construction
in Beihai with  daily capacity of ,000 tonne BLDS Although China is  major
producer of coal, it exports negligible amounts On the other hand, its imports
have grown rapidly, reaching 165 Mt in One third of this total originated from
Indonesia and nearly  quarter from Australia (LBNL, 2012) Since 2011, China has
been the largest importer of coal worldwide, with Japan be- ing the second
Despite the huge scale of domestic coal production, there could be various
reasons for the rapid increase in imports such as transportation bottlenecks,
environmental and safety considerations (related to mining), economic factors or
depleting coking coal re- serves (Tu and Johnson-Reiser, 2012) Renewable energy
markets in heating and transport applications China has had an ambitious biogas
programme for half  century and accounts for 90% of biogas installations
worldwide, with around 35 million units in operation in 2010 and  million new
units being added every year Most units are small-scale installations in farms
integrat- ed to livestock production The trend is, however, toward centralised
and industrial production as more than half of China’ commercial pork originated
from industrial scale farms in 2007 (Hallding et al, 2012) Heating/cooling and
motor fuels are the two thermal markets where renewables play  role today  wood
pellet market is emerging in China Production has reached  Mt per year There are
about 260 manufac- turers in China producing straw pellets (Xiajiao, 2012) Some
of the largest pellet mills worldwide are located in China with capacities
ranging between 100 and 200 kilotonnes (kt) per year (see Table ) Production is
dispersed across the country with plants of small size ranging from 10 to 50
kt/year Production is projected to grow (Vakkilainen, Kuparinen and Heinimoe,
2013; Goh et al, 2013) The target is to grow pellet manufacturing to 50 Mt per
year by Around 90% of all biogas was produced in small-scale units in Of the
medium and large-scale pig farms, typically only % of the potential has been
utilised (Hall- ding et al, 2012) Biogas production stood at 16 billion m3 in
2012, or around 25 EJ The installation of house- hold biogas plants has slowed,
and there are about 50 million such installations nationwide China is also
large producer of charcoal It ranks sixth in the world following Brazil, several
African countries and India, with  total production of  Mt/year (Vak- kilainen,
Kuparinen and Heinimoe, 2013) In keeping with this trend, current policies have
begun to focus on large-scale applications Distributed biogas 22  enewable
nergy Prospects: China digesters in rural areas account for more than 85% of
biogas production in China The installations receive investment subsidies in the
range of RMB 1300-Also, large-scale projects receive  % investment subsidy from
the national government as well as  -25% subsidy from local governments (Van
Sambeek et al, 2013)  variety of biogas systems can be dis- cerned that cater to
specific needs (IISD, 2014): collection cellar is included to meet the water
needs of the household and to support biogas production China has some ,000
gasification installations, mainly downdraft gasifiers that provide villages
with gas for cooking (Chen, 2011) Current developments focus on larger
installations with  MWe capacity, mostly flu- idised beds and circulating
fluidised bed units ● The ‘three-combined’ model Traditionally in rural China
domestic biogas digester is integrated with the toilet and livestock pen,
allowing animal and human waste to be fed in easily The ‘one-plus-three
renovation’ This system is also known as  ‘rural biogas digester and three
renovations’, because  rural household reno- vates the livestock pen, toilet and
kitchen when constructing the biogas digester The ‘three-in-one’ model in
southern China This system prioritises the efficient use of bio-slurry
Originally, the three-in-one name referred to ‘pig-biogas-fruit’, using pig
manure for biogas production and then bio-slurry as fertiliser for orange trees
This system has improved both the quality and quantity of fruit production The
‘four-in-one’ model in northern China  biogas digester,  cattle pen and  toilet
are all installed inside  greenhouse, which is also used for vegetable or fruit
production In these colder regions, the higher temperature in  greenhouse
enhances biogas production, animal growth and vegetable production The ‘five-in-
one’ model in northwest China De- signed for arid areas with water shortages and
long, cold winters, this is similar to the ‘four-in- one’ model, except that the
greenhouse is used as  warm enclosure for livestock, and  rainwater Investment
in biogas as  source of energy has other spin-off benefits such as an increase
in agricultural production ● Liquid biofuel use is rather small compared with
other forms of biomass in China The target is to produce  billion litres of
ethanol and  billion litres of biodiesel  year by ● Ethanol is produced from
corn, wheat and non-grain feedstocks Biodiesel is largely produced from used
cooking oil, waste animal fats and wild oilseed plants (Qiu et al, 2012) The
emphasis is on the use of lignocel- lulosic crops to avoid competition with food
produc- tion In 2012, there were 159 ethanol plants recorded in China, of which
five are licensed to produce fuel ethanol (see Table ) (Qiu et al, 2012; USDA,
2013) The plant in Guangxi is the first cassava plant worldwide; it was built in
2007 (USDA, 2013) The only government-approved, cellulosic ethanol plant in
operation is in Shandong province The facility has been operating since October
2012 and produces ethanol from corn cobs, with  to- tal production capacity of
50 kt/year In 2012,  sweet sorghum-based plant was built in Inner Mongolia with
total production capacity of 50 kt/; this capacity is pro- jected to reach 100
kt/year by 2015 (USDA, 2012;2013) ● ● Table : Five largest ethanol plants in
China Location Production capacity (kt/year) Production (2008) (kt/ year) 450
Feedstock Jilin 500 Maize Heilongjiang 400 140 Maize Henan 450 440 Wheat/maize
Anhui 320 320 Maize Guangxi 200 150 Cassava Source: Based on Qiu et al (2012)
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   For biodiesel, the industry is lobbying
the government to make the tax exemption on biodiesel (%) from waste cooking oil
permanent (USDA, 2012) Energy-Saving and New Energy Automotive Industry
Development Plan () which were released in 2012, by 2015, 500 000 electric and
plug-in hybrid vehicles are expected to be on the road This will be sup- ported
with 400 000 charging piles and  000 charging or battery-switching stations The
nation aims to have  million electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles on the road by
2020, less than % of all vehicles Of global annual sales of between 20 and 30
million, more than 90% were in China In 2010, the total number of electric two
-wheelers reached more than 200 million (IEA-ETSAP, 2013) Biofuel policies in
China targets production from feedstocks that do not compete with crops for
human consumption Solar thermal and geothermal also play  role in China in
meeting heating and cooling demand ,000 geother- mal projects are planned with
heating/cooling area of 50 million m2 while 100 solar thermal heating projects
are planned with an area of  million m2 In September 2013, the Ministry of
Finance, the Minis- try of Science & Technology, the Ministry of Industry &
Information Technology and the National Development & Reform Commission (NDRC)
issued  joint decision approved by the State Council on the extension of sub-
sidies for three years from 2013 to 2015 to promote new energy vehicles In 2010,
China had an installed solar thermal capacity in operation of 130 GWth, which
increased to 152 GWth in By 2012, installed capacity had reached 180 GWth This
was equivalent to 67% of the global total The majority of the installed capacity
by 2012 was accounted for by evacuated tube collectors (ETC) (168 GWth) The
remaining 12 GWth is flat plate collectors (FPC) (CNREC, 2013a; AEE-INTEC, 2014)
The new subsidy scheme has three main attributes: ) it expands the scope of
pilot cities to 88 across the country, particularly those cities where fine
particle pol- lution has posed  serious threat to public health; ) it provides
differentiated subsidies for different types of new energy vehicles; )
degressive rates of 10% and 20% will be applied to all electric vehicles and
plug-in hybrid vehicles excepting buses for 2014 and 2015, respectively from the
2013 subsidy level In addition, the new subsidy policy unifies the subsidies of
all regions, changing the previous situation where subsidies varied across the
country According to the “2005 Chinese Geothermal Environ- ment Bulletin”
released by the Ministry of Land and Resources of China, the direct utilisation
of geothermal energy for non-electric purposes reached GWh/ year In 2005,
installed geothermal energy capacity reached 10,779 MWe (Delman and Chen, 2008)
The installed capacity of direct use geothermal plants as of end-2011 was  GWth
which generated about 75 PJ of geothermal heat The use of geothermal heat pumps
(GHP) has grown substantially, with installed capacity reaching  GWth by the end
of 2009 (IEA-GIA, 2013) According to IEA energy statistics (IEA, 2013), geother-
mal heat consumption in 2010 was 150 PJ/year 80 PJ of this was in the
residential sector, 44 PJ in commercial buildings and  PJ in industry In July
2014, the State Council issued its Guidance on Accelerating the Use of New
Energy Vehicles The docu- ment proposes waiving  10% purchase tax for eligible
vehicles including electric vehicles, plug-in vehicles and fuel-cell vehicles
from  September 2014 to 31 December It is hoped that the reduced purchase cost
will make the new energy vehicles more financially attrac- tive In particular,
emphasis was placed on the need for the rapid development of charging
infrastructure and the creation of new business models The council also
requested relevant authorities to present proposals for  fiscal stimulus policy
for  by the end of Renewables make up  negligible share of total district heat
generation (less than %) today The majority of the demand is met by coal Given
the country’ increasing heating demand and technologies available, there is
considerable potential for various forms of renewables to play  bigger role
Electric vehicles The output of the 628 models identified in the directory of
recommended energy-saving and new energy vehi- cles of the Ministry of Industry
and Information Technol- According to the Ministry of Science and Technology’
12th FYP for electric vehicles and the State Council’ 24  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China ogy reached 24 800 in This increase is equivalent to 94% per
year, and in 2012 included 13 300 electric vehicles, 10 400 conventional hybrid
vehicles, and more than  000 plug-in hybrid vehicles Efforts need to be
accelerated further to meet government targets technology preference and
interests between the state grid (favouring battery switching solu- tions) and
most automobile companies (prefer- ring charging solutions), makes it
inconvenient to own an electric vehicle The total annual amount of new energy
vehicles de- ployed in the 25 pilot cities (under the “10 Cities and  000
Vehicles” programme) remained at 10 This is much lower than the initial goals
set by some cities, where the total number of new energy vehicles to be reached
was 30 000 within four years By the end of 2012, more than 27 000 new energy
vehicles were on the road in the 25 cities after two years following the
implementation of the subsidy policy Most of these are public vehicles This is
more than half of the goal, and two main factors explain the lacklustre
progress: China’ electric vehicle deployment have benefited from ambitious
targets and government support in recent years However, without further
coordination of the market and policy incentives by the government, the
industry’ future will remain unclear (WRI, 2013a) Despite attempts to encourage
people to buy electric vehicles, their high cost and poor infrastructure have
hampered efforts to introduce them China is also aiming for 30% of new
government ve- hicles to be powered by alternative forms of energy by At least
15% of new vehicles introduced in in 2014 in places such as Beijing and the
Pearl River Delta will use new energy The cabinet announced  new ex- emption law
which will apply from  September 2014 for battery electric and hybrid vehicles
The law will run until the end of China will offer subsidies for new-energy
vehicles that cost below USD 29 000 and also request local governments to build
more facilities (Spiegel, 2014; BNEF, 2014a) ● First, like elsewhere at present,
electric vehicles are relatively expensive in China Even with subsidies of RMB
120 000 (about USD 17 650) and up to RMB 60 000 RMB (about USD  800) from
central and local governments (the highest local subsidy exists in Shenzen), the
off-the-lot price of  BYD E6 ( popular Chinese-made electric vehicle) is between
RMB 170 000 and RMB 180 000 (USD 25  500) That is twice the price of
conventional internal combustion engine vehicle with similar configuration and
performance As  result, demand is still weak among private consumers Current
charging infrastructure does not meet recent trends in demand and more
investments are needed if the targets are to be reached By the end of 2012, the
25 pilot cities had only  107 charging piles and 174 charging or battery-
switching stations For example, the number of street charging piles in Shenzen
reached  000 in April This is much lower compared to the target to surpass 40
000 by By end of 2012, 60 charging or battery switching stations and  080
charging piles were built Similarly, this is also much lower than the goals of
256 stations and 42 000 piles by According to the infor- mation from the State
Grid Corporation of China and China Southern Power Grid, only % and 13% of the
2015 targets were achieved by 2011 for charging piles and charging or switching
sta- tions, respectively As  result of the shortage and uneven distribution of
charging facilities, varying In China, there are also electric vehicle
technologies oth- er than cars K9 is an electric bus manufactured by BYD and it
is powered by iron-phosphate battery developed by the manufacturing company On
one single charge, it drives 250 km under urban road conditions On Sep- tember
2010, the first BYD electric bus was on the road in Changsha city in Hunan
province By the end of 2012, more than  200 electric bus offers were received by
the BYD from countries across the world (BYD, 2013) Production costs are
expected to drop as the company escalates output ● Anhui Ankai Automobile Co,
Ltd is another company producing buses 44 hybrid and electric buses were in-
corporated in the ministry’ directory of recommended new energy and energy-
saving vehicles The company is one of the leading players in the domestic new
energy bus sector By end of 2012, in 27 cities including Beijing, Shanghai,
Dalian and Hefei,  000 new energy buses were on the road which were manufactured
by Ankai (Reports, 2013) Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Transmission and
distribution grids While electric cars have proved hard to introduce, by
contrast electric two-wheelers (-bicycles, -scooters and -motorcycles) are
rapidly gaining ground Of global annual sales of two- and three-wheelers between
20 and 30 million, more than 90% were in China In 2010, the to- tal number of
electric two -wheelers reached more than 200 million (IEA-ETSAP, 2013) -bicycles
account for more than three quarters of the market By 2018, China will have 355
million cumulative sales of such products This means one vehicle per four
persons To some extent these vehicles substitute cars (GCC, 2012) China has five
state-owned power generation com- panies: CDC: China Datang Co; CGC: China
Guodian Co; CHDC: China Huadian Co; CHNG: China Huaneng Group; and, CPIC: China
Power Investment Co China also has two state-owned grid companies, State Grid
Corporation of China (SGCC) and China Southern Power Grid Corporation (CSG) SGCC
accounts for ap- proximately 80% of the total grid CSG has the remain- ing 20%
These two companies cover almost all power transmission, distribution, and
metering activities in China SGCC is the largest, covering 26 provinces, whilst
CSG covers five provinces in the south The use of urban rail transport is also
growing There were ,688 kilometres (km) of operating metro railway in 14 cities
at the end of By 2015, there will be 3000 km of metro railway, and by 2020 6200
km are planned By 2050, mainland cities will have 11700 km of metro railway,
accounting for at least half the world’ total (SCMP, 2013) SGCC is the biggest
utility company worldwide SGCC’ core business is to build and operate power
grids; the service area covers 26 of 31 provinces and oversees 88% of China’
territory By the end of 2013, the installed capacity of SGCC was more than 900
GWe (,448 TWh generation) and the maximum peak load reached 654 GWe Coal power
accounted for % of installed capacity, hydro 18%, and wind % (GWe) In Beijing
around 40% of all passengers use public transportation, compared with 25% in
Shanghai and Kunming This percentage has been rising in Beijing and Kunming
(Yang, 2013) An aspiration is that by 2030, 39% of all city transporta- tion
will consist of cars and 29% of buses; others include two-wheelers (15%),
subways (%) and walking (13%) (Yang, 2013) Within the car park the share of
internal combustion engine and hybrid cars would decline to 85%, the remainder
including around % electric vehi- cles as well as other technologies (Yang,
2013) China’ power system consists of six regional clusters with weak
interconnectors (The north, northeast, north- west, central, eastern and the
south regions) Each clus- ter consists of several provinces that act as
balancing area There are interconnection lines that facilitate trade within the
regional clusters Table : Regional power generation capacities and peak demand
of the State Grid Corporation of China Installed capacity (GWe) Peak demand
(GWe) North China 201 188 North East China 112 52 North West China 123 66
Central China 248 149 Eastern China 243 215 Total 927 654 Based on SGCC (2013)
Note: data represents the situation end of August 2013 26  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China Figure : Installed capacity and peak load of State Grid
Corporation of China / 112G /52GW North East Installed Capacity and Peak Load
201 GW/188GW / 123 GW/66GW North China North West / 243GW/215G  Central China
East China 西藏� Tibet / 248 GW/149GW SCG Note: data represents the situation end
of August 2013 Source: SGCC (2013) average can be misleading because many lines
are at full capacity while others are operating sometimes with nearly no
capacity (DB, 2012) In terms of dispatch and planning, six regional grids and
the provinces which belong to them have considerable autonomy This creates
opportunities for local influence on grid operation although, under this system,
transmis- sion projects may be underutilised Sustained electricity growth
requires both long-distance and higher capacity transmission This is
particularly important for China where resource potential is widely distributed
and far from demand centres As  result of concerns over air pollution, railway
congestion, and to be able to meet the increasing growth of electricity de-
mand, north and western parts of China are becoming electricity production
centres Thermal power plants are assigned  fixed number of full load hours every
year and the volume of inter- provincial trading is decided  year ahead Day-
ahead dispatching takes these two rules into account There are fiscal incentives
to maximize local production The variability of wind power, notably, interferes
with the al- location of full load hours and trading practices The China
Electricity Council, in its 2014 projections and recommendations, focused on the
northeast’ excess capacity problem, recommending that the central gov- ernment
“strictly control” new coal and wind construc- tion in the region It projected
smaller (though still substantial) increase in coal-fired capacity nationwide of
30 GWe CEC’ other projections for new installations Peak loading and
transmission constraints make it hard to transport power into high consumption
areas The current transmission system was designed to accom- modate  base load
and slowly varying output of coal power Transmission lines in China reach an
annual peak loading on average of 50% of capacity However, this Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Box : Rural grids and mini-grids Since the 1950s,
China has pursued the development of small hydroelectricity plants, firstly in
terms of stand- alone projects and later those connected to the national grid as
it expanded In 2002, there were 42,000 small hydroelectricity plants with  total
capacity of 28 GWe providing distributed energy Today, China has roughly 60,000
diesel and hydro mini-grid systems, most of which have been connected to the
centralized grid Be- tween 2003 and 2005, China’ Township Electrification
Programme constructed 721 solar PV and PV/wind hybrid systems (20 MWe) along
with 146 small hydro stations (264 MWe) to provide electricity to  million
people (LBNL, 2013)  Village Electrification Programme, implemented between 2005
and 2010, connected another  million people to renewable sources of energy By
the end of 2015, China aims to address the challenge of providing power to
another 73 million people without electricity, including 54 million by grid
extension and 19 million by independent solar PV power supply utilisation By the
end of 2008, there were more than 400,000 off-grid solar home systems in China
(IRENA, forthcoming) in 2014: 23 GWe hydro, 17 GWe wind, 14 GWe solar,  GWe
nuclear and  GWe gas axes The vertical, north-south axis will connect the big-
gest coal and wind production areas of Inner Mongolia, Shanxi and Shaanxi to the
north central and eastern parts of the country Investment in long-distance and
higher capacity transmission networks is essential for sustained electricity
growth in China An ultra-high transmission corridor to increase the in-
tegration of renewable energy resources is outlined in China’ 12th FYP The
2090-km-long 800 kV UHV-DC Jinping-Sunan transmission line is the second largest
in the world, allowing  GWe to be transmitted, and is owned by SGCC The project
cost USD  billion, and transports hydroelectricity from power stations along the
Yalong river in Sichuan province to the industrialised coastal area of Jiangsu
This power line was built by ABB together with CEPRI and other Chinese partners
And even higher capacities are being developed The third largest UHVDC
transmission network in the world is also in China, comprising the 1980-km-long
line that con- nects the Xiangjiaba hydroelectricity plant to industrial users
around Shanghai with  rated capacity of  GWe It was the first such commercial
operation in the world, and completed 30 months ahead of schedule There are also
projects to integrate these HVDC lines into  HVAC grid based on technology by
CEPRI With the air pollution plan, 12 west-east “air pollution control
transmission corridors” are being planned These will reduce coal-fired
electricity generation in eastern parts of China where population is high In the
south- ern lines, hydro will be primarily connected whereas in the northern
lines wind and coal will be bundled as they originate in areas of development of
both energy sources  synchronised UHV alternating current (UHV-AC) grid could
lead to more centralised control of the national power system In comparison, an
asynchronous UHV direct current (UHV-DC) grid would not necessarily dis- turb
the current setup, and it is seen as  hedge against greater monopolisation
(Davidson, 2014) UHV-AC is planned to connect north and central grids (Huainan-
Shanghai) UHV-DC is planned to connect the power generation in the west with
centres of demand in the east (Hami-Zhengzhou) Total UHV transmission grid
capacity is projected to increase to 200 GWe by 2020 (% of total generation
capacity) Meanwhile,  UHV-AC synchronous grid is planned for northern, cen- tral
and southern areas The UHV grid lines in China use 900 kV, the highest rating in
the world The grid will give shape to  system of three vertical and three
horizontal The latest development suggests that SGCC will spend an additional
USD billion on eight UHV transmis- sion lines to be built before 2021, both for
renewables and coal-fired power stations located further away from the big
cities Another estimate states that by 2020, China would be spending about USD
107 billion in UHV transmission lines and related capacity Investment in end-
points of the transmission lines account for around half of the total
investments, for both AC and DC, and 28  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Table
: Installed and under construction pumped hydroelectricity Installed (MWe)  300
860  790  500 90  800 20 340 Under construction (MWe)  200  360  200 – –  480
240 North China East China Central China Northeast Northwest South Total Source:
Based on Perera (2014) Note: data represents the situation end of August 2013
include transformers, reactive power control devices, circuit breakers,
isolation switches, surge arrestors and other related subsystems The remaining
half consists of the cables, insulators and towers (DB, 2012) Total pumped hydro
capacity is more or less equally distributed across China’ eastern, southern,
northern and central provinces (Perera, 2014) The development of the smart grid
is also very impor- tant to achieve the aims of the 12th FYP, which mandates
that 15% of the primary energy consumption has to be provided by non-fossil
fuels in order to reduce carbon emissions The supply and demand of power through
the national distribution network are managed more effectively with smart grids
For doing so, smart grids introduce high-tech communications to the system They
also accommodate renewable power sources such as solar and wind more efficiently
Renewables such as pumped hydro can play  key role in balancing output, although
there is no scope for arbitrage unless price flexibility is introduced In
addition to these considerable developments in grid expansion, technologies for
accommodating the in- creasing share of variable renewables will gain further
importance Pumped hydro can play an important role in balancing variable
renewables However, in the cur- rent system there is no possibility for
arbitrage as elec- tricity prices are set by the state and there is no special
price for electricity from pumped hydro For the future, China has developed
smart grid plan which will be gradually deployed in three phases; con- struction
investment entered  large-scale phase in Since 2009, some 298 demonstration
projects have been set up across China (SGCC, 2014) As of 2011, eight
substations adapted to smart gird technology had been constructed in regions
including Beijing, Shanghai and Chongqin Also in 2011, the State Grid Company
deployed more than 50 million smart meters (ESTELA, 2011) China has over 20 GWe
of pumped hydro installed and more than  GWe is under construction (see Table )
Another  GWe of pumped hydro projects are in the planning stage; the target for
2030 is more than 100 GWe (Perera, 2014) Pumped hydro can help to stabilise
power generation from variable renewables Table : Operating performance of
pumped hydro plants, 2008 and 2012 2008  649 2012  450 Average capacity factor
(hours/year) Capacity factors (%) Average standby (hours/year)  350  266 Planned
outage (hours/year) 689 849 Source: Based on Perera (2014) Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   Table : China’ three stage smart grid plan Stages Title
Target Establishing master plan, carry out key technology research and key
equipment development, and proceed with demonstration projects Planning and
trial phase Stage  () Full scale construction phase Formulate standards and
requirements for strong and smart grid, to evaluate construction progress based
on the needs and technical development of smart grid and construct smart grid in
full scale Stage  () Leading and enhancing phase Stage  () Evaluate contraction
of smart grid in full range Source: Based on ESTELA (2011) It is worth noting
that China’ smart grid development is different from others in the West In the
USA and the EU, for example, the well-established power systems have little or
flat future demand for electricity and thereby the focus of smart grid
development is on distribu- tion networks By comparison, in China the focus is
on backbone transmission networks due to the continued growth of electricity
demand and the mismatch of gen- erators and load centres forecasting to support
renewable energy grid integra- tion There are plans to provide wind forecast
data with high spatial and time resolutions ( km grid, every  minutes) China has
more than 250 million smart meters installed, twice as many as the total number
of households in the USA Regarding smart grids for renewables, there are  num-
ber of activities that have been promoted One of the key applications (in terms
of investment streams) has been the deployment of smart meters China has just
under 250 million smart meters installed (Worldwatch, 2014) Another area that
has been promoted is wind There are also  large number of demonstration pro-
jects on smart grid development for renewable energy integration For example,
the Zhangbei Demonstration Project includes 100 MWe of wind, 40 MWe of PV, and
14 MWe of storage combined with smart substations, intelligent control systems,
and forecasting methods Table : China’ estimated annual CO2 reductions from
strong, smart grid Avoided CO2 emissions 2020 (Mt CO2) Mechanism 2005 Figure
2020 Figure Diference between 2020 and 2005 figures Raising the consumption of
“clean energy” 39 GWe 411 GWe 320 GWe ,018 Decrease in transmission losses 59% %
Save 17 million TCE 39 38 grams/kWh; save 189 Mtce Increase efficiency of coal
burning for generation 524 343 grams/kWh 305 grams/kWh 26% of consumer energy
consumption will be in the form of electricity 18% of consumer energy
consumption is in the form of electricity Increase in energy efficiency of
electricity sector and consumers Not yet calculated / million tonnes of petrol
use will be avoided Promotion of electric vehicles 30 000 000 EVs Total ,649
Source: Based on Lu (2010) 30  enewable  nergy Prospects: China  REFERENCE CASE
DEVELOPMENTS TO 2030 China’ TFEC is projected to increase from 57 EJ in 2010 to
92 EJ in 2030 (,130 Mtce) This is an increase of 60% in 20 years Total fossil
fuel demand is expected to increase at  slower rate of 40% Much of the shortfall
is accounted for by  fourfold increase in natural gas demand over the same
period Demand for coal would only increase by 13% This section explains the
Reference Case renewable en- ergy trends in China between 2010 and The REmap
analysis begins with an assessment of the uptake of renewable energy technology
options be- tween 2010 and 2030 based on current policies IEA (2012a) and CNREC
estimates are used to develop the Reference Case for the REmap analysis of China
To put this Reference Case in perspective, this section begins with  brief
timeline of China’ primary energy demand developments since 1990 (see Figure )
In the Reference Case, total power generation is expect- ed to more than double
(by at least  000 TWh) from  200 TWh/year in 2010 to approximately  300 TWh/
year by 2030 (Figure ) Renewable power generation is projected to increase from
about 800 TWh to more than  600 TWh By 2030, hydroelectricity generation will
total  600 TWh followed by wind with 650 TWh, solar PV and CSP 200 TWh and
finally biomass with 190 TWh Hydroelectricity includes an additional 200 TWh
that is related to the increased use of electricity-based technologies in end-
use sectors sourcing demand from The exponential growth in total primary energy
supply between 1990 and 2010 will slow down in the following two decades to Coal
consumption will flatten or increase only slightly with most consumption being
in natural gas, followed by oil and nuclear power Growth in other renewables
(solar, wind), bioenergy and hydro will follow Figure : Growth of the total
primary energy supply in China,  180 )     /   (                 160 140 120 100
80 60 40         20  20 04 20 06 20 08 2020 20 02 2022 20   1990 2010 1994 2014
2030 1996 2016 1998 2018 2024 1992 2012 2026 2028 Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Hydro
Bioenergy Other renewables Source: IRENA analysis based on IEA (2012a;2013b)
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Figure : Reference Case power generation
growth 1800 1600 )     /    (                1400 1200 1000 800 600 400 200
Hydroelectricity Wind Solid biomass & biogas Solar PV Geothermal 2010 2020 2030
Source: IRENA analysis based on IEA (2012a) and CNREC renewable power according
to the Reference Case, such as heat pumps and electro mobility (Figure 10) This
includes developments in the tradi- tional use of biomass where its demand
decreases from  400 PJ/year in 2010 to  000 PJ/year As  result of this decrease,
total bioenergy demand for heating decreases from  000 PJ to around  200 PJ per
year Growth is projected in all other resources as well Solar Total renewable
energy demand in end-use sectors (excluding renewable electricity and district
heat) will see an increase from about  EJ/year to  EJ/year Figure 10: Reference
Case growth of renewable energy in end-use sectors 4500 )     /   ( 4000 3500
-     3000 2500 2000                 1500 1000 500  Biomass heat/cooking (incl
traditional biomass) Solar thermal heat Liquid & gaseous biofuels Geothermal
2010 2020 2030 Source: IRENA estimates based on IEA (2012a) and CNREC 32
enewable  nergy Prospects: China Figure 11: China Reference Case – Renewable
energy in TFEC 40% 35%      30%                      25% 20% 15% 10% % % 2010
2020 2030 Industry Buildings (excl traditional biomass) Transport Electricity
District heat Total Source: IRENA analysis based on IEA (2012a) and CNREC
thermal increases by  factor of more than three in the entire period, from 860
PJ to  700 PJ per year All this growth is accounted for by the building sector
Geother- mal heat doubles from 150 PJ to 300 PJ, but its contribu- tion to the
total renewable energy share consumption still remains small and plug-in hybrid)
is projected to increase from about 30,000 to nearly 17 million This represents
% share of the total vehicle stock The number of electric two- and three-
wheelers is projected to double to 400 million Further electrification is key
for the transport sector of China The renewable energy share of % in 2030
Reference Case with liquid biofuels only, would increase to % when electricity
use for transportation and the related share of renewable electricity is
accounted for Modern forms of solid biomass use increase by four times, from 500
PJ per year to ,200 PJ/year The high- est rate of growth is projected for the
manufacturing industry sector, from  total use of 100 PJ/year in the pulp and
paper sector alone to 700 PJ/year including its other sub-sectors Solid biomass
in the form of bri- quettes and pellets triples by 2030 compared to with 2010
levels to ,500 PJ/year Liquid biofuel and biogas use increases to  EJ in Modern
renewable energy as  percentage of TFEC will increase from % in 2010 to % by
2030 (excluding traditional use of biomass) (Figure 11) The increase in the
Reference Case renewable energy share will be driven mostly by an increase of
renewable power generation from 19% in 2010 to 29% in The transport sector will
see an increase of renewable energy from % to % by 2030, in the form of biofuels
but also partly electrification The share of modern renewable energy use in the
industry sector will increase from % to % and in the buildings sector from % to
35% by 2030, both largely driven by biomass The rapid growth of renewables in
the power sector is balanced by the trends in the end-use sectors The renewable
energy share of district heat generation remains the same across the entire
period Further electrification of the transport industry will help increase the
share of renewable energy used by the sector Liquid biofuels use increases from
total of  Mt to 30 Mt per year in 2030, or from about  billion litres to  total
of about 23 billion litres in This is  con- tinuation of the trends between 2010
and 2020 biofuel targets of 12 Mt per year (10 Mt bioethanol and  Mt bio-
diesel) to The number of electric vehicles (battery Renewa ble  nergy Prospects:
Ch ina    CURRENT POLICY FRAMEWORK Key points To keep the balance between supply
and fast-increasing demand while improving security of supply presents  major
challenge which it is only possible to overcome with  whole range of different
policies These are dis- cussed later in this report in Sections  and  ●
Renewable energy policy in China has been largely driven by rapidly rising
energy demand, reflecting economic growth and related supply- security concerns
at  national level Renewables will also play  key role in raising the use of
non-coal and non-fossil-fuel sources as  proportion of total energy demand,
according to the Action Plan for Air Pollution Prevention and Control At
provincial level, renewable energy targets and the related Renewable Energy Law,
which consists of  feed-in-tariff and mandatory grid connection, are key
instruments to help increase the use of renewable sources for the power sec- tor
Specific support programmes for the expansion of the domestic renewable industry
– especially wind and solar PV – focus on research and devel- opment (&) as well
as an increase in manufac- turing capacity Mandatory market shares – also known
as “re- newable portfolio standards” – for utility and grid operators are under
discussion, with the possibil- ity of  programme being implemented by Future
caps on coal consumption for the whole of China, as well as for specific
provinces, may also help the uptake of renewable energy op- tions Grid expansion
plans are being implemented, and  smart grid programme is under develop- ment
However, there is no concerted power-grid policy for renewable energy yet
Renewable heating policy specifically focuses on solar water heating, while
transport sector policy is mostly concentrated on direct subsidies for electric
vehicles ●  Airborne Pollution Prevention and Control Action Plan Air pollution
and its effects on health and the economy are  serious concern for China
According to some es- timates, the total number of mortalities from ambient air
pollution (particulate matter and ozone pollution) reached approximately
million in China has suc- ceeded in reducing PM levels substantially and slowing
the increase in mortalities, but further reductions remain  challenge (OECD,
2014) PM concentration varies across the country; according to 2005 statistics
cities in the north have much higher levels ( µg/m3) compared with urban areas
in the south ( µg/m3) Based on the analysis of trends between 1975 and 2005,
Matus et al (2012) estimate that ozone and PM concen- trations resulted in  USD
billion loss of consump- tion and USD  billion loss of welfare in China’ economy
Besides the effects on human health, research shows that air pollution has also
significant impacts on agricultural production  global risk assessment shows
that local crop loss from sulphur dioxide emissions could be an important issue
for countries such as China and India (Marshall, Ashmore and Hinchcliffe, 1997)
● ● ● ● ● In response to these concerns, China’ State Council released its
Action Plan for Air Pollution Prevention and Control on 12 September The plan
focuses on three key regions, namely the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei area (Jing-Jin-
Ji), the Yangtze River Delta and the Pearl River Delta, and sets targets for the
next five years ● China’ energy demand has grown significantly over the past
decade due to rapid economic development This section starts with an overview of
one of the main driv- ers in China’ renewable energy policy – air pollution, and
it continues by providing further insight to the poli- cies across all sectors –
power, buildings and transport – but puts  clear focus on the renewable power
sector The Chinese government recognises that tackling the air pollution crisis
will require significant reductions in coal consumption For the first time, its
plans introduce coal consumption caps for provinces Furthermore, many provinces
have been committed since 2013 to reversing the rapid growth in coal use and
cutting their overall 34  enewable  nergy Prospects: China coal consumption in
just four years No other major coal-consuming country has ever implemented such
ambitious targets If achieved, the measures will not only fundamentally shift
the coal consumption trajec- tory of the world’ largest coal consumer, but also
sig- nificantly re-shape the global CO2 emission landscape Liaoning and Jilin
will also have to limit growth in their coal consumption to less than % per year
by Until recently, with the exception of Beijing, all provinces which were
covered by the plan have seen coal con- sumption grow rapidly The plan aims to
reduce the share of coal in total en- ergy consumption to 65% by 2017, with the
share of non-fossil energy reaching 13% Natural gas will be  key substitute for
coal in the generation of power and heat Twelve provinces which account for 44%
of China’ total consumption committed to implement measure to control coal
consumption Six provinces have included absolute targets in their plans, with
50% reduction targeted in Beijing, 13% in Hebei, 19% in Tianjin, % in Shandong,
21% in Chongqing and 13% in Shaanxi by the end of Beijing is also planning to
ban the use of coal by 2020 (Huffington Post, 2014) Tackling China’ air
pollution crisis will require significant reductions in coal consumption
Shandong province alone burns more coal than Germany and Japan combined  large
share of China’ total coal consumption is covered by the targets Shandong is the
largest coal consumer among Chinese provinces and Hebei ranks fourth Shaanxi is
among the ten provinces that con- sume the most coal Another two key economic
regions – the Yangtze River Delta, comprising Shanghai, Ji- angsu, and Zhejiang,
with 11% of national coal consump- tion, and the Pearl River Delta – are aiming
for absolute reductions in coal use by the end of While the current air
pollution plan runs until 2017, further action could be taken in  review
scheduled for 2015, as well as the upcoming FYP for the years 2016- Box :
Implications of changes in coal-based power production on water demand Changes
in coal use could have considerable implications for China’ water resources
Today, 85% of the country’ total power generation capacity is located in water-
scarce regions and 15% of this capacity relies on water-intensive technologies
Northern China in particular is suffering from high demand for water from the
coal supply sector Currently, more than half of China’ industrial water usage is
in coal-related sectors, including mining, preparation, power generation, coke
production and coal-to-chemical factories Coal min- ing and coal power
generation sectors in the north accounted for 15% of China’ total freshwater
withdrawals (98 billion m3) in 2010 (SA, 2013) National water consumption is
projected to increase from 599 billion m3 to 630 billion m3 by By then, the coal
sector will be responsible for 27% of withdrawals, with an estimated 34 billion
m3 of water per year used by coal-fired power plants alone The coal challenge is
exacerbated by the fact that almost all of the collieries are in the northwest,
which is also one of the country’ driest regions Coal expansion plans imply that
the equivalent of  quarter of the water in the Yellow River would be needed (ca
10 billion m3/year) This water is not available Of the planned coal power
expansion plans, half are located in high or extremely high water-stressed
regions (WRI, 2013b) Various plans such as water diversion from the south to the
north, seawater desalination, east-west pipelines and dry cooling for coal
plants (substituting water cooling) are being considered The South-to-North
Water Diversion Project, planned for completion in 2050, will eventually divert
billion m3/year to the north The Hami and Tianshan power plants will have air
cooling systems by the end of 2014, as will another plant next year in Junzheng
Wuhai (PE, 2013) However, dry cooling reduces the efficiency of coal power
plants, rais- ing their generation costs Moreover the quantities involved are
too small to make  significant difference to China’ overall water consumption
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Coal caps could be introduced to  number
of other key provinces, which would also ensure that pol- luting industries do
not simply relocate to areas without coal reduction policies In addition to
these twelve prov- inces, 17 others announced intentions to cap or reduce coal
use The main components of China’ renewable energy policy are as follows (Zhang
et al, 2013): ● Mandatory market share for renewables by sec- tor and technology
Tariff based support mechanisms Government financial support for renewable en-
ergy projects ● ● The change of direction is showing results New capac- ity
additions in power generation have begun to follow  new trajectory, with coal
accounting for only 26% of new investments as of 2012, while non-fossil sources
– hydro, wind, nuclear – made up 72% In 2012, China added 12 TWh of coal, 26 TWh
of wind, and 196 TWh of hydro Each component is discussed below in more detail
Mandatory market share (MMS) The National Development & Reform Commission (NDRC)
introduced mandatory market share (MMS, or “renewable portfolio standards” as
they are called in the United States) in 2007 in China, linked to the country’
mid-term () and long-term (until 2020) de- velopment plans for renewable energy
The NDRC is  ministry in the central government that is responsible for planning
the economic development of the country, and it has been assigned the
responsibility for energy and climate change (Lo et al, 2014) This trend is
encouraging, but major effects on air pol- lution levels remain to be seen Out
of the 161 cities monitored in the first half of 2014, only nine of them meet
China’ new air quality standards One of those cities which did not meet the
targets was Beijing, due to its high levels of PM2 and other pollutants (NY,
2014) In February 2014, the concentration of PM2 had reached 505 micrograms per
cubic metre, which is sufficient to penetrate into the lungs and the bloodstream
(Guard- ian, 2014) In regions served by centralised power grids, the share of
power generation form non-hydro renewable sources should reach % of the total by
2010 and % by 2020 ac- cording to the plan Furthermore, power producers with
capacity larger than  GWe must increase its actual ownership of power capacity
from non-hydro renew- able energy sources to % by 2010 and % by 2020 (NPC, 2013;
Zhang et al, 2013)  Renewable energy policy of China The development of new
renewable energy policies can be traced back to 2004, when China announced plans
to develop  renewable energy law and to establish  renewable energy development
fund16 At the outset, ‘small-hydro’ and small-scale solar PV were identified as
key areas for the encouragement of decentralised projects Many aspects of the
policy have yet to be put into prac- tice, according to Lo et al (2014) As of
2010, none of the six largest generators had met the % renewable energy target,
partly due to the lack of monitoring and compli- ance requirements Furthermore,
the focus of MMS is on installed capacity rather than generation Therefore,
there was no incentive for grid companies to act The establishment of the CNREC
– developed in close cooperation with Denmark – was another national mile- stone
This institution assists China’ energy authorities in renewable energy policy
research, industrial man- agement and coordination China’ 12th FYP, which was
launched in 2010, was the first time renewables were identified as an emerging
strategic industry To address these problems, the NDRC began to develop an
improvement plan in four-step programme was developed which introduced changes
and addition- al details to improve the renewable portfolio standard (Lo et al,
2014) These included the following: Individual targets would be assigned to
generators and grid companies, depending on their circumstances and 16 At the
“Renewables 2004” conference in Bonn, Germany in June 2004,  follow-up to the
2002 World Summit for Sustainable De- velopment (WSSD) 36  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China capacities, with the aim of making the RPS more practi- cal as
well as clarifying the companies’ obligations tors and grid companies regulated
by the RPS are state-owned enterprises, and their managers are evaluated
annually by the State-owned As- sets Supervision and Administration Commission
(SASAC) ● Significantly increased renewable energy targets would be set for grid
companies to provide more incentives to purchase renewable electricity For
example, the State Grid, China’ largest grid com- pany, is expected to achieve
% non-hydro renewable energy share by 2015 (The previous target was % by 2020),
The National Energy Administration (NEA) was given the responsibility of
monitoring compliance on  monthly basis Renewable energy certificates would be
used to track the fulfilment of targets, but the certificates had not been made
tradable The failure to meet targets negatively impacts on managers’ performance
evaluations All genera- This draft was released in May 2012 for public consulta-
tion (Lo et al, 2014) State-owned enterprises have so far resisted these new
requirements, which were still under debate in mid-The MMS is expected to be
implemented by the end of 2014 or in ● Tariff based support mechanisms for power
generation from renewable energy sources ● Since the Renewable Energy Law came
into force on January 2006, renewables have been guaranteed grid Box : Renewable
energy targets in China China’ 12th FYP identified renewables as an emerging
strategic industry and set overall targets for renewables Table  below lists the
different sectorial and/or technology targets for 2015 and The Chinese
government also released targets for renewable energy use under the current 12th
FYP The over- all goal is for total modern renewable energy consumption to reach
14 EJ (478 Mtce), representing % or more of the overall energy consumption mix
by the end of 2015 (this excludes the traditional use of biomass) (CNREC, 2012)
In January 2012, as part of its 12th FYP, China published  report on greenhouse
emissions control, which establishes goals of reducing carbon intensity by 17%
by 2015, compared with 2010 levels, and raising energy use intensity by 16%,
relative to GDP According to this plan China will meet % of its primary energy
requirements from non-fossil sources by At the same time coal use is projected
to decline, from 67% to 60% by China’ total installed power generation capacity
is expected to nearly double from 968 GWe in 2010 to ,786 GWe by The installed
capacity of renewable energy will reach at least 600 GWe by 2020, from 250 GWe
in In its 12th FYP, finalised in August 2012, China committed about USD 290
billion to clean energy investments Its goal is to produce 20% of the nation’
electricity from renewable sources by Total installed hydro- electricity
generation capacity is targeted to reach 290 GWe, while wind power will total
100 GWe Solar power capacity will total 21 GWe in In October 2012, China’ State
Council released its Energy Policy white paper, updating the previous targets
that had been outlined in its five-year plan The new document extended these
targets considerably China now determined that, by 2015, no less than 30% of its
electric power capacity would be based on non-fossil fuel sources – mainly
hydro, wind and some solar, as well as nuclear Installed total wind power
generation capacity had already reached 100 GWe by the end of 2013, while solar
PV had reached 35 GWe Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Table : Renewable
energy targets overview Status 2012 Targets 2015 2020 Power sector 13 GWe,
including  GWe agricultural and forest residues  GWe biogas and  GWe urban waste
Biomass power  GWe 30 GWe 260 GWe 350 GWe 249 GWe Hydroelectricity 30 GWe 70 GWe
20 GWe Pumped hydro 100 GWe (70 GWe by 2017) 50 GWe  GWe Solar PV 014 GWe CSP
GWe  GWe 100 GWe onshore  GWe offshore 200 GWe onshore 30 GWe offshore On-grid
wind power Thermal applications Biogas 47 million households 50 million
households Solar thermal 258 million m2 400 million m2 Solar cooker  million
sets 15 Mtce 580 million m2 building space (heating),  million households (hot
water) Geothermal  Mtce Bioethanol  Mt  Mt 10 Mt Biodiesel  Mt  Mt  Mt Sources:
Based on CNREC (2012); Campbell (2014) connection in China The law was amended
in 2009 (IRENA, 2013; NPC, 2013) the entire amount of electricity generated from
renew- able energy projects (IRENA, 2013; Zhang et al, 2013) According to this
law, purchase price of renewable elec- tricity generation is determined by the
NDRC The law provides the legal basis of the support to renewable en- ergy based
electricity generation, regulations for imple- mentation and administrative
practices that determine the electricity pricing There are  number of
obligations for power grid companies when entering into intercon- nection
agreements with certain projects They need to provide grid-connection services
and related technical support In addition they need to purchase and dispatch
There is  free connection service provided by the SGCC for distributed solar PV
electricity producers which are located close to consumers and for those with
installed capacity of less than  MWe from  November 2012 on- wards In addition,
in February 2013, SGCC expanded its free connection services to all types of
distributed electricity sources (Zhang et al, 2013) Two main methods have been
adopted— competi- tive tendering (government-guided pricing; an auc- 38
enewable  nergy Prospects: China tion mechanism) and FiTs (government-fixed
pricing) (NDRC, 2006; NPC, 2013; The World Bank, 2014) During the period from
2006 to July 2009, the grid-connected power price of wind power projects was
determined by  government-guided price set in accordance with the price selected
through  public request for tenders tion from various renewable energy projects
(Wang, Barosso and Elizondo, 2014)  categorised on-grid price setting for each
individual source of renewable energy generation connected to the grid has been
im- plemented to determine the FiT from 2005 onwards To set the price the
following factors are taken into account (Zhang et al, 2013): Under the
concession programme (, auctions), in- vestors and developers are selected for
renewable energy projects such as large wind farms or solar plants through
competitive bidding process; the government is committed to coordinating
connection to the power grid and purchasing all the electricity generated by the
concession projects Between 2003 and 2007, the NDRC initiated five rounds of
concession bids for wind power projects (Cozzi, 2012) Auctions were also
implemented for solar PV, offshore wind and CSP Price was the de- terminant
factor in deciding successful bidders (IRENA, 2013; Zhang et al, 2013) ● Techno-
economic performance of different re- newable energy technologies Geographic
location Availability of renewable energy resources The FiT rates evolved over
time and have been continuously reduced according to the cost of development
(see Table 10 for the rates as of July 2014) ● ● ● Government financial support
for renewable energy projects These auctions were basis for setting the level
for the FiT as the government was able to gather cost informa- The Chinese
government also supports renewable en- ergy projects by providing financial
subsidies In 2009 Table 10: Overview of the current feed-in-tariffs in China by
technology and resource II area2 III area3 Other areas  area1 Onshore wind 082
087 093 098 II area5 Other areas6  area4 Solar PV 145 153 161 Agricultural and
forest biomass Waste Biomass 121 105 Near shore Intertidal Offshore wind 137 121
Note: Information refers to July 2014 and all values are expressed in USD/kWh
with tax included  currency exchange rate of  USD = 21 RMB was used referring to
18 July In addition to other areas of Inner Mongolia Chifeng, Tongliao City,
Xing’anmeng Hulunbeir; Urumqi, Yili Kazak Autonomous Prefecture, Changji Hui
Autonomous Prefecture, Karamay, Shihezi City  Zhangjiakou City, Hebei Province,
Chengde City; Chifeng, Tongliao City, Hing’an, Hulun Buir City; Zhangye City,
Gansu Province, Jiayuguan, Jiuquan City  Baicheng City, Jilin Province, Songyuan
City; Jixi City, Heilongjiang Province, Shuangyashan, Qitaihe City, Suihua City,
Yichun City, Mountains region; Zhangye City in Gansu Province, in addition,
Jiayuguan, Jiuquan City than in other regions; Xinjiang addition Urumqi, Yili
Kazak Au- tonomous Prefecture, Changji Hui Autonomous Prefecture, Karamay,
Shihezi than other regions; Ningxia  Ningxia, Qinghai Haixi, Jiayuguan, Gansu,
Wuwei, Zhangye, Jiuquan and Dunhuang, Jinchang, Xinjiang Hami, Tacheng, Altay,
Karamay, except Inner Mongolia Chifeng, Tongliao, Xing’anmeng, Hulunbeier area
Beijing, Tianjin, Heilongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Sichuan, Yunnan, Inner Mongolia
Chifeng, Tongliao, Hing’an, Hulunbeier, Hebei Chengde, Zhangjiakou, Tangshan,
Qinhuangdao, Shanxi Datong, Shuozhou, Xinzhou, Shanxi Yulin, Yan’an, Qinghai,
Gansu, Xinjiang and other areas in addition to area   Tibet autonomous region
benchmark price will be forthcoming Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   the
Ministry of Finance (MOF) initiated two national solar PV subsidy programmes to
support and expand the domestic solar industry: on-grid systems and 70% for off-
grid systems in rural areas In 2012, on-grid systems received RMB /, while off-
grid systems received RMB / (Lo et al, 2014) ● An up-front subsidy for building-
integrated PV (BIPV) systems and  subsidy of 50% of the bid- ding price for the
supply of critical components are provided (Zhang et al, 2013) Financial sup-
port has decreased substantially since the pro- gramme’ inception, reflecting
the declining cost of photovoltaic energy By 2012, the rate had fallen to  RMB/
for BIPV (compared with 20 RMB/ in 2009) and  RMB/ for rooftop systems (from 15
RMB/ in 2009) (Lo et al, 2014) The Golden Sun Demonstration Programme pro- vides
direct subsidies for on- and off-grid PV systems: equivalent to 50% of the total
cost for  Transport sector related policies There are four key policy mechanisms
related to pas- senger cars which aim to reduce energy demand and increase the
share of renewable energy use: ● ● ● Fuel economy standards and labelling
Vehicle and fuel taxation Subsidies for energy-efficient and electric vehi- cles
● Box : Distributed solar PV in China and new policy developments Distributed
solar PV in China deserves particular attention It is important for the country
because it is an emerging industry and provides opportunities for new local jobs
as well as the chance for users to become producers In addition, distributed
solar PV offers cost benefits compared with utility-scale plants that need to be
connected to the grid Particularly because of these benefits, the government has
been encouraging investments since late Due to the slow uptake of the
technology, it had not been expected that production would reach the govern-
ment’  GWe target But by the end of 2013, the total installed distributed solar
PV capacity had reached  GWe and, in the first quarter of 2014, more than  GWe
capacity was commissioned This creates hopes that the  GWe target might be
achieved in In early September 2014, the NEA made its policy updates public
which include  range of options (BNEF, 2014b, EnergyTrend, 2014) The policy
offers the option to choose between  premium subsidy and  local FiT for solar PV
that is connected to  transmission grid Furthermore, the challenges related to
grid connection and payments are also addressed The policy update also addresses
number of more specific areas For example, local governments are en- couraged to
include distributed solar PV in their planning and to provide guidance and
support to both inves- tor and owners, in particular in development zones, on
large company rooftops, on public infrastructure and in areas previously not
considered for distributed solar PV Investments in projects outside the current
system boundaries for distributed solar PV are also accounted for, such as
plants on abandoned land, greenhouses, lakes or ponds While all these policy
updates are very encouraging, many barriers remain to the growth of  distributed
solar PV market for China These include the need to improve the quality of
equipment available,  lack of standards, lack of financing and risks that
involve roof ownership as well as technical issues relating to infra- structure
40  enewable  nergy Prospects: China ● Incentives for biodiesel use value added
tax rebate will also be removed and  % tax for grain-based ethanol production
will be applied There are nationwide targets to increase the consump- tion of
bioethanol and biodiesel Each province or city has the authority to implement
its own policies With regard to bioethanol, there are limited incentives for
grain-based production and subsidies have been cut In the case of biodiesel,
there are no national or provincial mandates given the small scale of production
(USDA, 2013) It should also be noted that, unlike the European car market, in
China only trucks use diesel engines Thus the feedstock for biofuels for
domestic consumption in China will differ from other countries The State Council
considers electric vehicles to be key to transforming the transport sector There
are three types of subsidies for energy-efficient and electric vehicles (Lo et
al, 2014): ● Energy-efficient automobiles with fuel consump- tion of between
litres per 100 km to  litres per 100 km, depending on weight, are supported with
,000 RMB, Electric vehicles: — Support ranges from ,000 RMB to  maxi- mum of
50,000 RMB depending on battery capacity and type of vehicle, ● — Plug-in hybrid
vehicles (50,000 RMB), — Pure electric vehicles (60,000 RMB) Hybrid and electric
public vehicles, including bus- es, taxis, official vehicles and municipal
service vehicles (, garbage trucks and mail trucks), are subsidised based on the
length and type of vehicle, its fuel-saving potential, and the ratio of electric
motor and battery type The future of the biofuel sector is still under
discussion – industry development is therefore insecure ●  Solar water heating
policy for buildings China is also aiming for 30% of new government ve- hicles
to be powered by alternative energy by In addition to subsidies, there were
number of license plate-based policies (, odd-even, end-number) in Beijing to
reduce car use In Beijing there is also  policy to increase the purchase of
small passenger cars with fewer than five seats Another policy in the city
restricts driving by one day  week to reduce car use by 20% during week days
(Wang et al, 2013) China has installed the most solar water heaters in the
world, accounting for nearly two-thirds of global capac- ity The adoption of
solar thermal heating has acceler- ated without government support; between 2000
and 2012 solar water heater installation increased almost tenfold from 26
million m2 to more than 250 million m2 In 2009, the MOF started  support
programme to sub- sidise solar thermal use for rural consumers in China This
programme provided an allowance equivalent to 13% of the product price, with
ceiling of RMB ,000 per unit for solar water heaters In June 2012  new subsidy
programme was initiated by the MOF for urban consumers offering up to 550 RMB
per installation (Lo et al, 2014) While in principle the government is keen to
encourage the use of biofuels, there are  number of major con- straints  variety
of feedstocks can be used for ethanol production, including cassava, sugar cane
or sweet sorghum However, land availability is an important is- sue for China in
view of the demand for food Rising domestic grain prices have also led to
ambitious plans for transportation biofuel production based on food crops being
abandoned  Industrial policies for renewable energy Instead, attention has
focused on advanced biofuels and the main policy for biofuel production in China
is to avoid competition with crops for human consump- tion Since 2008, the
government has been tightening controls on the grain processing sector to lower
financial support for grain-based ethanol production By 2015,  There are
important socio-economic benefits of renew- able energy deployment such as
increased income, industrial development and job creation (IRENA, 2014e) Hence
in addition to policies that focus on renewable energy use, China uses specific
supply-side tools to sup- port the development of  national renewable energy
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   industry One of them is financial support
for research and development (&) The 11th FYP classified the development of
energy technologies as  top priority and provides short-term targets and goals
for China’ & and innovation activities as well as listing energy technologies as
key area (Zhang et al, 2013) Three key clean technologies are highlighted:
special fund to support enterprises in their & These enterprises are either
controlled domesti- cally or 100% owned and produce wind power machines and
equipment Solar PV: Several & projects have been gov- ernment-financed, such as
polysilicon produc- tion This enabled bodies such as the state- owned
Semiconductor Research Institution to transfer knowledge from its & to other
manu- facturers in China ● – MWe wind turbine commercialisation: Among vari- ous
publicly funded programmes, the “863” and “973” programmes were the two most
important, providing substantial direct funding Another key area for financial
support is renewable energy equipment manufacturing In order to achieve self-
sufficiency in the supply of such equipment, China offers import tax exemptions
for complete sets of ● Domestic wind industry across the entire value chain: The
Ministry of Finance also established  Box : China´ “push & pull” strategy to
expand the renewable energy industry China has used  unique “push & pull”
strategy for the expansion of renewable energy over the past decade The first
step occurred in 2006 with the creation of  market for renewable generation
based on  FiT pro- gramme that drew heavily on the experience of other such
schemes elsewhere, particularly in Germany As  result,  renewable electricity
market was developed that created bankable project developments for new wind
turbines At the same time, China has actively encouraged the establishment of
local wind industry and  solar PV industry These “push” mechanisms have included
& programmes, financial support for renewable energy technologies and local
content requirements which have driven  significant expansion of the domestic
manufacturing base Figure 12: Interactions between renewable energy policy and
renewable energy industrial policy RE policy Industrial policy for RE RE
development & deployment RE manufacturing Affect RE development and deployment
Equipment RE development Component RE generation Part … RE consumption Affect RE
manufacturing Source: Based on Zhang et al (2013) Additionally,  strong export
strategy – especially for solar photovoltaic technologies – was established to
boost demand for China´ renewable energy manufactured products The result has
been  significant re- duction in the cost of solar PV modules and  market in
China that installed 13 GWe of new solar PV in Expanding the annual output of
renewable energy manufacturers in turn achieves economies of scale which reduce
generation costs and lead to cost-competitiveness with conventional forms of
power generation Increased market competitiveness also leads to  decrease in
required FiTs The interaction of lower equip- ment costs and the resulting lower
generation costs provides benefits for all involved These types of positive
feedback loops are possible especially in larger economies 42  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China foreign-made equipment, as well as import tax exemp- tions for
foreign-made parts which are necessary for the development of key equipment for
domestic enterprises (Zhang et al, 2013) port the trading scheme and to prepare
implementation plans Guangdong’ plan has already been approved by the NDRC where
the province aims to reduce its carbon intensity by % by 2015 compared to 2010
levels and raise its non-fossil-fuel energy share in total energy consumption to
20% by The CO2 emissions cap is 660 Mt CO2 Compared to the 2007 emissions of 508
Mt CO2, this allows room for continued growth in its emis- sions (IEPD, 2014) is
encouraging China local renewable equipment manufacturers through  range of tax
exemptions as well as direct financial support State-owned banks and local
governments have also provided strong financial support for “strategic emerg-
ing industries,” which include the renewable manufac- turing industry The China
Development Bank (CDB) has provided low-cost loans to the top five PV
manufactur- ers in the country (USD 30 billion in 2010 alone) Solar PV
manufacturing is one of the key industries identified according to the Catalogue
of Chinese High-Technology Products for Export which was updated in Solar PV
manufacturers are eligible for additional financial support for & and for export
credits at preferential rates from the Import–Export Bank of China They are also
eligible for export guarantees and insurance through the China Export and Credit
Insurance Corpora- tion (Zhang et al, 2013) In June 2014, China announced that
it will introduce an absolute cap on emissions from 2016 as its 13th FYP comes
into force (Reuters, 2014b) At the same time, the government also launched its
seventh pilot carbon mar- ket, the last before  national scheme which is
expected to be launched in China is promoting emissions trading as one way to
drive efficiency and carbon emissions cuts across its heavy industry sector,
thus boosting air quality and reducing the country’ contribution to climate
change The government is discussing how and whether  na- tional cap and trade
scheme,  carbon tax or pollution limits will be introduced Five of the seven
provinces today have an absolute cap on emissions which could also be applied to
national scheme Beijing has an intensity-based target (emissions per unit of
GDP) (RTCC, 2014)  Carbon policy China announced in March 2011 that it would
develop carbon-emission trading pilot projects to support its 12th FYP carbon
intensity target, signalling its increasing interest in the use of market
mechanisms (IEPD, 2014; Baron et al, 2012) In order to develop China’ carbon
trading system further, all pilot projects will be evaluated The NDRC developed
the following concept for the development of  Certified Emission Reduction
trading scheme (Feng, 2014): ● Carbon trading in China has been in development
since As policies around climate change and clean energy were being developed,
private exchanges be- gan to be set up that year The first such institutions
were the China Beijing Environment Exchange (CBEEX), the Tianjin Climate
Exchange (TCX), and the Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange (SEEE) These
in- stitutions initially focused on the clean development mechanism (CDM) and
voluntary carbon credit markets (IEPD, 2014) Enhancement of macro policy: — The
possible development of an emissions trading system (ETS) as one of the key
tasks in pushing forward reforms of the economy and establishment of  new
ecological cul- tural system — The 12th FYP on Social and Economics Devel-
opment —  working programme on GHG Emission Con- trol, as part of the 12th FYP —
The decision of the Third Plenary Session of In January 2012, the NDRC ordered
the seven carbon market pilot regions to set  cap on carbon emissions in
preparation for the launch of their trading schemes This notice also required
each region to set up  fund to sup- the Eighteen Central Committee ● Related
preparation works: — CDM cooperation Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Table
11: Overview of carbon trading systems in seven provinces of China Province /
Region Beijing (BJ) Shanghai (SH) Chongqing (CQ) Guangdong (GD) Tianjin (TJ)
Shenzhen (SZ) Hubei (HB) Launch date November 2013 November 2013 June 2014
December 2013 December 2013 June 2013 December 2013 Covered Carbon Emissions
(Mt) 60 136 125 388 108 33 324 — The development of  Chinese Certified Emis-
sions Reductions (CCER) trading scheme ● Beijing: enterprises with compulsive
responsibil- ity, other approved organisations are both al- lowed for trading
Guangdong and Shanghai: Only the enterprises with compulsive responsibility are
allowed for trading now but are considering to include or- ganisations and
individuals Beijing and Tianjin: Over-the-counter is allowed Since 2011, seven
emissions trading pilot programmes have been initiated with the purpose of
exploring the best approaches and obtaining the necessary experi- ence for the
development of  national ETS scheme in China According to Feng (2014), the
following trading methods are applied in the seven provinces/regions: ● ● Jotzo,
de Boer and Kater (2013) undertook  survey from late July to early September
2013, eliciting expec- tations about the future of China’ carbon price from 86
China-based experts on carbon pricing and carbon ● Shenzhen, Tianjin and Hubei:
enterprises with compulsive responsibility, other approved organ- izations and
individuals are all allowed for trading Table 12: China’ ETS pilots and
performance                                       )    (                       )
/    (       fi
/                                                                  )       (
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes SZ SH BJ GD TJ
HB 328 559 342 955 86 983 126 181 109 060  819 876 23 240 598 13 097 987  660
401  594 028  221 618 68 005 497 71 38 54 60 30 24 Jun-13 Nov-13 Nov-13 Dec-13
Dec-13 Apr-14 2014 (estimated) Yes Yes CQ Source: Based on Feng (2014) Note:
Trading volume until 21 May 2014 44  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Figure 13:
Expected average carbon price – China carbon trading 90 China Carbon Pricing
Survey 2013, ANU/China Carbon Forum Average 80 ,                        80th
percentile 70  20th percentile    /    60 50 ,    40   30     20 10  2016 2014
2018 Source: Based on Jotzo, de Boer and Kater (2013) markets The results
indicate confidence that China’ seven pilot ETS projects will be implemented,
with prices rising over time and influencing investment deci- sions However,
there remains significant uncertainty about price levels (RE New Economy, 2014)
This would make the market twice as big as the EU, which is currently the world’
largest China plans to start  national market in  Electricity pricing There are
high expectations that China will introduce national emissions trading in
combination with  carbon price  significant majority of respondents expect that
China’ 2020 emissions intensity target will be achieved or surpassed, and almost
all expect further targets to be adopted in 2025 and 2030, possibly in the form
of absolute limits on emissions Power prices are generally set by the state for
both gen- eration and distribution The State Electricity Regulatory Commission
(SERC) was set up in 2002 independent from the price setting NDRC Its tasks were
mainly to establish and monitor an electricity-trading mechanism between power
generators and buyers This trend is reversed in the new structure According to
the survey by Jotzo, de Boer and Kater (2013), the average carbon price across
all the ETS pilot projects that are in operation is expected to be around RMB
32/ in 2014; RMB 41/ in 2016; and RMB 53/ in However, there is considerable
uncertainty about price levels For the national ETS, the average price
expectation (factoring in no scheme and zero price ex- pectations from some of
the respondents) rises steadily from RMB 29/ in 2018, to RMB 51/ in 2020, and to
RMB 68/ in As of early September 2014, NDRC indicat- ed the total emissions it
could regulate by These would range between  billion and  billion tonnes of CO2
emissions and the market will be worth up to USD 60 billion at the carbon prices
suggested by the NDRC In terms of pricing, thermal power plants pay  fixed
uniform tariff irrespective of the time of day Prices are set  year ahead Unlike
many other markets, China lacks short-term and real-time trading of electricity
China´ electricity pricing system is controlled by the NDRC  central renewable
energy fund has been established This is mainly supplied through  fixed
surcharge on all electricity purchases As renewable growth has picked up in
recent years, the fund has faced shortfalls This may have contributed to late or
non-payment to gen- erators In order to ensure that the fund is solvent Renewa
ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   with more costly solar installations coming
online, both revenue streams and subsidy outlays to generators will need to be
modified Historically the high penetration of state-owned energy companies
active in the renew- able sector have influenced investment decisions These
state-owned companies have traditionally had responsi- bilities to the state
besides turning  profit The price for the first block (–240 kWh per month) is
subsidised to ensure residents are able to afford basic electricity and is
expected to cov- er approximately 80% of electricity consumption The price for
the second block (241–,400 kWh) is set to recover full costs Finally, the price
on the third block (,400 kWh) is punitive and considers resource scarcity and
pollution externalities Low-income groups are allowed to consume  certain amount
of electric- ity at no cost (Lo et al, 2014) ● ● ● There is  considerable
difference between residential and industrial electricity prices NDRC and the
grid com- panies agree on provincial electricity costs for residen- tial
consumers which are kept purposefully low While  large difference exists between
the international aver- age and China’ residential electricity prices, industry
prices are closer to the global average and much higher than residential sector
prices in the country China has  number of electricity pricing mechanisms – both
for supply and demand Were the electricity market to be established, the entire
design of the current power sector would require significant changes The
“Increasing block tariff” (IBT) is  common pricing mechanism used to encourage
households to conserve electricity It also divides electricity consumption into
several blocks for calculating electricity prices (Lo et al, 2014) The IBT is
often used in addition to subsidy programmes for energy-efficient appliances in
China to help conserve energy use by rewarding low electricity consumption or by
punishing overconsumption The IBT price of electricity sets  limit beyond which
usage is charged at  higher price The tariffs paid to generators of wind and
solar power were earlier determined by auctions These auctions were then used as
the basis for setting the level for the FiT Wind and solar power capacity has
grown quickly in China In order to address the issue of solvency of the fund, in
August 2013, NDRC doubled the electricity surcharge for industrial customers
Since  large share of China’ total electricity demand is consumed by in-
dustrial users, this will make  substantial contribution to the fund
Concurrently FiTs for solar were scaled back through instituting  regional
system similar to that de- veloped for wind (Davidson, 2013a) The NDRC approved
shift from the single tariff system in However, the use of block tariffs was not
implemented across China until July 2012 because of the potential negative
impacts such as the affordability of electricity and, partly in consequence,
social stability (Lo et al, 2014) Additionally, on-site distributed solar
electricity will re- ceive  RMB 42 per kWh subsidy Any excess electricity sold
back to the grid, where grid connections and policy are in place, will be at the
prevailing coal tariff, ranging from RMB  to RMB  per kWh (USD - cents per kWh)
It is unclear if these adjustments will mitigate the expected large financial
demands required to support solar technologies (whose FiT outlays per kWh are
still more than double that of wind) (Davidson, 2013a) China’ IBT has  three-
block structure: 46  enewable  nergy Prospects: China  RENEWABLES POTENTIALS
China has significant conventional energy resources Potentially, it also has
considerable renewable energy sources, most of which are still not utilised
Compared with the technical potentials of onshore wind and solar capacity, which
are close to ,000 GWe, current installed capacities are minimal (Table 13)
Resources vary by region The northern parts of China have the best wind
resources while the southeastern and central parts of China have high solar
irradiation The potential for hydro lies at 400–700 GWe By comparison, installed
hydro capacity in 2012 was about 250 GWe, about two-thirds of the total
potential animal wastes available for biogas production (Delman and Chen, 2008)
Sweet sorghum has the potential to be grown in differ- ent parts of China In
northern and southern China it is also possible to grow sweet potato Cassava has
po- tential to be grown in the middle areas and lower Yang- tze River as well as
in southwest China (Qiu et al, 2012) China has limited forest resources and they
are not evenly distributed across the country The solid for- est products
industry is therefore dependent on im- ports where much of the hardwoods logs
are brought from tropical sources and softwood logs are imported from Pacific
Rim nations and Siberia (Bioenergy Crops, 2013b) China is blessed with abundant
resources of all types of renewable energy sources,  small proportion of which
are used today Table 14 shows  breakdown of the total biomass supply potential
in 2030 by biomass With the exception of Batidzirai, Smeets and Faaij (2012), no
other study provides  potential for energy crops The total supply potential of
forest products, their residues, agricultural residues and waste according to
the four studies range from  EJ to 19 EJ (307 Mtce to 648 Mtce) (excluding
energy crops) by China also has abundant biomass resources, little of which are
effectively used today Biomass resources are related mostly to agricultural and
forest logging residues, animal waste and industrial and municipal bio-
degradable wastes The straw resource is concentrated in the northeast and lower
Yangtse River Furthermore there are significant wood resources in the northeast
and southeast (Sichuan, Shandong, Jilin, Henan) There is  biomass supply
potential ranging from  EJ to 19 EJ in China by 2030 but only  limited amount of
this is used effectively today China produces around 700 Mt straw per year Some
37% of this total is corn straw, 28% is rice straw and 20% is wheat straw The
remaining 15% includes various other crops Around half of the straw is used for
fodder and fertiliser This leaves around half (350 Mt/year) for ener- gy Around
40% of this amount is already used (Zhang, 2014) The livestock industry equates
to  Mt of By 2030, IRENA estimates that the supply costs of bio- mass will range
from USD  to USD 12 per GJ The lower Table 13: Renewable energy resource
potentials of China 2012 capacity (GWe) Technical potential (GWe) Hydro 250
Onshore wind (>50m) 63  300- 600 Offshore wind (at depth -25m)  200 Solar PV
(utility)   200 Solar PV (rooftop)  500 Source: CNREC (2012) Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   Table 14: Breakdown of total biomass supply in 2030
Batidziari, Smeets and Faaij (2012) (EJ/year) Van Sambeek et al (2013) IRENA
(2014c) CNREC estimates (EJ/year) (EJ/year) (EJ/year) - Forest products incl
residues  -  - Agricultural residues incl animal waste - Straw   Resides after
food crop processing   Livestock manure   Municipal solid waste 38  Municipal
sludge 05 Industrial organic wastewater and sludge   Energy crops -Total supply
potential --end of this range refers to agricultural residues (harvest- ing and
processing) as well as biogas; the higher end refers to forest products and
residues, including fuel wood 48  enewable  nergy Prospects: China  REMAP
OPTIONS Key points lated to permitting, licensing and other regula- tory issues
need to be resolved in order to build the necessary transmission grid While
part of the bioenergy demand in end-use sectors could be met with local
feedstock availability, domestic logistics for bioenergy trade must be developed
to meet demand spread across the country ● Options have been identified that
could raise China’ renewable energy use in terms of TFEC to approximately 23 EJ
(770 Mtce) by 2030 (equivalent to 26% in the share of TFEC) This includes the
full substitution of traditional uses of biomass with modern renewables Some 49%
of the total renewable energy use in REmap 2030 is related to renewable power
op- tions Various forms of biomass (such as power, heat, motor fuel) and solar
(PV, CSP, thermal) would account for 60% of the total renewable energy use in
REmap 40% of the REmap Options that have been iden- tified in the power sector
are related to solar, one-third to biomass and 20% to wind The remainder is
related to geothermal REmap Op- tions for renewable heating and transportation
account for two-thirds of the total Total wind capacity would increase by 13
times compared with Solar and geothermal ca- pacity would both increase by
factor of six or seven Total biomass use would double from While traditional use
of biomass is fully substituted be- tween 2010 and 2030, modern uses of biomass
increase by five times in the same period Additional biomass use potential is
concentrated in heating markets (building and industry), in- cluding the
district heat generation sector The total package of REmap Options identified
requires additional costs of USD  per GJ (RMB  230 per tce) for consumers and
USD  per GJ (RMB  480 per tce) for society (USD  bln/ year additional costs; RMB
billion per year) These costs exclude savings from the ben- efits of renewable
energy from improved human health and reduced CO2 emissions Costs are outweighed
by estimated savings due to external effects from air pollution, including
reduction of ,690 Mt of CO2 per year in There are challenges for wind and
biomass relat- ed to connecting supply and demand, and costs associated with
these Furthermore, barriers re- ● The Reference Case ( business as usual)
analysis for China utilizes an internally developed REmap tool that incorporates
the estimates of the IEA WEO New Poli- cies Scenario and CNREC for the year The
data, assumptions and approach used have been summarised above in Section  The
tool allows IRENA to enter addi- tional renewable energy options in the end-use
sectors of industry, buildings, and transport, as well as for power and district
heat generation The process for the REmap Options was as follows: ● ● )
Reference Case for the period between 2010 and 2030 was created The results of
this projection are explained in Section , Commodities and fuel prices were
prepared to reflect the national situation, Technology cost and performance
criteria (, capacity factors) were prepared to reflect the national situation,
Additional renewable energy options for all end- use sectors and the power
sector were analysed based on various study and assessments ● ) ● ) ) ● ● The
following studies have been used to identify addi- tional renewable energy
options beyond the Reference Case:  For power sector: CNREC estimates,
historical trends, IEA estimates and IRENA renewable en- ergy industry roadmap
and its accompanying data were used (for biomass power generation from CHP)
(IRENA, 2014b), For transport sector: IRENA estimates were used, For industry
sector:  recent IRENA renewable energy in industry roadmap (IRENA, 2014b) and
its accompanying data was used; only renewable energy options for new capacity
were considered ●   ● Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina    For building
sector: an internal analysis of Refer- ence Case developments and REmap Options
was used in addition to the draft “Roadmap Research of China Solar Thermal
Development” (Ruicheng, Tao and Xuan, 2014) early, in particular in western
China The total capacity growth is ambitious requiring about 24 GWe/year of on-
shore wind capacity deployment, double current levels For offshore wind, the
growth is about  GWe/year Solar PV and CSP This section is divided into five
sub-sections Section  focuses on the potentials of different renewable energy
technologies in China and also mentions the top re- gions with resource
availability Section  provides the REmap Options In Section , costs of REmap
Options are estimated and Section  presents the cost-supply curves for the REmap
Options Section  discusses these findings In the southwest and to the north of
China, solar irradi- ance levels range from ,500 to ,000 kWh/m2/year So far most
solar capacity is also installed in this band, notable in Qinghai Most of the
rest of the capacity is assumed to be deployed in this region as well, but with
rooftop solar PV distributed in other parts of China as well The average
capacity factor is estimated as 17% for utility-scale projects, and about 15%
for rooftop solar PV An additional 169 GWe in the  period (on top of the 139 GWe
in the Reference Case in 2030) was assumed in REmap In total, by 2030, 309 GWe
of solar PV would be installed (of which 118 GWe is rooftop), representing an
installation rate of around 16 GWe per year Most of the utility-scale solar PV
will be installed in western parts of China whereas distributed solar PV will be
spread across the country, but mainly in the eastern parts of the country
Renewable energy technologies  Wind The potential for wind lies mainly in the
northwest and northeast, and partly in the east of the country In these regions,
wind speeds easily exceed - / and capac- ity factors reach between 20% and 40%
(IEA, 2011a; He and Kammen, 2014) However, the ability to deliver electricity to
consumers in the southern and eastern parts of the country is  challenge given
existing grid infrastructure Solar CSP could also play  further role in China,
mainly in parts where solar PV also has potential, such as Xin- jiang and
Qinghai Without storage, the capacity factor would be around 17% An additional
20 GWe on top of the Reference Case of 12 GWe is assumed in REmap regional
approach has been chosen in determining the potential of wind in China by
distinguishing between high and low capacity factor regions More than two-
thirds of the total wind potential is assumed in regions with large wind
resources, mainly east and west Inner Mongolia as well as Xinjiang, Gansu and
Jiangsu (where capacity factors reach up to 35%) The remaining poten- tial is
assumed in regions with moderate availability of wind resources (those with
capacity factors of around 20%) Geothermal Geothermal resources are available in
many areas, but in most locations the temperatures are moderate, rang- ing from
30-90o  Since 1990, the use of geothermal energy for space heating, recreational
bathing and spas, and cultivation has evolved rapidly  total of 246 GWe capacity
has been assumed as Remap Options on top of the capacity identified in the
Reference Case This results in  total installed capacity of 561 GWe in REmap
2030, which is much lower than the technical potential of approximately ,500 GWe
Realising this potential would imply the deployment of all possible installed
capacity in Inner Mongolia, Xjiang, Gansu, Hebei, Jilin and Jiangsu (IEA, 2011a)
To realise this high wind potential, it is also assumed that some of the coal
plants built between 2010 and 2030 are retired High-temperature geothermal
resources do exist, but they are limited to  few locations in southern Tibet,
western Yunnan and western Sichuan, on the Himala- yan Geothermal Belt Thus far,
total installed capacity is 27 MWe As of 2006, 181 geothermal systems had been
found on mainland China, with an estimated generation potential of 74 GWe This
is small compared with the overall power demand needs and most of this capacity
is assumed to be deployed in the Reference Case In REmap Options, no additional
capacity is assumed 50  enewable  nergy Prospects: China An additional 27 GWe of
biomass power generation (in- cluding  GWe CHP used in industry) has been
assumed on top of the 38 GWe identified in the Reference Case, as well as an
additional  EJ of modern biomass for heating in industry and buildings (on top
of the  EJ in the Reference Case) All traditional biomass use in the 2030
Reference Case of  EJ is substituted Biomass/biogas As discussed in Section ,
China has considerable bio- mass potentials which are not utilised to their full
extent yet These include  mix of agricultural residues, waste and forest
products To some extent, straw production is already utilised, so is fuel wood
in traditional forms However, there is also  major potential for the use of
modern forms of biomass in the heating sector and partly for power generation,
in particular in industrial combined heat and power (CHP) plants Figure 14 shows
total primary bioenergy demand based on REmap 2030 reaching 12 EJ per year (410
Mtce), which based on the biomass supply literature review would represent two-
thirds of the high end of the sup- ply potential (-19 EJ) Compared with the low-
end of the total supply potential, demand could be higher This implies that
large share of the bioenergy resource potential of China would be used 30% of
this total would be consumed in the building sector followed by  quarter for
power generation The demand for biofuel production and for heating in industry
and district heat sectors account for 45% of the total demand Central and
northeastern parts of China have large stalk and straw potential which accounts
for the majority of the total supply in China The southwest has limited
potential for agricultural residues Fuel wood potential is distributed in the
southern and central parts of China As for animal manure, the main potential is
in the southern and central regions as well as in northeastern China (Jingying
et al, 2001) Forest-based bioenergy use is in its infancy in China, but there is
now  mid- term goal to develop forest-based bioenergy in those southern and
eastern parts of China which are in close proximity to ethanol and biodiesel
plants (Bioenergy Crops, 2013a) Hydro Of the total potential for
hydroelectricity, all the eco- nomic potential of 400 GWe is assumed to be
deployed Figure 14: Primary biomass demand by sector with REmap Options, 2030
Transport,  EJ Power,  EJ Transport; 14% Power and DH, 41% Total demand: 12
EJ/year Buildings,  EJ Industry and Buildings, 45% District heat,  EJ Industry,
EJ Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   already in the Reference Case No
additional potential is assumed in REmap commercial) The remaining 30% is
located in the in- dustry sector The major task is to substitute traditional
uses of biomass with modern cooking stoves and to continue to increase the use
of solar thermal for water/ space heating Additional potential of renewables in
end-use sectors The analysis can still be expanded to include additional
renewable energy options, particularly in end-use sec- tors where no
comprehensive accelerated renewable energy scenarios are available In industry,
retrofits for biomass medium/high temperature process heat (to  large extent
increasing the share of biomass and waste in the fuel mix of cement kilns) and
solar thermal for low/medium temperature heat could be considered Assuming about
20% of the total energy demand of the cement industry is provided by biomass and
waste by 2030,  total of about  EJ of fuel would be required Another  EJ of
biomass for heat production in indus- trial CHP plants and  EJ of biomass for
steam boilers are assumed that would account for about % of the sector’ total
energy demand for process heat genera- tion (WBCSD, 2009; IRENA, 2014b) For the
REmap analysis it is assumed that that the package of electric two-wheelers,
extended metro and broader use of electric buses can replace 20% of the
projected car demand in As for road transporta- tion,  significant amount of the
capacity is needed to haul coal from the mines to the centres of demand The
REmap Options could reduce coal demand by around % It is estimated that this
will reduce road transporta- tion demand by around % in  Roadmap table and
implications for renewable energy REmap results in  significant increase in the
amount of renewable energy consumed as  proportion of the total In 2010, about
EJ/year of renewable energy was consumed in China 60% of that was in different
forms of biomass The only other sizable contributions were from renewable
electricity in the form of hydro and renewable heating from solar thermal in the
build- ing sector In REmap 2030, total solar thermal capacity in China is
expected to reach ,500 million m2 Hence REmap Options represent an additional
potential in 2030 of 700 million m2 compared to the Reference Case of 800
million m2 Building sector accounts for 70% of the capacity installed by 2030
(60% residential and 10% Figure 15: Increases in renewable energy consumption in
TFEC by resource 8000 )     /   (      7000 6000 5000                 4000 3000
2000 1000  Biomass Solar Hydro Wind Geothermal 2010 2030 Reference Case REmap
2030 52  enewable  nergy Prospects: China In the Reference Case for 2030 an
additional  EJ of renewable energy will be consumed, resulting in total
renewable energy use of EJ The REmap Options show an additional  EJ of renewable
energy In REmap 2030, renewable energy use in the TFEC would reach 23 EJ
Compared with 2010 level, this is an addi- tion of EJ Figure 15 shows the
anticipated increase for each renewable energy resource The largest growth in
absolute terms is in the use of solar (including both PV and thermal
applications), in total approximately  EJ between 2010 and Biomass, wind and
hydro additions are each  EJ in the same time period biomass use is not seen in
the power sector, rather in the form of biofuels and residue combustion for
heating used in industry The other changes include  significant increase in
solar thermal use in both the building and industrial sec- tors In the power
sector, hydroelectricity remains the largest source of electricity, however wind
increases its share tenfold over 2010 levels Solar PV goes from being almost
non-existent in 2010 to comprising % of all renewable energy use by 2030,
becoming the third most important source of renewable electricity in The power
sector gains nearly  50% share in the total renewable energy market by 2030,
compared with 29% in Biomass may still be the largest source of renewable energy
in REmap 2030, but it is actually solar, hydro and wind that show the highest
growth rates Renewable power and heating applications each would account for
about half of the total renewable energy use in 2030 if all REmap Options are
implemented There is scope to more than triple 2010 levels of renewable energy
consumption to 23 EJ by 2030, with solar PV and solar thermal accounting for 40%
of the total potential beyond the Reference Case Table 15 below shows the
results of these increases on the share of renewable energy When excluding
tradi- tional uses of biomass, modern renewable energy use increases from % of
the total in 2010 (13% if traditional biomass is included), to over 16% in the
Reference Case When the REmap Options are included the share of modern renewable
energy in the total mix can be raised to 26% Figure 16 shows the breakdown of
renewable energy by consuming sector between 2010 and REmap Note that biomass as
an energy source changes sig- nificantly, as its traditional use in the building
sector is replaced with modern alternatives Also, the growth in Figure 16:
Breakdown of renewable energy use by application and sector, 2010 and REmap 2030
2010 -  EJ REmap 2030 - 23 EJ CSP <% Geothermal Power % Wind % Solar PV %
Biomass Heat Industry* % Hydroelectricity Biomass Heat/ District Heat Buildings
18% 26% Traditional uses of biomass 45% Wind 17% er secto  tor           Power
29%    -   Heat 47% Biomass Power % Power 49% Geothermal Heat % Transport Fuels
<%    ctor    Biofuels Transport <% Heat 70% -use secto Transport Fuels %
Hydroelectricity 21% Solar Thermal Heat 12%  Geothermal % Heat Solar Thermal
Heat 20% Biomass Heat Industry* % Biomass Power % Biogas Industry* Buildings
Biogas Power % Biofuels Transport % Biomass Heat/District Heat Buildings % %
*incl combined heat and power and district heat Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch
ina   Table 15: Breakdown of renewable energy share by sector RE use REmap 2030
(EJ/year) 2030 Reference Case REmap 2030 Renewable share of: as % of: 2010 Heat
Heat consumption % % 10%  Industry Heat, Electricity & DH Sector TFEC % 11% 21%
Heat Heat consumption 16% 39% 64%  Buildings Heat, Electricity & DH Sector TFEC
16% 36% 54% Fuels Fuel consumption % % %  Transport Fuels & Electricity Fuel
TFEC % % %  Power Generation 19% 29% 40% District Heat Generation % % 36%  Total
Total excl trad biomass incl trad Biomass TFEC TFEC % 13% 16% 17% 26% 26% The
building sector leads in terms of renewable use, largely driven by the high
levels of solar thermal use and biomass, followed by industry and transport
Renewable energy in power generation increases to almost 40%, with half of that,
or 20% of all generation, coming from solar PV, CSP and wind energy content
method These do not represent differ- ent cases, or levels of renewable energy
consumption, rather differences in converting renewable electricity and heat
into primary equivalents In primary terms, renewable energy increases between
42% and 48% over the 2030 Reference Case Coal sees the most significant
reduction, with 18% fuel savings to about 65 EJ of primary fuel ( 220 Mtce) but
remains the largest source of primary energy Natural gas sees the second largest
reduction of %, and is the fourth largest energy carrier after coal, oil and
renewables Oil is the third largest contributor of primary energy and sees only
% reduction Finally nuclear remains un- changed and the smallest contributor to
primary energy (using the IEA method) Renewable energy use by the manufacturing
industry and building sectors (including renewable power consumed in these
sectors) would account for 90% of the total renewable energy use in REmap 2030
Figure 17 shows how the REmap Options would change the primary energy fuel mix
in Renewables be- come the second largest contributor of energy services in
total primary energy demand (TPED)17 based on both methodologies used to convert
renewable energy to primary energy The “RE high” calculation uses the US Energy
Information Agency’ partial substitution meth- od while the “RE low” calculation
uses the IEA physical Table 16 goes into more detail about the energy system,
including data for 2010 (the analysis base year), the 2030 Reference Case, and
REmap 2030 which includes the REmap Options The renewable energy share in the
TFEC, when excluding traditional biomass, increases from % in 2010 to 16% in
2030 according to the Refer- ence Case (or from 14% to 17% if including
traditional use of biomass) 17 There are different methods applied to estimate
the total primary energy demand The two applied in this study are the “physical
energy content” and “substitution” methods The physical energy content method is
used by the IEA and Eurostat where renewable electricity and biofuels are
counted as primary energy as they ap- pear in the form of secondary energy,
while geothermal, CSP and nuclear are counted using average process efficiencies
to convert them into primary energy equivalents The substitution method is used
by the US EIA and BP where renewable electricity and heat are converted into
primary energy using the average efficiency of the fossil fuel power and heat
plants which would otherwise be required to produce these quantities
Implementing all REmap Options can raise the renew- able energy share to 26% in
REmap This will result in total renewable energy use of 23 EJ/year (770 Mtce) by
This consists of  EJ liquid biofuels, EJ renewables for heat in end-use sectors
and EJ re- 54  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Figure 17: Changes in total
primary energy supply in REmap 2030 90 18% Reduction 80 )     /   (           70
60 42% Increase 50 40 48% Increase 30 % Reduction 20    % Reduction No change 10
Coal Oil Natural Gas Nuclear RE low RE high Table 16: China REmap 2030 overview
Difference between REmap 2030 and Reference Case 462 Reference Case 2030 REmap
2030  Electricity generation Unit 2012 GWe Renewable energy hydroelectricity
(excl pumped storage) hydroelectricity pumped storage Wind onshore Wind offshore
Biomass (incl biogas, industry CHP) Solar PV utility scale Solar PV rooftop
Solar CSP Geothermal & Ocean Renewable energy Hydropower Wind Biomass Solar
Geothermal & Ocean 345  005  467 249 400  400 GWe                  20 100  100
GWe 63  269 46 232 14 501 60 GWe GWe  38 27 65 GWe   014 03  006 864 100 38   16
98 41 12   643 ,600 647 190 197  60 92 77 20   109  692 168 249  23 190 118 32
660 ,600 ,263 358 446  83 GWe GWe GWe GWe TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh billion m3
million house- holds                       Biogas Supply Biogas users 47 175 65
240  40 40 80 Mid-size and large biogas plant billion m3  EJ Biogas in tce Mtce
57  EJ Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Difference between REmap 2030 and
Reference Case Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030 Unit 2012  Heat Supply Solar water
heater 258 865  500 - 635 Mm2  EJ Solar water heater in tce Mtce 91 149  EJ
Geothermal energy for heating in tce  EJ Mtce  10 15  EJ  EJ Heat Supply in tce
Mtce 34 101 164  EJ  Biofuel  EJ Solid biomass Mt 28 85 133  EJ Traditional
biomass Mt 225 66 - - -  EJ Modern biomass industry Mt  40 88  EJ 31 bln liter
Bioethanol Mt  25 25 -  bln liter Biodiesel Mt    -  EJ Total Mtce 148 140 225
EJ  District heat generation  EJ Biomass Mt   78  EJ  Electric vehicles Electric
and plug-in hybrid vehicles 17 (million) 03 35 18 Electric two-wheelers
(million) 200 400 500 100  Ratio of electricity generation Total installed
capacity  203  306  602 330 GWe TWh Gross power generation  980  315  543 205
Capacity ratio of renewables % 28% 39% 53% 15  Generation ratio of renewables
Ratio of energy consumption TFEC % 20% 29% 39% 10  Mtce  150  123  055 -68 TFEC
EJ 66 - Renewable electricity (consumed) EJ    Renewable gas, heat and fuel EJ
All renewable energy EJ   Renewable energy in TFEC (in brackets, excluding
traditional use of biomass) 14% (%) % 17% (16%) 26% 10  Note:  percentage point
56  enewable  nergy Prospects: China Figure 18: Power capacity by renewable
energy technology 600 500 )    (                  400 300 200 100  )        (
)      ff  (                                     2013 2030 Reference Case REmap
2030 newable power Electrification in end-use sectors results in additional
power generation of about 280 TWh/year in REmap 2030 compared with the Reference
Case,  % additional electricity demand Biofuels used in trans- port will total
EJ, with 18% coming from advanced biofuels 2030, compared with 315 GWe in the
Reference Case Solar PV increases to 308 GWe, up from 109 GWe in the Reference
Case Solar CSP increases to 32 GWe,  three- fold increase over the Reference
Case installed capacity of 12 GWe Total hydroelectricity capacity increases by
nearly 150 GWe between 2010 and REmap 2030, from 215 GWe to 400 GWe The share of
renewable power generation grows to 39% in REmap Half of this, or 18% of the
total power generated, is considered variable power which includes solar PV, CSP
and wind Growth in the power sector’ renewable energy share is substantial
compared with the Reference Case This is due to growth in wind (more than 617
TWh/year), solar PV (233 TWh/year), and bio- mass including industrial CHP (168
TWh/year) Hydro and geothermal see no increase compared with the Reference Case
The increases in renewable power substitute coal capac- ity This results in 180
GWe less coal in REmap 2030 of which 45 GWe is accounted for the early
retirement of existing plants and substitution with wind power There remains
over 850 GWe of coal power generation capac- ity in the system, even after the
substitution However, this is less than the total of current installed (750 GWe)
and planned coal capacity (350 GWe) as of 2011 (Platts, 2013) The renewable
energy share ranges between 10% and 64% in end-use sectors This growth is mainly
from biomass which accounts for more than half of the total renewable energy
fuel use (when excluding electricity) Primary biomass demand for modern and
traditional applications in China doubles from  EJ in 2010 to Figure 18 shows
developments in power capacity If the trends to 2020 targets are extrapolated
assuming exponential growth, the capacity for renewables could grow to  200- 600
GWe in This is represented by the REmap 2030 total of  467 GWe Wind nearly dou-
bles to 561 GWe (including 60 GWe offshore) in REmap Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   nearly 12 EJ in REmap 2030 if all REmap Options are de-
ployed (demand in all sectors) This growth is tempered by the substitution of
traditional uses of biomass with modern biomass which is by  factor - more
efficient in comparison able power technologies only substitute coal-based
generation In the absence of  carbon price the cost of new coal power is
expected to rise to around USD 50 per megawatt-hour (MWh) Substitution of coal
genera- tion includes both new capacity and existing capacity, which produces
electricity closer to USD 20 per MWh Due to China’ abundance of coal, renewable
tech- nologies do not compete on cost alone, as shown by the USD 16 per GJ
substitution cost for the REmap Options in the power sector One third-of the
total renewable energy use in REmap 2030 is from biomass, and it has  higher
share in end- use sector total renewable energy use of 60% The con- tribution of
non-biomass renewable energy technolo- gies to supply heat in the building and
industry sectors is also substantial, with solar thermal at  EJ and geo- thermal
at  EJ Solar thermal capacity in 2030 would reach ,050 GWth (or  500 million m2)
About 40% of the total installed capacity would be in the industrial (30%) and
commercial (10%) sectors in The number of electric vehicles increases to 35
million in REmap This would represent more than 10% of the total car stock in
The number of two-wheelers would reach 500 million in REmap projects that
generation costs for wind will re- main relatively stable, at USD  per MWh
Another ‘remote’ wind onshore option is identified This refers to wind farms
installed in regions which have high capac- ity factors, but which are more
distant from the existing grid and may also require higher capital costs for
their construction and equipment transportation Contrary to the wind, the cost
of solar PV will decrease significantly to around USD  per MWh by Utility scale
plants have an LCOE of USD  per kWh compared with distributed solar PV plants,
which have an LCOE of USD  per kWh However, it should be noted that costs
related to the integration of various renewables are outside the scope of this
study, and according to the IEA could add between USD  and USD  Renewable energy
technology cost projections Table 17 provides an overview of current and
projected LCOE for new capacity power plants In REmap renew- Table 17:
Comparison of LCOE for power sector technologies BNEF 2012 (USD/MWh) / IRENA
2013 (USD/MWh) 10 IEA/NEA 2010 GlobalData 2013 REmap 2030 (USD/MWh) (USD/MWh)
(USD/MWh)  - 10 Discount rate (%): Renewables:  79    Wind onshore  Wind onshore
(remote)    Wind offshore  Solar PV (utility)  191    Solar PV (rooftop)  Solar
CSP  Landfill gas ICE    Biomass Conventional:  Coal (new)  Coal (existing)
Source: Based on Asia-Pacific Renewable Energy Assessment, BREE 2014, summary of
data from BNEF, IRENA, IEA/NEA, GlobalData 58  enewable  nergy Prospects: China
25 per MWh These additional costs could have an effect on the ranking of the
price of power generation Landfill gas will remain competitive with new coal
power plants LCOE of USD 85 per MWh (for all technologies including
conventional) The cost of transmission and the costs of demand/peak reduction
measures and storage would add USD 46 per MWh, resulting in total generation and
system costs of USD 131 per MWh by According to IEA estimates (IEA, 2011a; not
shown in the table below), wind power generation costs vary consid- erably
depending on the region and as installed capac- ity rises For example, as the
installed capacity increases from 45 GW to about 200 GW in West Inner Mongolia,
LCOE increases from USD 54 per MWh to about USD 70 per MWh For the same
installed capacity (for 45 GWe), LCOE ranges from USD 50 per MWh in Gansu to USD
74 per MWh in Heibei To reach 400 GWe installed capacity by 2030, IEA estimates
an LCOE range of USD  per MWh across the seven regions with the largest wind
resources18 This is similar to the REmap 2030 estimates for 467 GWe installed
wind onshore capacity BNEF (2013) estimates total capital investment re-
quirements of USD  256 billion between 2013 and 2030 to increase the installed
capacity from  124 GWe to  867 GWe Of this total installed capacity, half of it
would be renewable energy Of the total net ca- pacity additions estimated
between 2013 and 2030 ( 743 GWe), about two-thirds is renewables ( 110 GWe) and
of that about 900 GWe is related to wind and solar PV Additional investment
requirements for supporting infrastructure related to these capacity additions
are es- timated as USD ,123 billion in that period, adding about  third on top
of the total capital investment About 45% of the estimated infrastructure
investments are related to transmission lines, while one-third is related to
smart grids; and additional 17% is related to storage while the remainder % is
related to demand response By 2030, onshore wind, utility-scale solar PV and
landfill gas/biomass will be the cheapest sources of renewable power generation
System costs such as transmission can have an im- portant effect on overall
estimates According to the IEA (2011a), by 2020 the estimated average LCOE for
wind would be equivalent to USD 56 per MWh, when transmission costs are excluded
When these costs are factored in, the additional cost the LCOE rises to USD 79
per MWh ( 36% increase) In the building and industrial sectors, the outlook is
also challenging for renewable energy technologies due to the availability of
cheap coal (see Annex  for an over- view of these sector end-use costs) Due to
this cheap supply, many types of renewable energy technologies that provide
space heating or process heat will find it hard to compete based on price alone,
meaning that their substitution costs are  positive factor Taking these costs
into account, more than 200 GWe of wind capacity could be implemented in high-
resource regions by 2020, which would require the continuation of annual
capacity development rates today By 2030, the LCOE (excluding transmission
costs) could increase to 60 per MWh, versus tariffs which include transmis- sion
costs of USD 80 per MWh This would result in  total installed capacity of more
than 400 GWe by Transmission costs would add % to the overall sum In the
transport sector, the outlook for renewable ener- gy is better Since oil is
traded internationally and China is  net importer, the price per barrel of crude
in China does not deviate much from increases seen around the world For REmap
modest price increase is forecast, amounting to  barrel price of around USD 120
by 2030 (based on  lower heating value of  GJ per barrel of oil equivalent),
which translates to  price for petrol that increases from USD 23 in 2010 to USD
32 per GJ in 2030 – an increase of around 50%, assuming no changes in petrol
taxes According to the “high renewable scenario” laid out by the WWF (2014),
which foresees  56% share of renew- able energy in power generation by 2030 (22%
from wind and 18% from hydro, with the remainder  16% mix of solar PV and
biomass), there would be  weighted Additionally, because China is  rapidly
urbanising so- ciety and income levels are increasing, the car stock in China is
expected to increase from 100 million in 2012 to about 500 million in If this
were to happen, the increased demand for petrol would put even higher pressure
on petroleum prices This would enable many 18 The seven regions analysed by the
IEA (2011a) are Gansu, Heibei, Jiangsu, Jilin, East and West Inner Mongolia
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   types of alternative transport
technologies or fuels to compete on  cost-basis However, because many alter-
natives exist, ranging from biofuels to electromobility, and because there are
infrastructure costs associated with increased uptake, the cost structure of
these tech- nologies are still hard to estimate as well as long-distance rail
for both passengers and freight This is already being pursued aggressively in
China; however, REmap assumes more could be done and at significant cost-savings
Summary of REmap Options: cost-supply curves What is clear, however, is that
most of these technolo- gies pose  realistic potential to compete with petrol
use in transport on  cost-basis, according to the methodol- ogy applied and the
cost data (capital and operation and maintenance (&) costs, energy prices and
dis- count rates) used in this study This growth also presents an opportunity
for China to increase the use of transport modes that consume electricity rather
than liquid fuels – so called modal shifts These include supporting the
introduction of local electric bus and tram systems, The previous sections have
discussed the technology options and their costs In this section, the options
are aggregated into an overall potential curve, and they are ranked in terms of
their cost effectiveness The cost-supply curve displays an approximate repre-
sentation for the realistic potential of renewable energy Figure 19: REmap
Options cost supply curve, business perspective, by resource 28 27 40 Solar PV
Hydro CSP Wind onshore Wind offshore Solar thermal 26 )       /        ( 30 25
24 Geothermal Ocean Transport with renewable electricity 23 22 21 Biomass
traditional Biomass other Biofuel Biogas 20 20 19 18 17 16 15 10 14 Average
weighted cost of substitution ( USD/GJ) 13 12                        11 10
Efficiency % Reference case developments %-16%  -10  -20       -30  -40 12 14 16
18 20 22 24 26 Renewable energy share in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Note
: See Annex  for the numbered technologies Note : The purple bars represent
electrification technologies The substitution costs of these technologies
include their annualised capital (, electric vehicle ownership cost), & and
energy costs vs those of their conventional counterparts (, ICE passenger car
running with gasoline) It is also assumed that each additional electrification
technology will result in renewable power generation capacity investments;
hence, it is assumed they consume electricity from renewable sources only These
costs are included via the electricity prices that account for the changes in
China’ power generation mix As opposed to depicting the energy demand
technologies (, electric vehicle, heat pumps), bars for electrification
technologies could also be represented by the renewable electricity supply
technologies which consists of 70% wind and 30% solar PV in the case of the
China 60  enewable  nergy Prospects: China technologies – the REmap Options –
which can be de- ployed by 2030 in addition to the Reference Case The cost
supply curve is not used to develop the REmap 2030, but it is  representation of
the REmap Options which have been selected national taxes or subsidies, and
technology cost and performance characteristics; and another (government
perspective) based on standard international commodi- ties costs (with
differentiation made for coal and natural gas between export and import
countries) and  fixed 10% discount rate The REmap Options are  portfolio of
technologies for accelerated renewable energy deployment in the power, district
heat, and end-use sectors of buildings, industry and transport This portfolio is
not an allocation of the global additional potential based on the GDP of China
and the other 25 REmap countries, nor does it repre- sent extrapolations Further
technology portfolios can be generated based on the different understanding of
the parameters that constitute REmap Options or other studies looking at the
specific case of the China The former reflects factors likely to influence
private investment decisions; the latter is more relevant to gov- ernment
decisions on policy and spending Each of these two curves is presented twice,
once coloured by resource and once by sector The national cost supply curves are
used to examine the economic cost and financial savings potential of increased
renewable energy uptake The standard international curve is used when
considering & needs, comparing renewable potential and costs across regions or
globally as well as providing insight into cost differences between China and
global markets resulting from policy decisions such as energy taxation The
results of the analysis are shown in the cost-supply curves in Figure 19 through
Figure This includes two sets of curves: one based on national prices (business
perspective) that incorporate the national cost of capi- tal (% discount rate),
commodity prices that include Decision makers will be tempted to pick low-cost
op- tions, from the left end of the curve, and to skip high- Figure 20: REmap
Options cost supply curve, business perspective, by sector 28 27 40 Power
Industry Buildings Transport Transport with renewable electricity )       /
( 26 30 25 24 23 22 21 20 20 19 18 17 16 15 10 14 Average weighted cost of
substitution ( USD/GJ) 13                 12 11 10  Efficiency % Reference case
developments %-16%  -10  -20            -30    -40 12 1414 16 18 20 22 24 26
Renewable energy share in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Note: see Annex  for
the numbered technologies Color code: dark blue bars: electrification
technologies in transport sector; green bars: building sector; red bars:
industry sector; yellow bars: power sector Dark yellow bars: district heat
sector Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Figure 21: REmap Options cost
supply curve, government perspective, by resource 50 28 Hydro Solar PV 27 CSP )
/        ( Wind onshore Wind offshore Solar thermal 40 26 Geothermal Ocean
Transport with renewable electricity 25 24 Biomass traditional Biomass other
Biofuel Biogas 23 30 22 21 20 19 20 18 17 16 15 Average weighted cost of
substitution ( USD/GJ)                        10 14 13 12 11  10    Efficiency %
Reference case developments %-16% -10   -20  -30    -40 12 14 14 16 18 20 22 24
26 Renewable energy share in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Figure 22: REmap
Options cost supply curve, government perspective, by sector 50 28 27 Power
Industry Buildings Transport Transport with renewable electricity )       /
( 40 26 25 24 30 23 22 21 20 19 20 18 17 16 15 Average weighted cost of
substitution ( USD/GJ)                        10 14 13 12 11  10    Efficiency %
Reference case developments %-16% -10   -20  -30    -40 12 1414 16 18 2020 22
2424 26 Renewable energy share in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) 62  enewable
nergy Prospects: China  sector-based cost curve shows that most additional
potential lies in the housing, industry and power sectors cost options, on the
right-hand side; however the figure gives  perspective of the entire country
Decision mak- ers may assume that options represented by individual blocks in
the supply curve are homogenous in terms of substitution costs However, the
blocks represent aver- ages based on the assumed deployments in the REm- ap
focus on the cheapest individual options will not result in the least expensive
overall transition; achieving that requires  holistic approach, and only when
all of these options are pursued simultaneously can the share of renewables in
TFEC of China be raised to 26% by 2030 according to this study For the REmap
cost-supply curves, the Reference Case growth in renewable energy from  is shown
by the first horizontal bar, which is coloured based on resource The resource
colouring is consistent with the deployment of renewable energy seen in the
Reference Case The results of the REmap analysis and accelerated deployment of
renewable energy (the REmap Options) is plotted in the curve as coloured bars
showing the ad- ditional potential of each technology (on the -axis) and the
average incremental cost of substitution of deploy- ing that technology in lieu
of  conventional variant (on the -axis) The Reference Case already includes some
significant expansion of renewable resources: wind and solar already see growth
in the Reference Case and their incremental potential is lower in the REmap
Options In China, modern renewable energy in TFEC according to the Reference
Case is expected to grow from % in 2010 to about 16% by In Figure 20 (below) the
same curve is displayed but with the technologies coloured by sector This curve
shows that the additional potential lies largely in the building, industry and
power sectors Focusing on the cheapest individual options will not result in the
least expensive overall transition;  holistic approach is required Figure 21 and
Figure 22 are the REmap cost-supply curves for China based on standardised
international commodity price estimates (which exclude the effects of taxation
or subsidy) and  10% discount rate The curve is significantly different from the
national one, resulting from the changes relating to the discount rate (10%
versus %), and energy prices In addition to show- ing cost differences driven by
commodity prices that are locked into  local market (such as natural gas), this
curve also shows the effects of price differences result- ing from subsidies and
taxes on energy and how they can affect technology deployment This curve is also
used to look at regional and international contexts when comparing the results
from China Cost-curve results by sector and technology The results presented in
these cost supply curves are dependent on projections of technology cost and
fuel prices An overview of the assumptions underlying these projections is
available in the Annexes The technology option mix and costs vary according to
sector Costs as- sociated with the Reference Case are not quantified as they are
part of expected energy system developments and outside the boundaries of the
REmap analysis The results from the REmap cost-supply curves show that some of
the REmap Options identified, if viewed from  business perspective (national
prices), could be Table 18: Overview of the average cost of substitution of
REmap Options for the China Business Perspective (national prices) (USD/GJ)
Government Perspective (international prices) (USD/GJ) Industry   Buildings
Transport -- Power Average of all sectors   Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
deployed at  cost-saving when compared with fossil fuel alternatives Table 15
shows the average cost of substitution for each sector If viewed from  business
perspective, the REmap Options require additional costs of USD  per GJ If viewed
from the perspective of government (international prices), the cost of substitu-
tion increases to USD  per GJ, assuming the removal of tax on fossil fuels
(since biomass is taxed relatively lit- tle and other renewable energy
technologies that have no fuel demand are not affected by fuel taxes) and  high
discount rate of 10% (most renewable energy tech- nologies have higher capital
costs) This is higher than the global average of USD  per GJ estimated based on
the analysis of 26 REmap countries (IRENA, 2014a) residues Utility-scale solar
PV, onshore wind and geo- thermal are next, resulting in incremental costs close
to the total average substitution costs of USD  per GJ Solar PV for rooftop
applications result in an incremen- tal substitution cost of around USD 17 per
GJ However, it is important to note this is compared with wholesale power cost
as for all power generation technologies, not retail electricity Lastly offshore
wind, and wind plants that substitute existing coal plants result in the highest
cost of substitution of all technologies In the industrial sector results are
similar, also due to the availability of cheap coal that does not internalise
health or environmental costs Industrial process heat generated from biomass-
fired CHP plants using agricul- tural residues is the most cost-competitive
option Two novel, yet largely unused technologies, follow in terms of
competitiveness: solar cooling, which replaces elec- tric cooling, followed by
heat pumps providing process heat for temperatures of up to 150 oC Both of these
technologies compete well, with only around USD  per GJ incremental costs The
largest potential is found in solar thermal for low-temperature heat
applications; however, the cost of substitution is the highest among all
technologies in the industry sector (USD 11 per GJ) The cost-supply curve
results from the business per- spective show that most of the technologies
result in incremental costs when compared with their conven- tional alternatives
However, to put these incremental costs into perspective, the incremental cost
average of USD  per GJ of final energy is actually equivalent to an increase of
around USD 20 per MWh, or around USD  cents per kWh This is also despite China
having some of the lowest fossil fuel prices in the world, particu- larly the
extremely cheap coal used in the industry and power sectors This also explains
why most renewable energy options which are cost-effective are those that
substitute petroleum products (largely in transport) or fuels used in the
building sector (including traditional biomass) However, as shown in Table 21,
if externalities are factored into the cost of substitution, the REmap Options
as  whole result in cost-savings compared with their conventional alternatives
The cost-supply curves do not display these external costs since both health and
environment costs are not internalised into the sub- stitution process – they
are apportioned in  later step The building sector includes renewable
technologies that substitute both fossil fuels and traditional use of bi- omass
The most competitive is modern biomass-based space heating that substitutes
heating oil, mainly due to high oil product prices Heat pumps also result in
cost- savings when substituting natural gas; however, their potential is lower
than biomass Modern renewable- based cooking results in cost-savings when
compared with traditional uses of biomass when modern solid biomass is used
Utilising biogas for heating or cooking applications instead of traditional
forms of biomass re- sults in only  small incremental cost The largest poten-
tial is in solar thermal heating, as in the case of industry, which is already
very prevalent in China REmap shows this additional potential can be deployed at
relatively low incremental cost It is important to note that China has
significant district heating network in many cities, and REmap shows that waste-
to-energy systems can provide significant additional potential, however at an
incremental cost above the average Most cost-effective renewable energy options
in China are those that substitute petroleum products (mainly in transport) or
fuels used in the building sector In the power sector all technologies result in
incremental costs when compared with conventional alternatives This is due to
low coal prices, and also because some renewables are assumed to replace
existing coal power plants The most competitive renewable energy tech- nology is
landfill gas and electricity generated from biomass such as CHP plants that
utilise agricultural The transport sector has the most competitive set of
renewable technology options This is due to the high cost of oil, which mirrors
world prices, relative to the 64  enewable  nergy Prospects: China lower cost of
coal used in the other sectors Technolo- gies that utilise electricity, which in
China is cheap, re- sult in the most cost savings Developing passenger rail
networks that substitute aviation, or urban tram or subway systems that
substitute passenger automobiles, result in significant savings However, China
is build- ing significant infrastructure for these technologies, so only limited
additional potential is available beyond the Reference Case Forms of individual
electric transit, including various forms of electric vehicles and electric -
wheelers are also cost competitive However there is significant growth in these
technologies already as- sumed in the Reference Case, so additional potential
identified in REmap 2030 is also limited Electric mobil- ity technologies have
high efficiency compared with fossil alternatives, so even though they seem
small in energy consumption terms, they provide significantly better performance
(in terms of passenger miles, for instance) than  comparable unit of petrol or
diesel No liquid biofuel growth has been assumed for China in REmap 2030 beyond
the Reference Case be achieved if all REmap Options required for doubling the
global renewable energy share are implemented by 2030 ( total of  Gt CO2
emission reductions by 2030) Among the 26 REmap countries, China has the largest
potential in terms of an absolute reduction in emission volumes China is
followed by the reduction potentials of the USA and India if all REmap Options
are to be implemented These three countries could account for half of the
potential reductions in global emissions according to REmap Deploying renewables
and reducing emissions in these countries are essential for  transition in the
global energy system and to mitigate climate change China, the USA and India
together could account for half of global reductions in emissions by 2030 if all
Remap Options are implemented These emission reduction estimates assume that all
renewable energy sources are carbon-neutral While this applies to most
renewables, it is not the case for biomass due to GHG emissions during bioenergy
harvesting, processing and combustion, in particular when land use change
emissions are accounted for In addition, emission estimates are subject to
uncertainty originating from the discrepancies in China’ energy statistics,
mainly related to coal use in coal washing and the manufacturing and industrial
sectors For the year 2010, the margin of error for China’ total CO2 output is
estimated as  Gt, which is nearly as high as the total emissions avoided under
REmap 2030 (Guan et al, 2014) With better data, total energy use projections and
thus CO2 emission saving estimates can be refined Benefits of REmap Options In
addition to economic arguments for increased re- newable energy deployment,
there is also  strong environmental case The REmap Options would result in an
estimated reduction of  gigatonnes (Gt) of CO2 by 2030 (Table 19) The largest
decrease would occur in the building sector, followed by the power sector If all
REmap Options were fully deployed, China could reduce its CO2-related emissions
from energy combustion by around 17% over the 2030 Reference Case Reductions in
emissions from China would contribute 21% of the global CO2 emission reductions
which could Table 19: Development of China CO2 emissions,  2010 (Mt/year)
Reference Case 2030 (Mt/year) REmap 2030 (Mt/year) Total avoided (Mt/year) Power
and district heat generation  595  762  544  218 Industry  327  746  528 217
Transport 529  199  123 76 Buildings 467 478 298 181 Total emissions from fossil
fuel combustion for energy services  917 10 185  493  692 Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   If all REmap Options are implemented in 2030, total
emissions from the building and power sectors of China can be reduced by 37% and
20%, respectively do not include benefits related to reductions of air pollution
(health) and CO2 emissions If such exter- nalities are included, and depending
on how these are valued, full deployment of the REmap Options could result in
estimated reduced health costs of USD 78- 162 billion per year by These avoided
external costs result from  reduction of health complications due to air
pollution from fossil power plants, indoor and outdoor air pollution from the
traditional use of biomass and other solid fuels as well as fuels used in the
transport sector There are also socio-economic benefits to increasing the use of
renewables According to IRENA estimates, about  million people were already
employed in 2013 in the renewable energy industry worldwide, of whom  million
were in China (IRENA, 2014d) By 2010, China had the largest number of people
working in the solar PV sector, with 120 000 jobs In the solar thermal sector
the total number of people employed was between 250 000 and 600 000 in the
period 2006-The biomass sector also provided about 266 000 direct jobs If the
benefits of the  Gt of reduced CO2 are taken into account, an additional USD
billion per year could be saved by 2030 (based on  carbon price of USD  per
tonne CO2) The result of these externalities is  possible reduction in energy
system costs of between USD 55 billion and USD 228 billion per year It is
therefore possible to raise the renewable energy share with significant savings
if externalities are included, and depending on how these are valued The total
number of jobs worldwide could reach 16 mil- lion (in cumulative job-years) by
2030 according to REmap This implies an equivalent of  million additional jobs
which could be created in the global renewable energy sector (IRENA, 2014a)
Given that  large share of the global renewable energy use esti- mated in 2030
would be in China, the country would benefit considerably from these additional
jobs cre- ated For example, today the damage to GDP related to acute mortality
(from PM and sulphur dioxide) is equivalent to between 65% and 81% of China’
total GDP, with premature mortality of 62  000 per year Chronic mortality
related to particulate matter alone resulted in 561 000 cases of premature
mortality annually with  total health damage to GDP of 36% (Ho and Nielsen,
2007) With total reductions in coal use of about 16 EJ (or  18% reduction),
total savings could be equivalent to 78% of GDP This would mean The REmap
Options identified in China result in incre- mental system costs of USD  billion
from  gov- ernment perspective (Table 20) System cost calcula- tions from
government perspective exclude energy taxes and subsidies, and use  standard 10%
discount rate for capital investment Incremental system costs Table 20:
Financial indicators of REmap Options, based on government perspective (USD
bln/year) Changes in costs of the energy system (in 2030) Incremental system
cost  Reduced human health externalities from -78 to -162 Reduced CO2
externalities Net cost-benefits from -32 to -126 from -55 to -228 Incremental
subsidy needs in 2030 60 Investments (average between today and 2030)
Incremental investment needs 40 Total investment needs (REmap Options) 54 Total
renewable energy investment needs (REmap Options and Reference Case) 145 66
enewable  nergy Prospects: China  total saving of up to USD 200 billion per
year, as- suming China’ total GDP doubles by 2030 to USD 25 trillion investment
costs of power plants Other grid constraints (, institutional barriers, see
Section ) need to be resolved in the short-term as well to avoid today’ situa-
tion of capacity being installed but not necessarily con- nected to the grid
Table 20 shows that the total investment needs of the REmap Options would be USD
54 billion per year The table also shows that in addition to investment, an an-
nual subsidy of USD 60 billion would be required to make REmap Options
technologies with positive sub- stitution costs “competitive” with fossil
technologies Technologies which require  subsidy lie mainly in the end-use
sectors rather than power generation, namely for heating in buildings and
industry (solar thermal) and electric vehicles In addition, inter-provincial
transmission infrastructure needs to be built to allow power from the northern,
northeastern and northwestern regions to be supplied to central and coastal
demand areas Inter-regional connections need to be strengthened and electricity
trading markets will need to be developed Some of the solar PV and wind
development can be pushed to lower resource regions to ease the long-term
challenge of building transmission grids There will also be  focus on
southwestern hydroelectricity in the future, given the distribution and
development of water resources; however, here too there is  shortfall in
planning for long-distance transmission lines With regard to solar PV, the
quality of equipment needs to be improved to ensure long project lifetimes This
cost would likely be borne by consumers in the form of increased energy costs or
taxes It is important to note that by 2030 many renewable energy technolo- gies
should not require  subsidy, and should actually result in lower energy costs,
so  better metric for en- ergy prices might be the incremental system cost,
which shows that energy prices would increase slightly In the case of offshore
wind, the main challenge will be to increase connection to the mainland grid
China has limited experience in this area so far, particularly when it comes to
connecting farms further from the shore Hence, the challenge will be to develop
solutions by 2020 to cope with the potential growth in offshore wind such as the
development of offshore substations and sub-sea cabling as well as improving
gearbox reliability In parallel, offshore wind-related equipment manufac- turing
output will need to grow to meet the growing demand (Carbontrust, 2014)
Furthermore, China needs to focus on developing technologies that can deal with
the corrosive effects of seawater on offshore installa- tions as well as
typhoon-resistant models  Discussion of REmap 2030 Options Technology
development challenges Among the different REmap Options, four technologies need
to grow substantially if the estimated potential of renewables in REmap 2030 are
to be realised Onshore wind power needs to grow by about 24 GWe/year, solar PV
by about 17 GWe/year (40% of that related to roof- top installations) and solar
thermal by about 48 GWth/ year (40% related to industrial process heat and other
commercial applications) Given that there is very lim- ited deployment of
offshore wind today, development of  GWe/year is another substantial addition
Biomass as  source of energy for both the power and end-use sectors will also
need to grow substantially and its tra- ditional uses will need to be fully
substituted according to REmap In addition to technical challenges, costs may
also be  problem for solar and wind since, as capacity increases, spatial
constraints in certain regions may create issues Hence today’ economically
competitive locations may be less cost-effective in the longer term as their
poten- tial is realised While the growth rates envisioned are slightly higher
than current trends, another major issue lies in expand- ing grid transmission
capacity This will require substan- tial investments Estimates of other studies
show that additional infrastructure related to the power sector (transmission,
variable renewable energy measures) can add between 30% and 50% in addition to
the total As solar and wind capacity increases, the most favourable locations
may become less cost-competitive due to spatial constraints Solar thermal heat
use in the building sector is already high in China and this is estimated to
nearly quadruple Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   et al (2013),  million
tonnes of gutter oil is pro- duced and sold back to market as edible oil each
year by 2030, from 258 million m2 to 900 million m2 While this is already
challenge in its own right, the main ef- fort will need to focus on deploying
600 million m2 solar thermal in the industrial (450 million m2) and commer- cial
(150 million m2) sectors, where installed capacity today is nearly zero Assuming
10 megawatts-thermal (MWth) of installed capacity per solar thermal facility,
this would mean more than 30,000 manufacturing in- dustry plants would be
equipped with such technology As with solar thermal, biomass is not  fuel of
choice for process heat generation in industry However,  considerable share of
up to 20% of the total demand from cement kilns, which comprise one of the
largest manufacturing sectors in China, can be provided by biomass, waste and
other fuels without any process modifications In addition, biomass-fired CHP is
an alternative to any fossil fuel-based heating systems and can be considered in
investments for new production plants China has  manufacturing industry that is
diverse in terms of its energy demand and process heat tempera- ture levels
Although much of industry comprises medi- um- and high-temperature sub-sectors
such as cement, chemicals and iron and steel, many food processing and textile
manufacturing plants exist which utilise low temperature heat Given the highly
cost-competitive solar thermal equipment available in China, such sectors can
benefit from solar thermal if the right policies and targets are put in place
for 2020 and Water could be  major challenge with regard to  number of renewable
energy technologies, in particular bioenergy and CSP, as is the case today for
the coal supply chain Among the different renewable power generation options,
CSP is one of the most water intensive options In particular, areas where CSP
can be deployed (Qinghai, Gansu) are also arid Water for bioenergy cultivation
important consideration Although the liquid biofuel market in China is not as
developed as in the USA or India, about three-quarters of the total is assumed
to originate from conventional feedstocks which also rely on water For example,
sorghum-based ethanol production is the most water-intensive route, followed by
corn- and cassava-based ethanol Bioenergy is estimated to have  potential across
all sec- tors However, the residential and industrial sectors pose particular
challenges In the residential sector, traditional uses of biomass are
decreasing, and being substituted with modern forms of fossil fuels such as
liquid petro- leum gas (LPG) This change in fuel sources needs to be steered
towards modern renewables, including modern forms of biomass This requires the
availability of reliable and affordable modern cook stoves Earlier experiences
showed that such equipment may not necessarily be accepted and used Thus the
challenge here concerns aspects of policy and public awareness as opposed to
technical barriers is another Deployment of the full potential for biomass will
depend on the availability of bioenergy supplies In the high case of biomass
supply, demand could utilise up to two-thirds of total available But if supplies
are limited, demand is likely to exceed the domestically available biomass in
China As part of the demand may need to be met from land- and fertiliser-
dependent energy crops, improving yields and using marginal land will be
important Given the focus of China on non-food based liquid biofu- els, the
majority of production will need to be provided by advanced biofuel plants So
far production capacity is limited which means that substantial investments will
be required to meet the potential demand The capital costs of these plants are
currently higher than conven- tional liquid biofuel plants This capacity needs
to be deployed already by 2020 to meet the assumptions of the Reference Case
Meeting all demand locally would require about 200 advanced biofuel plants, each
with  total production capacity of 230 million litres ethanol per year Focusing
on the energy-land-water nexus and optimis- ing the key routes will be very
important if China is to realise its bioenergy potential China also needs to
start now on developing collection and logistics systems to increase the
availability of scattered agricultural and forestry bioenergy to end-users
Conversion of feed- stock to higher energy density biomass and related
technologies (, torrefaction) will gain importance Another option to reduce
increasing dependency on bioenergy will be to reduce total demand by improving
energy efficiency The China biodiesel industry needs to compete for feed- stock
supply with gutter oil According to Van Sambeek 68  enewable  nergy Prospects:
China Overcoming these development challenges will require target setting, the
development of finance mechanisms and in particular efforts to address
transmission-related issues China is currently putting much effort into these
issues, but this effort needs to be sustained in the long term to 2030 and
beyond mass fuels to heat-pumps results in around 470 TWh/ year of additional
power demand For the transport sector, the additions in biofuel con- sumption
identified in REmap 2030 are replaced by  shift from passenger automobile to
electric public transport For this around 20% of this passenger traffic is met
by better utilisation of existing public transport lines, and the remaining 80%
met through new electric transport infrastructure In total 38 TWh of additional
electricity is needed to power these electric transport systems The case for
electrification The analysis shows that biomass resources in China ac- count for
around 30% of the identified options in REmap However, affordable and
sustainable sourcing of biomass remains an important issue The concurrent
deployment of alternative and complementary renew- able energy resources can
help to reduce the potential dependence on biomass In the power sector, there
are plenty of alternatives to substitute biomass use in power production In
REmap- , 230 TWh of power production from biomass is reduced compared with REmap
2030, or  66 TWh reduction over the 2030 Reference Case level It was assumed
that this reduction is met by increases in solar PV generation Additionally, the
increased electricity demand resulting from electrification in the end-use
sectors of 415 TWh is met with 50% solar PV, 25% of onshore wind and 25%
offshore wind Electrification offers the potential to reduce fuel use for
heating and transport To further explore and clarify the renewable electricity
potential, we have created an additional set of REmap options expressly for this
case, Remap-, which considers  more radical electrification scheme than REmap It
essentially replaces most biomass and some fossil fuels with electricity from
re- newables In REmap-, we assume the deployment of three technology strategies
to reduce biomass depend- ency and increase the share of electricity in end-use
sectors In the building sector, heat pumps deliver the required heat in the
building and industry sectors in- stead of biomass (but only for low temperature
heat) In the transport sector, modal shifts (public trams, electric buses and
trains) can replace liquid biofuel use Increased electricity demand from these
end-use sec- tors would be supplied by additional solar PV and wind capacity
Figure 23 compares the breakdown of the additions identified in the various
REmap cases, as well as the renewable energy share in the energy mix of 2030:
REmap 2030 and REmap- and REmap-, which shows how  30% or great renewable energy
share could be achieved on  global basis Note that the share of re- newables in
TFEC would be slightly higher with electri- fication technologies replacing
biomass, increasing from 26% in REmap 2030 to 29% in REmap- Biomass demand in
China is assumed to increase in primary terms to  EJ by 2030 in REmap- instead
of EJ in REmap This translates to almost no growth in biomass demand compared
with today’ levels Compared with REmap 2030, this is halving the demand for
total biomass use  more radical electrification plan (REmap-) could raise the
share of renewables in power generation and total final energy consumption The
effect on the power sector in terms of installed capacity is dramatic The total
capacity of solar PV doubles from just over 300 GWe REmap 2030 to over 600 GWe
in REmap- For wind, including both offshore and onshore, around 100 GWe of
additional capac- ity is added, resulting in around 630 GWe in REmap- Biomass
power capacity decreases to about 25 GWe, or around two-thirds the 2010 level
The share of renew- able energy in power increases from 39% in REmap In
industry, the options for heating are limited, especially in the case of high-
temperature process heat generation in the manufacturing sector, which can only
be gener- ated from biomass (or fossil fuels) However, for low and medium
temperature applications, heat-pumps could be deployed In the manufacturing
industry an increase in electricity demand resulting from  switch from bio-
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Figure 23: Renewable energy technology
options in the cases of REmap 2030, REmap- and REmap-, 2030 8500 30% RE share
28% RE share )     /   (      26% RE share 6500 Traditional biomass Wind
offshore                 Wind onshore 4500 Geothermal CSP Solar PV Solar thermal
Biomass (power) 2500 Modern biomass (liquid)           Modern biomass (solid)
500 -1500 REmap 2030 REmap- REmap- Note: All cases result in  reduction of
traditional uses of biomass and REmap- results in  reduction of biomass use for
power generation, these are shown with the negative values in the graph (also
shown in Figure 23) In this case, all countries are assumed to reach at least
36% renewable energy share by 2030 regardless of where they stand today, using
generic mix of different renewable energy technologies While some countries
would need to substantially in- crease their renewable energy shares from today’
very low levels to 30%, others would meet, or even surpass, this level according
to their Reference Case develop- ments 2030, to 43% in REmap- These have the
effect of rais- ing the share of variable renewables in generation from 19% in
REmap 2030 to 26% in REmap-, implying that even more efforts will be required to
ensure grid stabil- ity compared with the REmap 2030 case Another important
finding is that REmap- results in  lower TFEC in 2030 of 83 EJ compared with 90
EJ in REmap 2030,  saving of % The main reason is the higher energy efficiency
of electrification technologies over combustion energy systems when viewed in
final energy terms As  result, even with  smaller increase in EJ from the REmap
Options in REmap-,  similar share of renewables can be achieved as in REmap
number of technology options and strategies are required to ensure that all
countries reach at least 30% by According to REmap-, the first strategy for all
countries is to reduce energy demand by implementing ener gy efficiency measures
The reduction potential would differ for each country, varying with the growth
of energy consumption and the current level and dis- Another strategy for
doubling the global renewable energy share is represented by the case of REmap-
70  enewable  nergy Prospects: China tribution of energy intensity For China an
energy ef- ficiency improvement of % was assumed improvements are taken into
account The electrifica- tion technologies chosen for China are those used in
REmap-, with the exception of industry reloca- tion, which is not considered As
shown in Figure 23, REmap- takes China’ renewables share to 32% The second
strategy involves using in creased electrifi- cation technologies for countries
that do not achieve  30% renewable energy share after the REmap Options and
energy efficiency improvements are considered This includes China, which only
achieves slightly more than 28% in REmap- when only energy efficiency There are
increased costs associated with both of these cases These increased costs are in
addition to the sub- stitution cost already incurred when deploying biomass
Figure 24: Comparison of REmap 2030 with the findings of other studies for power
sector, 2030 12000 )     /    (                46% 39% 10000 28% 39% 43% 56% 52%
40% 8000 6000 19% 4000 2000  IE  ( 013c)   ( 014), High   Greenpeace ( 012),
( 014), Ideal   ( 014), Lo    eference  ase Jiang ( 014)     ( 013)  010    ap
3500 ) 3000    (                  2500 2000 1500 1000 500  IE  ( 013c)   ( 014),
High   Greenpeace ( 012),        ( 014), Ideal   ( 014), Lo    eference  ase
( 013) Jiang ( 014)  010    ap   Coal Natural gas Oil Nuclear Hydro Biomass
Solar PV CSP Wind onshore Wind  hore Geothermal Ocean / Tide / Wave Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   technologies In REmap-, for the building sector, the
in- crease amounts to only around USD  per GJ to the sub- stitution cost For the
transport sector this increase rises to around USD 10 per GJ for the impacted
technologies In industry the use of heat pumps adds around USD  per GJ to the
substitution cost For REmap-, similar costs are associated with increased
electrification, the assumed energy efficiency improvements yielding cost
savings since less renewable energy capacity is re- quired As  result, the cost
impact of REmap- is lower than REmap- Hydroelectricity generation is among the
highest in REmap 2030, with about  600 TWh/year compared with total installed
capacity of around 400 GWe in most other studies The difference is explained by
the higher capacity factors of  000 hours assumed in REmap Total power
generation from wind of  300 TWh/year is lower than other studies With regard to
biomass and geothermal power generation, REmap 2030 is compa- rable to
projections in other studies Greenpeace (2012) projects much higher generation
for offshore wind, geothermal and ocean technologies compared with any other
studies Comparisons with other studies Figure 24 provides  comparison of the
REmap 2030 findings for the power sector with those of  number of other scenario
studies The most ambitious renewable energy scenario has been chosen from these
studies for comparison with the REmap comprehensive review of various modelling
tools looking into China’ energy future has been carried out by Mischke and
Karlsson (2014) According to the review of 10 energy models, the total energy
demand of China could grow by anywhere between 50% and 125% by 2030 compared
with 2010 levels In the Reference Case of this study, total final energy
consumption grows by about 60%, which falls in the middle of this range IRENA’
total power generation estimates of  595 TWh/year are in the middle of the range
found by other studies, which span from about  000 TWh/year to 11 000 TWh/year
in In terms of the renewable en- ergy share in power generation, REmap 2030
estimates are -15 percentage points lower than others This is partly due to
higher forecasts for coal-based power generation of around  300 TWh/year in
REmap 2030, compared with between  600 TWh and  400 TWh/ year in other studies
Forecasts of China’ energy demand growth by 2030 vary widely; projections in the
Reference Case of this study fall in the middle of the range 72  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China  BARRIERS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY TRANSITION
Barriers and opportunities in the power sector By contrast, 70% of the total
demand is in central and coastal parts of China (Hammons, 2011) The distance
between the best resources for renewable energy gen- eration and the main areas
of demand is  major ob- stacle because of the large investment needs for new
transmission and distribution capacity Conventional fuels As  result of its coal
dependence and size of the econo- my, China has the highest CO2 emissions of all
countries Moreover China currently accounts for 70% of new CO2 emissions each
year Burning coal also results in massive local and regional air pollution
problems The record air pollution in January 2013 resulted in increased efforts
to limit coal use, especially in the populated and industrial areas of eastern
China The government has recognised these environmental problems and is trying
to diversify its energy mix This has already constrained the rapid expansion of
renewables There is  considerable lag between addi- tions in wind power capacity
and the proportion that has been connected to the grid (DB, 2012; Zhang et al,
2014) In 2012, 22% of installed wind power was run- ning idle, mainly due to the
fact that coal-fired power plants have, in practice, priority grid access and
grid capacity is limited As of the same year, 20% of China’ wind farms were not
connected to  power grid This is caused by  combination of factors that include,
rapid capacity expansion, limited coordination between pro- ject developers and
grid planners, lack of transmission capacity and technical concerns of regional
utilities that the intermittency of wind power could be disruptive to normal
operations19 (Zhang et al, 2014) Around 95% of the total power generation
capacity in China has been built since 1990 and will still be op- erational in
Therefore replacement investments play  secondary role in the transition to
renewables unless the costly early retirement of some coal-fired plants is
considered, as has been addressed in the case of onshore wind power in this
study However, demand growth is projected to continue and double between 2010
and This translates to about  000 GWe of fu- ture coal power generation capacity
Overall, more than 500 GW of capacity additions are planned of which 70% are
coal-based (Platts, 2013) Restrictions to inter-regional grid connections mean
that cross-regional trade represented % of total pro- duction in Much of this is
due to the fact that coal power plants still have priority (IEA, 2011b;
Davidson, 2013b) The effect might be small in Liaoning, Ninxiang, Yunnan and
Xinjiang but it falls - percentage points off capacity factors in Jilin, Inner
Mongolia, Gansu, Heilongjiang and Hebei The effective capacity factor of Chinese
wind is %, compared with % for the United States (2013 data) Curtailment rates
ranged from 13% to 25% in 2012, although these restrictions are falling Between
January and June 2014, the nation- wide curtailment rate was % According to
China’ renewable energy policy, wind farm owners should be compensated for
curtailment, but in reality no economic compensation is paid Transmission and
grid infrastructure The distribution of energy resources in China is diverse
More than 80% of the potential energy resources, such as coal, oil, natural gas,
hydroelectricity, wind power and solar energy, are distributed in the northern
and western parts of China Around 80% of onshore wind energy capacity is
distributed in the “-North” regions (North, Northeast and Northwest) Two-thirds
of hydroelectric- ity is located in the southeast The spatial distribution of
supply and demand creates challenges Significant transmission capacity is
planned, but not yet in place Moreover, renewable power competes with coal power
for the same transmission capacity 19 Different accounting systems for annual
wind market statistics have led to different information about the status of
wind farm connection to the grid; thus different values are found in the litera-
ture Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Grid is  key enabler and the future
of wind energy is closely connected to the future development of grid policies
So far, high curtailment rates related to prob- lems with grid connections, the
lack of priority dispatch and missing power grid capacity have led to uncer-
tainty and financial losses In 2013, wind saw  capac- ity increase, possibly as
result of improved measures to reduce curtailment In addition to curtailment,
the second other big system challenge which China’ wind sector is facing today
is grid interconnection, but China made considerable progress related to that as
well since both new installations grew and the percentage of non- connected
capacity fell (14% of the total power generated in 2009); otherwise inter-
regional and provincial trading is determined by multi-year contracts, both in
terms of the volume and price (IEA, 2011b) Solar photovoltaics China had 21 GWe
of solar capacity installed as of the end of In the same year,  distributed FiT
was introduced For solar PV, the deployment strategy has changed in recent years
Before 2013, the focus was on large-scale solar PV installations There has been
movement on this front and since then the focus has begun to shift towards
distributed solar PV applications NEA recently approved  GWe of distributed
industrial/ commercial solar PV demonstration projects, and more than  GWe of
capacity was commissioned in the first half of 2014, with cumulative distributed
PV capacity reaching  GWe by the end of June 2014 (CREIA, 2014b) This is
considerable increase compared to end of 2013 where only 800 MWe capacity was
installed But current solar PV leasing models have encountered  number of issues
related to uncertainties about ownership of  property over the contract period
Such uncertainties could put developers into  situation where the contract might
not be respected if the business owner has changed Moreover, although the saved
tariff and received subsidies should be shared between the developer and roof
owners, the developers might face difficulties in receiving their share timely
or fully as agreed in the contract With regard to solar PV, curtailment in the
first half of 2014 reached up to 30% for many plants, and in particu- lar in
provinces where solar PV capacity is high Some % of the overall capacity
comprised utility-scale plants facing significant grid curtailment constraints
(notably in the northern and northwestern regions) Despite the improvements in
wind power,  number of institutional barriers continue to stand against in-
creased transmission These include disagreements on the engineering and economic
merits of AC vs DC lines, fragmented transmission authorities (implying the need
for centralisation of dispatch and transmission), and non-market and semi-
transparent transmission pricing (Davidson, 2013b) Each of the three independent
grid companies in China, namely SGCC, China State Grid Corporation Inner
Mongolia Grid (CSGC) and the Western Corporation, is responsible for its own
profit and loss This limits incentives for inter-company co-operation
Furthermore, the current electricity trading structure is an obstacle Without
changes to the current system, the expansion of grid transmission capacity may
not be  solution Spot market electricity trading is small Execution of projects
has so far also been hampered by  number of other factors These include
financial returns determined by FiTs which are less attractive as current policy
prefers  100% self-generation and self- consumption model instead of selling
self-generated power to the grid In addition, multi-point grid connec- tions are
not allowed, while residential power prices are Box : Inner Mongolia case study:
The need for connection In 2010, Inner Mongolia had total power generation
capacity of 34 GWe In comparison, demand is only 18 GWe Of the remaining 16 GWe,
only  GWe can be exported to the northern China grid This means there is an
overcapacity of 12 GWe This problem will grow as more wind farms are built In
the 12th FYP, Inner Mongolia requested the following grid expansion: seven 600
kV AC lines, one 660 kV DC line, and one 800 kV Ultra High Voltage Direct
Current (UHVDC) line which can bundle hydro, thermal and wind power and transmit
30 GWe outside of the province (Lu, 2010) 74  enewable  nergy Prospects: China
much lower than the industrial and commercial rates This makes residential
schemes comparatively unat- tractive: there is an unguaranteed stability of the
load, and as discussed above no standardised roof leasing contracts are
available, and the ownership and poor structural stability of roofs is often
unclear All of these risks help to limit the confidence of banks in providing
loans to distributed solar PV investors Quality of equip- ment (affecting
lifetime, return on investments, etc) and standards are also key issues quired,
as are distribution networks to make the most of the resource As  result, the
growth of biomass power generation capacity has been very moderate Waste-to-
energy technologies exist, but problems arise over the pricing of waste
treatment services and the allocation of energy recovery benefits Related
environmental impacts are another issue limiting the further use of waste for
power generation To address these issues, Chinese authorities released  number
of policy updates in September 2014 to ensure that the installation target of
GWe of distributed gen- eration can be reached Feed-in Tariffs China has chosen
to use FiTs to support the deployment of renewable energy So far the experience
has been good in general, despite problems with long delays in reimbursing
producers But the total costs of the FiT system are growing rapidly and the
Chinese govern- ment aims to gradually reduce the amount of tariff spending with
the aim of stopping FiTs for new installa- tions by smooth transition is
required in order to secure the future development and growth of the renewable
energy industry Parallel to the phasing out of FiTs, the current “FiT” –
guaranteed price per MWh which is set by the NDRC for thermal plants – should be
phased out at the same time in order to achieve  level playing field
Standardised grid connection regulation for solar PV electricity generators with
capacity below  MWe can guarantee private investors access, connection and
priority dispatch for the distribution grid one month after the completion of
construction In combination with standardised building regulation, this should
help to achieve the 2020 distributed solar PV targets Public buildings might get
permission to lease rooftops to in- vestors, benefiting both parties Wind
offshore It is not only the FiTs, but grid regulations which could be the
backbone of the renewable energy sector in the future If that would be the case,
renewable energy sec- tor will need more regulatory support after 2025 and less
monetary support Priority dispatch and mandatory grid connections will be key
policy instruments as they are expected to enter full competitiveness with
conven- tional power generation technologies between 2020 and minimum tariff for
all renewable energy generators – based on the annual average generation costs
of the previous year – could remain as  fall-back- option in order to lower the
risk to investors While offshore wind today is more expensive in China than
onshore wind, it is  technology of high strategic importance The cost reduction
potential for offshore wind installations is significant The majority of China´
mega cities are close to its long coastline and relatively short distances for
new power lines are required to con- nect offshore wind farms with cities and
industrial areas However, current offshore wind targets are low and  mid-term
programme to accelerate installation rates would help to boost the industry
Bioenergy Bioenergy for power generation is  mature market, but today feedstock
collection and the unstable prices of feedstock are major problems to its
deployment Resi- dues have  large potential, but agricultural production is
mostly small-scale and geographically scattered Sup- ply chains are not yet
established to collect and deliver the required quantities to end-users Despite
the large availability of straw, for example, its harvest period is short (six
weeks), meaning large-scale storage is re- Renewable energy equipment
manufacture China has  large wind turbine and solar PV production capacity The
massive scale-up of solar PV production in the country has contributed
significantly to the rapid decrease of solar PV investment costs Some two-thirds
of all solar water heaters and 90% of biogas installations are also located in
China  combination of market size, industrial capacity and the application of
policies to Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   specific areas of renewable
energy use has enabled this development Each entity must be independent, with
legal frame- work which guarantees  level playing field without the
discrimination of third parties The lack of progress in that regard creates
challenges for the renewable energy sector While it may not be the case today,
China might face several challenges to developing its renewable energy industry
further over the coming decades, including the increasing export orientation of
the wind industry and increased imports related to the domestic solar PV market
Targets for equipment manufacturing capacities (solar PV and wind) in terms of
GW/year, which take into account the medium and long-term goals for the do-
mestic market, require re-powering needs The overall assumed development of the
global market size could be useful in this respect Long-term certainty helps to
achieve cost stability for renewable energy policies as well Firstly, delays in
power sector reform create serious problems for the integration of renewable
energy The state-owned power generation companies have their power production
prices set by the government; oper- ating hours are set on  yearly basis for
coal plants that represent the bulk of generation capacity This makes it
difficult to ensure that the electricity system is efficient The power uptake of
renewables is regulated through state-regulated hydro expansion and portfolio
stand- ards combined with FiT for solar, wind and bioenergy, and it has been
difficult to coordinate the deployment of these technologies with plans for
local grid develop- ment Improving the quality of products is important for
number of reasons Better products enhance the life- time and durability of
plants, thereby ensuring  higher return on investments As  consequence, this
creates more confidence for both investors and financiers Fur- thermore, there
is  need for continuous innovation and & to improve the efficiency of plants
Barriers and opportunities in end-use sectors In 2030, power consumption would
only account for 30% of China’ total final energy consumption 70% would be
related to fuel use in end-use sectors for heat- ing and transport This means
efforts in end-use sectors to overcome related barriers, thereby accelerating
the use of renewables will be essential  Power market reform Power market
reforms have been on the Chinese gov- ernment’ agenda since 2002, and several
local tests have been conducted On the national level, however, there is only
limited progress Power market reforms on the wholesale and retail side are
closely linked to power sector restructuring with more transparent pricing of
grid services and clearer division of roles regarding grid development and
system operation Heating demand can be divided into four components Heating in
buildings is for cooking as well as space and water In the manufacturing
industry, it is process heat for production in the form of steam, hot water or
direct use In essence, the power sector can be broken down into three
independent areas: power production, transmission and distribution Transparent
regulation for grid access, grid services and dispatch and wheeling
fees/regulations enable private and public investors to enter the power market
Unbundling the sector from  transmission grid operator (TSO) and distribution
grid operator (DSO) is possible both with private and state- owned ownership
structures Liberalisation of the power sector in Europe over the past 20 years
has shown that state-owned grids can still provide access to private investors
So far, most policy attention has been related to im- proving efficiency, but
some renewable technologies achieved considerable success Today there is  sup-
port programme which covers both urban and rural consumers regarding the
increased use of solar thermal for water heating However, its capacity in the
industry sector is negligible Biomass also plays  negligible role in industry,
with the exception of some non-metallic mineral production processes that use
charcoal or bri- quettes as well as the use of black liquor in the pulp and
paper industry There is no policy focus to accelerate the use of renewables in
the sector 76  enewable  nergy Prospects: China District heating plays an
important role in urban areas of northern China The heat is however
predominately produced from coal-fired CHP Biomass-fired district heat
generation and other non-biomass renewables are alternatives Some of the solar
heating and geothermal related targets of the 12th FYP may create synergies for
the district heat sector To date, there are  number of solar thermal pilot
projects for district heat generation however, their status is unknown Without
better data, it is not possible to set targets and develop policies The second
priority is to create  market for efficient, reliable and affordable cooking
stoves and ensure their acceptability In order to draw up appropriate policies
for traditional biomass use, the priority is to acquire better data on the
sector and measure current demand China’ biogas programme has resulted in the
rapid expansion of biogas digesters; today around 100 million rural people
benefit from such systems In view of the changing socio-economic landscape (,
decreasing rural population), policies need to be adapted to ensure continuity
in growing biogas use For the transport sector, the policy focus is on improving
efficiency through fuel economy standards, labelling, improving the quality of
fuels, as well as subsidies and taxation of vehicle and fuels There are
subsidies which are specific to electric vehicles, the amounts depending on the
vehicle type and battery capacity Regarding biofuels, targets exist for 2020,
and the government encourages the use of marginal land and non-food feedstock
for their production However, mandates and market support for ethanol only
covers nine provinces so far and the government does not support and/or
incentivise specific biodiesel mechanisms One of the key challenges in the
residential sector is the traditional use of biomass The first priority is
improving knowledge about the actual use of traditional biomass, hence measuring
current demand There is  wide range in statistics about the number of people
relying on biomass for cooking in rural areas The Chinese gov- ernment provided
180 million improved cooking stoves to households across the country that use
biomass, Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina    SUGGESTIONS FOR ACCELERATED
RENEWABLE ENERGY UPTAKE The development and use of renewable energy is  high
priority for China in order to address growing environ- mental challenges and
the need to enhance the security of energy supply Reaching higher shares of
renewable energy use also has an important role to play in meet- ing China’
policy objectives in respect to job creation, new economic activity and  better
trade balance In the beginning of the 2000s, China decided to boost the de-
velopment of renewable energy through energy policies as well as industry policy
measures As  result, China is today  global leader in renewable energy Power
market design: ● Establish national power market, creating incen- tives for
flexible operation, and bringing in new investors Develop the grid to better
integrate renewable energy, enhance trade and deal with variability ● Technology
focused policies: ● Enhance government support for innovation, research and
development to reduce renewable energy costs Support development of next-
generation renew- able energy technologies Improve knowledge and data collection
on bio- mass and develop  working biomass feedstock market This study showed
that there is  potential to increase this growth further which can lead to 26%
renewable energy share in China’ total energy mix At the same time, there
remains  number of challenge and barriers which must be overcome to realise this
potential Based on the discussion in this study, the following high level policy
recommendations have been identified to help accelerate the deployment of modern
renewables in China from 2010 to 2030 and to account for some of the
requirements during the transition period: ● ● In addition to these high-level
policy recommendations, the rest of this section provides more detailed recom-
mendations grouped under five areas of policy action These recommendations
emerge from the outcomes of the China REmap 2030 analysis The policy action
areas are defined based on IRENA’ country analysis in consultation with the
national experts Renewable energy policy: ● Develop  comprehensive national
energy plan that accounts for the needed infrastructure for transmission and
distribution of electricity, heat and gas Introduce taxation, caps, and/or CO2
trading sys- tems to account for the damage of CO2 emission and other air
pollution from coal combustion Assess the socio-economic, energy security,
health, land and water use impact of various technologies Set targets for
renewables in manufacturing, buildings and transport Planning transition
pathways: — Diversify technology deployment to include op- tions which are being
deployed slowly today, including offshore wind, CSP, large biogas and waste to
energy Target cost reductions and power system market re-design for the short
term, and integration of large shares of renewables into the system for the long
term Ensure grid development as part of the develop- ment strategy for
renewables Cooperate with neighbouring countries in grid integration to allow
renewable electricity trade ● ● — ● — — 78  enewable  nergy Prospects: China
Creating and managing knowledge: (, wind and solar with Mongolia, hydro with
Siberia and South East Asia) Continue to focus on renewable energy use for end-
use sectors, and expand target setting — — Support the building of qualified
human and institutional capacity for deployment of renewa- bles and related
infrastructure Improve data collection as well as the quality of biomass
statistics (modern, traditional) Increase the availability of provincial level
data and improve access to data through the internet for load and production of
electricity and heat — Creating an enabling business environment: — Allow prices
to reflect the marginal cost realisti- cally (, spot markets, day/hour ahead
markets) Continue using subsidy schemes until technolo- gies reach  mature
level, in  way that supports cost reduction and efficient use of renewable
energy Revise renewable power subsidies to enhance ef- fectiveness by rewarding
both construction and operation, reach power generators in  timely manner, and
avoid delays in reimbursements — — Unleashing innovation: — — Assess best
practice technology and policies abroad and evaluate their applicability to
China conditions Consider biomass co-firing and waste use in coal-fired power
plants and co-combustion in cement kilns Refurbish small-hydroelectricity dams
with  view to increase efficiency of power generation Explore options for
advanced biofuels from lig- nocellulosic feedstock, and develop innovative
solutions for energy-intensive industries that ac- count for large industrial
energy use share Develop solar heat for industrial process heat generation and
solar absorption cooling for com- mercial buildings Strengthen electric vehicle
and modal-shift pro- grammes in tandem with an increasingly large share of
renewables in power generation Strengthen renewable energy use in newly con-
structed buildings in cities — Ensuring smooth integration of renewables into
the system: — — Ensure economic incentives for flexible operation of thermal
power plants and grids Develop solutions for pumped hydro business as part of
the power sector market reform Strengthen decentralised solutions, notably for
rooftop solar PV, including leasing models and policies such as net metering and
smart grids Improve planning and organisation to stabilise biomass feedstock
supply and improve feedstock logistics Improve planning for effective
utilisation of straw residues as an energy source — — — — — — — — Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   REFERENCES next years,  February 2013,  blog/some-
limiting-factors-for-bioenergy- growth-in-china/ 3TIER (2009), “Inc Global Wind
Dataset: Annual Mean Validation”, October 2009, Presented via IRENA’ Global
Atlas platform Bioenergy Crops (2013b), Asian biomass co-firing grows: China,
Japan and South Korea are the main consumers, 13 May 2013,  blog/asian-biomass-
co-firing-grows-china- japan-and-south-korea-are-the-main-consumers/ AEA
Technology Environment (2005), Damages per Tonne Emissions of PM2, NH3, SO2, NOx
and VOCs from Each EU25 Member State (Excluding Cyprus) and Surrounding Seas,
AEA Technology Environment, Didcot,  Biomass Magazine (2013), Beta renewable
technology to make ethanol, bioglycols in China, 18 November 2013,  renewables-
technology-to-make-ethanol-bioglycols-in- china AEC (Advanced Ethanol Council)
(2013), Cellulosic Biofuels, Industry Progress Report , AEC,  h2m6vaik3pdf AEE-
Intec (Institute for Sustainable Technologies) (), “Solar Heat Worldwide ”,
Annual Reports, AEE-Intec, Gleisdorf,  at/indexphp?seitenId=40&lang=en BNEF
(Bloomberg New Energy Finance) (2013), The future of China’ power sector: From
centralised and coal powered to distributed and renewable?, Executive Summary,
27 August 2013,  wp-content/uploads/BNEF_the_future_of_ chinas_power_sectorpdf
Al-Jazeerah (20104), “Chinese, Russian Presidents vow to enhance energy
cooperation, sign agreement about gas supplies, ahead of APEC summit“,  November
2014, Al-Jazeerah,  info/News/November/%20n/Chinese,%20
Russian%20presidents%20Vow%20to%20Enhance%20
Energy%20Cooperation,%20Sign%20Agreement%20
About%20Gas%20Supplies,%20Ahead%20of%20 APEC%20Summit,%20November%209,%htm BNEF
(2014), China Requires 30% of State Cars Use Alternative Energy, Bloomberg News,
14 July 2014,  targets-30-new-government-vehicles-use-alternative- energyhtml
BREE (Bureau of Resources and Energy Economics) (2014), Asia-Pacific Renewable
Energy Assessment, July 2014, BREE and Clean Energy Solutions Center Baron,  et
al (2012), Policy Options for Low-Carbon Power Generation in China: Designing an
emissions trading system for China’ electricity sector, OECD/IEA, Paris,
PolicyOptions_LowCarbon_Chinapdf Brendstrup,  (2012), Lessons learned from high
efficiency biomass power plants in China, Clean  Tech,
POWERGEN%20PRSTN_Renewable%20April2012/ High%20Efficiency%20Biomass%20Power%20
Plants%20in%20Chinapdf Batidzirai, , Smeets,  and Faaij,  (2012), “Harmonising
bioenergy resource potentials— Methodological lessons from review of state of
the art bioenergy potential assessments”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, Vol 16, October 2012, pp 6589-Campbell,   (2014), China and the United
States –  comparison of Green Energy Programmes and Policies, April 30 2014,
Congressional Research Service,  fasorg/sgp/crs/row/R41748pdf Bertani,  (2010),
“Geothermal power update in the world:  Update Report”, Proceedings World
Geothermal Congress 2010,  April 2010, Bali,
geotermiaorgmx/geotermia/pdf/WorldUpdate2010- Ruggeropdf Carbontrust (2014),
Detailed appraisal of the offshore wind industry in China, July 2014,
Carbontrust,   appraisal-of-the-offshore-wind-industry-in-chinapdf Bioenergy
Crops (2013a), Most relevant limiting factors for huge expected bioenergy growth
in China for the Chen, -, Yao -, and Li,  (2010), Analysis of rural residential
energy consumption and its carbon 80  enewable  nergy Prospects: China emissions
in China, , Energy Policy, Vol 41, February 2012, pp 445-CREIA (China Renewable
Energy Industry Association) (2014a), China Wind Power Review and Outlook 2014,
Chinese Renewable Energy Industry Association, Chen,  (2011), “Insight: State-
of-the-art biomass gasification in China”, 5th International Conference on
Application of Biomass Gasification, 11 February  LiChen-
GasificationstatusinChinapdf CREIA (2014b), “Innovation of Distribution
Generation with Solar PV Systems”, Presentations at China Solar PV Summit,
September, 2014, Beijing CWEA (2014), Statistics of Chinese Installed Wind Power
Capacity 2013, Chinese Wind Energy Association,   pdf Chen, , Zhao,  and Wang,
(2012), The progress and prospects of rural biogas production in China, Energy
Policy, Vol 51, December 2012, pp 58–Daioglou, , van Ruijven,  and van Vuuren,
(2012), “Model projections for household energy use in developing countries”,
Energy, Vol 37, January 2012, pp 601-Cho,  (2011), “How China is dealing with
its water crisis”, State of the planet – Blogs from the Earth Inistitute,  May
2011,  china-is-dealing-with-its-water-crisis/ Davidson,  (2013a), “
Transforming China’ Grid: Sustaining the Renewable Energy Push” 24 September The
Energy Collective,  com/michael-davidson/transforming-china-- grid-sustaining-
renewable-energy-push CHPDI (Chinese Hydropower Planning and Design Institute)
(2014), “Status and Outlook of China Renewable Energy Development and
Application”, presentation delivered by Mr Wang Minhao (Executive Vice
President), World Future Energy Summit 2014, Abu Dhabi Davidson,  (2013b),
“Politics of power in China: Institutional Bottlenecks to Reducing Wind
Curtailment Through Improved Transmission”, Fourth Quarter 2013, pp ,
International Association for Energy  Economics, newsletterdlaspx?id=CNREC
(China National Renewable Energy Centre) (2012), Key information at  glance
China 12th Five-Year Plan for Renewable Energy Development (), September 2012,
China National Energy Administration, CNREC, Beijing Davidson,  (2014),
“Primetime Debate: Will an Ultra-High Voltage Transmission Supergrid Solve
China’ Air Pollution Crisis?” 24 April The Energy Collective,
davidson/primetime-debate-will-ultra-high- voltage-transmission-supergrid-solve-
china- CNREC (2013a), 2012 China Renewable Energy Outline, December 2013, CNREC,
Beijing, China CNREC (2013b), Personal communication with Mr Wang Wei, February
2013, CNREC, Beijing, China CNREC (2014), “CNREC 2013 - Activities within the
China National Renewable Energy Centre”, March 2014, CNREC, Beijing, China DB
(Deutsche Bank) (2012), Scaling wind and solar power in China: Building the grid
to meet targets, February 2012,  Wind_and_Solar-Feb2012pdf Cozzi,  (2012),
“Assessing reverse auctions as  policy tool for Renewable Energy Development”,
Energy, Climate, and Innovation Program (ECI), Number , Center for International
Environment and Resource Policy, Tufts University,
Publications/more/~/media/Fletcher/Microsites/CIERP/
Publications/May12CozziReverseAuctionspdf DEA (Danish Energy Agency) (),
District heating – Danish and Chinese experience, Danish Energy Agency,
Nyheder/district_heating_danish-chinese_experiences pdf Delman,  and Chen,
(2008), Nordic Collaboration with China in Energy Research and Development,
Nordic Institute of Asian Studies, Copenhagen Initiative) (2013), Buildings CPI
(Climate Policy Energy Efficiency in China, Germany and the United States, April
2013, CPI, San Francisco, CA,  uploads/Buildings-Energy-Efficiency-in- China-
Germany-and-the-United-Statespdf (Environmental (2013), E2 Advanced biofuel
market report 2013: Capacity 2016, Environmental Entrepreneurs, through
Entrepreneurs) Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   San Francisco, CA,
E2AdvancedBiofuelMarketReport2013pdf GCC (Green Car Congress) (2012), “BYD
bringing electric buses to Uruguay; targeting more than 500 by 2015”, 19 July
2012, Green Car Congress,  greencarcongresscom/byd-html Economist (2012),
“Chinese carmakers still in second gear”,  May 2012, pp , The Economist Guan,
et al (2014), “The gigatonne gap in China’ carbon dioxide inventories”, Natura
Climate Change, Vol , pp 672-Eggleston  et al (2006), “2006 IPCC Guidelines for
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories”, National Greenhouse Gas IPCC
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), IGES, Kanagawa,  indexhtml
Inventories Programmes, Guardian (2014), “China’ toxic air pollution resembles
nuclear winter, say scientists”, 25 February 2014, The Guardian,  feb/china-
toxic-air-pollution-nuclear-winter- scientists EnergyTrend (2014), “China issues
new policy to boost distributed PV market”, 12 September 2014,
pvenergytrendcom/price-html GWEC (Global Wind Energy Council) (2014a), Global
offshore current status future prospects,  gwecnet/global-offshore-current-
status-future- prospects/, Last accessed on: 20 June ESTELA (European Solar
Thermal Electricity Association) (2011), Solar Thermal Electricity in China in
2011 and Future Outlook, Cayetano Hernández Lluna, European Solar Thermal
Electricity Association (ESTELA), Renewable Energy House, Brussels GWEC (2014b),
“Global Wind Statistics 2013”, Global Wind Statistics, annual, Global Wind
Energy Council,  GWEC-PRstats-2013_ENpdf ESTELA (2012), Solar thermal
electricity in China in 2011 and future outlook, July 2012, ESTELA, Brussels,
Publications/STE_in_China_By_CHernandez_ESTELA_ July2012_WEBpdf Hallding,  et al
(2012), Learning from previous failures: scaling up biogas production in the
Chinese countryside, Climate and Development, Vol , Issue , 199-EurObserv’ER
(2014), Solar thermal and concentrated solar power barometer, May 2014,
EurObserv’ER,   observ/baro221_enpdf in power Hammons,  (2011), Developments
generation and transmission infrastructures in China, Electricity
Infrastructures in the Global Marketplace, Ed:  Hammons,  wm/pdf Euroheat &
Power (2013), “District heating and cooling: Country by Country 2013 Survey”, 21
May 2013, Euroheat & Power, Brussels Haugwitz,  (2014), “China’ domestic solar
PV market dynamics during the 12th Five-Year-Plan () Period”, 7th Meeting of the
Asia Solar Energy Forum 2014, 16 October 2014, Seoul FAOSTAT (2014),
“ForesSTAT”, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome Feng,
, (2014), Update on China´ Carbon Market, 25 May 2014, Department of Climate
Change, NDRC, Cologne  files/documents/CHINA%20Update%20on%20
China%E2%80%99s%20ETS%20Pilots%pdf He, , and Kammen,  (2014), “Where, when and
how much wind is available?  provincial-scale wind resource assessment for
China”, Energy Policy, Vol 74, November 2014, pp 116-Ho,  and Nielsen,  (2007),
Clearing the Air The Health and Economic Damages of Air Pollution in China, MIT
Press,  air Forbes,  (2013), The United States and China: Moving toward
Responsible Shale Gas Development, September 2013, World Resources Institute,
edu/~/media/events /2014/ /06%20china%20
clean%20energy/uschina%20moving%20toward%20
responsible%20shale%20gas%20development_sforbes Huffington Post (2014), “In
effort to fight pollution, Beijing plans to ban all coal use by 2020”,  August
2014,  beijing-coal-ban_n_5650244html (Geothermal Energy Association) GEA
(2012), “Geothermal: International Market Overview Report”, May 2012, GEA,
Washington, DC,  org/pdf/reports-GEA_International_Overviewpdf IEA
(International Energy Agency) (2009), CHP and DHC in China: An assessment of
market and policy 82  enewable  nergy Prospects: China potential, OECD/IEA,
Paris  files/chp/profiles/Chinapdf must adjust to changing conditions”, IISD,
iiedorg/17185IIED IEA (2011a), “China Wind Energy Development Roadmap Technology
Roadmap” OECD/IEA, Paris IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
(2007), “Sum mary for Policymakers”, in:  Metz, et al (eds), Climate Change
2007: Mitigation, Fourth Assessment Report, IPCC, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge and New York,  assessment-report/ar4/wg3/ar4-wg3-spmpdf IEA (2011b),
Integration of Renewables: Status and challenges in China, Working Paper,
OECD/IEA, Paris,  publication/Integration_of_Renewablespdf IRENA (International
Renewable Energy Agency) (2013), Renewable Energy Auctions in Developing
Countries, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IEA (2012a), “World Energy Outlook 2012”, World
Energy Outlook, annual, OECD/IEA, Paris IEA (2012b), People’ Republic of China:
Oil & Gas Security Emergency Response of IEA Countries, OECD/IEA, Paris,
freepublications/publication/China_2012pdf IRENA (2014a), REmap 2030:  Renewable
Energy Roadmap, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  remap/REmap_Report_June_2014pdf IEA (2013a),
“World Energy Outlook 2013”, World Energy Outlook, annual, OECD/IEA, Paris IRENA
(2014b), Renewable Energy in Manufacturing:  technology roadmap to REmap IRENA,
Abu  Dhabi, 2030%20Renewable-Energy-in-Manufacturingpdf IEA (2013b), Medium-Term
Renewable Energy Market Report 2013: Market Trends and Projections to 2018,
OECD/IEA, Paris,  mtrenew2013sumpdf IRENA (2014c), Global bioenergy supply and
demand projections:  working paper for REmap 2030, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
REmap_2030_Biomass_paper_2014pdf IEA (2013c), “World Energy Balances”, IEA
Statistics, OECD/IEA, Paris,  energybalances/ IRENA (2014d), Renewable Energy
and Jobs 2013, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  IEA-ETSAP (IEA Energy Transition System
Analysis Program) (2013), “Two- and three-wheeled electric vehicles and
quadricycles”, IEA ETSAP Technology Brief T19, January 2013, IEA ETSAP,
HIGHLIGHTS%20PDF/T19_2-3W_GG_Jan2013_final_ GSOK%pdf IRENA (2014e), “Economic
Value Creation of Renewable Energy Deployment”, Presentation by Rabia Ferroukhi
in Delhi, April 2013, IRENA,  /%5CDocumentDownloads%5Cevents%5CDelhiEven
%5C2%20IRENA%20Econ%20Value%20Creationpdf IEA-GIA (IEA Geothermal Implementing
Agreement) (2013), “Annual Report 2011”,  October 2013, IEA-GIA,  GIA-Annual-
Report-Final-4Oct13pdf IRENA (forthcoming), Renewable off-grid systems: Status
report 2014 and methodological issues, IRENA, Abu Dhabi Jiang,  (2014), Recent
global and China’ modelling for low carbon scenario, Energy Research Institute,
Beijing IEPD (Industrial Efficiency Policy Database) (2014), Carbon Emission
Trading Pilots, CN-, July 2014,  iepdiipnetworkorg/policy/carbon-emissions-
trading- pilots Jingying,  et al (2001), “Biomass energy in China and its
potential”, Energy for Sustainable Development, Vol , Issue , pp 66-IFPEN (IFP
Energies Nouvelles) (2013), Overview of second-generation biofuel projects,
Panorama 2014, December 2013, IFPEN, Rueil-Malmaison LBNL (Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory) (2012), Key China Energy Statistics, June 2012, LBNL,
Berkeley, CA,  statistics-2012-june-pdf IIASA (International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis) (2014), “GAINS GLOBAL (Greenhouse Gas – Air Pollution
Interac tions and Synergies)”, IIASA, Laxenburg,  login?logout= LBNL (2013),
“China Energy Databook Version ”, September 2013, LBNL, Berkeley, CA Lee,
(2014), “Financing CSP in People’ Republic of China”, Presentation at CSP Focus
2014, 24 March 2014, Beijing, China, Asia Development Bank (International IISD
for Sustainable Development) (2014), “China’ domestic biogas sector Institute
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   Presented via IRENA’ Global Atlas
platform,  enopeneiorg//indexphp?title=File:NREL-asia-glopdf Lixin,  (2012),
“Overview and outlook of agricultural bio-energy development in China”,
Presentation at Energy Technology  & Needs of Emerging Economies Workshop,
Center for Energy and Environmental Protection,  egrdbeijing/IEAZhaoLixinpdf NY
(New York Times) (2014), “Only Nine Chinese Cities Pass Clean Air Test”,  August
2014,  nytimescom/blogs/sinosphere/only-- chinese-cities-pass-clean-air-
test/?smid=tw-share Lo,  et al (2014), “ critical review of China’ rapidly
developing renewable energy and energy efficiency policies”, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol 29, pp 508-OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development) (2014), The cost of air pollution: Health impacts of
road transport, OECD, Paris Pachauri,  et al (2012), Access to modern energy:
Assessment and Outlook for Developing and Emerging Regions, IIASA, Laxenburg Lu,
(2010),  Primer on the (Strong) Smart Grid and its Potential for Reducing GHG
Emissions in China and the United States, NRDC Working Paper, Natural Resources
Defense Council, October PE (Power Engineering) (2013), “Dry cooling system
headed to coal-fired power plants in China”, 11 April 2013,  cooling-system-
headed-to-coal-fired-power-plants-in- chinahtml Ma,  et al (2012), The future
demand of transportation in China: 2030 scenario based on  hybrid model,
Procedia – Social and Behavioural Sciences, Vol 54, pp 428-Perera,  (2014), Pump
storage hydropower  solution to challenges of wind power integration: Regulatory
policies and incentive structures in Chinese context, 20 June 2014, Asia
Development Bank Mainali, , Pachauri, , and Nagai,  (2012), “Analysing cooking
fuel and stove choices in China till 2030”, Journal of Renewable and Sustainable
Energy, Vol , pp 031805--Platts (2013), “World Electric Power Plants Database,
December 2013”, McGraw Hill Financial, New York, June 2013,  plants-database
Marshall, , Ashmore, , and Hinchcliffe,  (1997), “ hidden threat to food
production: air pollution and agriculture in the developing world”, Gatekeeper
Series No 73, International Institute for Environment and Development, London,
pdfs/6132IIEDpdf PNNL (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory) (2012), China’
building energy use:  long-term perspective based on  detailed assessment,
January 2012, PNNL, Richland, WA,  external/technical_reports/PNNL-pdf Matus,
et al (2012), “Health damages from air pollution in China”, Global Environmental
Change, Vol 22, pp 55-PV Magazine (2014), China erweitert Liste förderfähiger
Photovoltaik-Unternehmen, 18 July 2014, PV Magazine,
ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=16026&noMobile=&cHash=19 23ee54fd2893ae595401eb736cc1df
Mischke,  and Karlsson,  (2014), “Modelling tools to evaluate China’ future
energy system –  review of the Chinese perspective”, Energy, Vol 69, pp 132-NDRC
(National Development & Reform Commission) (2006), Trial Measures for Pricing
and Cost Sharing Management for Renewable Energy Power, National Development &
Reform Commission Qiu,  et al (2012), “Liquid biofuels in China: Current status,
government policies, and future opportunities and challenges”, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol 16, pp 3095-NPC (National People’ Congress)
(2010), Renewable Energy Law of the People’ Republic of China, Ministry of
Commerce, December 20, 2013,  englishmofcomgovcn/article/policyrelease/
questions/shtml RE New Economy (2014), “China plans $65 billion carbon market –
at around $18/tonne”, 12 September 2014, RE New Economy,  au/china-plans-65bn-
carbon-market-at-around- 18tonne-NREL ( National Renewable Energy Laboratory)
(2006), “Layer Multiple Countries 40km: Selected Asian Countries – Annual Global
Horizontal Solar Radiation”, Reports (2013), “China Electric Vehicle Industry
Report, 2013”, PRWEb,  84  enewable  nergy Prospects: China china-electric-
vehicle/industry-ankai-leads-2013/ prweb10712484htm pv-capacity-in-2013-shift-
to-distributed-generation- in-html Spiegel (2014), “Kampf gegen Smog: China
verzichtet bei Elektroautos auf die Mehrwertsteuer“,  July 2014,  in-peking-
setzt-mehrwertsteuer-fuer--autos- aus--html Reuters (2014a), “China finds shale
gas challenging, halves 2020 output target”,  August 2014, Reuters,  shale-
target-idUSKBN0G70GS20140807 Reuters (2014b), “China plan to cap CO2 emissions
seen turning point in climate talks”,  June 2014, Reuters,  climatechange-
idUSL3N0OK1VH20140603 The World Bank (2013), SE4All Global Tracking Framework,
May 2013, The World Bank, Washington, DC,  Global-Tracking-Framework-Report RTCC
(Responding to Climate Change) (2014), “China completes rollout of pilot carbon
markets”, 20 June 2014, RTCC,  completes-rollout-of-pilot-carbon-markets/ The
World Bank (2014), Performance of Renewable Energy Auctions: Experience in
Brazil, China and India, Policy Research Working Paper, The World Bank Group,
Energy and Extractives Global Practice Group, Washington, DC Ruicheng, , Tao,
and Xuan,  (2014), The Roadmap research of China solar thermal development,
Energy Procedia 48, pp 1642-Tu,  and  Johnson-Reiser (2012), Understanding
China’ Rising Coal Imports, 16 February 2012, Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, Washington, DC,  SA (Scientific American) (2013), “Water
demands of coal-fired power drying up northern China”, 25 March 2013,  demands-
of-coal-fired-power-drying-up-northern- china/ USDA (US Department of
Agriculture) (2012), “China – People’ Republic of Biofuels”, Annual Gain Report
Number 12044,  July 2012, USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, Global Agricultural
Information Network, Washington, DC,
GAIN%20Publications/Biofuels%20Annual_Beijing_
China%20-%20Peoples%20Republic%20of_7--pdf SCMP (2013), “Beijing and other key
cities plan for 10- fold expansion of metro railways”, August 26, South China
Morning Post,  economy/article/beijing-and-other-key-cities- plan-10-fold-
expansion-metro-railways USDA (2013), China – “People’ Republic of Biofuels”,
Annual Gain Report Number 12044,  September 2013, USDA Foreign Agricultural
Service, Global Agricultural Information Network, Washington, DC,
fasusdagov/Recent%20GAIN%20Publications/         %                       %   - %
Peoples%20Republic%20of_9--pdf SGCC (State Grid Corporation of China) (2012),
Developing the Smart Grid for Efficient Utilisation of Renewable Energy in the
PRC, September 2012, China Electric Power Research Centre, SGCC SGCC (2013),
“Overview of SGCC and the Integration of Large Wind Power”, September 2013, SGCC
SGCC (2014), “Developments, challenges, opportunities & prospects of Smart Grid
in China”, 15 May 2014, SGCC,  presentationliminaire/chen-yueming-developments-
challenges-opportunites-and-prospects-enpdf Vakkilainin, , Kuparinen, ,
Heinimoe,  (2013), Large Industrial Users of Energy Biomass, Lappeenranta
University of Technology, Lappeenranta, www
bioenergytradeorg/downloads/t40-large-industrial- biomass-userspdf Sinton,
(2001), Accuracy and reliability of China’ Energy Statistics, LBNL-48919,
September Van Sambeek,  et al (2013), Bio-energy Co-operation between China and
the Netherlands 26 April 2013, Azure International, Beijing,
files/Bioenergy%20China%20Netherlands%20 Final%20Azure%20NL%20Agency%pdf
SolarServer (2014), “Official figures published: China installed 92 GW of solar
PV capacity in 2013; Shift to distributed generation in 2014”, SolarServer –
Global Solar Industry Website,  solar-magazine/solar-report/solar-
report/official- figures-published-china-installed-1292-gw-of-solar- Wang,  et
al (2013), “Will  driving restriction policy reduce car trips?  case study of
Beijing, China”, Environment for Development Discussion Paper Series, Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   September  EfD-DP-13-pdf Renewable Power Sources in
China to 2050, February 2014, WWF Wang, , Barroso,  and Elizondo,  (2014),
“Promoting Renewable Energy through Auctions: The Case of China”, Live Wire
2014, The World Bank,  worldbankorg/external/default/WDSContentServer/
WDSP/IB/000456286_20140613154552/ Rendered/PDF/886970REPLACEM00Box385194B00P
UBLIC0pdf Xia,  (2013), CHP/DHC role in Chinese energy future, 28 November 2013,
Building Energy Research Centre, Tsinghua University,
org/Portals//pdfs/CHP%20Workshop/Xia%20Jianjun_ CHP-
DHC%20role%20in%20Chinese%20energy%20 futurepdf Yang,  (2013), China 2050
Pathway, Energy Research Institute,  climatechange/Public/pdfs/Events%20
China%202050%20ERI%20lecture/China%202050%20 -%20Yang%20Yufengpdf WBCSD (World
Business Council for Sustainable Development) (2009), “Global Cement Technology
lower Roadmap”, Developing technologies for  carbon cement industry, WBCSD
Cement Sustainability Initiative, Geneva,  indexphp/key-issues/climate-
protection/technology- roadmap Yishui,  and Liying,  (2011), “Resource, Policy
and Status and Prospect on Agricultural Bio-energy in China”, Presentation at
2nd Regional Bioenergy Policy Dialogue,  June 2011, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Engineering,  rap/files/meetings/110603_chinapdf Worldview (2012),
“Geothermal potential of China Worldview Report”, June 2012, New Zealand
Geothermal Association, Wellington  nz/Publications/Industry_papers/Worldview-
Report- Geothermal-Potential-of-Chinapdf Zhang, , Watanabe,  and Lin,  (2010),
Rural Biomass Energy 2020: People’ Republic of China, Asian Development Bank,
Mandaluyong City,  ubuni-muenchende//MPRA_paper_24987pdf Worldwatch (2014),
Smart Grid Investment Grows with Widespread Smart Meter Installations, May 22
2014, WorldWatch Institute,
sites/default/files/vital_signs_smart_grid_final_pdf pdf Zhang,  et al (2013),
“Interactions between renewable energy policy and renewable energy industrial
policy:  critical analysis of China’ policy approach to renewable energies”,
August 2013, Energy Policy 2013, Vol 62, pp 342–WP (2013), “Analysis – China
unable to achieve  GW offshore wind goal by 2015”, 21 June 2013, WindPower
Monthly, article/analysis---china-unable-achieve-5gw- offshore-wind-goal-Zhang,
et al (2014), “An integrated assessment of China’ wind energy potential”, Report
No 261, April 2014, MIT Joint Programme on the Science and Policy of Global
Change, Cambridge, MA,  mitedu/CECP/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt261pdf WRI
(World Resources Institute) (2013a), “China’ electric vehicle development
failing to meet ambitious targets”, WRI, Washington, DC,  org/revolt/chinas-
electric-vehicle-development-failing- to-meet-ambitious-targets/#more-Zhang,
(2014), “Introduction of utilization of straw energy in china”, Beijing
Shengcheng Bioenergy & Co Ltd, Beijing,
allgemein/pdf/veranstaltungen/Strohenergie2012/10_ Zhang-freigegebenpdf WRI
(2013b), “Majority of China’ Proposed Coal-Fired Power Plants Located in Water-
Stressed Regions”, 26 August 2013, WRI, Washington, DC,  blog/majority-
china%E2%80%99s-proposed- coal-fired-power-plants-located-water-stressed-
regions Zhou,  et al (2007), Energy use in China: Sectoral trends and Future
Outlook, January 2007, LBNL, Berkeley, CA,  61904-sectoral-energy-trendjan-pdf
WRI (2014), “What are China’ national climate and energy targets?” 22 May 2014,
WRI, Washington, DC,  table_China_climate_energy_targets_0pdf Zhou, , McNeil, ,
Levine,  (2009), Energy for 500 million homes: drivers and outlook for
residential energy consumption in China, ECEE,
org/library/conference_proceedings/eceee_Summer_ Studies/Panel_4/paper WWF
(World Wide Fund for Nature) (2014), China’ Future Generation: Assessing the
Maximum Potential for 86  enewable  nergy Prospects: China LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AC alternating current EU European Union BEV battery-electric vehicle FiT feed-
in tariff BIPV building integrated photovoltaics FYP five-year plan CBEEX China
Beijing Environment Exchange Gcal gigacalories CC combined cycle GDP gross
domestic product CCS carbon capture and storage GHG greenhouse gas CCER China
Certified Emissions Reductions GJ gigajoule CDB China Development Bank Gt
gigatonne CDC China Datang Co GW gigawatt GWe gigawatt-electric CDM clean
development mechanism gigawatt-thermal GWth CEC China Electricity Council HHV
higher heating value CGC China Guodian Co IBT increasing block tariff CHDC China
Huadian Co IEA International Energy Agency CHNG China Huaneng Group IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change CHP combined heat and power IPP
independent power producer CNREC China National Renewable Energy Centre IRENA
International Renewable Energy Agency CNPC China National Petroleum Corporation
km kilometre CNOOC China National Offshore Oil Corporation CO2 carbon dioxide kt
kilotonne CPIC China Power Investment Co kV kilovolt CSG Southern Power Grid
Corporation kW kilowatt CSGC China State Grid Corporation kWh kilowatt-hour kWe
kilowatt-electric CSP concentrated solar power LCOE levelised cost of
electricity DC direct current LHV lower heating value EJ exajoule LNG liquefied
natural gas ETS emissions trading system Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
RMB renminbi LPG liquid petroleum gas SASAC Supervision and Administration
Commission MMS mandatory market share SE4All Sustainable Energy for All MOF
Ministry of Finance SEEE Shanghai Environment and Energy Exchange Mt megatonne
SERC State Electricity Regulatory Commission Mtce million tonnes of coal
equivalent SGCC State Grid Corporation of China MW megawatt SO2 sulphur dioxide
MWh megawatt-hour tcf trillion cubic feet MWe megawatt-electric TCX Tianjin
Climate Exchange MWth megawatt-thermal TFC total final consumption NDRC National
Development & Reform Commission TFEC total final energy consumption NEA National
Energy Administration tce tonnes of coal equivalent NOx mono-nitrogen oxide TPED
total primary energy demand & operation and maintenance TWh terawatt-hour OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development UHV ultra high voltage PJ
petajoule UN United Nations PM particulate matter USA United States of America
PV photovoltaic USD US dollars & research and development WEO World Energy
Outlook RD& research, development and deployment WHO World Health Organisation
88  enewable  nergy Prospects: China ANNEX : Technology cost and performance
data assumptions Capital costs & Costs (USD/kW/ year) Conversion efficiency
Capacity factor (USD/kW) (%) (%) Power Renewables: Wind onshore  300 52 100 22
Wind onshore (remote)  500 80 100 30 Wind offshore  000 150 100 32 Solar PV
(rooftop)  400 14 100 15 Solar PV (utility)  000 10 100 Solar CSP (no storage)
700 27 100 Landfill gas  250 57 100 80 Wind onshore (remote)  000 80 100 25 Wind
offshore (remote)  050 200 100 32 Conventional: Coal  300 52 30 57 Buildings
Renewables: Air-to-air heat pumps 500 13 350 50 Solar water heating 220  100 14
Biogas boiler  000 25 80 50 Pellet burners 300  85 30 Cooking (solid biomass) 15
30 10 Conventional: Coal boiler 175  90 85 Oil boiler 175  85 85 Traditional
biomass cooking 30  10 10 Industry Renewables: Solar thermal 400  100 10
Geothermal  400 35 100 55 Air-to-air heat pumps 400 10 350 50 Biomass CHP  000
24 80 50 Conventional: Coal boiler 400 10 90 85 Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch
ina   Conversion efficiency (MJ/ or tkm) Activity per year ( or tkm / year /
vehicle) Capital costs & Costs (USD / vehicle) (USD / vehicle / year) Transport
Renewables: Liquid biofuel passenger car 28000 2800 64 15000 Biodiesel truck
120000 12000 15 110000 Plug-in hybrid (passenger road vehicles) 30000 3000 98
15000 Battery electric (passenger road vehicles) 32000 2880 69 15000 Battery
electric two-wheeler (passenger road) 4000 10000 07 5000 Conventional fuels:
Petroleum passenger car 28000 2800  15000 Petroleum truck 120000 12000 16 110000
Petroleum two-wheeler 3750 375  5000 90  enewable  nergy Prospects: China ANNEX
: Energy price assumptions National energy prices in 2030 (USD/GJ) Crude oil
Steam coal  Electricity Household (USD/kWh) 055 Electricity Industry (USD/kWh)
039 Natural gas Household Natural gas Industry Petroleum products Diesel
Gasoline Biodiesel Conventional ethanol Advanced ethanol Primary biomass  –
fuelwood Primary biomass  – biogas  Biomass residues  – ag residues  Biomass
residues  – forest residues Traditional biomass  Municipal waste  Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina   ANNEX : Details of REmap cost methodology Two examples
are provided to explain how the substitu- tion costs are estimated: projections
and these were applied to national 2010 prices (IEA, 2012a) For the case of
coal, import prices were used; for natural gas, Asian regional import prices
were used; for oil products, IEA crude oil import price projections were used
For conventional liquid biofuel prices, growth in price was matched to expected
devel- opment in petroleum prices; advanced biofuel estimates originated from
IRENA’ own estimates All biomass feedstock prices are based on IRENA bottom-up
analy- sis (IRENA, 2014c) Electricity prices were assumed to increase 30% over
2010 levels, which is based on the average price increase of conventional energy
carriers, but also taking into account the changes in the fuel mix of the power
sector with renewables ● Biomass boiler substituting LPG-based boiler: The
difference between the annualised capital, operation and maintenance and energy
costs of the two boiler systems to deliver the same amount of heat are
estimated, thereby taking into account the conversion efficiency, size of
capacity, lifetime, capacity factors, etc This is divided by the total final
biomass demand of the boiler required to deliver that heat Wind power
substituting existing coal-based power: The difference between the annualised
capital, operation and maintenance and energy costs of the two power systems to
deliver the same amount of electricity are estimated, there- by taking into
account the conversion efficiency, size of capacity, lifetime, capacity factors,
etc In the case of existing coal-based power, there are no capital costs as the
capacity is assumed to be depreciated already This difference is divided by the
total renewable electricity generated from the wind power capacity ● In the
government case, for coal, China was assumed to largely remain  domestic
producer, therefore the lower price option was used Electricity prices are based
on national prices as described in the business case, but with the effect of
taxes removed For natural gas China was assumed to be an importer of natural gas
and the higher price was used Natural gas and coal prices were based on
import/export price estimates from the IEA (2012a) Petroleum prices are
standardised for the world and indexed to expected developments in the price of
crude oil based on IEA (2012a) Liquid biofuel prices are IRENA estimates with
the effect of taxes or subsidies removed Biomass fuel prices are regionalised to
the Asia (non-OECD) region For the business case, energy prices were estimated
based on  number of methods For some multipliers, expected developments in
energy prices for the period between 2010 and 2030 were used based on the IEA 92
enewable  nergy Prospects: China ANNEX : Reference Case Sector Renewable energy
deployment in Reference Case in 2030 Total electricity production 9312 Hydro
1600 Geothermal  Solar PV 197 Power sector (incl CHP) (TWh/year) CSP 18 Wind 648
Solid biomass 192 Liquid & gaseous biofuels  Solar thermal Total heat production
5884 Geothermal District heat sector (incl CHP) (PJ/year) Solid biomass 805
Liquid & gaseous biofuels Solar thermal Total consumption 46027 Electricity
consumption 18255 Industry (PJ/year) Solid biomass 875 Liquid & gaseous biofuels
Solar thermal Total consumption 18171 Transport (PJ/year) Electricity
consumption 1256 Liquid & gaseous biofuels 600 Total consumption 20996
Electricity consumption 7052 Buildings (PJ/year) Solid biomass 2516 Liquid &
gaseous biofuels 1130 Solar thermal 2675 Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
ANNEX : Data for cost-supply curve, from the business perspective and the
government perspective Business Perspective Substitution cost (USD2010/GJ TFEC)
Technology PJ TFEC  High speed train for passenger aviation  -35  City tram for
passenger road vehicles  -32  Battery electric (public road vehicles)  -30
Battery Electric Two-wheeler (passenger road)  -30  Battery electric (passenger
road vehicles) 34 -28  Plug-in hybrid (passenger road vehicles) 54 -27  Space
heating: Pellet burners 500 -14  Space heating: Air-to-Air heat pumps 127 -12
Cooking biomass (solid) 92 - 10 Landfill gas ICE 316  11 Autoproducers, CHP
electricity part (solid biomass) 196  12 Autoproducers, CHP heat part (solid
biomass) 838  13 Space heating: Biogas (replace trad Biomass) 244  14 Solar
cooling 200  15 Space heating: Air-to-Air heat pumps (LT Industry) 290  16 Water
heating: Solar (thermosiphon) 570  17 Solar PV (Utility) 268  18 Geothermal 145
19 Biomass waste-to-energy 1124  20 Space heating: Biogas (coal rural) 200  21
Space heating: Pellet burners 258  22 Wind onshore 482 10 23 Solar thermal 935
10 24 Wind onshore (remote, existing) 656 15 25 Solar PV
(Residential/Commercial) 268 16 26 Wind offshore 77 27 27 Solar CSP PT no
storage 79 36 28 Wind offshore (remote, existing) 59 36 94  enewable  nergy
Prospects: China Government Perspective Substitution cost (USD2010/GJ TFEC)
Technology PJ TFEC  High speed train for passenger aviation  -35  City tram for
passenger road vehicles  -34  Battery Electric Two-wheeler (passenger road)  -31
Battery electric (public road vehicles)  -22  Space heating: Air-to-Air heat
pumps 127 -16  Cooking biomass (solid) 92 -  Plug-in hybrid (passenger road
vehicles) 54 -  Space heating: Pellet burners 500 -  Landfill gas ICE 316 - 10
Autoproducers, CHP electricity part (solid biomass) 196 - 11 Autoproducers, CHP
heat part (solid biomass) 838  12 Space heating: Air-to-Air heat pumps (LT
Industry) 290  13 Space heating: Biogas (replace trad Biomass) 244  14 Water
heating: Solar (thermosiphon) 570  15 Solar cooling 200  16 Solar PV (Utility)
268  17 Geothermal 145  18 Biomass waste-to-energy 1124  19 Battery electric
(passenger road vehicles) 34  20 Space heating: Biogas (coal rural) 200  21
Space heating: Pellet burners 258 10 22 Wind onshore 482 11 23 Solar thermal 935
12 24 Wind onshore (remote, existing) 656 16 25 Solar PV
(Residential/Commercial) 268 18 26 Wind offshore 77 30 27 Wind offshore (remote,
existing) 59 40 28 Solar CSP PT no storage 79 42 Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch
ina   ANNEX : Levelised costs of renewable and conventional technologies in end-
use sectors in 2030 USD/GJ USD/GJ Autoproducers, CHP electricity part (solid
biomass) 17 Autoproducers, CHP heat part (solid biomass) 17 Coal (steam boiler)
Industry Solar thermal 14 Coal (steam boiler existing)  Geothermal  Heat Pumps
(LT Industry)  Water heating: Solar  Space heating: coal (boiler)  Space
heating: petroleum products (boiler) 35 Space heating: Pellet burners
Heating/cooking traditional biomass 24 Buildings Space heating: biogas 14 Space
heating: Air-to-Air heat pumps  Space heating: Natural gas (boiler) 21 Cooking
biomass/gas 41 USD/ or -km USD/ or -km First generation bioethanol (passenger
road vehicles) Petroleum products (passenger road vehicles) 52 52 Second
generation bioethanol (passenger road vehicles) Petroleum products (freight road
vehicles) 52 31 Biodiesel (freight road) 25 Petroleum products (two-wheeler) 23
Petroleum products (passenger aviation) High speed rail for aviation 01 29 City
trams  Transport Plug-in hybrid (passenger road vehicles)  Battery electric
(public road vehicles) 48 Battery electric (passenger road vehicles) 51 Battery
electric (two-wheeler) 23 96  enewable  nergy Prospects: China ANNEX : Resource
maps Solar Source: NREL (2006) Wind Source: 3TIER (2009) Renewa ble  nergy
Prospects: Ch ina   ANNEX : Detailed roadmap table Total primary energy supply
(PJ/year) 2010 Reference 2030 REmap 2030 Coal Oil Natural gas Nuclear Hydro
Traditional biomass Modern bioenergy (incl biogas, biofuels) Solar thermal Solar
PV Wind Geothermal Ocean / Tide / Wave / Other Total Total final energy
consumption (PJ/year) 61 561 11 460  863 806  600  400  357 860  161 156  85 229
81 944 21 083 13 633  575  760  008  429  674 709  332 353  145 500 67 400 19
552 12 454  575  760  11 246  482  602  804 643  137 519 Coal Oil Natural gas
Traditional biomass Modern biomass (incl biogas) Modern biomass (liquid) Solar
thermal Geothermal Other renewables Electricity District Heat Total Gross
electricity generation (TWh/year) 24 945 11 082  006  400 607 343 500 140  11
338  424 56 785 25 874 20 676  501  008  424 858  667 293  26 563  918 91 780 22
800 19 145  322   312 858  365 439  27 099  918 89 257 Coal Natural gas Oil
Nuclear Hydro Biomass Solar PV CSP Wind onshore Wind offshore Geothermal Ocean /
Tide / Wave Total  262 83 13 74 722 33   43     233  099 663 12 878  600 192 197
18 465 182    315  269 663 12 878  600 358 445 46  105 158    543 98  enewable
nergy Prospects: China Electricity capacity (GW) Coal Natural gas Oil Nuclear
Hydro (excl pumped hydro) Biomass Solar PV (utility) Solar PV (rooftop) CSP Wind
onshore Wind offshore Geothermal Ocean / Tide / Wave Total CO2 emissions (Mt
CO2) Total emissions from fossil fuel combustion Renewable energy indicators (%)
671 35 15 11 213     45    999  020 257  119 400 38 98 41 12 269 46    306 854
257  119 400 65 190 118 32 501 60    602  917 10 185  493 Renewable energy share
electricity - generation VRE share electricity - generation Renewable energy
share electricity - capacity VRE share electricity - capacity District heat
Industry incl renewable electricity and DH Transport incl renewable electricity
and DH Buildings (excl trad biomass) incl renewable electricity and DH TFEC
(excl trad biomass) TPES (excl trad biomass) Financial indicators (in USD2010)
Substitution Cost - Business Perspective (USD/GJ) Substitution Cost - Government
Perspective (USD/GJ) Incremental system cost (bln USD/year) Reduced human health
externalities (bln USD/year) Reduced CO2 externalities (bln USD/year)
Incremental subsidy needs in 2030 (bln USD/year) Incremental investment needs
(bln USD/year) Investment needs Reference Case (bln USD/year) Investment needs
REmap Options (bln USD/year) Total investment needs RE (bln USD/year) Biomass
supply (PJ/year) 19% % 28% % % % % % % 16% 16% % % 29% % 39% 20% % % 11% % % 39%
36% 16% 13% 40% 18% 53% 35% 36% 10% 21% % % 64% 54% 26% 21%    -78 to -162 -32
to -126 60 40 91 54 145 Total supply potential Total demand 8000 - 19000 12004
Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina   ANNEX : Traditional use of biomass in
China While studies provide indications of the total population relying on
biomass in China, it is not entirely clear how much traditional biomass is
actually used according to the energy statistics available traditional uses of
biomass in rural areas since an increasing share of China’ population is moving
to urban areas; in addition, fuel mix changes in the residential sector are
increasing the availabil- ity of LPG from urban to rural areas According to the
FAO, fuel wood includes all demand for power generation, heating and cooking
Exclud- ing biomass demand related to power genera- tion, we estimate the total
wood fuel used for heating and cooking in the residential sector to be  EJ in
However, it is not possible to pro- vide  further breakdown about how much of
the demand is traditional and how much is modern There are, however,  number of
organisations which look into the total biomass demand by sector The time series
for the years between 1990 and 2013 based on the IEA (2013a), LBNL (2013) and
FAOSTAT (2014) are provided in Figure The main findings based on these three
sources are discussed below: () According to the IEA (2013a), in 2011 the resi-
dential sector used around  EJ of solid biomass; this was followed by the power
generation sec- tor where demand was 45 EJ The residential sector also used
total of  EJ of biogas Solid biomass use in the residential sector is decreas-
ing whereas the demand for other applications is increasing From these
statistics it is not clear which part of the total solid biomass use in the
residential sector is actually traditional Accord- ing to the IEA definition,
all biomass use in the residential sector of the non-OECD countries should be
traditional unless otherwise stated If this definition is followed, the total
traditional use of biomass in China in 2011 was  EJ The IEA states in its
methodology that data collected for biofuels and waste are estimates based on
per capita average consumption according to various surveys and studies The FAO
provides figures for fuel wood produc- tion and trade statistics by country
According to the organisation, the total fuel wood con- sumed (equivalent to
production) in China has decreased from  EJ in 1990 to  EJ in 2010 (FAOSTAT,
2014)This decrease is  strong in- dication that much of this demand is related
to (iii) Another source which provides bioenergy use data is the LBNL China
Energy Databook (LBNL, 2013) This source provides  breakdown of bio- energy use
for three types of biomass, name- ly crop stalk, firewood and biogas The source
states that biomass data for rural household consumption should be treated with
caution, saying that “…since sources vary, official esti- mates of biomass use
for various years may not be comparable”According to LBNL, in 2007 the total
demand for solid biomass had reached  EJ, which is similar to what is reported
by the IEA (2013a) for the residential sector in the same year Biogas data is
identical to the IEA statistics Crop stalks ( EJ) accounted for two-thirds of
the total demand for rural biomass household consumption with the remaining
third coming from firewood ( EJ) in Firewood data provided by the LBNL databook
show strong similarities with the fuel wood data from the FAO In addition to
these energy statistics,  number of other studies provide estimates for the
total use of traditional biomass in the rural residential sector According to
Chen, Yao and Li (2010), rural residential energy con- (ii) 21 The following
sources have been quoted for the energy data in the statistics: EB, National
Rural Energy Planning, 1990; SPC, Energy Conservation in China, 1997; NBS, China
Energy Statistical Year- book, various years; NBS, China Statistical Yearbook,
various years; EB, China Rural Energy Statistical Yearbook,  The FAO reports
wood fuel used in traditional form separately, if countries report the related
quantities This was not the case in China 100  enewable  nergy Prospects: China
Figure 28: Comparison of China total biomass use based on different sources,
9000 8000 )     /   (          7000 6000 5000 4000 3000  2000 1000  1990 1992
1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Residential total solid
biomass, IEA Residential total biogas, IEA Residential fuel wood, FAO
Residential crop stalk, LBNL Residential ﬁrewood, LBNL Residential biogas, LBNL
Source: IEA (2013a); LBNL (2013); FAOSTAT (2014) sumption has shown
considerable shift from tradi- tional to modern biomass use The share of
traditional biomass decreased from 82% in 2001 to 71% in 2008 of the total non-
commercial energy use The absolute volume of traditional use of biomass is shown
in Table In 2008, about  EJ of traditional biomass was used in China, according
to the study This is much lower than the data provided by the IEA statistics and
LBNL data- book, but higher than the values according to the FAO biomass was  EJ
and  EJ per year in 2010 and 2012, respectively CNREC data for power generation,
liquid biofuels and biogas are very similar to the values ac- cording to the IEA
statistics and the LBNL databook However, data for solid biomass (88 PJ) is much
lower than what is reported by other sources According to Mainali, Pachauri and
Nagai (2012), house- hold energy consumption in China ranged between  GJ and 10
GJ per capita per year (GJ/cap/year) in About - GJ/cap/year was related to
biomass for cooking and heating Based on  total rural popula- tion of about 670
million people, the study estimates to- tal biomass demand for cooking was
EJ/year in Xia (2013) reports that rural biomass energy use for the residential
sector in China in 2011 was 127 million tonnes of coal equivalent, or  EJ per
year Another source of data is the CNREC, which provides  breakdown of total
biomass demand for power genera- tion, as briquettes in heating, biogas and
finally liquid biofuels According to the CNREC, total demand for According to
the data provided by Zhou, McNeil and Levine (2009), we estimate the total per
capita energy demand in China for cooking and space/water heat- Renewa ble
nergy Prospects: Ch ina    ing as  GJ/cap/year in Half of this is for water
heating and the other half is split between 80% space heating and 20% cooking
lated to cooking and  GJ/cap/year was related to space and water heating, of
which space heating accounted for  considerably larger share Other studies also
provide values for similar indicators According to Daioglou, van Ruijven and van
Vuuren (2012), total annual rural energy use per capita in 2007 was 12 GJ Of
this total, about  GJ/cap/year was re- Based on these per capita demand
estimates and de- pending on the share of the total rural population rely- ing
on traditional uses of biomass, total demand in 2010 would be - EJ in China 102
enewable  nergy Prospects: China IREN  Head   ar te rs  Box 236, Abu Dha bi Un
it ed Arab  mira tes IREN  Innovati   and Technol ogy   ntr  Rob er -Schuman-
Pla tz  531    onn  erm  ny  na rg Renewa ble  nergy Prospects: Ch ina
Copyright©IRENA 2014