’Agence française de développement and Energy Efficiency #MondeEnCommun GROUPE
AGENCE FRANÇAISE DE DÉVELOPPEMENT #MondeEnCommun AGENCE FRANCAISE DE
DEVELOPPEMENT AFD’ Energy Transition Strategy  Goal « Accelerate the energy
transition of developing countries towards energy services accessible to all,
efficient and carbon-free » Strategic priorities 2019 TOWARDS  WORLD IN COMMON
AFD Group  The AFD Group commitments in the energy sector Figures for 2020 AFD
Group  Axis  – Figures of 2020 AFD Group  Axis : ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND DEMAND
MANAGEMENT Key areas of intervention: Planning for urban areas and transport
Organizing energy sobriety in countries and territories • • Optimize facilities
and equipment in urban areas • Promote high energy-efficiency standards for
buildings  Developing an efficient and energy-efficient productive sector
Supporting the implementation of demand-side management programmes  100% Paris
Agreement AND  100% Social link AFD Group  PROGRAMME FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN
BUILDINGS (PEEB) Transforming the building sector through financing, policy and
capacity-building 2021  PEEB SERVICES Financing Policy support PEEB (AFD, GIZ,
ADEME) • Project preparation • Setting-up financing • Project grants • Green
Building Codes • NDC Roadmaps • National programmes Capacity-building • Support
to building sector actors Knowledge International • agenda-setting • Knowledge
sharing PROJECT LEVEL POLICY LEVEL French-German initiative launched in 2018
implemented by GIZ, AFD and ADEME PEEB supports countries in their transition
towards low-carbon, energy-efficient and resilient building sectors 2021  PEEB
IMPACT TO DATE 35 projects ongoing in over 20 countries EUR 3bn pipeline
identified to date PEEB Secretariat First Partner Countries Other countries
benefiting from PEEB support EUR 400M climate co-benefits in  2021  PEEB
TECHNICAL PROJECT ASSISTANCE @AFD PEEB  NEW INITIATIVES PEEB 2021 PEEB French
Overseas Terr Project TA starting in TA facility only available for public
sector project owners In preparation In preparation PEEB Cool PEEB Med GCF
Ongoing application 200  EUR concessional loan 50  EUR grant For project TA and
institutional support DG NEAR Ongoing application 24  EUR investment grant   EUR
project TA EE interventions in the region Georgia  Since 2018: policy reform
program to structure the electricity market in accordance with the EU
directives, and develop the regulatory framework for renewable energies and
energy efficiency  AFD support: multi-year program of Policy Based Loans to
Georgia, with co- financing from KfW and grant support from the European Union
Total AFD funding is 355M€ ()  The reform should strengthen Georgia economy and
embark in an energy transition in full compliance with the Paris Agreement The
program pays  particular attention to the promotion of energy efficiency both on
the supply and demand side It is critical to promote market efficiency but also
to mitigate the impact of tariffs increase on vulnerable customers  Concretely
  the program facilitated the adoption of energy efficiency and energy
efficiency labelling laws in compliance with EU directives In the coming months,
Georgian authorities should adopt the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(NEEAP) as well as several secondary acts to operationalize the reforms AFD
Group 11 EE interventions in the region Albania    Since 2019: Policy-Based
Loan in cofinancing with KfW to support energy sector reform, in line with EU
Acquis Total AFD financing: EUR 100M EUR 5M Technical Assistance Package, to
support reform Includes: capacity-building program for the Energy Efficiency
Agency (EEA), to improve structure, organization, performance and knowledge of
the agency  Upcoming PEEB Cool: Albania to be included in PEEB Cool, with
funding dedicated (loans + grants) to EE improvement of public buildings AFD
Group 12 EE interventions in the region Moldova   Latest addition to AFD’
geographical scope: July 2021 EE identified as key priority by the new
government, to increase energy security by reducing energy consumption 
programme for rehabilitation of public buildings is currently under finalisation
with support from EBRD, EIB and the EU, for 75 MEUR Loan and grant agreements
under this project expected to be signed by end- 2021, with implementation to
start shortly after  GoM request for AFD to provide complementary funding for
this programme  AFD to assess possibility to provide loan + grant package to
accelerate rate of EE renovation of buildings AFD Group 13 THANK YOU ! 2019
TOWARDS  WORLD IN COMMON AFD Group 14