National Action Plan for Renewable Energy Resources in Albania  Albania, as
Contractual Party in the Treaty of Energy Community September 2015 (PASSED in
January 2016) [] Table of content EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   RES GENERAL SITUATION IN
ALBANIA   Introduction and historic overview   RENAP FOR THE FULLFILLMEN OF THE
OBJECTIVE FOR RES IN ALBANIA 10   Summary of the policy for renewable enrgey in
Albania 10 Indicating objectives for renewable energy 10  MEASURES for the
fulfilment of specific OBJECTIVES in the SECTORS 13  Summary of the policies and
of the measures for the enhancement to use energy from renewable resources 13
Current supporting schemes for energy production from Renewable Resources 13
Supporting promoting schemes of RES in energy market 14   Supporting schemes for
the promotion of energy use from renewable resources of heating and cooling
(RER-&) 14 Supporting schemes for the promotion of the use of energy from
renewable resources in transport (RER-) 15  Specific measures for the promotion
of the exploitation of energy from biomass 17  Supply with biomass: domestically
and abroad 17  Measures to increase biomass availability taking into
consideration the other users of biomass (agriculture and other sectors based on
the forests) 20  Mobilization of the new biomass resources 20  Influence on
other schemes 21  Specific measures to meet the requirements under articles 13,
14, 16 and articles 17 to 21 of the Directive 2009/EC 24  Administrative
procedures and spatial planning 24  Buildings 33  Informative provisions 34
Electricity infrastructure development 35  Grid operation 39  Development of
regional heating and cooling infrastructure 40  Bio-fuels and other bio-liquids-
sustainability criteria and cHPPking of compliance 40  Intended use of
statistical transfers between Member States and planned participation in joint
projects with other member states and third countries 43  Procedural aspects 43
Certificate of origin warranty 43  Monitoring procedure 44  Monitoring procedure
and prohibition of multiple sales 44  International cooperation for origin
guarantees 45  Calculated surplus of the production of renewable energies that
may be transferred to other member states compared to the indicative trajectory
46 []  Potential calculated for joint projects 46  Assessment of the available
potential for the development of local renewable energy resources48  Potential
of hydropower plants (HPP) 48  Concessions for SHPPs 48  Operational SHPP: old
rehabilitated units and new units 49 10 SHPPs under construction 49  Energy
potential from biomass 49  Solar energy potential  Wind energy potential 56 58
Geothermal energy reserves 60  RER input to power generation 61 ANNEX : ENERGY
BALANCE SHEET (2009/IN KTOE) BASED ON NET CALORIFIC VALUES 64 ANNEX II: energy
balance sheet (2014/in ktoe) based on net calorific values 65 ANNEX III: FEED-IN
TARIFFS FOR WIND-POWER PLANT TECHNOLOGIES AND PHOTOVOLTAIC PLANTS IN DIFFERENT
COUNTRIES 66 Feed-in tariffs for wind power plants 66 Feed-in tariffs for PV
plants 67 Acronyms NANR RER RER-& RER- RER- EE ERE EUROSTAT HPP SHPP CM EGFC
ktoe MARDWA MEI ME WHSP GDP NAPEE NREAP IAE UNFCCC [] National Agency of Natural
Resources Renewable Energy Resources Renewable Energy Resources in Heating and
Cooling Renewable Energy Resources in Electrical Energy Renewable Energy
Resources in Transport Energy Efficiency Energy Regulatory Entity European
Statistics Hydro Power Station Small Hydropower Plant Council of Ministers
Energy Gross Final Consumption Kilo ton oil equivalent Ministry of Agriculture,
Rural Development and Water Administration Ministry of Energy and Industry
Ministry of Environment Water Heating with Solar Power Gross Domestic Product
National Action Plan for Energy Efficiency National Action Plan for Renewable
Energies Influence Assessment on Environment United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Changes EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Albania as one of the Contractual Parties
of the Energy Community Treaty is obliged to transpose and to be in compliance
with the EU Directive 2009/EC “On the enhancement of the use of energy from
renewable resources” One of the requests of the law 138 “On Renewable Energy
Resources” and of this Directive is the preparation and the approval of the
National Action Plan for Renewable Energy (NREAP), which establishes national
objectives of renewable energies in the final total domestic consumption as well
as the supporting measures to achieve them Also, Albanian Government considers
the promotion of renewable energies implementation as an important means of
energy policies to increase the security for energy supply, economic
development, energy sector sustainability and environment protection Even though
Albania ensures over 90% of the power from the hydropower stations,
considerable part of the energy is imported This part varies – depending on the
annual conditions- between 30% and 60%^ of the Total Supply with Prime Energy
Renewable energies might be  solution for the reduction of this dependence from
the imports and it might improve not only the security for the supply with
energy, but even the macroeconomic and political security of the country
decreasing the country budget deficit Based on these facts, which offer the
context for potential increase of the EREs role in the current situation of
energy and economy in Albania, and based upon the principles of energy and the
added domestic economic value, the potential objectives of EREs policies have
been passed:  Consumption of renewable energy resources at the measure of 38% in
2020; II Desertification of domestic renewable resources, not only from the
water resources but even from wind, sun, biomass and geothermal energy; the use
of domestic energy resources, especially in the remote areas providing vacancies
and improving the living standards III The increase of the contribution of bio-
fuels and other burning materials from renewable resources with 10% in the total
of fuel consumption in transport sector until The increase of the use of EREs
technologies is an essential step in general towards  more sustainable society
and in particular it brings considerable benefits for Albanian industry ERE’ 38%
objective was passed in the Decision of the Council of Ministers of Energy
Community 2012/MC- EnC General National Objective The year 2009 will be the
starting point in the National Objective for ERE In this year the EGFC was ,104
ktoe and ERE percentage in consumption terms was % Implementing the approach
determined in the Directive, pursuant to technologies, the basic data are
provided for ERE promotion Renewable energy for ERE- transport sector: In order
for the ERE consumption National Objective of 38% to be accomplished in 2020,
the consumption of % for the Albanian territory of EGFC has been predicted
Otherwise, the mixture up to the measure of 10% in the volume of fuels of the
renewable burning materials (FAME), consumed in the Transport sector, has been
predicted This amount is equal with at least 75 ktoe FAME for the transport
sector in This amount of the renewable part in biofuels takes into consideration
the increase with 60 ktoe in 2020 compared to Renewable energy for heating and
cooling sector ERE-&: in order for the ERE consumption National Objective of 38%
to be accomplished in 2020, it is necessary that the consumption of 10% of EGFC
in the Albanian territory, which has to be consumed in the Heating and Cooling
system, ERE-&, is consumed This amount means an additional increase of the heat
with at least 800 GWh/year in 2020 or an annual consumption of ERE-& of / ktoe
heat from wood/industrial/waste and heating pumps biomass Renewable energy for
energy sector, ERE-: In order for ERE consumption National Objective of 38% in
2020, it is necessary that the amount of 29% of EGFC, used in energy sector,
ERE-, in the Albanian territory is consumed This amount means an additional
increase of at least 270 ktoe (,140 GWh) until Also, this means an average
increase of energy generators from renewable resources in the amount of 830 MW
(% capacity factor) which are proposed to be divided according to the
summarizing table: [] Table  – Summarizing table of ERE for Heating/Cooling,
Transport and Energy which will be added to the Final Gross Energy Consumption
in Albania after 2015 until ERE additional technology  SHPP up to 10 MW (SHPP)
Eolic (Wind) Photovoltaic (PV)  ERE- Quantity Generation Instalatyion GWh ,326
233 582 ,140 MW 750 30 50 830 ktoe 200 30 40 25% 52 10% 75 % 800th - - Total
270ktoe % in EGFC Total  52ktoe % in EGFC Total  75ktoe % in EGFC Total ++ 397
ktoe from the total ,017 ktoe % in EGFC 38% Biomass Biofuel FAME  ERE- &  ERE-
ERE Table / – The remaining percentage  for the accomplishment of EREs national
objective  EREs part consumed compared to EGFC during   ERE objective which will
be consumed in EGFC in 2020  ERE quantity consumed in average in EGFC during
EGFC for Albania during   Expected EGFC for Albania in 2020 (with EE)  ERE
additional annual quantity to achieve the objective in 2020  ERE total annual
quantity to be consumed in 2020 % % ktoe ktoe ktoe ktoe ktoe % % ,,,[]  RES
ACTUAL SITUATION IN ALBANIA  Introduction and historic overview The supply with
prime energy in Albania has been dominated by fuel, hydropower plants and
biomass Domestic energy sector has been supported by energy imports, especially
by fuel products and energy imports Historically, energy needs have been
accomplished almost exclusively by the hydropower plants The total installed
energy capacity in Albania reaches up to  GW, dominated by hydropower plants
Water resources are the most important natural resources in Albania and the
general hydropower potential is assessed up to 500 MW Today, the country has
exploited only 35% of the hydropower stations potential The hydropower stations
established and linked on the cascade on the river Drin represent about 80% of
the total energy production The changes in power production might be attributed
to the unstable production from the hydropower plants Furthermore, the country
suffers from significant transmission and delivery losses – which are technical
and non-technical – which were assessed up to 96% in 2012, according to ERE, and
due to the tough and active measures undertaken by the Albanian Government, they
fell up to 29% in the first six months of As the water conditions change year
after year, the country is compelled to support on energy export at  large
measure The increasing requests for energy have increased even the support of
Albania in energy import Especially, during the first decade (), energy final
request increased with an annual average norm of % On the other side, energy
generating capacity increased by an annual norm of % The country has changed
from an energy exporter into an importer For this reason, the generating
capacity extension is one of the main priorities of energy policies sector in
Albania The future development of energy capacity has been planned mainly along
the rivers Mat, Vjosa, Devoll and Bistrica Apart from this, the Albanian
government has been focused on the diversification of its supply with energy and
the promotion of other renewable energy resources, such as biomass, solar energy
and wind energy Albania has  considerable potential of RER Its solar power
potential has been assessed in ,500-,700 kWh/m2 per year The country has also
unexploited potentials of wind power, especially along the Adriatic coastline
According to the Albanian Agency of Investment Developments  series of zones
have been identified with high potential of wind energy, with an average annual
wind speed of - / and with energy density of  /m2 Albania has also considerable
potential of biomass from agricultural waste, which is assessed approximately
about ,300 GWh/year The heat from renewable resources, which is being offered
from the inefficient use of firewood, is promoted mainly through the
implementation of solar systems for water heating, industrial biomass and
agricultural biomass As long as energy production system is concerned, despite
the hydropower stations, which is the main RES technology, it is expected to
expand considerably up to the year The other RES technologies such as wind,
biomass ore solar power are expected to play  limited role, even though
considerable potential exists The developments in energy final consumption
indicate the domination of fuel products From 1990 up to 2013,  considerable
decrease might be noticed in the contribution of solid combustibles, that means
coal and natural gas In 2013, transport sector was the greatest energy consumer,
with about 40% of the final total consumption, followed by the residential
sector (27%), industry (17%), service sector (%) and at the end agriculture (%)
Albania as one of the Contractual Parties of Energy Community Treaty is
compelled to transpose and to be in compliance with the EU Directive 2009/EC “On
the enhancement of energy use from renewable resources and it must amend and
then abrogate Directives 2001/EC and 2003/EC” This comes even as  request of Law
138 “On Energy Renewable Resources” One of the requests of law and of this
Directive is the preparation and the approval of the National Action Plan for
Renewable Energy (NREAP), which would stipulate the national objectives on
renewable energies in the [] final consumption of domestic energy On the other
hand, Albanian government has considered the promotion of renewable energy use
as an important tool of energy policies for the increase of the security for
energy supply, economic development, energy sector sustainability and
environment protection Even though, in Albania, more than 95% of energy and % of
primary total resources have been provided by hydropower stations, the
objectives of Albanian Government energy policy intend to increase further more
the use of RER In the last decade all over the world, the greatest part of the
debate in relation to the encouragement for the implementation of renewable
resources has been focused on the financial support schemes and the improvement
of the conditions in network connection for renewable energy There is no doubt
that these are the main issues which continue to remain in the centre of the
policy-makers’ attention today and in the future Albania is  special case
because domestic energy production is realized mostly by the use of big and
medium hydropower plants Also, about % of the Total Energy Primary Resources
(TEPR) in the country – including the imports – is ensured by biomass, and
especially from the firewood On the other hand, Albania carries out important
imports of energy which according to the annual conditions, change from % of the
TEPR Renewable energy might  be the solution for the decrease of this strategic
dependence on the imports and the improvement not only of the security for
energy supply but even of the macroeconomic and political security of the
country decreasing the domestic budget deficit Based on these facts which offer
the context for the potential increase of the role of RES in the current energy
and economy condition in Albania, based even on the energy security principles
and on the added domestic economic value, the potential objectives of RES
policies have been approved The increase of the use of technologies RESis  step
of special importance in general towards  more sustainable society and in
particular it brings considerable benefits for Albanian industry The argument of
added value in domestic economy shall be used in the decision-making process for
the new supporting schemes towards RES The support of RES installations might
offer an opportunity of importance for the development of local areas which are
relatively poor  OFFER and DEMAND for energy Based on Energy National Balance
2009, where the general net consumption of the primary energy resources is 93
ktoe, where just 82 was produced ny the hydropower stations, 210 ktoe is the
contribution from biomass, solar power is 65 ktoe and in total all the RES are
47 ktoe (equal to % of energy final consumption in 2009) Meanwhile, according to
the last energy balance for Albania issued by the Natural Resources National
Centre (NRNC) in 2013, from  general net consumption of energy primary resources
of 90 ktoe, just 72 ktoe are from the hydropower plants, biomass contribution is
50 ktoe, solar power is 11,92 ktoe, non fuels 35 ktoe, and in total all the RES
are equal to 63 (equal to 20% of energy gross final consumption in 2013)
Historically, Albania has gone through  high abnormal increase of energy
consumption  considerable part of this increase has been encouraged artificially
by the extraordinary levels of energy theft, the failure to pay the energy bills
and in some cases by the tariffs under cost The high consumption of energy in
the sector of buildings, especially to heat the buildings, has caused that
valuable resource is removed by the trade and industrial use which otherwise
would create vacancies and would contribute in the economic growth The measure
taken by the Albanian Government recently for the prevention of energy non-
payment (reduced from 52% in 2013 to about 29,% for the first six months of
2015) have removed one of the main obstacles for the introduction of RES and the
energy efficient measures for both sides of Albanian energy system: the request
and the supply  OBJECTIVE FOR RES IN ALBANIA  National Objective for RES [] The
main intention of the new EU Directive for renewable energy (Directive 2009) is
the determination of mandatory objectives for the use of energy for renewable
resources The Directive stipulates  general objective of 20% for EU and
individual objectives for the Member States based on their current renewable
energy level and their economic development level Within the general objective
for RES, there is  specific obligation that 10% of the energy that is used in
the transport sector is provided from the renewable resources The same approach,
but with another base year (2009 instead of 2005) has been applied to calculate
the individual objectives of each Contractual Party in Energy Community, exactly
for Albania, there is an Objective of 38% and the specific obligation within
this Objective to fulfill 10% of the energy used in transport by renewable
resources The objective of 38% from RES has been adopted in the Decision of the
Council of Ministers 2012/MC-EnC, when the Directive of RES was approved for the
Energy Community In table  below, there are all the predicted figures of the
final energy gross consumption of all the kinds of energy (from both the
renewable as well as the conventional resources), in the period until These
calculations have taken into consideration even the expected effects of the
measures for energy efficiency and saving which will be introduced over the
period Under the title “reference scenario”,  scenario has been introduced
taking into consideration only the measures of the efficiency of energy and
savings It is very important to emphasize the fact that as it was mentioned
above, these savings have been almost inconsiderable, as the RENAP was passed
officially in September Under the title “Additional Scenario for Energy
Efficiency”,  scenario has been introduced taking into consideration all the
measures that will be undertaken in order to achieve the RENAP objective of % in
Pursuant to article  () of the Directive 2009/EC, with the intention to measure
the compatibility with the indicative objective 2020 and the temporary
trajectory, the amount of energy consumed in aviation must be considered not to
be higher than ,18% of the general consumption of the Contractual Party energy
Energy consumption in aviation for Albania during 2009 and 2010 was 97% and 07%
respectively of the general consumption of final gross energy Therefore, there
is no need for regulation as these values are lower than 18% (in continuation
table ) [] Energy currents in the national balance () heating/cooling1 () power2
() transport3 () Gross Energy Final Consumption4 Energy currents in the national
balance () heating/cooling () power ()transport () Gross Energy Final
Consumption 2009 Base year 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Reference Scenario RE
Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario Reference
Scenario RE Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario 89 20 44 66 96 44 66 96 44
56 59 00 56 59 00 20 47 73 69 38 23 66 29 86 93 80 37 34 23 80 67 97 13 ,53 ,06
,06 ,15 ,15 ,41 ,30 ,81 ,10 ,37 ,77 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Reference
Scenario RE Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario Reference Scenario RE
Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario Reference Scenario RE Scenario Reference
Scenario RE Scenario 17 50 30 40 13 71 48 80 00 56 75 77 43 10 70 78 60 67 12 40
10 04 12 24 68 70 20 45 17 29 02 00 26 09 02 72 ,97 ,24 ,28 ,08 ,23 ,05 ,62 ,39
,58 ,90 ,28 ,82 Table : Final gross consumption predicted in Albania for
heating-cooling and transport until 2020, taking into consideration energy
efficiency efefcts and teh measures for energy saving52009-2020 (ktoe)  Is the
final energy consumption for all the energy commodities apart from power for
other purposes apart from transport, (EU/OJ L304 of 2008)  Energy gross
consumption is taken from the internal gross production of energy, including
autoproduction, plus the import, minus the export  Consumption in transport is
provided for in Article ()) of the Directive 2009/EC Energy from RERs in road
transport for this parametre shall be multiplied with the factor , as it is
described in Article ()) of the Directive 2009/EC  According to the provision in
Article () of the Directive 2009/EC It inscludes the final consumption of energy
plus the losses in the network and the use of heat for internal needs and energy
in energy and heat production plants  These predictions on energy efficiency and
the savings of energy in compliance with the RENAP []  NREAP-THE FULFILLMENTS OF
THE OBJECTIVES ON RES  Summary of the policy for renewable energy in Albania In
the recent years, the Albanian Government has been trying to improve the legal
and the regulatory framework for energy In this direction, it made several
attempts to change the existing laws and to encourage  competing climate for
energy productions in general and the RES in particular Along with  series of
legal improvements, four key laws have been passed: the law for concessions, for
energy sector (passed by the Parliament of Albania in May 2015), for renewable
energy (passed by the Parliament of Albania in May 2015, but is being reviewed
and is going to be ready for approval at the end of 2015), for the efficiency of
energy in the buildings (the draft law was passed the previous year It was
prepared in line with the EU Directive) The purpose of these increase,
encouragement of renewable resources development and the attraction of the
foreign investments in energy sector and ensuring  sustainable reform in the
field of energy With regard to the development of the projects for renewable
energy, the licensing process has been improved The establishment of one-stop-
shop office for the licenses is  big step ahead made by the Albanian Government
from However, with regard to its functioning, it needs further improvements
liberalization of energy market, competition is the laws  Indicating objectives
for renewable energy Pursuant to article  () of the Directive 2009/EC, the
Contractual Parties in the EC Treaty were asked to have the following indicating
objectives with regard to the part of the energy with renewable resources in
2020:  Heating and cooling;  Energy, and  Transport The calculation of
specific objectives of these three sectors converted in the predicts energy
values (ktoe) must be at least as big as the energy amount expected from
renewable resources which correspond with the general objective of RES for
Albania in 2020, as it is reported in the final cell of the table 6b)
Furthermore, the specific objective for transport shall be in compliance with
the requests of article  () of the Directive 2009/EC for  level of 10% of the
part covered by renewable energies in transport sector From oil products, only
diesel and diesel fuel are calculated for the nominator This means that “Jet”
fuel used in aviation as well as the fuel used for the ships is not calculated
Biofuels from the rubbish, the waste, cellulose non-food material and the
lignocellulose material are calculated double regarding the nominator; General
National Objective for energy from renewable resources in the final energy gross
production in 2009 and 2020 (data taken from Appendix , Part  of Directive
2009/EC) has been presented in Table  Table : General National Objective  EREs
part consumed compared to EGFC during   ERE objective which will be consumed in
EGFC in 2020  ERE quantity consumed in average in EGFC during   EGFC for Albania
during   Expected EGFC for Albania in 2020 (with EE)  ERE additional annual
quantity to achieve the objective in 2020  ERE total annual quantity to be
consumed in 2020 % % ktoe ktoe ktoe ktoe ktoe % % ,,,Tables 2a dhe 2b have been
filled in for both specific objectives and the energy trajectory assessed by
renewable resources for heating, cooling and air conditioning, energy and
transport The calculation of [10] the table 2a and 2b provide instructions for
the preparation of tables 3a and 3b, based on the methodology proposed by the
Secretariat for Energy Figure : Indicating objectives and the trajectory
predicted for energy from renewable resources for heating and cooling, energy
and transport (%) Figure : Trajectory predicted for energy from renewable
resources for heating and cooling, energy and transport (ktoe) Figure : Part of
energy from reenwable resources for heating and cooling, energy and transport
(%) Figure : Indicating objectives of RES which are used in trasnport pursuant
to the requests of the law for bio-fuel and the objectives of RES in transport
(%) [11] RER Technologies RER Heating and Cooling(%) RER Energy(%) RER-
Transport(%) National objective RER- (%) vs Transport 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 55% 16% 00% 71% 00% 12% 18% 00% 31% 00% 87%
51% 00% 38% 00% 51% 98% 00% 49% 00% 52% 05% 63% 20% 36% 80% 27% 66% 73% 44% 97%
69% 66% 32% 40% 06% 83% 83% 73% 23% 15% 25% 16% 55% 10% 37% 80% 60% 76% 25% 42%
00% 09% 48% 55% 60% 21% 65% 43% 00% Table 2a: Specific objective 2020 and the
energy trajectory assessed from RES in heating and cooling, energy and transport
(the figures belong to the scenario with the implementation of RENAP) RER
Technologies RER Heating and Cooling(%) RER Energy(%) RER-Transport(%) RER
National Objective RER- (%) vs Transport 2009 55% 16% 00% 71% 00% 2010 12% 18%
00% 31% 00% 2011 87% 51% 00% 38% 00% 2012 51% 98% 00% 49% 00% 2013 52% 05% 63%
20% 36% 2014 80% 17% 66% 63% 44% 2015 63% 69% 66% 95% 40% 2016 58% 41% 83% 81%
23% 2017 58% 52% 16% 23% 10% 2018 66% 64% 60% 85% 25% 2019 67% 61% 09% 31% 55%
2020 80% 67% 65% 04% 00% Table 2b: Specific objective and the energy trajectory
assessed from RES in heating and cooling, energy and transport (the figures
belong to the scenario with the implementation of RENAP) Predicted final gross
consumption: 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 () of
RESfor heating and cooling 72 06 74 50 50 62 49 01 86 24 72 34 () of energy from
RER 48 86 50 86 23 15 66 94 63 77 82 94 () frem RESin transport 00 00 00 00 00
00 60 44 56 83 41 53 RER predicted consumption 20 92 24 36 73 77 75 39 05 84 95
Table 3a: Final Calculation Table for the part covered by renewable energy in
three base sectors: Heating/Cooling, Energy and Transport (ktoe) [12]  MEASURES
FOR THE FULFILMENT OF SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES IN EACH SECTOR  Summary of the
policies and of the measures for the enhancement to use energy from renewable
resources Albania has undertaken  series of steps for the inclusion of in its
policies for energy, the requests of the EU Directives about the common rules
for the creation and the development of internal energy market and the
enhancement of production and energy consumption from renewable resources In
order for Albania to fulfill its international obligations and to achieve
pursuant to the legal obligation the objective of 38% renewable energy in the
final gross consumption until 2020, the country is undertaking  review of its
supporting tools for renewable energy production The scheme described in the
following paragraphs will permit Albania to follow its objectives of RES and
more concretely preserving and increasing the security in supply including
variety of RES generation technologies  Current supporting schemes for energy
production from Renewable Resources  At the moment there is  promoting tariff
just for the small HPPs with installed power less than 15 MW and the tariff is
calculated according to the average annual price of energy at Energy Stock
market in Hungary (HUPX) determined in Euro cent/kWh  24  average exchange rate
Euro/Lek for the previous year This approach has been based on  simple formula
and furthermore takes into consideration the price of energy import and connects
it with the tariff to avoid the costs against the customer The abovementioned
formula, pursuant to the Decision of the Council of Ministers, shall be for  for
the existing HPPs The new system of promoting tariff shall be presented through
the adaptation of the new law for RES, which is being prepared, taking into
consideration that the level of the tariffs shall take into consideration the
type the technology and the efficiency of the generating equipments Also, the
new law for RES shall offer other stimuli, such as:  The determination of
national objective for RES in the total of the final energy consumption;  The
obligation of the transmission or distribution companies to connect new plants
of RESin their networks; the payment only of the direct costs of the connection
in the transmission networks and of energy distribution;  Recognition of the
existing agreements for the purchase of energy produced from RESand the
obligation of the Operator to buy energy produces from small HPPs As  result of
these measures the interest on renewable resources has increase considerably,
particularly on small hydropower stations as the “most” traditional technology
that is best known The thermal system of solar panels for hot water preparation
has gone through  considerable development The current law provides facilitating
measures in the tax system for these panels [13]  Supporting promoting schemes
of RES in energy market The state support is intended to be restructured for
renewable energies and to replace the scheme of the feed-in tariff with  system
based on Contracts for the difference (CfD) Anyway, in the legislation that is
being amended, the feed-in tariff scheme is expected to remain into force to
support the renewable energy in  small scale up to the capacity  MW installed
for generating units The renewable energy producers, at the moment with energy-
purchase agreements finalized before the law which is being amended will enter
into force, will have  fixed feed-in tariff for the remaining part of the
contact This situation does not exclude the right of these producers to move to
Supporting Scheme Contract for Difference Based upon law 43 “On energy sector”,
the new model of energy market is being drafted, providing for the trading of
energy from the renewable sources, to the advanced market when the Albanian
Energy Stock market is established The legal criteria of RES generation shall be
established by ERE Only the generation that fulfils the legal conditions might
be supported pursuant to  CfD The renewable technologies that will be acceptable
for support according to the scheme CfD are listed in the following paragraph: -
Biomass transformation - Wind in terrestrial boundaries - Solar photovoltaics -
Hydroenergy - Energy from the waste through CHP - Gas from landfills - Gas from
the dirty urban water sanitation The Ministry shall review the list every year
and might propose  change to the list at the Council of Ministers in case
another technology is considered consolidated Also, the legal changes will
provide for the drafting of the Methodologies for the determination of standard
prices which will be calculated in such  way that they will support the
production of considerable renewable energy, economically acceptable from the
market  Supporting schemes for the promotion of energy use from renewable
resources of heating and cooling (RER-&) The government is being planned to
introduce some supporting schemes for the use of renewable energies for heating
and cooling The government is reviewing the law on RES to add  provision that
would finance the projects for heating and cooling, which use mainly biomass in
the sector of agriculture The financing is expected to be made through the
grants from the RESfund set up by the government The grants will reach up to 30%
of the total cost of project investment Ministry of Energy and Industry in
corporation with the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Water
Administration will identify the most suitable projects based on their financial
realization and the influence to fulfill the objective of RESin the sector of
agriculture [14]  Supporting schemes for the promotion of the use of energy from
renewable resources in transport (RER-) Law no 9876, dated 2008 “On the use,
transportation and trading of bio-fuels and other renewable combustibles for
transport”, article  (), provides that from 2010, the minimal annual amount of
bio-fuels and other renewable combustibles which are used for transport shall
not be less than % of the total of the combustibles traded in the market,
meanwhile from 2015-ongoing, it won’ be less than 10% The new draft law on
biofuels will have the same objective of 10% to comply with the EU Directive
2009/EC The legislation does not contain any specific objectives about the
different kinds of technology Based upon point  article  law no 9876, dated 2008
“On the production, transport and trading of biofuels and other renewable
combustibles for transport”, the Council of Ministers, with the proposal of the
minister in charge of the transport sector and the minister in charge for the
sector of hydrocarbon/energy determines the minimal annual amount of bio-fuels
and other renewable combustibles that shall be used in the following year in
transport However, this determination has not been made by any ministers from
the moment the law entered into force The obligation mentioned above has been
determined for the whole companies of fuel products, which have  trading license
The law does not provide for sanctions or punishing measures for non-
accomplishing the objective However, the people who go through this obligation,
licensed by the Ministry of Energy and Industry might be punished by this
institution for noncompliance with the requirements of the primary and secondary
legislation into force which regulates the activities for renewable combustibles
used for transport purposes Furthermore, the same law provides for fining for
the retail tradesmen of fuel products who do not publish in  visible place in
the places/points where they sell  note that indicates bio-fuels of other
renewable combustibles as well as oil or diesel, mixed with bio- dieseline and
bio-ethanol in the measure of % No mechanism has been established for the
supervision of the accomplishment of the objective Ehen though the law for bio-
fuels does not express this, the Technical and Industrial State Inspectorate,
which is responsible for market surveillance of oil products, has the authority
to supervise the accomplishment of the objectives provided for by law Financial
support might be classified in different ways Such examples are: financial
support for investment, capital grants, loans with low interest, the exclusion
from the taxes or their reduction, tax reimbursement, tendering schemes,
obligations for renewable tariffs with or without green certificates (tradable
green certificates), promoting tariffs (feed in), promoting rewards, voluntary
schemes Financial support for bio-fuels used for transport is provided through
the exclusion from the taxes Pursuant to article 10 of law on bio fuels, from
the period when the law enters into force and until 2018, the excise tax for
these products will be zero [15] Apart from this, the law has another exception
which was into force in 2012, the exclusion from the customs taxes and the VAT
for all the machineries and the necessary equipments and the parts of the used
objects for the production of bio-fuels and other renewable combustibles,
include, but are not limited only with: - The equipments and the machineries
which changer the organic fertilizer into organic improver of the soil, which
might be used for the cultivation of the plants for energy purpose; - The
equipments, materials and the agricultural machineries which will be used by the
local farmers for plant cultivation for energy purposes; - The equipments and
the main and assistant technological machineries of the bio- fuel production
plants and of the other renewable combustibles are excluded from the customs
taxes and from the VAT for the first period until the end of The executive
bodies of this scheme are the Ministry of Energy and Industry and the Ministry
of Finances along with the General Directorate of Taxes and the General Customs
Directorate No assessment has been made about the expected influences related to
energy production However, last year  plant was implemented for bio-fuel
production in the industrial area of Porto Romano in Durres with the production
capacity of about 100 000 ton per year The tax decrease is not conditioned from
any criteria about energy efficiency This is  supportive measure implemented
since The legal basis of this measure is law no 9876, dated 2008 “On the
production, transportation and the trading of bio- fuels and other renewable
combustibles for transport” The supporting scheme has been functional since The
starting date of exclusion from the taxes (VAT and the customs taxes) for the
equipments and the farmers’ machineries which produce the raw material for bio-
fuel production and which are used for the construction of bio-fuel production
plant was 14th March 2008, meanwhile the last date was 31st December The
starting date from the excise exception regarding the produced bio-fuels was
14th March 2008, meanwhile the last date is 31st December No maximal or minimal
system measurement has been determined for the producers of bio-fuels who
benefit from the tax exclusion as it is provided for by law At the moment, only
one supporting measure is applied in Albania for the producers of bio-fuels: the
one of the exclusion from the taxes No local or regional scheme is applied for
bio-fuels in Albania The scheme offers the tax exclusion (VAT and the customs
taxes) for the machineries and the equipments which are used for the
construction of  plant for bio-fuel production Anybody benefits from this scheme
as long as he receives  permission for the construction of  plant for bio-fuels
production The scheme does not include specifications related to the technology
implemented for bio-fuels production to benefit from this scheme VAT is
reimbursed pursuant to the procedures provided for in law for VAT, meanwhile
that the exclusion from the customs taxes is applied in the moment the
machineries and the equipments enter the Albanian boundary As it was mentioned
above, even though the law stipulates that the Council of Ministers after the
joint proposal for energy and the minister in charge of transport, determines
the minimal objective [16] (percentage) of bio-fuels which will be used within
year in the sector of transport, no such an obligation has been determined As it
was mentioned above, the law does not make distinctions about the support based
on the fuel and technology types No specific support for bio-fuels, which
fulfill the criteria of article 21 () of the Directive 2009/EC, has been
provided  Specific measures for the promotion of the exploitation of energy from
biomass In many Member States, energy source of biomass plays  crucial role as
primary energy to cover the energy needs in the three sectors: heating and
cooling, energy and transport National strategy for biomass prepared in several
Member States, is essential to plan the role and the interlinking of the uses
among the terminal use of energy and the interconnection with the other non-
energy sectors For this reason, even Albania has assessed the domestic potential
of biomass to use it with more efficiency in different sectors The supportive
measures will be provided with the review of Law on RES  Supply with biomass:
domestically and abroad Biomass is one of the most implemented sources of energy
in Albania – mainly in the form of firewood, combined in some cases with shrubs
and waste of the plans from the agricultural sector The consumption of firewood
has decreased at about three up to four times more during the period 1990-After
this year, firewood consumption has increased  little in the last years, as the
result of the increase of the prices of the other combustibles and energy The
processed wood combustibles – woodchips, pallets and briquettes – are not used
lot due to their high price and the underdeveloped supply system The remains
which have fallen by the trees and the woods of poor quality are mainly used The
waste of biomass from agriculture is not used widely and usually it is destroyed
right in the spot The use of bio-gas is not developed, despite the available
resources It is important to consider that the majority of the heating
equipments which are used – the stoves and the chimneys – are old and
inefficient, with heat loss up to % The heating through the radiators with high
efficiency for the local systems is underdeveloped The assessments of the
updated energy strategy indicate  considerable potential for extraction and
exploitation of biomass in Albania from forestry, agriculture and livestock (for
bio-gas production) Biomass might be used for the production of energy only in
the cogenerating plants (CHP- Combined Heat and Power), especially in the ones
which function with sawdust by different wood processing industries Its use in
the energy centrals with condensation (it is considered as unfavourable from the
environmental, economic and technical prospective Base on table  in the
following paragraph it is clear that the information about the available amounts
of biomass is insufficient Of course, the state authorities should make more
attempts for the development and the implementation of an information system
related to the sources of biomass, which serves to channel the information in
the Natural Resources National Agency [17] Sector of origin Internal Resource
Amount Imports BE (ktoe) Jo-BE (ktoe) Biomass from forests: Out of which: direct
supply with wood biomass from forests and form the other forest lands for energy
production Optional – if there is information, you can detail the quantity of
teh raw material which belongs to this category Cut wood Remains from teh cut
woods (tops, branches, roots) Remains from the management of the landscapes
(wood biomass form the parks, gardens, rows with trees, shrubs) others (please
specify) Indirect wood biomass supply for energy production Optional – if thers
is information, you migh detail further more: ) remains from the saws divisions,
wood processing industry, furniture industry (sawdust) ) subproducts of paper
dough industry and paper (“black liquid”, liquid resin) ) processed woodfire
Recycled wood after teh consumption (recycled wood for energy production, wood
from family waste) Others (please specify)                             Table :
Supply with biomass in 2009 (with the latest available data) Exports BE/jo- BE
(ktoe)               Net quantity (ktoe)               Energy (ktoe) 00 00 00 00
00 00        [18] Tables 7a and 7b give the assessed energy contribution from
biomass in 2015 and Sector of origin ) Biomass from forests: ) Biomass from
agriculture and fishing ) Biomass from waste direct supply with wood biomass
from the forests and teh other forestated lands indirect supply with wood
biomass for energy production agricultural energy culture and fishing products
supplied directly  Subproducts: Agricultural/processed waste and fishing
subproducts  The bio-degradable part of inert urban waste, including the
biological waste and the gas of the rubbish collection lanfills  The
biodegradable part of teh (including waste industrial papers, cardboard,
pallettes)  Canalization sludge 2015 Expected amount of internal resources (m3)
2020 Expected internal resource quantity (m3) Main energy production (ktoe) 28
Main energy production (ktoe) 78 ,119,010 156,250 145,000 - - - 923,112 173,307
574,286 - 61,429 235,286 Table 7a: Internal supply calculated with biomass in
2015 and 2020 - - Apart from the information provided above, table 7b provides
that at the moment, there are no plans for the use of agricultural land for the
production of energy agricultural cultures Exploitation of agricultural land for
the production of agricultural cultures for energy Land used for the trees with
fast growth cycle (willow, poplars) Land used for other agricultural energy
cultures, such as: grasses (Phalaris arundinacea, Panicum virgatum, Miscanthus),
sorgum Surface (ha) Zero Zero Table 7b: Current use of agricultural land for the
production of energy agricultural cultures in 2009 (with teh latest data at
disposal) [19]  Measures to increase biomass availability taking into
consideration the other users of biomass (agriculture and other sectors based on
the forests) The role of biomass will increase very little in absolute terms, as
it is shown above, but at the same time, its relative contribution will decrease
Measures have been predicted in two directions:  The slight decrease of biomass
in the final energy consumption;  The slight decrease of the heating energy
produced by biomass exploitation The use of biomass has been stable during the
last three years for the following reasons:  The slow introduction of improved
installations used for the exploitation of biomass in heating;  The increase of
wood price;  The improved performance of energy in buildings Apart from the
above information, we are kindly asking you to describe the current agricultural
land situation used for energy production as follows:  The current use of the
agricultural land for the production of agricultural energy cultures in 2009
(ha);  The use of agricultural land for the production of agricultural energy
cultures, Surface  Land used for wood with  fast growing cycle (poplins,
willows); For the period  there is no HPPtare of land used for these purposes;
Land used for other agricultural energy cultures, such as: grasses (Phalaris
arundinacea, Panicum virgatum, Miscanthus), sorghum: based on the statistics
published by INSTAT, there is no HPPtar of land used for these purposes
Mobilization of the new biomass resources According to the figures offered by
the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Water Administration (based
on the annual publication in 2009), the degraded land surface is 12,335 ha The
unused agricultural land is assessed as approximately 34 568 ha There is no
planned measure for the increase of energy agricultural cultures but at the same
time it is important to mention the fact that planting energy agricultural
cultures is one of the mitigating measures for the gases with the greenhouse
effect, which is mentioned in the Second National Communication of Albania
addressed to the Framework Convention of United Nations on Climate Changes
(FCUNCC) from Energy was not generated from the animals’ fertilizer and some
preliminary feasibility studies have been carried out for the production of bio-
gas from the fertilizer of different farms There are no specific stimuli which
promote the production and the use of bio-gas, apart from its use in the
combined production of heat and energy, based on which the produced amount of
energy is bought with preferential prices and Energy Regulatory Entity (ERE)
should prepare the special fees for this technology At the moment, the amount of
biogas produced is zero; however, measures have been planned for getting the
product in an amount of , ktoe biogas pursuant to the current document of RENAP
[20] Attempts are being made to improve the management of forests in order to
increase the development on the future and the sustainable reproduction The
certification of the communal forest and the state ones has been planned, to
improve the techniques for their management  Influence on other schemes No
assessment has been made for the influence of energy use from biomass in the
other sectors Such an assessment will be carried out in the future ( draft
proposal has been drafted to study these effects The draft proposal is still
under the internal discussion through the national actors) The use of biofuel in
the agriculture sector , 85% of energy consumption in agriculture in 2009, was
based on the liquid combustibles So, the use of biofuels in this sector would
facilitate its increase () What kind of developments is expected in the other
sectors which are based on agriculture and forestry, which would influence on
energy production? (For example: Would the efficiency/the improved product
increase or decrease the amount of sub- products at disposal for energy use?)
The increase of processed biomass production, for example, pallets, etc would
cause  decrease in price for the final consumers This thing would decrease the
consumption of firewood and would decrease the loss of the companies which sell
them Measures for the promotion of RES are presented summarized in table : [21]
Measure name and reference Type of measure Expected results Targeted group and
/or activity Existing or planned Starting date/Completion Financ effects mil
ALL/year MEASURES REGARDING LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  To meet the national
objective of 38% for RES in the total of Energy Final Gross Consumption
drafting the approach for fixed prices of energy from RESat energy market
Appropriate procedures for the auction of RESas capacities provided for in RRNAP
pursunat to MEI proposal Project of DCM for the amount of RESwhich will be
consumed until Regulatory Regulatory  Origin warranty for all RES Regulatory
Produced energy (ktoe) RER investors, NRNA, MEI Planned in 2015  RER- in the
energy stockmarket ERE/MEI Planned Within 2016 Produced energy (ktoe) Produced
energy (ktoe) MEI/ERE Planned 5years Investors Planned No specific term / 50 00
The obligations of the transmission or distribution companies to connect new
RESplants in their network; the payment of the direct costs for the connection
in the energy transmission and distribution networks MEASURES WITH FINANCIAL
EFFECTS TO PROMOTE RES Legal Regulatory Loss reduction RER Investors , OST/OSSH
Planned on /  2016  ,00  Receiver’ obligation (Operator) to buy energy produced
from small HPPs Financial Produced energy (ktoe) RER Investors, OSSh, Existing
with improvements in  të 2016 For new projects, the measure will continue beyond
2020 Depending on the existing contracts PPA ,00 ,00 Legal Regulatory Finance
Produced energy (ktoe) ,700GWh RES Investors, OSSh, KESh, OST Existing Finance
Produced energy (ktoe) RES Invesotrs, OSSh, KESh, OST Existing with improvements
të 2016 PPA Contract  Long-term agreements to purchase energy producxed by the
current enrgu produces from RER  Fiscal Supporting policy for the promotion of
diversified RESsystems (HPP, PV and Eolik) [22]  Mandatory purchase of energy
therough CfD in the market of energy from RES  The obligations who introduce in
the market, for transport reasons, liquid combustibles originating from oil, to
provide fuel for the motors with oil and diesel, which are mixed with biofuels
precentages according to determined in the existing law for biofuels the Zero
level of the excise tax for clean biodiesel until 2018 The supervision of
biofuels quality from the Technical State Inspectorate and the Offices of the
assessment of sustainibility criteria Legal Regulatory finance Produced energy
(ktoe) Financial Production and use of biofuels (ktoe) Financial Identical RES
Investors, OSSh, KESh, Ndihma Shteterore Investors MEI/MB/MM And the Offices of
the assessment of sustainibility criteria Trading investors and public
administration Planned  të 2016  00 Planned  00 Administrative Use of biofuels
for transport Distributors and final users Planned  Existing  Energy produced
from NUED systems Enrgy produced from biomass Public or private buildings
constructed from the beginning or the existing ones Existing  Agricultural
sector Planned Qershor 2016 00 30 00 00 Thermal energy Environment sector
Planned TOTAL in mil ALL/year 21,80 The approval of the policies and measures
for the increase of solar energy in buildings for water heating Administrative
Financing through the grants form RES Fund for the heating and cooling in
agriculture sector using projects biomass Firewood processing TOTAL in  along
with 108,500 million ALL Financial Financial Table : Summary of all the policies
and measures [23]  Specific measures to meet the requirements under articles 13,
14, 16 and articles 17 to 21 of the Directive 2009/EC  Administrative procedures
and spatial planning ()  list of the existing legislation and if possible, the
regional legislation on the procedures of authorization, certification and
licensing and territorial planning applied to plants and their power
transmission and distribution to the network infrastructure: Relevant applicable
legislation in the energy sector  Law no 43, dated 2015 “On power sector” sets
out the main principles for the energy sector development, including RESpower
plants and the transmission and distribution networks Law transposes the EU
Directive 2009 on electricity and repealing the previous law on electricity (Law
no 40, dated 2003) This law also includes the requirements and criteria for
granting  license to carry out an activity in energy sector The law also
includes  number of specific provisions regulating the construction of  direct
line or of  commercial interconnection line  The Albanian Government and ERE
are reviewing bylaws, with the aim of meeting the requirements of the new law on
energy sector, including  number of bylaws provided below  Decision of Council
of Ministers no1701, dated 2008 “On approval of the regulation for procedures of
granting permits/authorizations for the construction of new power generation
plants/facilities not subject to concession” sets out the necessary procedures
and documents for application, evaluation and granting of an authorization for
building  new power generation capacity that is still not subject to concession
 ERE decision no 108, dated 2008 “On approval of the regulation for procedures
of licensing and granting, changing and/or revoking  license”, as amended This
decision sets out the procedures and requirements for granting  license to carry
out any activities in energy sector  Law no125, dated 2013 “On concessions and
public-private partnership” establishes the legal framework for all concessions
The purpose of this law is to build  favorable framework to promote and
facilitate the implementation of concessionary projects, increase transparency,
justice, effectiveness, long-term stability for the development of
infrastructure-related projects and public services, including the concessions
for construction of hydropower plants  DCM no 575, dated 07 “On approval of
evaluation rules and award of concessions/public- private partnership” defines
the detailed procedures and requirements for the evaluation and award of an
applicable concession for hydropower plants  Law no111/, dated 2012 “On
integrated management of water resources”, establishing the legal framework for
the use of local water resources, including their use for power generation 
Decision of Council of Ministers no 416, dated 2015 “On approval of the general
and special conditions, accompanying documents, term of validity, application
forms for authorization and permit, procedures for the revision of decision-
making process and forms of authorization of permit for the use of water
resources”, which defines the specific conditions and procedures for reviewing
and decision-making to grant an authorization or permit of use of water
resources, including the use of water for construction of hydropower plants 
ERE Decision no 123, dated 2008, “On approval of the code of transmission
network operation”, as amended, which defines the planning and connection
procedures for the development of transmission system  ERE Decision no 100,
dated 2008, “On approval of the power distribution code”, as amended, which
defines the planning and connection procedures for the development of
distribution system  ERE Decision no , dated 2007, “On rules and procedures of
the certification of energy production from renewable resources”, which defines
specific rules and procedures for granting warranties of origin and green
certificates for the power generated from renewable resources [24]  Law no
8734, dated 2001 “On guaranteeing work safety of electrical equipment and
installations”  DCM no 646, dated 2002 “On approval of technical standards and
conditions of design and implementation in the fields of industry and energy, to
acquire the status of “Technical rules”, which are binding for application” 
DCM no 529, dated 2007 “On approval of criteria and procedures of application
and approval of construction permits of commercial interconnection lines”
Specific applicable legislation in the sector of RER  Law no138, dated 2013 “On
renewable energy resources” with special provisions for the connection of
RESoperated plants to the transmission and/or distribution network  Law no
9876, dated 2008 “On production, transport and trade of bio-fuels and other
renewable fuels for transport”, as amended, sets out the legal framework for
granting permits for the production, wholesale and retail of bio-fuels and other
renewable fuels, for the purpose of transport Specific applicable legislation on
spatial planning  Law no 107/ , dated 2014“On territory planning and
development”, as amended, is the key legislation governing the territory
planning and development in Albania, with the aim to define the general
principles, rules and procedures, including the responsibilities and powers of
the central and local government institutions for territory planning and
development The law on territory planning and development specifies the
institutions for bodies responsible for territory planning, including: ) At
central level - Council of Ministers; - National Territory Council; Ministry
responsible for territorial planning and development (Minister of Urban
Development) ) at regional level - Regional Council ) at local level - Municipal
councils; the law provides for that National Territory Council (NTC) and the
Mayor are two competent authorities to issue construction permits - Construction
permits for each power plant are issued by the National Territorial Council
Although the line ministries, including the ministry responsible for energy,
have no decision-making power regarding the territory planning and development,
they are charged with responsibilities for preparing sector-based development
plans and should ensure that each application for construction permit complies
with the effective sector-based plans  DCM no 408, dated 2015 “On approval of
the regulation for territory development”, which defines detailed conditions and
procedures for territory development  DCM no 1190, dated 2009 “On the way of
organization and functioning of the National Agency of Territorial Planning”
This decision sets out the duties and responsibilities of the National Agency of
Territorial Planning acting as Technical Secretariat of the National Tourism
Council [25]  DCM no 68, dated 2001 “On approval of technical standards and
technical design conditions and implementation of construction works”  Law no
8561, dated 1999 “On expropriations and temporary usufruct of private property
for public interest” that sets out criteria and procedures for the expropriation
of private property for each project representing  public interest, such as the
construction of  power plant, including the generation, transmission and
distribution power plants, facilities for the production of bio-fuels etc  Law
no 8652, dated 2000 “On organization and functioning of local government”, as
amended, governing the organization and functioning of local authorities,
including their specific responsibilities for spatial regulation Specific
environmental protection  Law no10431, dated 2011 “On environmental
protection”, as amended, aiming at environmental protection at  high level, its
preservation and improvement, prevention and reduction of risks to human life
and health, assurance and improvement of life quality in the interest of the
present and future generations, and preparing the ground for national
sustainable development  Law no 91, dated 2013 “On environmental strategic
assessment”, aiming to afford high environmental protection and sustainable
development through the involvement of environmental matters in drafting,
approval, revision, change or modification of plans and programs with potential
negative environmental consequences The requirements of this law are subject to
formulation of all plans and programs for agriculture, forests, fishing, energy,
industry, mining administration, telecommunication, tourism, national and local
urban and rural territory planning, including also the landscape protection,
land use, establishing the framework for approval in the future, of projects
listed in annexes  and  of Law no 10 440, dated 2011 “On environmental impact
assessment”; transport, waste management, water industry,  DCM no 507, dated
2015 “On approval of the detailed list of plans or programs with significant
negative environmental effects, to be subject to the environmental strategic
assessment process”  DCM no 219 dated 2015 “On rules and procedures for the
consultation with stakeholders and public, and public hearing during the
environmental strategic assessment process”  DCM no 620 dated 2015 “On approval
of rules, responsibilities and detailed procedures for the environmental
strategic assessment in the cross-border context”  Law no10440, dated 2011“On
environmental impact assessment”, as amended, specifying that prior to the
approval of every construction permit for the plants of production, transmission
or distribution,  process of environmental impact assessment should be carried
out (EIA)  DCM no 686, dated 2015 “‘On approval of rules, responsibilities and
deadlines for the implementation of the Environmental Impact Assessment
procedure (EIA) and the procedure of transfer of the decision and environmental
declaration’  DCM no 247, dated 2014 “On definition of rules, requirements and
procedures for information and public participation in the environmental
decision-making process”  DCM No 598 dated 2015 “On definition of rules and
procedures for the impact assessment in the cross-border environment”  Law
no10448, dated 2011 “On environmental permits”, as amended, aims to prevent,
decrease and keep under control the pollution caused by  number of categories of
activities, in order to achieve  high level of environmental protection as
whole, human health and life quality Every installation listed in annex  of this
law should be subject to the requirements of this Law  DCM no 417, dated 2014
“On approval of tariffs for environmental permits”  Law no8906, dated 2002 “ On
protected areas “;  Law no 111 “On integrated management of water resources”
[26]  Law no 10 463, dated  2011 “On integrated waste management”, as amended 
DCM no 417, dated 2014 “On approval of tariffs for environmental permits”  DCM
no 103, dated 2002 “ On environmental monitoring in the Republic of Albania“; 
Law no8906, dated 2002 “ On protected areas “;  Law no 8905, dated 2002 “ On
protection of marine environment from pollution and damage“;  Law no7875, dated
1994 “ On protection of wild fauna and hunting“;  Law no 9385, dated 2005, as
amended, pending  new Law to be approved by this year;  Law no 8672, dated 2000
“On ratification of Aarhus Convention “On the right of the public, DCM no 16
dated 2012 “On the right of the public to environmental information”  Law no
9334, dated 2004 “On accession of the Republic of Albania to Kyoto Protocol of
the Framework Convention of the United Nations on Climate Changes”;  DCM 1353
and 1257 “On criteria of the removal from the national forest and pasture fund
of surface areas, subject to concessions”  DCM no 1553, dated 2008
“Establishment of the Designated National Authority of Clean Development
Mechanism, in the framework of the implementation of Kyoto Protocol commitments”
 Law no10463, dated 2011 “On waste integrated management”, as amended  DCM no
608, dated 2014 “On the determination of proper measures for bio-waste
collection and processing, and the criteria and deadlines for their decrease” 
DCM no 127, dated 2015 “Requirements for agricultural use of wastewater sludge”
Other key legislation  Law no 10081, dated 2009 “On licenses, authorizations
and permits in the Republic of Albania”, identifying  “one-stop shop” for all
licenses, authorizations and permits issued for the natural persons or legal
entities to carry out an activity of public interest or use of  public facility
 Law no 10137, dated 2009 “On some amendments to the legislation in force on
licenses, authorizations and permits in the Republic of Albania”, reflecting the
amendments to the existing legislation, of specific areas affected by Law no
10081, dated  DCM no 538, dated 2009 “On licenses and permits treated by or
through the National Licensing Centre and some other common sublegal remedies” 
DCM no 410, dated “On creation, organization and functioning of the State
Technical and Industrial Inspectorate” establishing the central technical
inspectorate that is competent for technical equipment, pressure-operated
equipment and the market of oil byproducts ()Body (bodies)
national/regional/local level: the distribution of information responsible that
for are at Ministry of Energy and Industry (MEI) is fully responsible for the
electricity sector MEI is the responsible institution for the development of
energy policies and mid-term and long-term strategies for the energy sector MEI
is also responsible for the assessment and revision of the requirements for the
rights to concession for the construction of hydropower plants and for the
authorizations of other types of technology for the energy production from
renewable resources such as wind, biomass, solar resources etc The mission of
the ministry in energy sector is to promote  solid, sustainable economic
development through: The mission of the ministry in the sector of energy is to
promote  rapid and sustainable economic development through:  Preparation,
periodical review and update of the National Strategy on Electrical Power; 
Promotion of energy efficiency and renewable resources, including small
hydropower plants; [27]  Forecast of the demand for various energy resources; 
Promotion of private local or foreign investments in the sector of energy,
building an attractive legal climate for these investments;  Development of
market reforms in the power sector to meet the national objectives for the
integration in EU and development of  rational electricity market;  Formulation
of the adequate legal framework;  Preparation for the privatization of state
energy companies National Agency of Natural Resources, with the scope of its
work focusing on the development and supervision of rational use of natural
resources, based on governmental policies and monitoring of the phase after
their use in mining, hydrocarbons and energy National Agency of Natural
Resources has  number of responsibilities under the law for RER, as the body
responsible for RESdevelopment State Technical and Industrial Inspectorate is an
institution responsible for ensuring the safety of persons for goods placed on
the market The inspectorate has the authority to oversee the safety of
electrical equipment and installations, including the safety of power generation
facilities, transmission and distribution of electricity Energy Regulatory
Entity (ERE) is an independent public body responsible for the regulation of
activities in the sectors of electricity and natural gas ERE is the body
responsible for issuing licenses to carry out activities of generation,
transmission, distribution, supply and trade of electricity It is responsible
for the approval of the grid that provides to all electricity producers
connection and access to transmission and distribution networks ERE has also the
authority to adopt promotional tariffs (feed- in) to all eligible producers of
renewable sources, including fees, and standard agreement for the purchase of
energy applied to the priority RESproducer  key responsibility given to ERE is
the development and adoption of rules of the electricity market and monitoring
of the energy market Ministry of Economic Development, Trade, Entrepreneurship
and Tourism is responsible for the overall development strategy of the country'
economic development  number of other entities that play  role in RESdevelopment
are subordinate to the ministry National Licensing Centre (NLC) is  public
institution established by law and under the subordination of the Ministry of
Economic Development, Trade, Entrepreneurship and Tourism The mission of the
National Licensing Center is to facilitate licensing procedures, authorizations
and permits issued by public authorities NLC is designed to function as  "one-
stop center" (one-stop shop) for all licenses, authorizations and permits issued
by public authorities Agency for Treatment of Concessions (ATC) is  unit
established in conformity with the law on concessions and is under the
subordination of the Ministry of Economic Development, Trade, Entrepreneurship
and Tourism ATC mission is to support the Contracting Authority to evaluate and
negotiate the concessions in all fields of concessions, including the
construction of hydropower plants National Territory Council (NTC) is the
decision-making body responsible for the adoption of national territorial
planning instruments under provisions of law NTC is  collegial body attached to
the Council of Ministers The National Territory Council (NTC) has the following
powers: ) decides on the approval, approval with changes, postponement for
subsequent review or non-approval of the national territorial planning
instruments; [28] ) decides on the approval of the identification of national
importance of  territorial planning related issue; ) revises and adopts the
compliance of the local instrument with the applicable planning instruments; )
urges the development of national territorial and local plans from the relevant
planning authorities and ensures they comply with technical and procedural
standards defined by law ) approves construction projects on main development
projects, including the construction of new power plants Ministry of Urban
Development is responsible for the development of spatial planning policies and
issues licenses for the design, construction, supervision and testing of
construction works This Ministry is also responsible for issuing professional
licenses for the individuals involved in the design, supervision and testing of
construction works National Agency of Territorial Planning (NATP) is  public
institution under the subordination of the Ministry of Urban Development and has
the following responsibilities: ) supports the horizontal coordination between
the national authorities in the field of territory planning, with  view of
harmonizing issues of national importance addressed in different fields and
sectors, bringing together the responsible authorities and interested
stakeholders and helping to resolve the conflicts between them; ) supports the
vertical coordination between the national and local planning authorities, with
view of harmonizing the treatment of issues of national and local importance in
the field of territorial planning by bringing together the responsible
authorities and interested stakeholders and by helping with the settlement of
disputes between the national and local authorities and the interested
stakeholders; ) provides technical support to the local government units for the
formulation of policies and acts for urban planning and management, as well as
the development inspection; ) supports the development of professional and
technical skills of the national and local planning authorities through direct
training and assistance; ) conducts studies and assessments for territorial
developments and based thereupon, recommends  the Council of Ministers the
improvement of legal system for territorial planning and development control
instruments or the need to launch planning processes or other appropriate
measures; ) informs the public about the planning processes, provides
information and advises the planning authorities of the procedures and rules for
territorial planning process; ) prepares and publishes methodological manuals
for territorial planning and prepares and delivers training programs for the
preparation of planning documents; ) designs and distributes technical standards
for building and administering the register; ) supports the planning authorities
in respect of the method of registration and independent administration of data
in the register and advises the planning authorities for their effective
distribution to the interested stakeholders and consultation procedures; )
supports international cooperation in the field of territory planning [29]
Ministry of Environment (MoE) is fully responsible for the environmental
protection, specifically for air, waste, chemicals, climate changes and of
forests, protected areas and biodiversity The Ministry is responsible for
approving the strategic environmental assessments for any territorial or sector-
based plan approved under the Law on planning and development of the territory
“as per the approval of EIA in-depth reports for any previous impact through
special projects within the territorial plans MoE is responsible for policies
related to climate change and focal point for the Albanian government for the
UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol MoE also exercises the powers of the national
authority for Clean Development Mechanism projects defined under the Kyoto
Protocol in Albania National Environmental Agency (NEA) is an institution under
the subordination of the Ministry of Environment, which is responsible for
reviewing the environmental impact assessment process for projects under law no
10 440, dated 2011 “On environmental impact assessment”, as amended, and for
reviewing environmental permit applications Further, this Agency is responsible
for environmental monitoring In view of article 13 () of the Directive 2009/EC,
the Albanian government has taken some important steps The new law on power
sector (Law no43) in Article 49 () provides for that building of new generating
capacity up to  MW, including renewable energy producers, is approved by the
minister responsible for energy On the other hand, the new law on renewable
energy sources (Law 138), in its Article 10 foresees that the Council of
Ministers approves simplified procedures for obtaining authorizations and
licenses required for the production of energy from RER Article 37, paragraph
() of the law on energy sector also provides for that all producers, including
the producers connected to the national grid with an installed capacity up to
MW, are not obliged to obtain  production license by ERE The same law, in
Article 39, paragraph , provides for that ERE may adopt simplified licensing
procedures for producers connected to the distribution network Based on the
above legislation, the Council of Ministers is expected to prepare and adopt
specific procedures that will simplify the issuance of construction permit
necessary for RESproducers, while ERE will adopt  simplified procedure for the
licensing of small producers of electricity, including RESproducers directly
connected to the distribution network Currently it appears that there is no
unnecessary obstacle or inappropriate claims regarding authorization,
certification and licensing procedures applied to plants and associated
transmission and distribution infrastructure Furthermore, the RESlaw contains
provisions that exclude small producers of energy, with installed capacity up to
MW, from the obligation to obtain the production license On the other hand, the
creation of the National Licensing Center, according to Law no 10081 dated 2009
"On licenses, authorizations and permits in the Republic of Albania", as
amended, has significantly facilitated the process of obtaining  license, permit
or authorization Authorizations for the construction of installations of
renewable energy are granted by the Council of Ministers or by the requirements
of the law on concessions for hydropower plants, or as required by law for the
energy sector to other types of producers of electricity using renewable energy,
or the law on bio- fuels for bio-fuel producers Licenses for the implementation
of the activity of power production from renewable energy resources are issued
by the Energy Regulatory Entity [30] Any project which envisages the power
generation from RESor for any producer of bio-fuels is required to perform the
procedure of preliminary or in-depth Environmental Impact Assessment (depending
on the project), and then if the installation is listed in Annex  the law in
force for environmental permits, and should be supplied with an environmental
Permit of type ,  or  Environmental protection law and the law on environmental
impact assessment require the Ministry of Environment and its subordinate
institutions and local authorities to cooperate throughout the process, ensuring
public participation in any potential decision making process As regards the
construction permits, according to the new law on territorial planning (Law no
107 and DCM no 408, dated 2015), the local authorities are responsible for
granting permission for construction of any power plant On the other hand, for
each installation of photovoltaic or NUED systems in buildings that are not
considered as part of cultural heritage, require only  preliminary notice of the
local authorities (the Mayor) An important improved measure presented by the new
legislation on territorial planning is to create  one-stop office ("One stop
shop") for each building permit This measure will reduce the time required for
obtaining  construction permit within  period not to exceed 60 days, and will
increase the transparency of the process Concessions for the construction of
hydropower plants are awarded through an open and competitive bidding process,
where bidders are provided equal access to information and data relating to the
project The information and data for  specific concession are also made
available in the official website of MEI Conditions and criteria for granting
permit for the construction of  plant with renewable resources, other than
hydropower plant, are already foreseen in the new law for the energy sector (Law
no 43, dated 2015) and the specific Regulation approved by the Council of
Ministers (DCM no 1701, dated 2008) Licenses for the production of electricity
from renewable resources, transmission and distribution are granted based on the
criteria established by law for the energy sector and licensing procedures
approved by ERE, which are published in the Official Journal and in ERE official
website Interested parties wishing to carry out an activity in the energy sector
can contact also directly with ERE technical staff, which is responsible for
licensing, and to receive information on the procedures, requirements and
documents to be submitted for obtaining  license The Albanian government has
made  number of efforts to facilitate coordination between different
administrative bodies responsible for different parts of the permit for
specific project Establishment of the National Licensing Center has been
positive step forward in creating  "one-stop shop" service for all licenses and
permits required for  project However, according to the legislation in force for
the construction of  new plant or new transmission or distribution
infrastructure,  series of main authorizations/permits/licenses are approved or
other approving acts, including: - - - decision of the National Environmental
Agency for the preliminary environmental impact assessment (EIA) or the
Minister’ Declaration for the in-depth EIA as per the stipulations of Law no
10440, dated 2011 “On environmental impact assessment”, as amended; concession
or authorization approved by the Council of Ministers or of the minister
responsible for energy, in accordance with the law on concessions and law on
power sector; activity license issued by the Energy Regulatory Entity As regards
the time limits for application processing, it is hard to provide an average
period for administering  case because it largely depends on the project The
major projects should often be subject to  spatial planning process that would
require more time, partly due to the complex character of [31] the project and
involvement of local population during the reviewing process (process of
approval of the environmental impact assessment) It is worth stressing the fact
that legislation provides for the implementation of the principle of
acquiescence in case of the failure to reply of the administrative institution
to  specific request, within  specific time limit provided for in the respective
legislation As regards the EIA process, the legislation foresees some
differences Construction of small power plants with renewable energy, under the
legislation in force, are initially subject only to preliminary EIA, and the
National Environmental Agency is the one that based on its Decision, decides
whether the proposed project should be subject or not to the in-depth EIA
Further, the plants with conventional energy undergo  more advanced EIA process
The authorization procedures of Albania take into account the specificities of
different technologies of renewable energies, because they are governed by
different legislations As mentioned above, the authorizations for the new
hydropower plants are granted in accordance with the law on concessions, which
contains specific procedures and authorizations for other REStechnologies are
granted as required by law for the energy sector Both legislations have
different procedures, because while concessions are awarded on the basis of
competitive bidding process, authorizations for other renewable energy
technologies are granted on the basis of the principle "first in time, first in
rights" Regarding construction permits, the legislation makes no distinction
between renewable energy technologies and other conventional technologies
Currently, there are no specific procedures in Albania for small decentralized
RESinstallations Both laws, the one for the power sector and on renewable
energy, lay down provisions requiring the Council of Ministers and ERE to adopt
procedures and simpler requirements for providing licenses and permits to
producers of eligible RESand small producers Tariffs for the authorization of
new RESplants are published in the Official Journal and in MEI website together
with the relevant government decision containing the criteria and procedures for
reviewing and granting authorizations Royalties set by ERE for production
licenses are published in the Official Journal and in ERE website together with
the regulation on licensing procedures After the start of production activity,
the licensees will be subject to  regulatory fee set by ERE based on their
annual turnover, however, these fees are public and are applied proportionally
to all licensed companies Fees for environmental permits are published in the
Official Journal and are and published in the website of the MoE Concession fees
for the hydropower plants are the result of the bidding process, where bidders
offer concession fee based on  percentage of annual output they foresee, which
is one of the bid evaluation requirements There is no official guidance
available to local administrative bodies of planning, design, construction and
rehabilitation of industrial and residential areas to install equipment and
systems using renewable energy resources for producing electricity, and for
heating and cooling purposes The new law (Article ) provides for that the
Ministry responsible for energy and the agency authorized to be responsible for
renewable energy resources, will need to ensure that information on support
measures for installations should be available to all interested parties such as
developers, sponsors, investors, financial institutions, builders, installers,
architects and suppliers of energy equipment and systems for heating and cooling
in accordance with the use of energy from renewable resources [32] However, the
law does not set out any deadline or specific procedure on the way how to
provide this information or instruction Therefore,  specific remedy needs to be
applied for this purpose in the near future, and the order of the minister
responsible for energy should be approved On the other hand, the RESlaw (Article
28/) provides for that the Council of Ministers shall issue  regulation to
ensure that the public is made available information on the availability and
environmental benefits of all renewable energy resources for transport
Regulation will impose an obligation to specify at the sales points, where the
percentages of bio-fuels mixed with crude oil derivatives, exceed the percentage
of the volume defined by ERE  Buildings Law on RES provides for that the Council
of Ministers will adopt policies and measures to increase the use of solar
energy within buildings, including the obligation for different categories of
buildings, whether new or existing, public or private ones, in order to install
water heating systems with solar energy to produce hot sanitary or technological
water and therefore to meet the objectives set for increasing the input of solar
energy in the total energy consumption within the country The same article
requires the Council of Ministers, upon the approval of the Minister responsible
for energy, to identify the economic sectors and categories of buildings, the
minimum area or capacity of water heating system with solar energy, the
technical requirements of water heating systems with solar energy that will be
installed, as well as specific procedures and criteria to be followed in
connection with the implementation and monitoring of this obligation by the
responsible institutions Ministry responsible for the construction sector is the
Ministry of Urban Development However, energy issues in buildings are divided to
some extent between the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Energy
and Industry It is worth noting that based on current legislation on urban
planning and development, local authorities have  key role in the construction
sector and they are responsible for issuing and monitoring construction permits
The new law 124 on energy efficiency attaches stronger role to the Agency
responsible for energy efficiency regarding the energy performance in buildings,
where the conformity of each objective mandatory for RESinstallation within
buildings will be monitored in the framework of overall performance of the
building RER law does not set out any deadline or schedule on this measure,
however,  draft governmental decision is already prepared, establishing
schedule for the mandatory installation of NUED systems in different categories
of buildings It is important that the adoption and implementation of this
decision is in line with the new legislation on the energy performance of
buildings (energy efficiency legislation) Another major revision of the existing
legislation is the one proposed by the UNDP Program on Climate Changes for the
establishment and strengthening of the market of solar panels for hot water, and
for revision of Law no10112, dated 2009 "On administration of co-ownership in
residential buildings " Based on the proposed revisions, NUED system
installations must be included in the joint ownership of apartment buildings
enabling  better functioning and management of these systems According to UNDP
Program on Climate Changes for creating and strengthening of market solar panels
for hot water,  proposal is made by virtue of  decision of the municipal council
of Tirana for installation within minimum surfaces of NUED into different
categories of buildings, including buildings with households, apartment blocks,
private offices, hotels and restaurants, sports facilities [33] According to the
draft decision, this NUED system will have  surface area to meet at least 60% of
the demand for hot water, apart from the open-door swimming pools that should
fully heat water from solar thermal energy systems Currently, there is no
minimum level for the use of renewable energy in building regulations and codes
As mentioned above, the new law on renewable energies requires the Council of
Ministers to set minimum targets for the production of sanitary and
technological hot water with solar energy in buildings, and mandatory
installation of NUED systems for  category of buildings Meanwhile,  governmental
draft decision is prepared on mandatory installation of NUED systems within
buildings The draft-decision also contains minimum NUED area that must be
installed to meet the building demand for hot water According to the draft
decision, this NUED system will have an area to meet at least 60% of the demand
for hot water, apart from the addition that will have to heat water completely
by solar thermal energy systems The national policy has not taken into account
any obligations for the minimum levels of renewable energy at the new and
recently refurbished buildings Based on the requirements of the new law on
renewable energies, these minimum levels should be taken into account in these
policies  Informative provisions Current and future information, as well as
awareness campaigns and programs together with planned revisions and expected
results should be described Member States should also indicate which responsible
authority will monitor and review the effects of the programs When regional
authorities / governments have  key role, please specify and summarize According
to Article  of the law on renewable energies, the Ministry responsible for
energy and the authorized agency being responsible for renewable energy
resources (NANR) ensures that all stakeholders, such as customers, developers,
planners, sponsors, investors, financial institutions, builders, installers,
architects and suppliers of equipment and heating and cooling systems,
electrical power equipment and other devices that use renewable energy, are made
available information on support measures for plants that use renewable energy
resources The same article (paragraph ) provides for that the Ministry
responsible for energy or agency responsible for renewable energy should develop
appropriate programs for training or guidance on public awareness and
information, in order to inform the interested parties and citizens about the
benefits, costs and realization of the development and use of energy from
renewable sources Ministry responsible for energy or subordinate institutions
have not provided detailed rules or procedures on the way how to provide this
information or awareness However, it should be noted that  series of awareness
campaigns have been launched by energy institutions in Albania to promote the
use of RESin Albania, through various seminars, advertising in mass media etc
Ministry responsible for energy, together with its subordinate agencies, have
organized  number of promotional activities that private investors invest in
small power products with very good results In recent years,  large number of
private investors have shown keen interest to invest in electricity produced
from water and wind There is still no plan of measures to promote the use of
RESat  local level The new territorial reforms, which will enable the creation
of large municipalities expected to emerge after local elections of June 2015,
can be  key opportunity to enhance the role of local authorities for the
implementation of RESpolicies [34] Currently, there are no bodies responsible
for providing information on the use of renewable energies in the heating and
cooling sector and transport sector As mentioned above, the new law on renewable
energy (Article 25), the Council of Ministers issues  regulation to ensure that
public is given information on the ownership and environmental benefits from all
different sources of renewable energy for transport Regulation should also
foresee the obligation to specify at the sales points when the content of bio-
fuels diluted in oil byproducts exceed the limit set in percentage, according to
the stipulations made by ERE As mentioned above, the new draft on renewable
energies requires, with regard to information on support measures for the use of
renewable resources for electricity, the government has made available this
information to investors not only through legislation published in the Official
Journal or various websites, but also through  series of public events such as
conferences, seminars etc The government aims to transform the agency
responsible for renewable energies into an information center for all
stakeholders regarding support measures for the use of renewable energies
Currently, no institution or agency is responsible for developing and providing
guidance for planners and architects to help them to take into due account the
optimal combination of renewable energy resources, high-efficiency technologies,
as well as central heating and cooling when planning, designing, building and
refurbishing industrial or residential areas The Albanian government is
preparing new legislation on energy efficiency and energy performance of
buildings, including specific provisions for the optimal combination of
renewable energy resources and high-efficiency technologies in planning,
designing, building and refurbishing industrial or residential areas
Information, awareness and training programs on the benefits and practices of
using renewable energies to date have not been properly organized Institutions
responsible for energy policy, mainly for the support of international donors,
have launched  series of information and awareness campaigns, but with little
results The only area where these programs have had satisfactory results are
programs for the promotion of small power producers  great interest is recently
shown by the Ministry responsible for energy and the National Agency of Natural
Resources to promote solar panel systems for hot water at local level
Electricity infrastructure development In addition to the existing situation and
future actions of the current legislation,  description should be made of the
planned revisions, relevant responsible bodies and expected results The existing
domestic legislation includes as follows:  Law no43, dated 2015 “On energy
sector”;  Law no138, dated 2013 “On renewable energy resources”  Transmission
Code  Distribution Code  Measurement Code  Market Rules  Law no 107, dated
2014 “On territorial planning and development”, as amended  Law no 91 “On
environmental strategic assessment”  Law no10440, dated 2011 “On environmental
impact assessment”, as amended  Law no 10448, dated 2011 “On environmental
permits”, as amended [35]  Other secondary legislation approved in conformity
with law According to the law on energy sector (Article 60), the Transmission
System Operator, in consultation with interested stakeholders, draws up  ten-
year plan on network developments and submits it for approval to ERE Network
development plan should take into account existing and scheduled demand for
electricity; urban and regional planning of the area where transmission
installations are extended; investment plans for regional networks and
legislation on environmental protection, in particular the requirements of
applicable law on environmental strategic assessment Also, the Transmission Code
(Chapter ,  and ), Transmission Operator System (TSO) is, inter alia,
responsible for the operation, development and expansion of the transmission
network, as well as for the management of any transit of electricity between
foreign systems using Albanian grid According to Article III of the Transmission
Code, TSO is required to produce  Perspective Plan that covers  period of 15
years for the development of transmission system, taking into account the
forecasts for electricity demand, peak capacity, additional capacities for
electricity, transmission capacities, losses and other important parameters of
SEE On the other hand, the Distribution Code (article II) requires the
Distribution System Operator (DSO) to prepare  development plan for the
distribution system based on the study of the future development of electric
grid for an average period of  years and maximum 10 year term Both the
transmission and distribution code will be revised to be in line with the
provisions of law for the energy sector It is clear that any development plan
must take into account the National Energy Strategy, updated for the development
of energy resources, including the production of electricity from renewable
sources Currently, TSO has in place not  too modern system of information
measurement and collection However, in recent years TSO realized  new dispatch
center, together with  more advanced SCADA system that will enable TSO to gather
real-time information from all producers of electricity and transformation
points The new energy law (Article 78) requires that intelligent metering
systems of end users can be installed in the power supply market Implementation
of intelligent metering systems will undergo  preliminary economic assessment,
which must take into account all long-term future costs and benefits of the
market and clients, including also the form of intelligent metering to be
selected , which must be economically more effective and with more appropriate
time limit for applying in practice such metering system DSO will perform an
economic assessment and prepare  schedule with the aim of installing intelligent
metering systems within  period of 10 years Albanian operator of the
transmission system has already completed  new 400 kV interconnection line with
Montenegro (Tirana  - Podgorica), which increased the capacity of the Albanian
system interconnection up to 1000 MW Currently, OST is working to build  new 400
kV line with Kosovo (Tirana  - Pristina), which is expected to be completed in
In addition,  Memorandum of Understanding is signed between the Albanian and
Macedonian transmission system operators for the construction of  new 400 kV
line (Elbasan-Bitola) The project is expected to be financed by German KfW bank
[36] Private investors have also shown interest to build an underwater cable
system linking Albania to Italy All these interconnections are increasing and
strengthening the interconnection capacity of Albania with other neighboring
states, which will largely facilitate the potential development of  regional
market, where power plants with RESare expected to play  key role, considering
the substantial resources in Albania and in other regional countries According
to article 31 of Law no 40, dated 2015 "On power sector" authorization for
construction of new interconnection lines, whether funded by the TSO or by
private persons, should be approved by the Council of Ministers Furthermore,
construction permits for network infrastructure are granted to companies that
have  license for the transmission and/or distribution of power According to Law
no 107 dated 2014 "On territorial planning and development” and DCM no 408,
dated 2015 "On approval of the regulation on territorial development", every
construction permit for energy infrastructure will be granted by the National
Territory Council Projects for building new infrastructure facilities for
electricity are required to undergo the procedure of Environmental Impact
Assessment according to provisions of applicable legislation in this area The
main problems that transmission and distribution companies face in the
construction of  line are related to land ownership These issues are not related
to the cost of paying the compensation price in case of expropriation, instead
they are linked with the fact that in many cases landowners do not possess the
certificate of ownership, since most of the lands in remote areas are not
registered with the Immovable Property Registration Office Procedures for
transfer of land ownership, where the project is implemented, are followed in
accordance with law 8361, dated 1999 "On expropriation and temporary usufruct of
private property for public interest" For this purpose, the interested subject
prepares the relevant file as required by law The file is sent to the Ministry
of Energy and Industry (MEI), which designated the Special Committee on
Expropriation to review the file If the file is completed in accordance with the
law, MEI sends  proposal for expropriation to the Council of Ministers, which
decides in favor where it notes that expropriation is based on law Further, the
applicant properly compensates the owners according to tariffs set by
withdrawing the title of ownership (retrieved from the Immovable Property Chief
Registrar Office) and an identity document and prepares documentation for
registration of property in his/her name with IPRO Due to the difficulties of
Albania in administrative spatial planning, there existed  more efficient
coordination between grid infrastructure approval and other administrative
procedures planning However, specific regulations adopted by the ERE regarding
the review and approval of investment plans of the licensees in the electricity
sector provides that such plans must take into account any spatial planning to
develop the institutions of central or local authorities Discipline and better
planning of new constructions will facilitate the development and building of
new network infrastructure in the future According to Article 11 of the law on
renewable energies, at the request of  producer and in accordance with ERE
regulations, the network system operators realize the connection of the plant
with its point in the network system at the best option possible regarding the
distance and technical requirements of the plant, if the network system has no
other more favorable connection point In choosing the best and [37] most
appropriate network, the system operator must take into account technical
limitations or technical efficiency of the point where connection will be
realized The same article (paragraph ) provides that network system operators,
at the request of the manufacturer of highest priority, make the connection of
the plant with its point in the system, at the best option possible for the
manufacturer with priority from the location of the plant, meeting the technical
requirements of the plant, if the network system has no other more favorable
connection There are no such cases because the current legislation requires that
before  concession or authorization is granted for the construction of  new
power generator from TSO or DSO,  connection point should be ensured to the
transmission or distribution network According to the Power Sector Law (article
28) any costs of connection to the transmission and / or distribution network of
producer of electricity, including RES electricity producers, will be borne by
the manufacturer The connection procedures are defined by codes of transmission
or distribution Article 27 of the law on energy sector provides for that each
new connection will be based on the rules and procedures proposed by the
licensee and approved by ERE, including the cost calculation methodology and
standard agreement of network connectivity However, the new law on renewable
sources (article 11) provides for that operators of network system must
optimize, expand and improve the system for connection and transmission of
electricity from new power plants that use renewable energy resources, in
accordance with the National Action Plan for Renewable Energy, master-plans of
network operators to expand network system or any official document in force
These plans for optimization, expansion and reconstruction of the network
system, where appropriate, should intelligent networks and accumulation
capabilities, in order to ensure the operation of network operator, and adaption
of further developments for the production of electricity from renewable energy
resources include the capacities of interconnection, The same article stipulates
that network system operators should develop and publish standard rules for
keeping and sharing costs of technical adaptations, such as network connections
and strengthening of network, improvement of the operation of networks and rules
for the non-discriminatory implementation of network codes required to integrate
new producer on the national grid These rules should be based on objective,
transparent and non-discriminatory criteria taking into account all costs and
benefits from the connection of producers to the network, as well as special
circumstances of producers located in peripheral regions and in regions with low
population density Standard rules on cost maintenance and sharing will be
approved by ERE Any expenses incurred by transmission and distribution system
operators to improve relevant systems in order to enable the connection of new
producers of electricity with RESare reflected in their rates of transmission
and distribution approved by ERE, if the investment for these improvements is
previously consented by ERE Costs incurred by electricity producers for
connection to the grid will be borne by themselves As mentioned above, the new
law on renewable resources authorizes ERE to develop standard rules, including
the allocation of costs between electricity producers and RES network operator
However, these specific rules are not yet developed and approved There are no
such rules for costs associated with upgrading of the network If an investment
for connection of  new producer of electricity is done by the private investor,
any connection to other manufactuRES who use this investment will be subject to
private agreement between the two [38] manufactures Specific rules for the cost
allocation of connection to the grid, as required by law for renewable energies,
would include provisions dealing with the connection of this producer to
connection of an existing plant, already included by the first manufacturer
Currently, the connection of new producers with RES is done according to
specific rules contained in the transmission and distribution code, but the
primary legislation does not include any specific provision for this purpose
Renewable energy law (Article 11/) provides for that, upon the request of
producers seeking connection to the network systems, network system operators
will give them full and necessary information, including -  comprehensive and
detailed assessment of the costs for physical connection to the network; -
Reasonable and accurate time limit for receiving and processing the request for
grid connection; - Reasonable time limit for any proposed grid connection - All
these requirements will also be part of the relevant codes or other special
regulations approved by ERE  Grid operation The new law on energy sector
(Article 29) provides for that operators of transmission and distribution system
ensure access to the network for all clients and users of the system, on
transparent and non- discriminatory basis and at ERE approved and published
tariffs The same article foresees that producers who produce energy from
renewable sources, have priority access to the grids The new law on renewable
energies (article 11/) provides for that transmission and distribution of
electricity produced from renewable energy resources are guaranteed, except in
emergency situations defined in the law on energy sector or in the transmission
and distribution codes In the course of the dispatch of power generation plants,
the Transmission System Operator will attach priority to power generation
installations to the extent that allows safe operation of the national
electricity system and based on transparent and non-discriminatory criteria
Currently, all existing producers of electricity in Albania rely on hydropower,
therefore no priority is attached to the generating installations Furthermore,
the transmission system operation is carried out by an independent operator of
the transmission system that dispatches the producers based on market rules As
for producers connected to the distribution network, existing legislation
guarantees their access to the network, unless there is  security problem with
the functioning of the network Constraints/interruptions of electricity from
renewable sources are reported when the distribution system operator has been
forced, due to technical reasons, to disconnect  remote area where it is and
where the small hydropower manufacturer is connected The Albanian government has
prepared  purchase contract for small hydropower plants based on the principle
"take or pay", which will guarantee that in the event of constraint/interruption
by the network operator without  technical reason small producers of electricity
will be compensated for the decreased product Energy Regulatory Entity (ERE) is
the responsible institution for monitoring the application and implementation of
the measures described above This regulatory entity is also responsible for the
adoption of secondary legislation on the operation of network All RESpower
plants are integrated in the energy market The energy market is designed in
accordance with the Albanian market model adopted by DCM no 338, dated This
market model requires that all electricity of the distributed producer ( ) be
purchased by the buyer at  regulated promotional fee approved by ERE At the same
time, ERE has approved  standard agreement for the purchase of [39] electricity
(EPA) for these SHPPs However, the model also foresees that SHPPs sell their
electricity in the market at market prices, if they prefer so Albania has
adopted  new law on the energy sector (lawnNo43 /2015, dated 2015) and secondary
legislation should be developed to implement this new law, including  new model
of the market and new market rules Considering that the new law abolishes the
concept of Public Wholesale Supplier,  new entity is expected to be designated
as  recipient of electricity produced from renewable energy plants On the other
hand, power producers (IPPs), which do not meet the conditions to receive
promotional fee of selling electricity to the receiver, can sell electricity to
DSO at negotiable prices to cover the losses of distribution or to sell in their
energy at the competitive domestic market or export it abroad by using the right
of access to the transmission system All electricity producers are required to
be licensed by ERE and be registered with the market operator, and to pay
financial guarantee These requirements are the same for the participants in the
market and no preferential treatment is afforded to RES producers of electricity
The new law on power sector envisages that energy market should be consolidated
in Albania, in order to further increase transparency and competition in the
wholesale market Day-ahead market will create more market opportunities for
renewable energy plants, especially for those that are not eligible for
promotional fee Based on the transmission and distribution tariff methodologies,
and according to market rules approved by ERE, transmission or distribution
tariffs in the domestic market are paid as per the load and not by producers
There are no plans to introduce  distribution or transmission fee for
electricity producers, including those with RES plants in the near future
Development of regional heating and cooling infrastructure The country has no
long-distance heating or cooling infrastructure and no specific legislation for
long- distance heating or cooling is approved or expected to be approved  Bio-
fuels and other bio-liquids-sustainability criteria and cHPPking of compliance
The following part of the national action plan should explain the future
strategy of the Contracting Parties to meet sustainability criteria for bio-
fuels and bio-liquids and cHPPk the compliance with the scheme In February 2008
Albania adopted  special law on bio-fuels and other renewable fuels for use in
transport (law no 9876, dated 2008) The purpose of this law is to promote the
production and use of bio-fuels and other renewable fuels used for the
replacement of oil byproducts in the transport sector, in order to contribute to
the accomplishment of commitments established under Kyoto Protocol for climate
changes, as well as provide tools and promote renewable energy resources through
the introduction and cultivation of crops for energy and environmental
protection The law transposes the previous EU Directive2003/EC of  May 2003 on
the promotion of bio-fuels or other renewable fuels used for transport However,
the current law has no special provision to define the sustainability criteria
for bio-fuels and bio-liquids The Albanian government is in the process of
development of  new law on bio-fuels to transpose the Directive 2009/EC [40] The
new law is expected to contain  number of provisions on the sustainability
criteria for bio-fuels and bio-liquids produced or traded in the Albanian market
Law on bio-fuels has set specific objectives for the use of bio-fuels in the
transport sector, and according to the new law on renewable sources, these
objectives will be integrated into the overall objective of renewable energies
in the total final consumption within the country Every compliance with the
objectives set by law for the consumption of bio-fuels and NREAP will be
monitored by State Technical and Industrial Inspectorate, which is the successor
of the former Central Technical Inspectorate According to the new law on
renewable sources, the National Action Plan for Renewable Energies to be adopted
by the Council of Ministers, will be monitored by the agency responsible for
renewable energy resources, which is expected to have authority and powers to
monitor compliance with targets set for all renewable resources, including bio-
fuels While the current law on renewable sources has no special provisions for
the sustainability criteria on bio- fuels and bio-liquids, the new draft law on
bio-fuels will incorporate such criteria transposing the Directive 2009/EC At
the same time, the new draft law on bio-fuels will require the responsible
Agency for renewable sources that in cooperation with the respective authorities
responsible for agriculture and forestry, it will monitor and cHPPk compliance
of bio-fuel producers with the sustainability criteria defined by law National
Agency for Natural Resources, which is responsible for renewable sources, as
required by the revised law on renewable resources, will have responsibility for
monitoring and cHPPking the compliance with sustainability criteria This Agency
is expected to be supported by responsible authorities for agriculture and
forests based on the new law on administrative and territorial division
Protected areas established in accordance with law no 8906, dated 2002 "On
protected areas" are managed by the relevant state authority set up by the
Decision of Council of Ministers, depending on the type and nature of the
protected area The composition, duties, responsibilities and functioning of the
administration of each category of protected area are approved by the Council of
Ministers MoE, after approval by the Council of Ministers, can take over the
management of protected areas, including its auspices of the respective
administrative body for this administration ME defines the method of marking the
protected areas on the ground and on the map The emblem of the Republic of
Albania will be used to mark the protected areas ME informs the relevant
geodesic and mapping bodies about the statements, changes or removal of the
protected area status Protected areas are registered with the central archiving
system of the Ministry of Environment, which is created by using data of the
relevant state institutions and other specialized institutions MM formulates and
approves rules for establishment, operation and use of the central archiving
system The central archiving system of protected areas is open to the public and
everyone can use it with permission and in the presence of an authorized
official Law no 8906, dated 2002 "On protected areas" provides special
protection for some key components of nature and biodiversity This law
classifies protected areas into six categories, as follows:  strictly natural
reserve/scientific reserves - Category   national parks - Category II  natural
monuments - Category III  managed nature reserve / area of management of
habitats and species - Category IV  protected Landscape - Category  [41]
protected area of managed resources - Category VI The categorization of areas,
status and level of protection for each area based on the criteria of the World
Centre for Nature Conservation For each category, the legislation provides
certain level of protection Categories of protected areas are defined in the
Decision of the Council of Ministers for their recognition Article / of the Law
also foresees that areas where natural habitat species of interest to the
European Community, as well as other habitats of interest to this community, are
declared areas of special conservation These areas are part of the national
ecological network and may include protected areas and ecosystems, habitats and
landscapes outside the network Minister responsible for the environment approves
the list of Albanian areas of interest to the European Community The law
provides that protected areas are declared land, water, marine and coastal areas
designated for the protection of biodiversity, natural, cultural and social
features managed by legal remedies and modern scientific methods Article 15 of
the law stipulates that the Ministry of Environment, other state agencies and
local government authorities or in cooperation with third parties, draw up for
each protected area, management plans of this area Management plans of protected
areas will be included in policies, plans and programs related thereto, as well
as in decision-making at the national, regional or local level Procedures for
changing the status of agricultural land are provided by DCM no 665, dated 2010
"On the rules and procedures of change of categories of land resources" and DCM
no 410, dated 2012 "On establishment of rules and procedures of change of
categories of land resources" including  number of requirements for each
application associated with the land status change The process involves  number
of institutions, Regional Directorates of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture,
Rural Development and Water Administration, Regional Forest Service and Ministry
of Environment in cases of the change of forest land status The decision on the
land status change is made by the Minister of Agriculture, Rural Development and
Water Administration to change the status of agricultural land to forest land,
pasture or meadow and through  joint decision of the Minister of Agriculture,
Rural Development and Water Administration and the Minister of Environment to
change the status of forest land, pasture or meadow to agricultural land The
protection status of  protected area is removed or changed when the
circumstances or objective for granting this status has changed The status of
protected area is revoked by  Decision of Council of Ministers, with proposal of
the Ministry of Environment, after receiving feedback from specialized
institutions, local government authorities, non-profit organizations and owners
when their properties are part of the protected area The proposal on revocation
of the status of  protected area should include: ) Justification for the status
revocation ; ) environmental impact assessment that reflects the impact on the
existing categorization of the protected area, biodiversity and local
communities or populations; )  description of mitigation measures; ) the results
of the coordination and consultation processes with stakeholders from civil
society, especially with populations or communities within and around the
protected area, including  summary of comments received and reflection on the
proposal The legislation has not provided for any time limit to update the
registry (cadastral) of land zoning, however the legislation requires that under
the new territorial and administrative division, the Department of Land
Administration and Protection should update cadastral documentation for the
territory under [42] their jurisdiction and they are also obliged to inform the
local immovable property registration offices of any changes of land categories,
which can be adopted according to the requirements and procedures of the
applicable legislation The Albanian legislation generally requires that raw
materials used in agriculture should meet the best agrarian-environmental
practices The use of raw materials in agriculture is regulated by Law no 7659,
dated 1993 "On seeds and saplings" The State Entity of Seeds and Saplings is set
up for the purposes of quality control for the plant cultivation material and
for conservation of genetic material This institution is under the Ministry of
Agriculture, Rural Development and Water Administration The State Entity for
Seeds and Saplings is the only governmental body responsible for licensing the
importation or exportation of any kind of plant cultivation material  Intended
use of statistical transfers between Member States and planned participation in
joint projects with other member states and third countries This sub-chapter
should describe the intended use of cooperation mechanisms between Member States
and third countries like Albania This information should be based on what is
provided in the forecast document, referred to in Article  () of Directive
2009/EC  Procedural aspects Accurate, reliable and timely assessment of
production capacities is essential for the country' ability to provide
statistically "surplus production" for Member States, taking into account the
mandatory percentage of renewable energies in energy consumption The
establishment of national procedures requires the creation of an updated and
well-coordinated register of gross final energy consumption in all sectors of
the economy and reliable tracking of the implementation of renewable energy
projects In the sector of electricity, gross production and consumption from
renewable energy resources is determined on the basis of guarantees/certificate
of origin Currently in Albania there is still no market for
warranties/certificates of origin ( as part of the sales of energy green
certificates (produced from renewable sources) Detailed promotions of the
guarantee /certificate of origin under the new law on RESare set out in Articles
19, 20 and  Certificate of origin warranty ERE, at the request of  manufacturer
that has been supplied by ERE with technical preliminary qualification for the
plant with renewable energy under provisions of the regulation referred to in
paragraph 10 of this Article, will issue  certificate of origin guarantee for
electricity or heat produced by  generating plant Guarantees of Origin will
apply to the standard size of  MWh and will specify: • energy resources from
which electricity is produced, classified by type and key components, including
the information to what extent the electricity was produced from renewable
energy resources; • exclusive percentage of biomass, in cases where biomass is
used; • name and address of the producer; • location, capacity and date of
commissioning of the plant; • Period during which energy is produced and to what
extent it is paid in accordance with Articles 15 and 16 of this Law, and • Place
of issue and unique identification number ERE will supervise the issuance,
transfer and cancellation of guarantees of origin in accordance with the
provisions of the regulation issued under paragraph  of this article [43]
Guarantees of origin are issued based on comprehensive data and correct
information to certify the origin of electricity supplied by the manufacturer
and certified measurement data from network system operator Guarantees of origin
are issued only if the producer provides all the information required under
paragraph () of this Article Any use of the guarantee of origin is made within
12 months of production of the corresponding energy unit The guarantee of origin
is canceled after use If electricity is produced from  hydro power plant with
reversible pumping system, guarantees of origin will be issued only for the
amount of energy corresponding to the difference between the electricity
produced by hydropower plant and electricity consumed by the reversible pumping
system If electricity is produced from biomass, guarantees of origin will be
issued only for the percentage of energy corresponding to the bio-degradable
share, as defined in paragraph  of Article  of this law Within  period of 12
months from the date of entry into force of this law, ERE will create an
electronic register of guarantees of origin with  suitable mechanism for data
processing to ensure that guarantees of origin are issued, transferred and
canceled electronically and are accurate, reliable and not subject to fraud Any
interested party is entitled to freely have access to this register Within the
same period referred to in paragraph  of this article, ERE will adopt  specific
regulation for the procedure applied for guarantees of origin The regulation
foresees in particular: Documents to be submitted by the Producer for technical
qualification of its installation as  plant for generating electricity or heat
from renewable energy resources Technical qualification procedure and in
particular the timeframe within which ERE must respond to applications
submitted, as well as the legal consequences due to failure to meet this
obligation  Monitoring procedure Procedure applied to the issuance,
registration, transfer or cancellation of guarantees of origin Issues related to
cooperation with competent authorities of the EU Member States and other
countries with which an agreement is signed for mutual recognition of guarantees
of origin ERE is responsible for changing the previous regulations on the
procedure applied for guarantees of origin to reflect the provisions set out in
paragraph  of this article  Monitoring procedure and prohibition of multiple
sales To ensure that the conditions for issuing the guarantees of origin are met
and that data and information on which their issue is based are correct, ERE
representatives and any person authorized by it, have  right of free access to
the respective generation plant and to all data and information related thereto,
without prejudice to the maintenance of business secrets The producer is obliged
to facilitate the work of ERE representatives and the persons authorized by it
Electricity and heat produced from renewable energy resources, as well as
landfill gas or gas from wastewater treatment disposed to the gas network cannot
be sold or transferred more than once As  result, the Producer is paid by
promotional legal fees and will not be permitted to transfer or sell any
guarantee of origin for electricity If the Producer delegates this guarantee of
origin for electricity from renewable energy resources, no feed-in tariff can be
paid for electricity and the Producer may lose benefits from feed-in tariffs
[44]  International cooperation for origin guarantees The guarantee of origin
for electricity produced from renewable energy resources, which is issued by
state that is  Contracting Party or  Member State of  Contracting Party to the
Energy Community Treaty, is also recognized in Albania The Council of Ministers
or the Ministry responsible for energy may enter into agreements with one of EU
member states or  contracting party to the Treaty of the Energy Community for
Southeastern Europe for mutual recognition of guarantees of origin for the
purposes of measuring compliance with the requirements of Article  of this law
on general national objectives for renewable energy Guarantees of Origin
issued/registered by ERE and this mechanism are sufficient to determine the
production of renewable energy as part of the gross final consumption of
electricity It is more difficult to determine the major contribution of biomass
energy in the heating and cooling sector Given the huge consumption of wood
biomass for heating purposes, the estimation of the part of renewable energy
resources in final energy consumption in this sector requires information on: 
     total direct supply with wood biomass (from the managed forests);
total direct supply of wood biomass from individual collection of villagers;
total biomass supply from industrial waste (from the wood processing and
furniture industry, sawmill units, paper and paper pulp processing industry,
recycling of wood); total recycled / remained / regenerated biomass; assessment
of the gross calorific value of alternative biomass total biomass production
from energy agricultural crops; To this end, we need to ensure close cooperation
between the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Water Administration,
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Energy and Industry, Ministry of Public
Works and Transport, National Agency of Natural Resources and Institute of
Statistics (INSTAT) Based on the above information, it can determine the total
energy content of the total biomass production can be calculated compared to the
corresponding total energy content of fuel used for heating Despite the great
variety of combustion technologies with high efficiency, it can be assumed that
in  certain use, the total usable energy content of the biomass would be equal
to that of ordinary fuels,  bio-fuels directly replace the same amount of
conventional energy ERE and the National Agency of Natural Resources will
administer  national database for electricity, for all the statistical data
related to energy resources as described above Statistical guarantees of origin
shall be issued for every  MWh (086 toe) produced from renewable energy
resources in transport and heating, as well as for electricity produced from
renewable energy resources These origin warranties will be available for trading
by EU member states The implementation of renewable energy projects can be
combined with the implementation of energy efficiency measures based on NAPEE,
already approved by the Albanian Government on September , Given the national
potential for implementing energy efficiency measures,  key criterion in the
selection of fund-eligible projects will be the participation of enterprises
making improvements in energy efficiency, for example, enterprises with high
demand for energy, large buildings and energy traders Another advantage would be
the existence of an energy audit report to contain information about the
economic advantages of energy efficiency measures, allowing an assessment
whether these measures should be integrated or not to the measures for renewable
energies [45] Contracts with guaranteed results, together with grant financing
for additional measures from the state budget, private investors and the
operational programs will constitute an appropriate mechanism Albania is ready
to participate in joint projects with Member States After the approval of law on
RER, ERE shall prepare feed-in tariffs for cogeneration plants using biomass
energy  Calculated surplus of the production of renewable energies that may be
transferred to other member states compared to the indicative trajectory In the
best scenario for the development of energy production from renewable sources,
combined with  firm policy on energy efficiency, Albania has high potential for
statistical transfers to other member states, especially based on the concept
that only wind power plants (eolic parks/wind farms) with  capacity of  MW would
be needed to meet RESobjective Wind potential is approximately 1500 MW, as it
will be mentioned in the following section, and all the difference will be
available for export purposes  Potential calculated for joint projects There are
number of options for the development of projects for the use of renewable
energy in Albania Production of electricity from renewable energy resources is
strongly supported by the domestic legislation and  number of investors from the
European Union Several projects have already been completed, while others are
ongoing There are  number of opportunities for joint projects in this field
within the range of up to 3000 MW of installed capacity (mainly hydropower,
wind, biomass and solar energy) However, economic conditions in Albania require
combination of policies to encourage the use of renewable energy policy
promoting the production of heat, which is much more efficient in terms of
primary energy use and requires less relative investment Costs of supply and
transformation would also be lower because production would be closer to the
consumer There are  number of options: •  large-scale program to promote the use
of solar panels for water heating, thus reducing energy use It is worth noting
that UNDP program on Climate Changes supported by FGM and the Albanian
government is working for two years to promote this technology as one of the
main uses of RESto cover the demand for hot water, coupled with the reduction of
gases with greenhouse effect; • combined burning of fossil fuels and biomass for
central / regional heating in public buildings; • expansion of the production of
wood chips from wood waste use, with  view of replacing installations for the
production of heat in industry and public services buildings • The Albanian
Government is also implementing  project to replace fossil fuels with renewable
energy resources for heating / water heating in public buildings This project
supported by KfW "Promotion of energy efficiency of renewable energy resources
in Albania" is already implemented as  pilot project in three cases and is
planning to invest around  million Euro in various public buildings The fuel-
operated current boilers can be completely replaced with plants using solid
biomass, bio-gas or bio-fuels to meet energy demand for the heating of premises
and solar collectors to cover hot water demand Yes,  proper technology for the
heating of premises is based on the combustion of solid unprocessed biomass raw
( wood chips and pallets) in boilers with installed capacity of  to  MW The
exact number of potential installations will be determined in the next two
calendar years after the preparation of the register of hot water boilers in the
Albanian territory, as required by the draft law on energy efficiency The
National Agency of Natural Resources will start the preparation of such
register within the next two years Most of the waste from agriculture, food
processing industry and logging can be processed by being transformed in chips
and wood briquettes Currently, these opportunities are not used due to the high
[46] price of chips and the fairly low price of firewood widely used by families
According to estimates, about one third of apartments in Albania use wood
biomass for heating, most of which is crude This market is continuously
expanding because families refuse to use the expensive services of central
heating companies, which use mainly electricity and LPG Municipalities with
their forests that have proper annual growth to supply the planned capacities,
are suitable for the implementation of joint projects Funding may be provided
under contracts for guaranteed energy savings under operational programs and the
European Union Owners of forests or large farms and producers of biomass boilers
are eligible participants for the construction of factories for the production
of chips and wooden pallets Currently, Albania has no joint project with other
member states regarding the promotion of biomass boilers with high energy
efficiency However, suitable technologies from Germany and Austria have just
arrived in the Albanian market [47] ASSESSMENTS  Assessment of the available
potential for the development of local renewable energy resources  Potential of
hydropower plants (HPP) It should be noted that in Albania there is still  high
hydro-capacity for creating new power generation capacities to be built in the
coming years The following HPP- are proposed to be considered as new capacities:
• About nine medium and large hydropower plants with total installed capacity of
385 MW, including HPP of Kalivac • On Devoll River: HPP of Banja with 65 MW and
HPP of Moglicë with 178 MW • Medium and large HPPs with  total installed
capacity of 480 MW • ERE plants with total installed capacity of 30 MW •
Photovoltaic plants with total installed capacity of 32 MW  Concessions for
SHPPs Since 31 December 2014, the Albanian Government, based on the law "On
concessions" (adopted in December 2006), has awarded up to about 120 concession
contracts (110 have been already approved and 10 are in the final stage of
discussion) for the construction of HPP- of different categories Annex  provides
the total number of concessions, the relevant company, installed capacity,
average annual production and respective investment for each concession contract
To have  clear picture of small medium and large hydropower plants, the total
list of HPPs is divided into the following three categories:  One or cascade of
SHPPs-with total capacity below 15 MW Based on the definition of the Decision of
the Council of Ministers (DCM), they are considered SHPP;  SHPP-cascade with
total capacity of over 15 MW: Based on the definition of the Decision of Council
of Ministers (DCM), they as considered as SHPPs;  Medium and large HPP- and
cascade of hydropower plants with  capacity of over 15 MW each: Based on the
definition of DCM, since each plant has  capacity of over 15 MW, they are not
considered SHPPs; The analysis shows that the largest number of concessions is
related to the first and second group, with  total of 112 concession contracts
included in the category of small hydropower plants The total installed designed
capacity is 1740 MW and the share of SHPP- is about 48%, with an installed
capacity of 839 MW The new planned capacity of energy constitutes  substantial
capacity when compared with the current total installed capacity of hydropower
plants in Albania (1426 MW) Also, the total planned capacity of SHPP’ of 839 MW
is much higher compared to the installed capacity of the existing SHPP- (25 MW)
until Comparison of estimated annual production of electricity with average
annual production of electricity from existing hydroelectric plants in Albania
(4180 GWh) shows that the total potential of electricity generation is 185% of
current production from hydropower plants The first group can provide 84% of the
present average, while groups two and three can produce 45% and 55% of the
current electricity production from hydropower plants Regarding the total
investment for each of the aforementioned groups, the analysis shows that total
demand for investment is EUR  471 million and the share of investment required
for small HPPs is [48] about 785 million Euro Both these values represent
significant amounts for the Albanian economy in general and its banking sector
in particular, making it  very attractive sector  Operational SHPP: old
rehabilitated units and new units The total list of existing operational SHPPs
and their production for the first half of 2014 is available from MEI In early
2015, the number of the existing operational SHPPs was approximately 90 compared
to 18 in early The total list of new operational SHPPs, their total capacity
installed is equal to 32 MW and their production for 2014 (equal to 919 GWh) 10
SHPPs under construction The number of concession contracts for small hydropower
plants under construction is approximately 25 and  of them have secured loans,
15 are in the process of negotiation with banks  Energy potential from biomass
The usable biomasses for energy purposes may be classified into four main
categories:  Wood or its remnants from different wood processing industries; 
Plant residues (stalks, seeds etc) after the completion of their production
cycle, which are not used in other production sectors;  Energy-related
agricultural crops (woods) cultivated to be burned as biomass and;  Animal
residues (bones, skin, manure), which are not used in other economy sectors
Forests occupy about 36% of the land surface of Albania Some afforested areas
are included in calculations of the land covered with forests, where half of
them are classified as groves and shrubs and the other half as forests with high
stems/trunks Almost / of woods are represented by broad-leaved species, with
dominance of oak and permanently green beech trees Albania is one of the few
European countries that has suffered  decrease in the area covered by forests in
recent decades, due to cleaning for agriculture purposes, overgrazing and
cutting of wood stuff for fuel, especially during the transition period (in
around 1990s ) Cutting of trees has exceeded the annual net growth, which
results in decrease of growing stock trees; there was also  decline in its
quality as  result of illegal logging Most of the forests are available for the
supply of timber; the rest, which is the vast majority, is not available for
economic reasons More than / of forests are classified as semi-natural, while
the rest is divided into forest without human intervention and plantations The
country developed  reforestation program to plant trees, mainly in  difficult
terrain, but currently it is downgraded due to lack of investment in this field
All forests have been state-owned, but land ownership regime is changing
categories, including private and community forests Currently, 47% of the forest
is owned by the municipalities, about 51% is owned by the state and around % is
under private ownership Efforts are being made to increase the area of protected
forest to preserve the rich biodiversity and landscape Protected areas comprise
of more than 450 thousand HPPtares, and they will grow as  result of the
commitments of the government From 2004 to 2012, the surface of Albanian
protected areas Albanian has suffered  triple increase During the 1990s, and
despite the fact that forest management was particularly influenced by the
sudden collapse of the previous economy, the forestry sector was not adequately
supported However, the productive capacity of the sector has the potential to be
restored, in order to play an important role in rural employment, industrial
development and environmental protection [49] Contrary to its unique importance
for the economy, the forestry sector continues to suffer from some typical
problems of transition: declined investment, weakening of practical forest
management, maintenance, lack of supervision and law enforcement Therefore, the
basis of resources has declined substantially for many years towards the end,
not only in terms of quantitative aspects, but also for the large-scale
degradation of forests Growing of trees per HPPtare is significantly affected,
and  large amount of mature timber can be nowadays found only in physically
inaccessible parts of the country At the same time, economic restructuring has
caused  decline in the efficiency of wood cutting and processing, while illegal
cutting have distorted market prices Also, the local energy policies were not in
favor of forests, negatively affecting forest degradation Forests all over
Albania, especially in mountainous areas, serve as  source of livelihood and
income Firstly, the firewood gathered by villagers, not to mention most of the
population in urban areas supplied with firewood, which are vital for heating
and cooking almost all over the year Firewood is an important commodity for
Albania, because they are used for heating by most households, and in rural
areas they are also used for cooking They now cover 36% of energy demand for
heating and 12% of energy for cooking This means that firewood is still
indispensable source of energy and will continue to be important Larger groups
of consumers of firewood are families, but public institutions, manufactuRES of
charcoal and limestone also consume large volumes of firewood One of the main
problems of the forest sector is the lack of accurate data regarding stock of
forests (increase, decrease of its surface area and volume etc) Forest Cadastre
continues to not reflect the real situation of national forests On the other
hand, there is no nationwide cadastral office to evidence/reflect the relevant
changes of land use within the country Forest area is one of the main forest
indicators Over the years, it has undergone some significant changes It is
decreased in absence of  data system due to the failure to draft management
plans for many years, national inventory of forests and maintainance of the
system database For this purpose, an identification project with the support of
World Bank is ongoing Data presented in the figures below are based on
information released by the Ministry of Environment [50] Forest areas (ha)
Volume of forest biomass (000 m3) Figure : Annual forest area (HPPtares) for
Albania (Source – Ministry of Environment) Figure 10: Annual volume of forest
biomass (000 m3) for Albania (Source-Ministry of Environment) Annual growth
(m3/hectares per year) Firewood consumption ktoe/year Figure 11: The respective
annual growth rate (m3/HPPtares per year) for Albania (Source – Ministry of
Environment) Figure 12: Annual consumption of wood stuff as fuel (ktoe) for
Albania (Source – Albanian National Balance Sheet, NANR) [51] Forest areas (ha)
Consumption ktoe/year of firewood, Annual growth (pjesë potenciale për ’
përdorur vetëm për dru zjarri) Figure : Comparison of the annual wood
consumption as (ktoe/year) fuel (ktoe) and annual forest growth (expressed in
ktoe) for Albania Scenario needed to be followed increasing forestation with
planning to approx 2200 ha per year (including fruit frees) to reach stable
growth of forests Figure : Current and planned forest areas to meet the main
objective: in 2020 the wood consumption as fuel will equal the annual forest
growth for Albania Biomass categories Forests Biomass from seed and fruit &
agricultural production Urban waste Waste from fruit trees Cattle waste Power
plants TOTAL Theoretical potential (ktoe) Participation in energy balance (%)
Technical energy potential, heat (ktoe) Participation in energy balance for
heating (%) Technical potential of energy, electricity (ktoe) 07% 95%
Theoretical potential of participation in energy balance (%) 07% Credible
potential for the next decade (ktoe) 17% 97% 45% 25 34 4176 39% 68% 37% 25% %
1276 3212 18% 58% 12% 232% % 50 13 80% 65% 37% 260% % 72 Table : Theoretical,
technical and economic potential of each category of biomass Based on the data
presented, it is clear that the current level of wood consumption as fuel used
only for energy requires  higher annual growth of % than the annual increase of
forests Such  trend should change in order to allow sustainable development of
this sector for the Albanian vital economy In order to attain forest sustainable
development, due account should be taken of the use of biomass as fuel to reduce
consumption from 2011,50 ktoe (in 2013) to 167,79 ktoe (in 2020), and re-
afforestation at the minimum threshold of at least 2200 HPPtares annually [52]
The use of biomass for energy generation in Albania can be obtained from the
following sources (Table ): • Agricultural waste (stems, seeds etc) after the
end of their production cycle, which are not used in other production sectors; •
firewood or wood residues from different wood processing industries; • Energy
Plantations (fast growing grove) cultivated to be burned as biomass, and; • The
remains of animals (bones, skin, livestock manure) that are not used in other
sectors of the economy; • Waste (for instance, food and household waste) Olive
cultivation is an important industry for the coastal area of Albania Olive oil
extraction is the process of oil separation from other fruit content (vegetative
liquid extract and solid material) Basic steps in producing olive oil are always
the same and include: ) cleaning the olives and removing the seeds, leaves, buds
and other waste; ) pressing of olives for making  paste and ) separating the oil
from the rest of the components of olive oil Currently, three main methods are
applied to extract olive oil: "traditional process", three-phase process and
two-phase process Types of waste generated: olive mill technology produces
variety of waste, both solid and liquid Solid waste produced from the extraction
of olive oil are alperujo [Spanish] ( pomace remained from the two-phase
system), and orujo [Spanish] ( pomace remained from the three-phase system)
Solid waste are also generated while pruning olive trees in the olive-grove
These include leaves and small branches (after pruning) The leaves can be used
as animal feed, fertilizer or compost production, while small branches, pits and
dried olive pomace can also be used for energy production Liquid waste are known
as oil mill sewage and in some cases are used as additives for making cosmetic
products and also for bogaz as large amounts of non-collected oil and fine
residues of pomace remain in the oil mill wastewater particles The potential
uses of pomace are: () bio-energy production ; (ii) production of  low-quality
oil as  food product, through  factory chemical process known as "olive pomace
refineries"; (iii) spread in agricultural fields as fertilizers (or mixed with
soil for the refilling process, for example in quarries); (iv) used as animal
feed; and () destruction as waste Energy production (the focus of this project),
olive pomace is directly burned into boilers or transform into pallet or
briquette for use in boilers and stoves In both cases, oil-pomace must be
firstly dried Rural areas present some features favoring the potential
development of an energy chain with olive pomace because: ) agricultural sector
is one of the most important economic activities in rural areas, which face
serious difficulties The unemployment rate is higher than the national average,
especially among young people; ) the local community is provided additional
economic activity Community development based on bio industries often involves
strengthening community support services, providing additional jobs in the local
government bodies and service sectors; ) provides  green label for energy users
differentiating it from other competitors; and ) mitigates rural depopulation
Document FGM / 31/ of FGM Council, together with the United Nations Organization
for Industrial Development (UNIDO), have established at the Ministry of
Environment the project on "use of olive pomace for energy purposes", with the
aim of facilitating the direction for development with small amounts of carbon
in agro-farming industry in Albania Critical factors for the project success are
the implementation of technical solutions adapted to local needs of four
industrial sub-sectors in Albania, and the creation of  [53] chain of domestic
supply, so that piece of equipment are produced at effective cost, building of
the system and costs compliant with the local economy, and the operation and
maintenance to be timely and affordable UNIDO experience working with industrial
sector in general for small and medium enterprises in particular is important
for achieving the objectives set out in this project Moreover, upon the use of
pomace as biomass, most of olive oil factories have planned to use  portion of
the biomass (%) for domestic needs and the rest (%) will be transformed into
briquettes / pallet and will be sold for residential buildings, private/public
service buildings, as well as for small food processing establishments by
applying the latest renewable energy technologies Bio-gas use is underdeveloped
despite the available resources, so the agricultural biomass from major plants
will be subsequently calculated in detail, and the biomass to be collected by
pruning the main fruit trees Table 10 shows the respective areas planted with
wheat, barley, corn, forage and grain and the most important agricultural plants
for 2014, based on data collected from the Third National Communication Plants
(HPPtares) TOTAL Wheat 70000 Barley 2150 Corn 68000 Forage Grain 205000 150000
Table 11 introduces the respective number of olive trees, citrus fruits,
pergola, vineyards and all other trees for year 2014, based on data collected
from the Third National Communication Fruits (number of trees) TOTAL All other
fruits Olives Citrus fruits Pergola Vineyard 9882000 5590000 707000 5503000
9806000 Based on the above numbers, the tables  introduce the energy from
biomass calculated from the theoretical and technical perspective, to be
potentially used to cover some part of RESheating demand for the period
2015-Parameters Wheat Barley Corn Forage Grain All fruits Olives Citrus fruit
Pergola Vineyard Plants (ton) Fruit drying (ton) Total amount of biomass, ton
Biomass parts to be used for energy, % Total amount of biomass, tons to be used
for energy, ton Net calorific value (MJ/kg) Agricultural biomass to be used for
heating purposes, ktoe 183,167 ,193 305,029 443,931 241,538 71,150 40,248 ,090
,9622 11,767 20% 20% 20% 20% 20% 80% 80% 80% 80% 80% 36,633 ,039 61,006 88,786
48,308 56,920 32,198 4072 31,697 ,414 18 60 35 11 12 50 61 92 75 78 12 Table 12:
Theoretical and technical biomass energy potential that may be used to cover
some part of RESheating demand The biomass potential for the transport sector is
not presently calculated and will be  primary task for future works [54] 2015
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 495150 519908 545903 573198
601858 631951 654069 676962 700655 725178 750559 68 01 56 34 36 63 16 97 06 47
19 334 371 601 038 697 594 909 613 736 306 357 83939 86457 89051 91722 94474
97308 100227 103234 106331 109521 112807 18 93 72 58 48 45 47 56 70 91 19 10% %
00% 00% 00% 00% 00% 00% 00% 00% 00% 818 989 345 894 645 607 789 200 851 753 915
152 360 946 932 342 201 697 813 587 059 272 Parameters Agricultural plants
(HPPtares) Potential of agricultural biomass Agricultural biomass to be used
Areas of fruit trees (HPPtares) Potential of fruit trees as biomass due to the
pruning process, ktoe Distribution of fruit trees to be used to meet RESheating
objectives to be applied Distribution of biomass of fruit trees to be used TOTAL
of agricultural biomass & fruit trees to be used Table : Theoretical and
technical biomass energy potential that may be used to cover some part of
RESheating demand for the period  [55]  Solar energy potential The study “Sun in
Action” showed that there is  great potential for solar heating systems, not
only for the EU area, but practically worldwide, including participating states
in IEA countries It was also shown that  number of obstacles must be challenged
to develop the market for this consolidated technology In general, solar energy
market can be described as  market with steady growth and technology placed on
the market long time ago However, some part of the public and commercial sectors
continue to be aware of these facts and are astonished by short-term profit
objectives Therefore, industries, public and private housing companies and
public utilities, account for only  small portion of the users of installations
for solar heating systems The aim of this analysis is to describe the potential
of water heating with solar energy and the expected market growth, as well as
the main obstacles, in order to highlight opportunities to spread the use of
solar heating energy market and housing sector There have been  number of recent
important market development studies and potential of solar energy systems All
these studies have reached the same result: The market is very large and, taken
as  whole; it is growing steadily, although growth performance largely varies
from state to state These studies show that the potential of solar collectors
for the housing sector and district heating sector can be easily expressed as
very significant figure:  to  m2 solar collectors per capita The minimum value
represents warmer climates and high value the climates of Northern Europe and
Central Europe Studies also show that the number in question could go to  m2
solar collector per capita in countries with warm climate In Albania there are
excellent conditions for water heating by solar energy heating systems Annual
solar radiation is high and could theoretically provide to Albania adequate
heating water at low temperature over  period of at least (-) months The regime
of solar radiation and annual sunshine hours in Albania are shown in Figures 15
and Solar collector systems available in Albanian markets rely on electricity as
additional energy, especially during the period from November to March Also, it
is worth noting that the demand for energy for heating water in  family of
people is approximately ,500 kWh /year The need for additional energy can be
reduced by installing more effective solar panels, but as  result it will
increase the surplus of solar energy from April to September As noted from the
charts, for an average efficiency of 55% of solar systems, NUED systems can
provide up to 68% of the energy demand for water heating in Peshkopi, which goes
up to 86% in Saranda MEI during the period , assisted by the program of FGM /
UNDP "Global initiative to transform and strengthen the market for the use of
solar energy for water heating: Program for Albania", MEI has taken over many
tasks, particularly with regard to monitoring systems for solar heating
installed so far in Albania and assessment of the future market for households,
dwellings and public and private services, as well as for  number of industry
sub-sectors 6Thermal solar markets in Europe Market trends and statistics, 2009
(published in June 2010) [56] Figures 15 and 16: Solar radiation (kWh/m2 per
year) and sunny hours (hours/year) in Albania Figure 17: Potential of NUED
systems for household sector /residential buildings (m2) for each climate area
Figure 18: Potential of NUED systems for the sector of public service and
private buildings (m2) [57] 0100002000030000400005000060000700008000090000100000
11000012000013000014000015000016000020072008200920102011201220132014201520162017
201820192020Zona III Zona IIZona I0300006000090000120000150000180000210000240000
27000030000033000020072008200920102011201220132014201520162017201820192020Totali
kategorive të spitaleve, shkollave dhe ndërtesave publikeTotali  hapësirave
argëtuese dhe restoranteveTotali  hoteleve  Wind energy potential Wind energy is
used for pumping water, windmills and in recent decades the focus is shifted on
the production of electricity Machinery operated by wind energy have an
installed capacity varying from several [kW] to  [MW] and are being used
successfully in isolated areas Wind energy is  substantial potential as an
energy resource and is uniformly distributed all over the world Windmills can be
quickly installed and use  small area of land In most countries, windmill
installations face  common concern, lack of continuous measurement of wind
velocity and lack of permanent wind Figure 21: Division into areas as per the
number of annual hours of wind per average value of wind velocity Therefore,
various companies wishing to invest in this sector can hardly decide whether it
is worth investing in  particular region without these necessary data Data
obtained from different metrological stations in Albania are
conservative/approximate and not very reliable because they are not gathered
with the specific purpose of measuring wind energy (table 14 and figure 21)
There are big plans for wind energy development in Albania in the coming years
with significant investments, with  total of licensed windmills at  capacity of
1300 MW (Table 14) (licenses issued until 2010) [58] SHPEJTESIAMESTARE VJETORE
ERES (/sek)LegjendaSASIAMESTARE  OREVE ME ERE (ore/vit)Legjenda Company name
Location Installed capacity, MW HERA Ltd Bilisht Kapshticë Alb Wind Energy Ltd
Enpower Albania Ltd Ers-08 Ltd Biopower Green Energy Ltd Unione Eolika Albania
Ltd -Vento Albania Ltd TOTAL Estuary of Shkumbin, Tërpan Karaburun Llogara
Kryevidh Kavajë Shëngjin Renci Hills, Lezhë Kryevidh Kavajë Butrint Markat 150
225 500 40 230 150 72 1367 Point of connection to the transmission network
Sub/st Zemblak 400 kV 220 kV Rrashbull – Fier, 110 kV Tempan – Uznovë Sub/st 110
kV Kavajë Sub/st 110 kV Kavajë Sub/st 400 kV 220 kV Rrashbull- Fier Sub/st 150
kV Bistricë Annual GWh production Investment ( Euro) Commissi oning deadline
License granted in 330 229,037 2014 484 454,127 2013 ,369 700,000 2015 68 43,582
2013 450 250,000 2013 300 149,100 2012 65 93,000 2012 ,066 ,918,846 Novemb er
2007 January 2008 October 2008 June 2008 August 2008 August 2008 July 2008 Table
14: List of eolic parks for which license is granted for construction,
installation and generation of electricity With  view of assessing the potential
of this source, it is estimated the level of production of the eolic parks
planned for construction in Albania (Table 15) Availability of eolic park or
load factor - the percentage of time during which the wind turbines are able to
work at full-load is universally regarded as the biggest problem for wind energy
Uncertainty about the amount to be produced by an eolic park is  real challenge
The methodology of forecasting and estimating wind sources are tasks of the
experts The average annual wind measurements between , /  to   / in the
requested areas are promising The table below can show load factors typically
varying from 22% to 25% Licenses continued to be granted during the period  and
by the end of December 2014 their total in Albania roughly amounted to 2548 MW,
based on the information provided by the Ministry of Energy and Industry, with
power generation potential of about  TWh / year Albanian power system capacity
to transmit and absorb wind energy is estimated to approximately  MW  balanced
approach is required since the wind is an energy resource of low probability The
combination of wind and hydric resources is  good option Hydro-plants can be
commissioned at any time, therefore it is an excellent balancer of wind power
plants [59] Company Area Installed capacity Load factor Average effective
capacity during one year Annual GWh production (company assessment) Annual GWh
production (study assessment) HERA Ltd Alb Wind Energy Ltd Enpower Albania Ltd
Ers-08 Ltd Biopower Green Energy Ltd Unione Eolika Albania Ltd -Vento Albania
Ltd Bilisht Kapshticë Estuary of Shkumbin, Tërpan Karaburun Llogara Kryevidh
Kavajë Shëngjin Renci Hills, Lezhë Kryevidh Kavajë Kryevidh Kavajë 150 MW % 35
MW 225 MW % 46 MW 330 484 312 407 500 MW % 129 MW ,369 ,134 40 MW %  MW 230 MW %
50 MW 150 MW % 36 MW 72 MW % 17 MW 68 450 300 65 73 481 319 146 Table 15: List
of eolic parks for which license is granted for construction, installation and
generation of electricity   Geothermal energy reserves There are  variety of
geothermal resources, which can be classified into: hydrothermal springs,
streams of hot water and molten rocks Of these three groups, to date only
hydrothermal resources have been practically used in Albania Most of the time,
hydrothermal sources are geothermal energy resources that produce hot water and
are used in some countries for heating of various facilities  new technique of
using geothermal energy is the injection of cold water in deep wells of oil and
natural gas, which are already no longer used for heating Water is injected at
temperature of (-) °  and comes to the surface at  temperature of () °  In
Albania there is little hope to produce steam from geothermal sources, but there
are several hydrothermal sources at  low temperature (Table 16) [60] No
Location of hydro-thermal source Karmë-Sarandë Langaricë-Përmet Sarandapori-
Leskovik Tërvoll-Gramsh Spa Center-Elbasan Kozan-Elbasan Shupal-Elbasan
Mamurras-Krujë Peshkopi Table 16: Geothermal resources in Albania Temperature,
0C 34   24 58 57  21 35-Name of the well Ishmi-/ Kozan- Galigati- Bubullima-
Seman- Ardenica-12 Surface water temperature, 0C 60 54 45  35  The most
important geothermal resources explored to date in Albania are as follows: 
Geothermal surface of Kruja, which is the area with the largest geothermal
resources in Albania, with  surface area of 18 km length and , km width,
containing reserves within  range of 9x108-1x109 GJ  Geothermal area of
Ardenica, where water comes out from the depth at  temperature of  oC and
flowing at surface with an intake of  /  Geothermal area of Peshkopi, where
there are  number of geothermal sources located next to each other Water intake
is around  / and temperature is , oC  RER input to power generation In order to
better prepare the implementation of Directive 2009/EC, similarly to all EU
members and other Contracting Parties of CoE Treaty, Albania has conducted an
assessment of the potential available for the development of renewable energy
resources for power generation Table 10, along with tables  and  of the National
Action Plan for Renewable Energies, are used as  structure to sum up the main
findings For the energy sector, the projected installed capacity (accumulated)
(in MW) and annual production (GWh) are shown as per each individual technology
As for the hydric sector,  distinction is made between the plants at an
installed capacity of less than  MW, between  and 10 MW and above 10 MW Details
for solar energy are given separately for the inputs from power plants with
photovoltaic solar panels and those with solar energy heating systems Data on
wind energy in the sea (onshore) and on the ground (offshore) are presented
separately As for the biomass used for electricity,  distinction needs to be
made between the solid, gaseous and liquid biomass (tables and ) Figure 22
introduces the power supply provision under this study, based on different and
updated studies Furthermore, the relevant cover for each plant (including
RESplants) is given in Figures 22-[61] Figure : Historic values () of power
supply and respective projection for the period 2015- 2020 (GWh/year) (2002)
Sector  Energjisë, Energy of Strategjia Kombëtare WB-Development ish-AKE,
miratuar(2003) AKBN- Strategjia Kombëtare  Energjisë  përditësuar(2008) OST-
Zhvillimi  Masterplanit Parashikim Veprimit BRE (2015) Vlerat historike (2014)
përgatitur për riushikimin  Planit të të Shpërndarjes të Sistemit (2009) [62]
Technologies Hydro: <1MW 1MW–10 MW >10MW Solar: Photovoltaic Solar energy of
NEUD Wind: In sea On ground Biomass: 2009 2014 MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW
GWh MW GWh 2012 2010 2013 2011 19  ,460 53 24 ,900 21 18 ,460 69 32 ,743 23 26
,460 91 100 ,158 25 44 ,460 101 188 ,725 33 117 ,483 122 375 ,586 45 225 ,506
164 755 ,058 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Solid Bio-gas Biol-liquids TOTAL Of which in CHP - -
- ,488 - - - - ,200 -  - - ,499   - - ,360   - - ,509   - - ,379   - - ,529  12
- - ,552 12  - - ,633  16 - - ,701 16  - - ,777  20 - - ,793 20 Technologies
Hydro: <1MW 1MW–10 MW >10MW Solar: Photovoltaic Solar energy of NEUD Wind: In
sea On ground Biomass: 2015 2020 MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh MW GWh 2018
2016 2017 2019 48 248 ,506 185 941 ,453 50 272 ,571 195 ,035 ,713 55 315 ,571
213 ,197 ,713 60 360 ,571 232 ,368 ,713 61 369 ,834 236 ,402 ,680 67 423 ,834
259 ,607 ,680 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 50 - -  120 - -  - - - - - - - - -
- - 10 - 20 - 20 - 40 - 30 - 60 Solid Bio-gas Biol-liquids TOTAL Of which in CHP
- - - ,803 - - - - ,095 -  - - ,995   - - ,396   - - ,052   - - ,697   - - ,114
12 - - ,998 12  - - ,405  16 - - ,299 16  - - ,483  20 - - ,600 20 Table :
Estimation of the potential available in Albania for each technology of
renewable energy in the electrical energy for the period  [63] ANNEX : ENERGY
BALANCE SHEET (2009/IN KTOE) BASED ON NET CALORIFIC VALUES Energy balance sheet
of Albania for year 2009 (Source: NANR – December 2011) [64] Year 2009TOTALSolid
fuelsNatural GasCrude, NGL and FeedstockBiomass (Fuelwood)Hydro &
ElectricitySolar Energy Derived HeatPrimary production12636Recovered
products00Imports (Pet Prod+ Electricity)13Stock change5403Exports
83Bunkers000Gross inland consumption210360Transformation input80575Classic
thermal Power Stations17Public Hydro power stations44975Autoprod thermal power
stations000Nuclear power stations000Patent fuel and briquetting plants000Coke-
oven plants000Blast-furnace plants000Gas works000Refineries353697District
heating plants000Transformation output6633Classic thermal Power
Stations007Public Hydro power stations44763Autoprod thermal power
stations000Nuclear power stations000Patent fuel and briquetting plants000Coke-
oven plants000Blast-furnace plants000Gas works000Refineries3453District heating
plants0000Exchanges and transfers, returns000Interproduct transfers000Products
transferred000Returns from petrochem industry000Transformation
Losses1505Consumption of the energy branch33430Production and distribution of
electricity041Pumped storage stations000District heating plants000Extraction and
agglo of solid fuels000Coke-oven and gas works plants000Oil and Nat Gat
extraction plants2201Oil & Gas pipelines000Oil refineries1001Nuclear fuel
fabrication plants000Distribution losses (humbje jo tekn ne shpernd)00Available
for final consumption194630Final non-energy consumption7610Chemical
industry1290Other sectors6320Final energy consumption18703Industry2753Iron &
steel industry2574Non-ferrous metal industry535Chemical industry2308Glass,
pottery & building mat industry8688Ore-extraction industry1399Food, drink &
tobacco industry283Textile, leather & clothing industry1138Paper and
printing814Engineering & other metal industry623Other
industries6510Transport75444Railways300Road transport72179Air
transport1850Inland navigation1115Households, commerce, pub auth,
etc65Households48700Agriculture9421Fisheries2500Other 12Statistical
difference248- ANNEX II: ENERGY BALANCE SHEET (2014/IN KTOE) BASED ON NET
CALORIFIC VALUES Energy balance sheet of Albania for year 2013 (Source: NANRF –
May 2015) [65] Year 2014TOTALSolid fuelsNatural GasCrude, NGL and
FeedstockBiomass (Fuelwood)Hydro & ElectricitySolar Energy Derived HeatPrimary
production20211Recovered products00Imports (Pet Prod+ Electricity)54Stock
change30754Exports 78Bunkers2700Gross inland consumption233910Transformation
input76730Classic thermal Power Stations00000Public Hydro power
stations40630Autoprod thermal power stations0000Nuclear power stations000 Patent
fuel and briquetting plants000Coke-oven plants000Blast-furnace plants000Gas
works000Refineries36100District heating plants000Transformation
output6635Classic thermal Power Stations000Public Hydro power
stations40480Autoprod thermal power stations000Nuclear power stations000Patent
fuel and briquetting plants000Coke-oven plants000Blast-furnace plants000Gas
works000Refineries3363District heating plants0000Exchanges and transfers,
returns000Interproduct transfers000Products transferred000Returns from petrochem
industry000Transformation Losses272Consumption of the energy
branch598300Production and distribution of electricity033Pumped storage
stations000District heating plants000Extraction and agglo of solid fuels28Coke-
oven and gas works plants000Oil and Nat Gat extraction plants2720Oil & Gas
pipelines000Oil refineries28500Nuclear fuel fabrication plants000Distribution
losses (humbje jo tekn ne shpernd)00Available for final consumption215760Final
non-energy consumption8749Chemical industry033Other sectors8717Final energy
consumption20696Industry4176Iron & steel industry10419Non-ferrous metal
industry616Chemical industry1803Glass, pottery & building mat industry15166Ore-
extraction industry706Food, drink & tobacco industry576Textile, leather &
clothing industry1812Paper and printing1112Engineering & other metal
industry700Other industries3540Transport815000Railways210Road transport77930Air
transport091Inland navigation3367Households, commerce, pub auth,
etc00Households54638Agriculture7990Fisheries3404Other 00Statistical
difference000 ANNEX III: FEED-IN TARIFFS FOR WIND-POWER PLANT TECHNOLOGIES AND
PHOTOVOLTAIC PLANTS IN DIFFERENT COUNTRIES Feed-in tariffs for wind power plants
For many REStechnologies in general and wind power plants in particular,
specific costs of energy generation in MWh vary according to the plant size;
this is typical for small and large wind turbines etc Almost all EU candidate
and non-candidate countries apply feed-in tariffs at different levels of
remuneration, mainly based on the plant size within these technologies By
applying this approach, due account can be taken of the low/high energy
generation costs due to scale economies / non-economies The range of prices can
be too high for different capacities installed Figure  introduces  comparison of
wind power plants in different countries and according to different sizes Figure
: Comparison of feed-in tariffs for wind power plants for different countries
and different sizes (€ cent/kWh) The projects of wind power plants require high
initial investments; therefore CAPEX projection is highly critical Figure
introduces the results for feed-in tariffs for wind power plants, based on the
average feed-in tariffs (retrieved from figure ) for installations of wind power
plants at  higher capacity Figure : Comparison of feed-in tariffs for wind power
plants for different countries and average capacities (€ cent/kWh) [66] Feed-in
tariffs for PV plants For  number of REStechnologies in general and PV plants in
particular, the specific costs of power generation per MWh vary as per the plant
size This is typical for PV plants, solar power plants, biomass and biogas,
geothermal plants, small wind power plants etc Almost all EU candidate and non-
candidate countries apply feed-in tariffs at different compensation rates,
mainly on the basis of plant size within these technologies By applying this
approach, due account can be taken of the low/high power production costs, due
to scale economies/non-economies The range of prices may be too high In Germany,
for solar power plants with  capacity between 500 kW and  MW, the tariff level
varies from 130 to 80 €/MWh, while the United Kingdom falls within another
extreme category, with  feed-in tariff starting from 61 €/MWh for  MW up to270
€/MWh for 15 kW plants Figure  introduces  comparison of feed-in tariffs for PV
solar power plants for different countries and plant sizes Figure : Comparison
of feed-in tariffs for the PV solar plants for different countries and different
sizes (€ cent/kWh) Figure  shows the average feed-in tariffs (retrieved from
figure ) for PV plants with an average installed capacity (PV plants of  kW)
Figure 30: Comparison of feed-in tariffs for the PV solar plants for different
countries and average capacity (€ cent/kWh) [67]