United Nations Development Program – Solar Water Heating System Project: Albania
Country Program (Project ID 00062827) Solar Thermal Obligations for Public
Buildings in the Municipality of Tirana September 2013 CONTENTS Abbreviations
and Acronyms   Solar Thermal Obligation for the Municipality of Tirana
Definitions   Objectives of the Tirana Municipality Solar Thermal Obligation
(STO)   Scope of the Tirana Municipality STO   Quantification of the Tirana
Municipality STO   Quality Requirements of the Tirana Municipality STO  10
Design and specification of the SWH systems  10 Installation and commissioning
of SWH systems  11 Maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems  12 Municipal
Targets for Solar Water Heating in Public Buildings  14 Annexes  16 Annex  –
Method for calculating the SHW thermal load  16 Annex II – Steps for designing
SWH system in the scope of the Tirana Municipality STO  17 Annex III –
Curriculum for the training and coaching program for certification of SWH
systems designers  17 Annex IV – Structure of the document to be produced by the
SWH systems designer when designing systems in the scope of the Tirana
Municipality STO  19 Annex  – Curriculum for the training and coaching program
for certification of SWH systems installers 20 Annex VI – Guidelines for
developing the SWH systems preventive maintenance plan  21 Annex VII –
Guidelines for developing the SWH systems monitoring plan  23 Annex VIII –
Evaluation grid for the course of SWH systems designers  23 Annex Ix –
Evaluation grid for the course of SWH systems installers  23 Annex  – Check‐list
for information collection in the scope of the SWH systems design  23 Annex XI –
Grounds for developing  Solar Thermal Obligation in the Municipality of Tirana
26 Municipal Vision of  Solar Water Heating framework  27 Key Challenges  28
General recommendations  29   vision of EU Standards on STO  30 The scope of
STO  31 Quantifying the Obligation  31 Quality Requirements  36 Architectonic
Issues and Protected Buildings  38 Supervision of the STO  39 References  42
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS EE ‐ Energy Efficiency GHG – Green House Gases MoT –
Municipality of Tirana MV& – Monitoring, Verification and Enforcement NPV ‐ Net
Present Value NZEB – Nearly Zero Energy Building RES – Renewable Energy Sources
SF – Solar Fraction SHW – Sanitary Hot Waters STO – Solar Thermal Obligation SWH
– Solar Water Heating TL – Thermal Load UNDP – United Nations Development
Program  SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION FOR THE MUNICIPALITY OF TIRANA The importance
of the SWH and all to it relevant concerns have been recognised on the national
level SWH is one of the most promising technologies to reduce electricity and
fuel wood consumption in Albania with  significant contribution towards GHG gas
emissions reduction The Global Solar Water Heating Market Transformation and
Strengthening Initiative: Albania Country Programme, funded by the Global
Environment Facility and implemented by UNDP, under the National Execution
Modality, addresses the most common barriers to solar water heating development:
policy and regulations, finance, business skills, information, and technology
The UNDP Project will give  contribution regarding the creation and drafting of
all SWH bylaws of governmental decrees The Energy Efficiency (EE) Center has
taken the initiative to develop an initiative aiming at raising the awareness of
Municipal staff in what regards the benefits of EE in buildings It would be
important to have these activities integrated and co‐ordinated since they all
have the same purpose – save energy, raise competitiveness and avoid polluting
emissions According to the National Energy Strategy and Albania’ First National
Communication and Technology Needs Assessment, over 70% of domestic hot water
needs of the household and service sector in Albania is supplied by electric
boilers, while the energy demand for hot water in Albania was projected to grow
from 600 GWh in 2000 to 875 GWh in 2015, in the residential sector alone The
objectives of Albania energy policy are competitiveness, security of supply and
sustainability The Law, No 138 on Renewable Energy Sources (RES), endorsed by
the Albanian Government, recognises the important role of Albanian
municipalities in taking the lead in making solar water heating as  standard
solution for all new public buildings and those going through major renovations
DEFINITIONS Amplification – the intervention in one existing building that aims
at adding  new body, section or floor and that has the consequence of augmenting
the useful pavement surface Annual solar energy (design) – it is the energy
expressed in units of final energy, supplied by the SWH system, according with
the design methodology and estimation method used Annual solar energy (measured)
– it is the energy expressed in units of final energy, supplied by the SWH
system, according with the information made available by the use of an energy
management system Measured in the boundaries of the primary circuit of the SWH
system, , before and after the heat exchanger Appropriate solar exposition – is
the existing roof, in terrace or sloped surface, the latter with  perpendicular
oriented in  range of azimuths of 90º between south‐east and south‐west, that
are  not shaded by significant obstacles in the period initiating everyday two
hours after sunshine and finishing two hours before sunset Autonomous fraction –
it is  section, floor or apartment within  building which is designed or altered
to be used separately Building – in the scope of this STO, it is either the
whole part of  property or one of its autonomous fractions Energy management
system – it is an electronic system, composed of hardware and software, used for
managing the SWH system, including, the supervision, monitoring, command of the
system and its components and the quantification of the energy collected and
made useful by the SWH system Energy mix – is the distribution in percentage
terms of the primary energy sources for producing electricity at the national
level This value varies every year, namely in function of the annual hydropower
generation capacity Envelope – it is  building component that defines the
boundary between the internal and external space It is closely related with the
architecture and construction of the “skin” of the building but depends also of
the physical relations between the “skin” of the building, its structure and the
other constructive elements Final energy – is the energy made available to users
under different forms (electricity, natural gas, propane, butane, diesel,
gasoline, and biomass) and expressed in units with commercial meaning (kWh, Nm3,
kg) Large rehabilitation – the intervention in the envelope or in the technical
installations (energetic or not) of one existing building, that should not
result in the erection of  new body or section and which has an estimated cost
superior to 25% of the value of the building, excluding the value of the
terrain, in the conditions defined in the relevant legislation Monitoring – in
the scope of this STO, it is the accompanying of the SWH system by following
program of regular and periodic readings and registries of pertinent
characteristic parameters This activity can be executed continuously in real
time or periodically Municipal energetic matrix – it is  quantitative
representation of all the available energy, in  region under administration of
Municipality, which can be used for all the productive processes It is essential
for the orientation of energy‐sector planners in their mission of ensuring
production, security of supply and rational use of energy The municipal energy
matrix details the energetic profile of the Municipality, separated by activity
sectors and energy use typologies It also details the group of energy forms or
vectors of each sub ‐sector and or energy use typology The pollution potential
of each subsector or energy use typology can be done by correlating the energy
matrix with the carbon emissions matrix The carbon emissions matrix, reflects
the corresponding emissions of each sub‐sector or energy use typology The
pollution potential of each subsector or energy use typology can be indicated in
terms of the result of dividing tonnes of carbon by the tonnes of oil equivalent
It is important to refer the difference between the calculation of carbon
emissions, taking into account the final energy matrix or the primary energy
matrix From the global perspective, it is more correct to calculate the carbon
emissions through the primary energy matrix, because, in that situation, the
inefficiencies of the power generation  and distribution systems can be
included, as well as the inefficiencies of the various fuels for processing the
distribution Nearly Zero‐Energy Building – is  building that has  very high
energy performance, as determined in accordance with Annex  of the EU Energy
Performance Buildings Directive (recast) The nearly zero or very low amount of
energy required should be covered to  very significant extent by energy from
renewable sources, including energy from renewable sources produced on‐ site or
nearby Nominal primary energy global needs – it is the parameter that expresses
the quantity of primary energy that corresponds to the pondered sum of the
nominal useful energy‐needs for heating, cooling and production of sanitary hot
waters, taking into account the adopted systems or, in the absence of their
respective definition, conventional reference systems, and the current
utilization patterns of those systems Nominal useful energy‐needs for cooling –
it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of useful energy needed annually
to maintain  building or an autonomous fraction with  reference internal
temperature during the cooling season Nominal useful energy‐needs for heating –
it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of useful energy needed annually
to maintain  building or an autonomous fraction with  reference internal
temperature during the heating season Nominal useful energy‐needs for producing
sanitary hot waters – it is the parameter that expresses the quantity of useful
energy needed to heat the annual average reference sanitary water volume to
temperature of 60 ºC Preventive maintenance plan ‐  set of maintenance tasks and
activities that are recommended for each component and part of the SWH system,
taking into consideration the good practice of the professional category, the
manufacturers instructions and the specific applicable regulations Primary
circuit – is the hydraulic closed circuit of  SWH system that makes the
transportation of the solar thermal energy, collected in the solar collectors,
to the sanitary hot water storage tank() Primary energy – is the energetic
resource that is found available in nature (petroleum, natural gas, hydro
energy, wind energy, biomass and solar) and is expressed generally in units of
equivalent mass of petroleum (tonnes of oil equivalent) There are forms of
primary energy (natural gas, wood, Sun) that can also be made available directly
to the final users, being coincident in those cases to final energy Renewable
energy – is the energy with origin in, the Sun (used under the form of light,
thermal energy or photovoltaic electricity, of biomass, wind and waves), in the
Earth (geothermic) and in the gravitational effect of the Moon and Sun (tides)
Roofing surface – is the surface, measured from the inside, of the opaque
elements of the envelope, horizontal or with an inclination inferior to 60º that
separates superiorly the useful space from the exterior or from non‐useful
adjacent spaces  Sanitary hot water – is potable water at  temperature higher
than 45 ºC used for showers, cleaning, cooking, washing and other specific uses,
prepared in an appropriate device and using conventional and, or, renewable
energy sources Secondary circuit – is the hydraulic open circuit that ensures
the supply and heating of fresh water to the final consumption The heating
process happens with the heat exchange between the primary and secondary
circuits, generally with support of an internal or external (to the storage
tank) heat exchanger Solar fraction – is the proportion, in percentage terms, of
the thermal load that is satisfied by the SWH system Thermal load – is the
energy, in units of final energy, needed to satisfy the nominal useful energy‐
needs for producing sanitary hot waters Useful pavement surface – is the sum of
the surfaces, measured in plan from the inside perimeter of the walls, of all
the compartments of an autonomous fraction of  building, including dressing
rooms, internal circulations, sanitary installations, internal sheds and other
compartments of similar function and built‐in wardrobes OBJECTIVES OF THE TIRANA
MUNICIPALITY SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION (STO) By building on the provisions of the
RES law (Law No 138 ON RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES), the Municipal STO aims at
making solar thermal applications as  common and obligatory component for all
new public buildings and those going through large rehabilitation in the area of
Tirana Municipality The Tirana Municipality STO and respective accessory
standards aims also at defining:  The specific type of buildings subject to this
obligation (or which should be exempted from this obligation on technical or
cost‐efficiency grounds);  The minimum technical and quality requirements
applicable for SWH systems, in three phases of their overall life‐cycle:  ii iii
design/specification installation/commissioning operation  The minimum technical
qualifications applicable to SWH designers and installers and the contents to
include in specific vocational training and certification schemes for these two
professional categories;  The timeframes for the objectives and targets SCOPE OF
THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY STO  All the public buildings under the jurisdiction of
the Municipality of Tirana, in which sanitary hot water needs were identified,
are in the scope of this STO, with the exception  of those public buildings
under the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Tirana referred in point number
This STO applies to all buildings referred in point  regardless of their age, ,
it applies to new buildings and existing buildings  For  complete understanding
of the point number , in the scope of this STO, the following applies:  New
buildings are buildings being erected for the first time or amplifications of
existing buildings  Existing buildings are buildings that:  Will be subjected to
large rehabilitation and, or, an amplification ii Have energy systems for
producing sanitary hot water that will be replaced and, or, rehabilitated
Public buildings exempted from this STO are:  Buildings used as places of
worship and for religious activities  Temporary buildings  Buildings which have
permanently no appropriate solar exposition and that are, therefore, impeded of
receiving  profitable SWH system  Historically protected buildings (, monuments)
The Municipality of Tirana shall extend the scope of this STO to non‐public
buildings through  governmental order to be published by the Municipality of
Tirana/the Ministry responsible for Energy QUANTIFICATION OF THE TIRANA
MUNICIPALITY STO The quantification of the STO follows an approach based on the
principle that  minimum percentage of the thermal load shall be covered by the
SWH system  In all buildings included in the scope of the STO, considering that
there is an appropriate solar exposition, the annual solar fraction of the SWH
systems shall be at least 55%, as an average over the annual expected
consumption  The thermal load shall be calculated through the method described
in Annex   The Tirana Municipality STO shall have  simulation software tool, to
support the design of the SWH systems In particular, the referred simulation
software tool shall be able to provide information regarding:  The collecting
area (number of collectors) of  given SWH system, based on the specification of:
the daily thermal load ii the annual utilization of the system iii the storage
tank() iv the heat exchanger  the solar collectors vi the solar collectors
orientation and inclination  The solar fraction of  given SWH system
configuration   The annual energy supplied by the SWH system  The only argument
for the designer to not comply with the point number  is an argument related
with the absence of, available roofing surface (due to the occupation with other
energy systems) and, or, appropriate solar exposition In this case the solar
fraction may be reduced to  limit of 35% QUALITY REQUIREMENTS OF THE TIRANA
MUNICIPALITY STO The implementation of  STO in  community or country introduces
significant alterations in the local solar thermal market Without appropriate
measures of quality assurance, low quality installations may occur frequently To
ensure persistence of the solar energy gains and to amplify the acceptance of
the Municipal STO and of the solar thermal technology, strict requirements must
be verified in the following stages of  SWH system, under this STO DESIGN AND
SPECIFICATION OF THE SWH SYSTEMS  project with insufficiencies may force the
installer to assume the responsibility of defining details of the installation,
for which he is generally not qualified This may lead to the making of decisions
that may compromise the functioning of the SWH system On the other hand, the
lack of clear and objective specifications may encourage the use of more
economic equipment and components, generally with doubtful quality, raising the
risks of reliability and contributing to low availability levels of the system
and loss of credibility of the technology The design of all SWH systems under
the scope of this STO must be developed by certified SWH systems designers The
design and specification of all SWH systems under the scope of this STO,
including the respective components, must follow the steps defined in the Annex
II of this STO The certification process of the SWH system designers, referred
in the point number 10, will be defined in  governmental order to be published
by the Municipality of Tirana/the Ministry responsible for Energy, and will
consist in the evaluation of the professional competence of individual
candidates, taking into account the performance of the individual candidate in
designing and specifying  SWH system, defined and attributed to him, in the
scope of  training and coaching program The training and coaching program
referred in point number 12 shall be based in the curriculum indicated in Annex
III, which includes professional development in security aspects, commissioning,
maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems The training and coaching program
referred in point number 12 shall be developed, adapted and delivered for the
following two different stages:  Initially, to train and certify the first
frontrunners, ,  training of trainers In this case the evaluation will be based
on the performance of individual candidates during:  the referred training and
coaching program; and 10 ii the first experience of delivering  course to
certify SWH systems designers (,  mentoring session to evaluate and improve
training skills);  In the following editions, to train and certify the SWH
designers The specification of the SWH systems components shall take into
consideration the need to choose components with  recognized and accepted
certification In this sense, solar collectors chosen for SWH systems, under the
scope of this STO, must have certification Solar Keymark, and the other main
components (, storage tanks, circulation units, piping accessories and safety
equipment) must have the mark CE For all the SWH systems developed in the scope
of this STO, there should exist  document containing all the relevant
information that can serve as:  The basis for understanding between the owner
and the technician responsible by its definition  Provide grounded estimates and
transparent information regarding the economical and environmental evaluation of
the project  Give orientation to the installer in the execution phase; and
Support the clarification and allocation of responsibility in the case that the
installation presents deficiencies and, or, malfunctioning The document referred
in the number 16 is of the responsibility of the certified SWH designer It
should be in  complete version before the procurement process of the SWH system
and should have  structure that addresses, at least, the points indicated in
Annex IV of this STO INSTALLATION AND COMMISSIONING OF SWH SYSTEMS The
installation stage of SWH systems has been, in several European countries,
stage when many mistakes that endanger the reliability and durability of the
installations occur On the other hand the essay of all components and
fine‐tuning of their respective working parameters, before entering in
operation, helps to adapt the system to the concrete operational context and to
the technical conditions that optimizes the systems’ performance This STO aims
at avoiding the concretization of performance risks in the several stages of
SWH system life‐time The installation and commissioning of all SWH systems under
the scope of this STO must be executed by certified SWH systems Installers The
certification process of SWH system Installers and commissioning technicians
will be defined in  governmental order to be published by the Municipality of
Tirana/the Ministry responsible for Energy, and will consist in the evaluation
of the professional competence of individual candidates, taking into account the
performance of the individual candidate in performing the activities foreseen in
specific training and coaching program The training and coaching program
referred in point number 19 shall be based in the curriculum indicated in Annex
, which includes also professional development in security aspects, maintenance
and monitoring of SWH systems The training and coaching program referred in
point number 19 shall be developed, adapted and delivered for the following two
different stages: 11  Initially, to train and certify the first frontrunners, ,
training of trainers In this case the evaluation will be based on the
performance of individual candidates during:  the referred training and coaching
program; and ii the first experience of delivering  course to certify SWH
systems installers (,  mentoring session to evaluate and improve training
skills);  In the following editions, to train and certify the SWH installers
MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING OF SWH SYSTEMS Nowadays SWH systems are planned to
have  useful life of about 20 years Maintenance of SWH systems is  key success
factor for assuring high levels of reliability, availability, maintainability
and security of those systems On the other hand, in some cultures the energy
performance of an energy system is not always related to its reliability To
overcome this issue it is important to establish, in parallel with  preventative
maintenance plan,  monitoring plan to have  notion of how is our system
performing Monitoring plans of SWH installations under the scope of  STO are
also important to ensure the supply of information to the STO administration
entity Resulting information of  monitoring plan can help characterize the
success of the STO or, in case the SWH installations under the STO are being
financed or co‐financed by public funds, of how those public funds are being
used All the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO must have, at the
beginning of their operation,  preventive maintenance plan proposed by the
certified SWH designer that was responsible for the design The existence of this
preventive maintenance plan is  necessary condition to the emission of the
building permit by the competent authority The preventive maintenance plan
referred in the point number 22 should be developed according with the
guidelines indicated in point number 24 and in the Annex VI of this STO The
preventive maintenance plan should be adapted to the specific operational
context, of the SWH system, by the entity or individual responsible for assuming
the responsibility of the services contract referred in the point number The
preventive maintenance plan shall include, at least, the identification of:  The
installation and its location, , building address  The contacts of the
technician responsible for the design or maintenance, and, or the maintenance
contract manager  The function of the SWH system  The expected number of users
The solar collecting area, in reference to the aperture area of solar collectors
The characteristics and specifications of the main components (circulation kit,
storage tank(), collectors, thermal fluid)  The detailed description of the
maintenance and cleaning tasks and their respective periodicities 12  The
detailed description of procedures for troubleshooting, in relation the most
common failure modes of SWH systems  The registry of the maintenance operations
and alterations to the installation performed, including the name of the
technician who performed said operations, the results of executing the
procedures and other eventual pertinent comments  The definition of the
parameters to be read and registered for construction of the maintenance
historic registry The preventive maintenance plan of the SWH systems under the
scope of this STO, shall foresee the need to, access to and intervene in, all
the constituting equipment and components for maintenance purposes In  sheltered
technical area of the SWH system there should be, easily accessible:  an updated
unifilar diagram of the SWH system   copy of the design document  operating
instructions  emergency instructions The entities and, or individuals
responsible for assuming the responsibility of the services contract referred in
the point number 30, must be able to demonstrate, at any time, that they possess
the professional aptitude in the scope of this STO, ,  professional SWH systems
designer and, or installer certificate, to perform the corresponding activities
All the SWH systems developed in the scope of this STO must have  monitoring
plan Said monitoring plan must define responsibilities for:  Data acquisition
Data registry in the maintenance folder of the SWH system  Submission of data to
the administrating entity of this STO The definition of the monitoring plan
should follow the guidelines indicated in Annex VII All the SWH systems
developed in the scope of this STO must be, since the beginning of their
operation, subjected to  services contract for:  Executing the preventive
maintenance plan referred in point number 22  Executing any other activity
related with the reliability assurance of the system (, corrective maintenance,
fine‐tuning to improve performance, satisfy legal warranties over deficiencies
in the installation)  Monitoring the installation in accordance with the
monitoring plan mentioned in point number 28, and  Keeping guard and managing
the resulting information of both, the preventive maintenance plan and the
monitoring plan (, maintenance and performance historic of the installation) The
services contract referred in the number 30 should be established with the
following entities, listed in order of preference:  The entity or individual
responsible for the installation of the SWH system  The entity or individual
responsible for the design of the SWH system  Any other entity or individual
possessing  certification of installer and, or, designer of SWH systems as
mentioned in this STO The activities in the scope of the services contract
referred in the point number 30 are of the responsibility of the services
supplier However, the contracting authority 13 (Municipality of Tirana) as
administrator of this STO and owner of the buildings in which the SWH systems
will be installed and working, should include in its management activities
procedures for monitoring the quality of the services provided by these service
providers MUNICIPAL TARGETS FOR SOLAR WATER HEATING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS The
Municipality of Tirana shall start implementing this STO in The Municipality of
Tirana shall define, document and implement, until the end of 2013, action plans
to achieve the objectives and targets of this STO The Municipality of Tirana
shall define and document, until the end of February 2014, the time frames for
extension of this STO to private buildings, , private residential and non‐
residential buildings The Municipality of Tirana shall define and document,
until the end of February 2014:  The appropriate allocation of resources (human,
technical and financial) and responsibilities (who does what) to put in place
the operational and instrumental structures of the Municipal STO, including
those needed for the supervision of this STO  The precise way by which the SWH
systems designers and installers will be qualified and certified This shall
include:  the approval of the training and coaching programs and curriculums ii
the approval of the processes for recognition of competencies, rights and
obligations of those new professional categories iii the indication of the
entities responsible for creating, developing and managing this qualification
and professional aptitude certification process iv the annual scheduling of
training and coaching courses to qualify and certify SWH designers and
installers  The precise way by which the SWH systems will be simulated, as
referred in the point number  of this STO  The precise way by which the
procurement, acquisition and final reception of SWH systems, to be installed in
Public Buildings, will occur This shall include the rules, procedures and the
needed documentation  The precise way by which the SWH systems will be licensed
Monitoring, Verification & Enforcement (MV&) plan to supervise and ensure the
integrity of this STO This MV& plan shall not collide with the actual related
procedures (, licensing) and shall be defined in  cost‐effective manner, ,
ensuring the rational use of Municipal technical, human and financial resources
The appropriate flanking measures to maximize the promotion and dissemination of
information regarding this STO and the benefits of SWH technologies, :
Campaigns ii Municipal knowledge centre iii Training of Municipal Staff in MV&
activities inherent to this STO  The appropriate sanctionary regime to be
applied in case of nonfulfilment 14  The motivations and causes that conduce to
the need of revising and altering this STO This statement for the revision of
the STO shall have  periodicity referred in it The Municipality of Tirana shall
ensure, by the end of April 2014:  The training of the implicated Municipal
staff in performing the MV& activities needed to ensure the integrity of this
STO The Municipality of Tirana shall ensure, by 15 July 2014:  The existence of
team of certified Trainers, able to qualify and certify individual candidates
for the programmes of SWH design and installation, using the curriculums
foreseen in the Annexes III and  of this STO and the mentoring process referred
in point number ii  The existence of results of the first training courses, for
designers and installers, after the Training of Trainers referred in the point
number  15 ANNEXES ANNEX  – METHOD FOR CALCULATING THE SHW THERMAL LOAD The
daily thermal load is calculated by using the following expression: DailyTherm
alLoad   ( *   *)   shw *   / 1000 [kWh] Where: Vshw – is the reference daily
average sanitary hot water (SHW) consumption in [liters] ρw – is the density of
water, 988 [kg/liter] cw – is the specific heat capacity of water, 163 [Wh/kg*]
∆ – is the increase of tap water temp for the preparation of SHW ( from 15ºC to
45 ºC) For dimensioning the SWH system, the daily thermal load is expected to be
the same in every day where there is consumption of SHW For the purpose of
calculating the reference daily average SHW consumption
((cid:1839)(cid:3046)(cid:3035)(cid:3050)), for  given type of building, the
following values should be used: Table  – Reference values of SHW consumption
for several types of buildings, [] Type of building Residential Hospitals School
Hotel ***** Hotel **** Hotel *** Hotel ** Hotel * Elderly or students house
Military facilities Gymnasium (showers) Laundry Restaurant Canteen Sanitary Hot
Water daily consumption (60 ºC) 40 50‐65  90 70 55 40 35 55 20 25‐35 ‐ ‐12
Units /capita /bed /capita /bed /bed /bed /bed /bed /bed /capita /capita /kg
cloths /meal /meal The increase in tap water temperature to prepare the SHW
(∆(cid:1846)) shall have the reference value of 45 ºC This value results from
two considerations: ) ii) The annual average temperature of the water coming
from the public grid is 15 ºC The temperature at which the SHW must be warmed up
is 60 ºC 16 ANNEX II – STEPS FOR DESIGNING  SWH SYSTEM IN THE SCOPE OF THE
TIRANA MUNICIPALITY STO It is suggested that the design of SWH systems is made
by realizing the following sequence of activities:  Collecting information
about the building, the hot water needs and the expectations of the building
owner, regarding the SWH system to produce This activity can be carried out by
using the check‐list provided in Annex  of this STO  Simulating the SWH system
in  software simulation tool as referred in point number  of this STO, ,
quantify the collecting surface, the solar fraction and the annual solar energy
obtainable  Define the line‐up of the collectors and the physical
characteristics of the primary circuit  Define the filling pressure of the
primary circuit, specify the safety components and define their location in the
circuit  Define the SWH system configuration (technical drawing, identification
of components and map of quantities)  Define the backup system  Calculate the
economical and environmental viability of the installation (ROI, NPV)  Describe
the sequence of activities for the installation execution  Describe the
procedures for final cleaning and commissioning of the SWH system ANNEX III –
CURRICULUM FOR THE TRAINING AND COACHING PROGRAM FOR CERTIFICATION OF SWH
SYSTEMS DESIGNERS The proposed programmatic content is expected to respond to
the training needs of professionals that are willing to become specialized in
the design of SWH systems of medium‐ and large‐size The proposed curriculum will
deliver  level of knowledge to participants such that, since the beginning of
the definition of the system, there will be the potential to condition the
operation, the cost, the durability, the performance and the maintenance cost of
the installation The certification process of SWH designers initiates with the
candidacy of the individual candidates There will be no pre‐requisites The
training and coaching program consists of seven () days in class Four () days
will be used to deliver knowledge from the trainer to the participants The three
() last days will be used to initiate and elaborate on the practice exercise, ,
designing with support of the trainer  medium‐size SWH system according with the
information contained in Annex II and Annex IV of this STO After the seven ()
days in class, totalling 56 hours, the participants will have 10 useful days to
complete the SWH system design and the document referred in the number The final
work will be subjected to the evaluation of the trainer The participant will
have two opportunities to see his work evaluated The evaluation will be made
objectively and taking into account the evaluation grid included in Annex VIII
If the first evaluation delivers  classification inferior to 85%, the
participant will receive his work with written comments in relation to the parts
that 17 were not well done If it is superior to 85%, the participant is approved
as certified SWH systems designer under the scope of this STO If, after the
second evaluation, the classification is again below 85%, the participant will
not be approved as certified SWH designer in the scope of this STO Participant
can always try more times but will have to initiate the process from the
beginning If approved, the participant will become habilitated to:  Design
installations for SWH in global terms and in relation to all of its constituting
elements  Make critical analysis of projects  Elaborate the budget to execute
the project  Define and plan the program of works and activities in relation to
all stages of the project development  Elaborate the plans for, production,
installation, commissioning, maintenance and monitoring of  SWH system The
programmatic content of the training and coaching program for certification of
SWH systems designers is as follows:  Basics of solar energy collection and
storage (elementary physics / fundamentals of hydraulic circuits / solar
radiation)  Fundamentals of solar thermal energy (relative movement Earth‐Sun /
study of shades / detailed study of components / thermodynamic analysis of
solar collector) Legislation and technical standards   Types of systems 
Check‐list for information collection – Aspects to include for several types of
buildings  Choice of storage capacity(ies)  Choice of collectors  SOLTERM
software tool (Determination of collecting area / determination of Solar
Fraction)  Displacement and interconnection of collectors  Primary circuit
dimensioning (validation of commercial diameters / pressure loss calculations /
circulating pump / heat exchangers dimensioning)  Charging pressure of the
primary circuit and security equipment selection  Overall configuration of the
system (single line diagram / location of safety components / map of quantities
/ working principle description and function of components / control of the
system)  Back‐up system  Economical and environmental evaluation of SWH
systems  Installation execution (schedule of activities / schedule of
inspections / acceptance criteria)  Failure modes of  SWH system  Maintenance
and monitoring of SWH systems  Security related with SWH systems operation and
installation  Generalities on procurement of SWH systems installations 
Project practical exercise 18 The pedagogic methodology of the training and
coaching program for certification of SWH systems designers is as follows:  The
contents are presented in power point format with oral exposition and will be
distributed to participants in hard copy  The project practical exercise,
initiated in class and finished in the participant’ premises, is developed
according with the format indicated in Annex IV and submitted by ‐mail to an
address defined by the entity managing the certification process, before the
deadline indicated in this Annex In the end of the training and coaching
program, the approved participants will receive  certificate, attributed by the
National Agency for Natural Resources, which will confer them the professional
aptitude to design SWH systems As  result of this process  list of certified SWH
systems designers will be created and maintained accessible to the interested
parties on the internet site of the Municipality of Tirana/National Agency for
Natural Resources The training and coaching course is  presential course and
implies the presence of participants in at least 90% of the total number of
hours (56) ANNEX IV – STRUCTURE OF THE DOCUMENT TO BE PRODUCED BY THE SWH
SYSTEMS DESIGNER WHEN DESIGNING SYSTEMS IN THE SCOPE OF THE TIRANA MUNICIPALITY
STO The document to be produced for the purpose of satisfying the point number
15 of this STO shall have the following structure:              path)
Introduction Building description Initial information supplied by client Hot
water consumptions / demand Additional information resuting from the visit and
inquiry (use of check‐list) Simulation program (, SOLTERM) Choosing the hot
water storage tanks Choosing the collectors Simulating the system – Calculation
of collecting area and annual solar energy Collectors’ arrangement and primary
circuit characteristics Primary circuit mass and volumetric flow Diameters of
the piping network (validation of commercial diameter) Pressure loss in the
primary circuit – piping and accessories (identification of the critical Heat
exchanger thermal power Primary circuit circulation pump Primary circuit
pressure and definition of security equipment/components Security equipment and
components Loading pressure of the primary circuit Configuration of the SWH
system Single‐line diagram (with precise location and identification of
accessoories) 19 Detailed description of components (map of quantities and
commercial reference of Control system and system’ working principle (monitoring
parameters and control Collector’ security temperature Backup system Source of
energy for backup system Technical characteristics and interconnection with SWH
system Control of backup system and working principle (monitoring parameters and
control Installation’ viability Acquisition budget Installation budget Avoided
energy costs Simple payback; Net present value; Internal rate of return
Environmental benefit of the installation Execution of the installation Schedule
for execution of works List of equipment suppliers (collectors, storage tanks,
hydraulic groups, …) List of installers (companies) that can be invited to bid
List of tools to be used in the installation execution (referring the utility
and function) Maintenance program and plan (actions, verification parameters and
respective  accessories)  conditions)      conditions)             periodicity)
10 Annexo  – Building plants (technical drawings) Anexo II – Check‐list used for
information collection Annex III – Simulation reports Annex IV – Calculations
spreadsheet Annex  – Equipment catalogues Market consultation procedure
(including parameters evaluation and selection criteria) Installations’
provisional acceptance criteria Annex ANNEX  – CURRICULUM FOR THE TRAINING AND
COACHING PROGRAM FOR CERTIFICATION OF SWH SYSTEMS INSTALLERS The proposed
programmatic content is expected to respond to the training needs of
professionals that are willing to become specialized in the installation of SWH
systems The proposed curriculum will deliver  level of knowledge to participants
such that, there will be the potential to condition the operation, the cost, the
durability, the performance and the maintenance cost of the installation
Furthermore,  large focus on the safety of the installation activities will be
given so that accidents can be minimized The certification process of SWH
installers initiates with the candidacy of the individual candidates There will
be no pre‐requisites The training and coaching program consists of seven () days
Four () days will be used to deliver knowledge, in class, from the trainer to
the participants The three () last days will be used to visit existing and
selected installations so that  real perception of good and bad practices can be
made 20 After the seven () days, totalling 56 hours, the participants will have
10 useful days to complete the SWH system installation exam The final work will
be subjected to the evaluation of the trainer The participant will have two
opportunities to see his work evaluated The evaluation will be made objectively
and taking into account the evaluation grid included in Annex IX If the first
evaluation delivers  classification inferior to 85%, the participant will
receive his work with written comments in relation to the parts that were not
well done If it is superior to 85%, the participant is approved as certified SWH
systems installer under the scope of this STO If, after the second evaluation,
the classification is again below 85%, the participant will not be approved as
certified SWH designer in the scope of this STO Participant can always try more
times but will have to initiate the process from the beginning If approved, the
participant will become habilitated to:  Execute installations of SWH systems
of all sizes  Elaborate the plans for, production, installation, commissioning,
maintenance and monitoring of  SWH system  Take the responsibility for the
maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems The curriculum for installers should
be based on the following topics:  Basics of solar energy collection 
Fundamentals of solar thermal energy (detailed study of components /
thermodynamic analysis of  solar collector / study of shades)  Fundamentals of
hydraulic circuits  Materials of SWH systems  Sequence of activities needed
for having  SWH system constructed  Means and tools needed and respective
function  Washing and filling up the primary circuit  Preparing the
commissioning – development of  check‐list  Failure modes of  SWH system 
Maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems  Security related with SWH systems
operation and installation ANNEX VI – GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING THE SWH SYSTEMS
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PLAN In the scope of this STO all SWH systems shall have
preventive maintenance plan including the following maintenance actions and
respecting the respective periodicities Table  – Preventive maintenance actions
recommended for SWH systems COMPONENT INTERVENTION FREQUENCY (months)
OBSERVATIONS Solar Collectors Cleaning With water and detergent Execute the
operation in periods of low sun radiation (sunrise or sunset) 12 21 Structure 12
Recover structure parts that present corrosion; sand and paint Verify screw
tightness           Covering Joints Absorbing board Piping Box Thermal fluid in
circulation      12 60 Visual inspection Replace in case of crack If significant
condensation is observed inside, identify the origin and correct the situation
Visual inspection (adherence, deformation and degradation) Visual inspection to
detect scaling of paint, corrosion points, strange bodies deposition, leakage
and deformations Replace in case of leakage Visual inspection for leakage
detection Visual inspection for deformation detection Check density and PH (pH<
may indicate the need for replacement) Replacement of thermal fluid
Waterproofness 24 (max) Make pressure proofs from the second year of operation ‐
Automatic 12 Clean and confirm correct operation      Primary Circuit ‐ manual ,
Activate to release air retained Coil Pump Thermostat Expansion vessel Heat
exchanger Cut off valve Security valve 60 12 12 12 60 12 12 60 Cleaning and take
out Simultaneously with replacement of thermal fluid Waterproofness and
lubrication Cleaning Check functionality control and regulation Use temperature
sensors Comprove pressure Cleaning and inspection (12 months in locations with
hard waters) Lubricate and fasten Move them along their entire course to avoid
incrustation or mineral deposits Check release pressure Thermal storage
reservoir 24 (max) Verify cathodic protection elements Cleaning and fasten the
terminal connections Cleaning and fasten the terminal connections Control of
operation Verification of mass connection Cleaning Switch Meters Differentials
Electric panel 12 12 12 12 22 Secondary circuit Electric components ANNEX VII –
GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING THE SWH SYSTEMS MONITORING PLAN In the scope of this
STO, the objectives of monitoring are: ) ii) iii) to determine the quantity of
solar thermal energy that is converted and delivered to the consumption as well
as the contribution, for the same consumption, of the source of energy that
supplies the backup equipment; to validate the calculation tools used in the
dimensioning of the SWH system; and provide valorous information to the
administrating entity of this STO about, among other thing, the number of
installations, their performance and energy savings achieved In the scope of
this STO all SWH systems shall have  monitoring plan including the following
actions and respecting the respective periodicities Object of Monitoring Thermal
fluid temperature at the exit of each autonomous group of collectors Fuel or
electricity that is used by the backup system Annual solar energy collected –
Productivity (kWh/m2) Sanitary hot water consumption KPI Differences larger than
ºC  months Periodicity Kg or kWh Integration of the enthalpy measured by the
energy management system Install  meter at the entrance of the storage tank() 12
months  months 12 months ANNEX VIII – EVALUATION GRID FOR THE COURSE OF SWH
SYSTEMS DESIGNERS ANNEX IX – EVALUATION GRID FOR THE COURSE OF SWH SYSTEMS
INSTALLERS ANNEX  – CHECK‐LIST FOR INFORMATION COLLECTION IN THE SCOPE OF THE
SWH SYSTEMS DESIGN The following is an example of the use of  check‐list
appropriate to multi‐family apartments building 23 Local Somewhere in Tirana
Typologies Quantity Nº of bathrooms Nº of showers Observations T0 T1 T2 T3 T4 T5
Building under rehabilitation It will incorporate taps and showers of Class +
hydraulic efficiency Observations Consuming profiles Regulation derived Other
Seasonality According with Tirana SWH Standards See the decree for details To be
used all year Other hot water requirements Washing machines Other SWH system
applications Pool Other Machines receive pre-heated water It must be defined an
extra hot water demand for this No pools Observations Back‐up system
Observations Is there  grid of conventional fuel (natural gas) ? What is the
most cost‐effective local source of energy ? Are the houses equiped with heating
system ? Specify Roofing Plane accessible Plane not accessible Sloping Other
type Observations The roofing is plane and accessible, by stairs There is an
elevator between living floors Rrofing is above the 5th floor Collectors may
have to be transported to the roof by elevating means (depends on the model
chosen) The roof is in good condition to resist to the load Roof covering
Ceramic tile Metal sheet Mosaic Asphaltic Pebble Inclination Orientation
Observations The roof coveing is asphaltic The covering is supposed to be
replaced in the scope of the rehabilitation There should exist  careful planning
to integrate the installation of the SWH system without damaging the new
asphaltic covering No inclination There is sufficient space to install the
collectores South oriented and according with good rules of the art Sources of
shading Observations 24 Existing Potential The only shading source is the
surrounding wall of ,  height and the howuse of the elevator room located in the
centre of the roof Positioning of lead columns The lead columns can pass through
the existing technical courette that exist in the lateral of the elevators
vertical passage Space available Observations Building technical room Local Roof
Ground‐floor Basement Other Dimensions ‐ plan Height Access dimensions Fraction
technical room Local Laundry Shed Other Dimensions ‐ plan Height Access
dimensions Observations The bulding technical room is in the basement It
accomodates currently an old boiler, used for heating purposes, that will be
removed in the scope of the rehabilitation Technical drawings exist There is
sufficient space to accomodate (and move in) the needed equipment for the SWH
system (circulating system and expansion reservoirs) Observations The most
appropriate space to accomodate the individual hot water storage tank would be
in the sheds, where old electrical thermal accumulators are installed Attention
to the choice of model and the respective space needs for maintenance Technical
drawings exist There is sufficient space to accomodate (and move in) the
indivuidual hot water tanks and security components Primary and secondary
circuits must pass there Positioning of accessories Observations Energy meters
Water meters Cut‐off valves Flow regulation valves The system should have at
least one enrgy meter, located in the technical area with  sensors (one in the
collectors area and one just before the pump) The cut-off valves of the
collectors area should be instaleld on the top of the lead columns (at the level
of roofing) There should exist, in the primary circuit, flow regulation valves
in each autonomous group of collectors, at the exit of each individual storage
tank and in the technical room Date: Surveyor: 25 ANNEX XI – GROUNDS FOR
DEVELOPING  SOLAR THERMAL OBLIGATION IN THE MUNICIPALITY OF TIRANA Solar Water
Heating (SWH) is  proven technology to supply Sanitary Hot Water (SHW) to the
service sector ( hospitals, hotels, and schools), industry and households
However, low electricity prices and non‐payments are obstacles to the
penetration of this carbon‐free source of useful energy Nevertheless, solar
panels are already available on the market and significant volumes have been
installed According with the national Agency of Natural Resources of Albania, in
2010,  total of 10,700 m2 were installed (60% by services, 40% by households),
bringing total installations to 52,000 m2 (equivalent to around 70 GWh/ or % of
electricity consumed by households in 2009) UNDP is supporting  programme
(2011‐2015) to install 50 thousand m2 of solar panels based on grants and fiscal
incentives In Tirana, the daily average solar radiation in each month is given
in the table below Table  – Monthly daily average solar radiation [kJ/m2] County
Tirana Jan Dec 12066 13292 14243 16007 18555 20538 21598 21896 19854 16564 13604
13250 Feb Mar Nov Aug May Sep Apr Oct Jun Jul The following pictures illustrate
the availability of the energy resource – Sun – in annual energy per square
meter and the annual sunshine hours It can be seen that Tirana is located in
region where there is an annual average of 1500 [kWh/m2] and where it is
possible to have  SWH system operating during more than 2500 hours per year 26
MUNICIPAL VISION OF  SOLAR WATER HEATING FRAMEWORK Generally composed of solar
thermal collectors, an hydraulic circuit to carry the thermal energy collected
and  storage of the thermal energy, SWH systems provide  simple, cost‐effective,
and sustainable means of heating water for domestic and other uses In addition
to reducing Green House Gas (GHG) emissions, SWH systems offers  host of
potential benefits to governments seeking to reduce their dependence on fossil
fuels and, or, reducing energy importations and improving the overall efficiency
of their energy sector, in both perspectives – supply and demand sides In
countries where power demand is exceeding capacity, SWH can reduce pressure on
the national power system and diminish pollution produced by conventional energy
sources The contribution of SWH for the Nearly Zero‐Energy Buildings (NZEB)
concept can be very significant, especially in residential buildings and in
those buildings where there is  significant need of heat for preparing sanitary
hot waters The NZEB concept is related to the development of buildings that have
very high energy performance and therefore require  very low amount of 27 energy
to comply with its function Moreover, the low amount of energy required should
be covered to  very significant extent by energy from renewable sources,
including energy from renewable sources produced on‐site or nearby The NZEB
concept is being widely studied through all Europe and is expected to be
mainstream from 2018 onwards (on new public buildings) and from 2020 onwards (on
all buildings) Given the crisis in the EU construction sector, it is expected
that new incentives and obligations will redirect the construction companies’
efforts for the urban rehabilitation and, therefore, the NZEB concept eventually
start being applied also to the existing buildings, which hide the greatest
potential to avoid energy use Environmental benefits of  SWH framework are the
direct and indirect reduction of GHG emissions Direct reduction of GHG emissions
are obtained by the avoidance of using fossil‐fuel based primary energy sources
to prepare sanitary hot waters Indirect reduction of GHG emissions are obtained,
for example, by the avoidance of overheating of buildings, the reduction of the
heat‐island effect and by the avoidance of transporting fossil‐fuel based
primary energy from outside the boundaries of the city to the city (, LPG,
natural gas, diesel) The environmental performance of cities can be well
characterized and monitored using and implementing the concept of Energetic
Matrix Economic and social benefits of  SWH framework include the creation of
new (and eventually certified) professional categories, enhanced employment
opportunities and the creation of small and medium‐sized SWH businesses The
development of such businesses and maturation of the respective market could
lead to improved product quality and professional culture KEY CHALLENGES Through
all Europe, and especially in the South European countries, solar thermal is
key technology to address multiple current challenges such as sustainable
development, green economy, population growth, housing, quality of life,
resource efficiency, energy efficiency, climate change and poverty eradication
Albanian challenges are  combination of the global challenges with particular
challenges of Albania as  state with  transitional economy From the analysis
made to the available information, it was possible to identify several aspects
and market barriers that must be addressed by the implementers of the Tirana
Municipality STO in order to achieve the objectives of the STO and to promote
the creation, development and sustained growth of  solid solar thermal market 
   Lack of installations working in  correct and effective manner Lack of
installations working and subjected to  monitoring program Lack of knowledge
from the public in general regarding the benefits of SWH and Energy Efficiency
(EE) Lack of service providers (companies) duly qualified and certified by an
accredited certification body 28   Lack of individual technicians qualified
and certified, by an accredited certification body, to perform the activities of
design, installation, commissioning, maintenance and monitoring of SWH systems
Lack of financial incentives to promote not only the final users of SWH systems
but also:  The construction stakeholders (supporting the over‐cost of new
constructions); and especially  The entrepreneurs that know and believe in the
benefits and potential of SWH and that may want to create their business in the
area GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS It is not uncommon to see countries that have loads
of laws and regulations that, although technically perfect, do not work as
initially expected There are at least two major reasons for this: ) The high
level of complexity of the Regulations; ) The inadequate instrumental and
operational structure of the Regulations to ensure its integrity Regarding point
), the complexity of the law makes it difficult to be applied and constitutes
general barrier to its fructuous implementation This is even clearer if the
object of the new law is  “new subject”, as it is for the case of SWH in Albania
Therefore, it is recommended that the regulation should be simple and clear to
be, easily applied, less expensive to manage and to more easily convince all
stakeholders that the application of the law will benefit the community The
regulation shall establish in  clear and direct way the linkage of activities to
be done, the entities responsible implicated and the respective timeframes that
must be satisfied by the implicated parties, , operational structure of the STO
and its target groups (time of entering into force, actors, deadlines,
documentation to present, periodicity of inspections, training and certification
of professionals, …) Regarding point ), the initial operational structure must
be carefully balanced in order not to compromise the integrity of the standard,
in one hand, and to ensure that the implementation and maintenance costs are
kept as low as possible, on the other hand The integrity of  standard can be
measured by the respective levels of Monitoring, Verification and Enforcement
(MV&) Monitoring comprises the collection and analysis of data to give an
accurate picture of the STO progress and compliance, and is usually an on‐going
process It provides the opportunity to identify and act on any implementation
issues, as well as providing data for the STO evaluation Verification is the
process of determining whether the SWH systems are being developed according
with the requirements of the STO (, quality requirements) Enforcement is about
responding to non‐compliance offences with  suite of timely and appropriate
actions When developing  STO it is essential to consider not only how non‐
compliance will be detected, but also how it will be responded to and by whom
When instances 29 of non‐compliance are not responded to as often or as
appropriately as they should be, there are negative repercussions on the STO
integrity If participants see that the penalties for non‐ compliance are low,
then there is less motivation for them to comply, particularly if the costs of
compliance are seen to be high The STO administrators should consider the design
and implementation of procedures for responding to non‐compliance offences
VISION OF EU STANDARDS ON STO The experience has been showing that there has
been in the several EU regulations concerning energy use in buildings,  merging
of measures that promote renewable integration and EE improvement In fact, the
need to save conventional (fossil‐fuel based) energy, through, namely, the
limitation of energy demand, the increase of the thermal energy systems
efficiency and the introduction of renewable energy collected locally or nearby,
made clear that it is necessary to establish an integrated “bundle of policies”
in the direction of the Nearly Zero‐Energy Buildings One key aspect hat must be
reflected in this “bundle of policies” is that of quality It is essential, for
the benefit of the users, the market and the credibility of the STO, to
integrate certification schemes in key aspects of the STO as well as technical
and, or, performance requirements Examples of these aspects are:  Certification
of components of the SWH system (, the collectors);  Certification of the
designers for medium and large size installations;  Certification of installers
for installations of all sizes;  Introduction of technical requirements, such
as reference to EU Standards and comprehensive maintenance plans; Integration of
requirements for reliability assurance, such as the existence of  valid
maintenance contract during the useful life‐time of the SWH system; Integration
of performance requirements, such as persistence of  given Solar Fraction (SF)
and, or, annual productivity   Another aspect to reflect in the Tirana
Municipality STO, as  general good practice and for the benefit of overcoming
existing barriers, is that of the public awareness Parallel to the
implementation of the STO, the public in general must have easy and free access
(, on‐line access, solar thermal municipal knowledge centre) to information
about the work being developed by the operational structure of the STO Examples
of relevant information are:    Lists of certified equipment that exist in
the market (national/international); Lists of local certified professionals
(designers and installers); List of institutions that promote the training of
all stakeholders and the qualification and certification of SWH systems
professionals;  Annual scheduling of training and coaching programs for
certification of preofessionals;  Technical description of SWH systems and
respective individual integrating equipment;  Manuals containing guidelines; 
Data and graphics illustrating the chronological rate of penetration of SWH
systems in the market (desirable before and after STO implementation to have
better perception of the effect); 30  Initiatives of financial incentive for
voluntary integration of SWH systems THE SCOPE OF  STO STO’ are generally
applied to new and existing buildings subjected to large refurbishments and,
sometimes, when there is the need to replace water heating systems Although it
would be desirable to integrate all buildings in  STO, pondering on the existing
limitations is recommended The first STO ever,  1980 Israeli law, had
encompassed only the residential buildings with  height up to 27 meters Very
tall buildings and non‐residential buildings were not considered in the scope of
the law The following group of criteria can be used to determine the type of
buildings to include in the scope of an STO: Localization (, climatic zone); 
Type of use (residential; non‐residential; seasonality);   Age (new/existing
buildings);  Hot water needs (litre/day or litres/year, SHW temperature); 
Dimension (total net area; height; number of autonomous fractions)  Energy
consumption The following group of criteria can be used to determine the type of
buildings to exempt of the scope of an STO:  Buildings used as places for
worship or religious activity;  Temporary buildings;  Protected monuments; 
Buildings under permanent shading;  Buildings not included in the scope of the
STO It is  success key factor to define as clear as possible the scope of the
STO (, buildings in the scope and buildings exempted), in order not to affect
its intention and not to allow circumvention of the rules The Tirana
Municipality is already limiting the scope of intervention of the STO to
develop, to the universe of Public buildings This seems wise and advisable at
the first glance, but it is recommended just for the purpose of highlighting the
intention of being the Public Authority to set the example; progressive
extension of the scope of the STO to other buildings (, private buildings) is
recommended because of the cost‐benefit analysis of applying the STO QUANTIFYING
THE OBLIGATION 31 The critical aspect of an STO is the minimum proportion of
solar energy contribution to the overall thermal load for water heating purposes
(, the solar fraction)  STO must define clearly:   quantitative and qualitative
definition of the obligation; and   unequivocal description of the calculation
procedure The following approaches are possible:  The STO stipulates the SF of
the SWH system (, 40 % ‐ 80 %) This SF can vary depending on several parameters
(, the use of the building; hot water needs; availability of solar energy;
availability of area to install solar collectors) SWOT Analysis, [] Strengths
correctness and precision: giving different values for the obliged share, taking
into account different parameters (building size, climate, etc) and requiring
specific calculation allow to meet precisely the requirements; for instance, the
efficiency of the solar collector could be included in the calculation; from the
point of view of communication, it is easy to understand how much solar really
contributes to the hot water demand and therefore to the energy savings in
buildings Opportunities / Weaknesses calculations should be first performed and
then checked; this means that both designers and Municipality staff (or other
actors in charge of the checks) should be adequately trained the approach is
practically applicable only to solar domestic hot water systems It is not
applicable for systems for combined domestic hot water preparation and space
heating Threats simplified tools and standard calculation methods should be
provided and their correct use should be carefully checked; otherwise, any
applicant could do his/her own 'tricks' for not fulfilling the obligation; the
above tools should be for free, cleary visible on web sites and easily
downloadable; do not allow exemptions or lowering of the minimum share based on
too generic 'technical impossibility' to install the solar thermal plants
Making  relation between the minimum solar collecting area to be installed and
some well known and standardized figures of the construction sector, such as,
square meters of useful area or number of occupants For this method to be
precise, it will be needed to define parameters for the specific climatic zone
and parameters related with the solar collector’ technology 32 SWOT Analysis, []
Strengths this approach is easy both for calculating the amount of solar thermal
to be installed and also for checking the fulfilment; it is applicable for both
applications of solar plants, domestic hot water preparation and space heating;
it uses figures which designers and Municipality staff are quite familiar with
(floor area, number of occupants and which should be anyway communicated when
asking for building permission Opportunities / Weaknesses not precise and not
correct on  technical/scientific basis, since we only talk about m2 of 'solar
thermal', without taking into account the efficiency of the collector; defining
set of values depending on the efficiency could avoid this problem; from the
point of view of communication, solar thermal is something which is expressed
through m2 and not through the produced heat Presently the solar thermal markets
are changing to the use of kWth instead of m2 for defining the size and capacity
of solar heating systems Following this development it is should be considered
to specify the obligation in kWth collector capacity per m2 and per occupant
Threats define precisely which area of solar thermal we are referring to
('gross', 'aperture', 'absorber'); do not allow exemptions or lowering of the
minimum values based on too generic 'technical impossibility' to install the
solar thermal plants The first approach is  more simple and easy to understand
option, besides being more precise, since it is more directly related with the
purpose of the system The second option can become complex and become  source of
questions from the interested parties involved For the Tirana Municipality STO
the use of the approach described in point  above is recommended Given that
Tirana has very good solar radiance  high threshold could in principle be placed
However, as the economical aspect of SWH systems must not constitute
discouraging factor, the Tirana Municipality STO should be implemented with
moderate level of SF Ideally there should be  range of acceptable SF to be taken
into account when designing  SWH system (55‐65) and  solution to exceptions that
can eventually surge when the application of the STO begins 33 Experience has
shown that  high solar fraction (, > 70%), does not mean cost optimality of
minimum SWH requirements The next figure is  tendency curve of the SF of  SWH
system in function of the collecting area It was placed here to illustrate the
idea that it may be better having  system with  moderate SF and operating with
high levels of global efficiency instead of  very high SF and  system with lower
global efficiency 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10  Figure  – Solar Fraction (%)
of  SWH system vs Collecting Area (m2) For this graphic, 13 simulations were
done in the SOLTERM dimensioning tool It can be noted that the last  simulations
correspond to values of SF between 80% and 90% and that the corresponding
increments in SF associated with the increase of collecting area is
progressively smaller It should also be noted that from simulation nº
(Collecting area = 14,22 m2 | SF = 75,%) the simulation resulted in the
generation of wasted energy, , solar energy that was collected but that will not
have use/be useful, taking into account the application foreseen for the SWH
system (in this case, preparation of SHW) These facts constitute valorous
information for defining the cost optimality of the minimum SWH requirements, to
be established in  STO On the other hand, the optimization of the NPV of  SWH
system implies the collection of  significant amount of solar energy, to ensure
the profitability of the investment Calculating the NPV of the system, , the
accumulated cash flows provided by the operation of this SWH system, one can
have  perception of the exact collecting area that provides economical
optimization of  SWH system The SOLTERM tool has this optimization process
integrated in its functionalities Using this specific example,  designer could
dimension the SWH system for  collecting area immediately below the threshold of
waste generation (14, m2 –  collectors) However, after integrating all the
relevant information to have  clearer picture of the economics of this SWH
system, the designer can 34 conclude that the collecting area that optimizes the
NPV of this specific SWH system is lower than what was defined just by analysing
the annual performance of the system (, m2 –  collectors) The Municipality of
Tirana, as  leader in Albania for the implementation of STO, given the potential
national interest, should strive to have the support of the Ministry responsible
for Energy and, or the UNDP, to initiate the procurement of  simulation software
tool, perfectly adapted to the conditions and needs of the STO Said software
tool, eventually useful also for the Albanian Buildings Energy Performance
Certification System, should be able to be further adapted to encompass the
climatic conditions of all the Albanian territory Figure  – SOLTERM output
related with the economical optimization of  SWH system, using the NPV method
Finally, using the value of collecting area that optimizes the NPV (, m2) and
the graphic of Figure , the SF of the economically optimized SWH system is
approximately 62 % There are other software tools, such as POLYSUN and, or,
‐SOL, that can be indicated for the purpose of being considered as the tool to
be used in the scope of the Tirana Municipality STO The SF is naturally related
with  given Thermal Load (TL) The TL’ to consider for the STO should be the hot
water needs of several types of buildings The following table taken from [],
gives an indication of reasonable values of hot water needs for several types of
buildings These figures presuppose that the hot water piping of the secondary
circuit is thermally insulated The units in which the hot water needs are
expressed must facilitate the design of the SWH system, in particular the
dimensioning of the storage tank() It is good practice that the storage tanks
are dimensioned with the following criteria: the volume of the storage tank()
must be equal to the daily hot water needs Table  – Hot water needs by type of
building according with Portuguese STO (RCCTE) Type of building Residential
Hospitals School Hotel Hotel Hotel Hot water daily consumption (60 ºC) 40 50‐65
90 70 55 Units /capita /bed /capita /bed /bed /bed 35 Hotel Hotel Elderly or
students house Military facilities Gymnasium (showers) Laundry Restaurant
Canteen 40 35 55 20 25‐35 ‐ ‐12  /bed /bed /bed /capita /capita /kg cloths /meal
/meal These values can be used for the Tirana Municipality STO providing that
the design of the secondary circuit comprehends thermal insulation in the hot
water piping EXAMPLES Several approaches used in Europe to define the solar
collectors’ mandatory surface  ‐ The Portuguese legislation requires  m² of
standard solar collector per occupant of the residential building  ‐ The
regulation in Murcia, Spain, demand that the system covers 60‐70% of the heat
needs to produce sanitary hot water  ‐ The German law of renewable heat and the
regional law of Baden‐Württemberg of renewable heat demands that, for the
existing buildings and for the new buildings, 10 to 20 % respectively of the
global energy needs for heating are covered by renewable energy sources This is
accomplished when ,04 (m2 of solar collector / m2 of useful pavement surface),
is installed QUALITY REQUIREMENTS Without appropriate measures to ensure,
quality of SWH systems installations and persistence of SWH systems performance,
there can be frequently installations of low quality that will generate lower
solar energy gains than expected and will affect the credibility of the STO and
eventually the credibility of the technology This latter is more probable in
markets with low penetration of solar thermal (as it is the case in Albania)
Therefore the regulations must be conceived in  way to ensure that the products
used in the SWH systems, the planning/design of the SWH systems, the
installation, commissioning and maintenance/monitoring of the SWH systems are
according with the state‐of‐the‐art The STO should not include to much technical
requirements if it will not be possible to confirm them all and if, by doing so,
the technological innovation and development will be impeded The quality
requirements should be:  Clear;  Applicable (, certified products and, or,
services only if in the market there is  significant quantity available;
otherwise the STO must establish deadlines to accomplish 36 the certification
requirements included in the STO) Even if there are not many internal suppliers,
Albania is  member of the World Trade Organization and can, therefore, access
easily the EU market Inclusive, , include quality requirements for the services
needed in the main stages of the SWH systems (from planning/design to
maintenance/monitoring) and for the products/components;   For the services,
several requirements should be established, :  Design (certified designers;
accredited training centres/entities)  Installation (certified installers;
delivery of  specific maintenance plan; accredited training centres/entities);
Operation and Maintenance (maintenance contract valid for  given number of
years; energy performance contract; monitoring of the system; random
inspections);  For the products and components, it is preferred that Albanian
or European standards are used (, solarkeymark for solar collectors) If
different schemes are created and, or, adopted the market may become fragmented,
the competition will be reduced, the certification costs will be higher all with
disadvantage to the final users; EXAMPLES  ‐ The Solar Keymark is the first
internationally recognized quality mark for solar thermal products and it is
based in three main imperatives:  Testing of the initial type of collector
through the methodologies described in the European Normatives EN 12975 or 12976
 Having implemented  Quality Management System for the manufacturing process 
Ensuring annual revision of the Quality Management System and submitting the
product to  bi‐annual inspection Sometimes the market feels as if it is awash
with  large variety of standards and directives to achieve the necessary market
compliance To simplify understanding of achieving EU market needs:  The
obligatory CE marking shows conformity with European directives  The voluntary
Keymark certifies conformity with European standards and so offers market
opportunities  National marks certify conformity with requirements of national
Member State certification schemes If the EU has produced  directive relevant to
particular product, then manufacturers selling that product have to show
conformity by attaching the relevant CE mark For the time being, only very large
collectors can be CE marked In the next  to 10 years, it is anticipated that
collectors will need  CE mark 37 The Solar Keymark is  voluntary third‐party
certification mark, introduced by CEN and CENLEC (the European Committee for
Standardisation introduced the Keymark) and developed by ESTIF (the European
Solar Thermal Industry Federation) and CEN, with the support of the European
Commission By obtaining the Solar Keymark, the solar product qualifies for
nearly all the different Member State regulatory and financial incentive schemes
The voluntary Solar Keymark scheme encourages the further expansion of the
European solar thermal market by improving market confidence in solar products
‐ In Portugal besides the existence of  certification scheme for installers,
ADENE(*) is developing, in partnership with CERTIF(*),  certification scheme for
SWH systems Designers As the thermal regulation for buildings is to be
reformulated, one aspect that is expected to be included is that medium‐ and
large‐size SWH installations (mandatory according with the buildings thermal
regulation) will require  design developed by  certified designer To be
certified designer, one must conclude successfully  training/coaching course
(with classification above 90%) and have significant experience (still to be
defined) (*) :  ADENE ‐ the Portuguese Agency for Energy  CERTIF – an
association for Certification composed of 27 associate members like business
associations and laboratories that represent several activity sectors  – In
France, Qualisol is  qualification of installers that includes 10 compromises
(from advisory to the after sales) It is  voluntary compromise valid for three
years, but with annual renovation To become  Qualisol company, the organization
must demonstrate that possesses technical competency in solar thermal, through
previous experience and, or, professional development certificates Within the
three years of the compromise, the certification organization (Qualit’EnR) will
execute  quality audit to one installation done by the installer The audit is
presented as  pedagogic tool for the installer and  confidence mark for the
customer Depending on the number of non‐conformities, the results of the audit
may vary from, “perfect service” to “failed installation” Based on the result
the installer will maintain, or not, the commercial quality certificate In 2008
more than 5000 audits were done (>  € spent), and more than 85% passed the
threshold ARCHITECTONIC ISSUES AND PROTECTED BUILDINGS  well developed STO
should include requirements about architectural integration and clear rules
about what buildings are exempt of complying with the law, , for historic
reasons Naturally that the requirements for architectural integration of SWH
systems in new buildings, should be more tight than those for existing buildings
(under large rehabilitation) At this respect, the STO should include simple
rules, , rules that are easy to verify and to execute For example: 38     
Installation in plane roofs or terrace: consider the height of the existing
platband and define it as the maximum height of the solar collectors’ field to
minimize the visual impact The orientation should be free However preferential
orientations can be specified so that the visual impact is reduced and the
efficiency of the system is augmented Installation in tilted roofs: the solar
collectors should have the same orientation and inclination of the roof The use
of supporting structures should not be allowed In new buildings with tilted
roofs the architecture should foresee the need to have at least one slope of the
roof with sufficient surface and favourable inclination and orientation In new
buildings with tilted roofs the architecture should foresee the need to have
good access to the roof (to allow passing materials and persons) In historical
areas, instead of just impeding the installation of SWH systems, special
requirements may be established for their architectonic integration The STO
should not exempt too many types of buildings and the exemption criteria should
not be vague EXAMPLES Integration of SWH systems in the historical and protected
area of Lisbon’ down‐town The buildings located in the Portuguese protected
areas or belonging to the historic patrimony are exempt of the thermal
regulation (which imposes the use of SWH systems to produce SHW) Although it can
be accepted that the historic patrimony should be preserved, this exemption
conduces several times to  situation where the investors and promoters of the
construction industry (especially of residential buildings in protected areas)
will try to escape of complying from the thermal regulation To overcome this
tendency it is important to adapt residential protected buildings to modern
patterns which include the possibility to integrate technologies to collect and
convert solar energy In the context of the urban requalification of the Lisbon
down‐town, the Municipal Energy Agency (Lisboa‐Enova) in cooperation with the
Municipality and IGESPAR (the entity responsible for the management of the
national archaeological and architectural patrimony) promotes the development of
the “Potential for integration of solar technologies in the Lisbon’ down‐town”
The application (an IT web based platform), allows the identification of the
solar potential for all the buildings in the perimeter of the project  This
information will be integrated in the urban requalification plan, in order to
promote the integration of solar systems in the renovation process of buildings,
in accordance with the cultural patrimony requisites The assessment of potential
will be accompanied by an Integration Manual, do be developed in accordance with
the solutions currently existing in the market and the relevant criteria for the
integration of such systems in classified buildings SUPERVISION OF THE STO 39
The supervision is  key question when  STO is introduced: the laws can be well
made but will not have impact until  well defined and balanced MV& regime is in
place Supervision means also the appropriate monitoring of the STO impact
Without an impact monitoring it is not possible to compare the real results with
the targets established in the preparation phase There are many indicators that
should be considered when defining the MV& of the STO At least, the following
two categories of indicators are essential:  The values relative to buildings
Number of buildings in the scope of the STO (also interesting to be defined in
terms of m2 of useful pavement surface and, or, number of persons); to be
compared with  Number of buildings in the scope but exempted of the STO  Values
of the real over‐cost in new buildings or buildings rehabilitated; infer about
the reasonableness of this value  Number of cases where the minimum solar water
heating requirements (, solar fraction) was evidently surpassed  The values
relative to verifications  Number of people in the administrating authority of
the STO that received training to perform verifications in the scope of the STO
Percentage of negative verifications in the SWH system design phase  Number of
random verifications (or inspections) in the installation phase and the
percentage of negative situations  Number of random verifications (or
inspections) in the operation phase and the percentage of negative situations
Number of sanctioned situations (and type, , severity of non‐compliance) and
rate of execution (payment of the fine) An enforcement strategy is  set of
responses to incidents of non‐compliance, coupled with  progressive action plan
for their application that should include  range of elevating enforcement
responses that can be implemented depending on:  The severity of the
non‐compliance;  The range of sanctions that are available;  The type of
programme ( whether it is mandatory or voluntary);  The quality of the evidence
supporting the claim of non‐compliance;  The responsiveness of the party
responsible for the non‐compliance;  The potential to rectify non‐compliance If
compliance is enforced, participants will be encouraged to comply when the
potential costs, whether financial or to the participant’ reputation, are
greater than the benefits Similarly, if programme participants consider that
there is only  small chance of  transgression being discovered and that the
associated penalty is also low, there will be little motivation to comply
Enforcement, including remediation, is most effective when action is timely,
responding to the detection of transgressions without undue delay Enforcement
processes with  limited range of 40 possible responses tend to be unwieldy and
often require high levels of “proof”, which make them impractical in dealing
with minor transgressions  wider range of sanctions allows the enforcement
authority to respond more quickly, is less costly, and more effective Where
sanctions are necessary, they should be sufficient to outweigh the benefits of
non‐ compliance in order to be an effective deterrent Taking enforcement action
improves the level of compliance by elevating the perception of risk to the
parties involved in the STO Before creating the enforcement strategy, answering
some basic questions will help to develop an effective enforcement strategy and
highlight areas that need further information or investigation  preliminary set
of questions includes:  What types of non‐compliance can be envisaged?  What
criteria will be used to rank types of non‐compliance?  What levels of
compliance will be acceptable?  What will be deemed as non‐compliance?  At
what level of non‐compliance will penalties commence and what will trigger their
escalation?  What action will be taken and by whom? Understanding the costs and
benefits associated with MV& activities of an STO is important:  For
governments to justify decisions on the design of  STO to industry partners 
For programme administrators to articulate requests for adequate public funding
of MV& processes Generally MV& regimes that deliver high rates of compliance
will have  higher overall cost than those that achieve lesser outcomes This is
true irrespective of the regime design, although the design is likely to affect
how these costs are distributed amongst governments, industry and consumers 41
REFERENCES [] [] [] RCCTE – Portuguese Decree‐Law about the thermal regulation
of buildings EPBD – EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive  – European
Community funded project to promote and disseminate information about STO []  42