United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project
Services DP/DCP/ALB/ Distr: General  July 2021 Original: English Second regular
session 2021 30 August– September 2021, New York Item  of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters Country programme document for Albania
(2022–2026) Contents  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… ………… III Programme and risk management
………………………………………………………………… IV Monitoring and evaluation
………………………………………………………………………… Annex Results and resources framework for Albania
(2022–2026) ………………………  ……………… Page      21-09396X () 150721 *2109396*
DP/DCP/ALB/  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework  Albania, with its population of  million, is an upper-middle-income
country with  high Human Development Index of 791, Gender Development Index of
967 and Gender Inequality Index of Women hold half of senior government
positions The economy is stable but underperforming, dependent on consumption
and remittances, with low productivity and  limited tax base Unemployment is
structural and long-term at per cent2 with  gender pay gap of  per cent
According to official figures, per cent of the population suffer severe material
deprivations and per cent are at risk of falling into poverty (2018)  Albania
faces multiple challenges that drive vulnerabilities, including weaknesses in
rule of law, uneven institutional capacity, service gaps, limited investments in
social services, degradation of natural resources and few labour opportunities
The November 2019 earthquake and coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
highlighted the need to address disaster risk management and the socioeconomic
impact of these events, particularly on vulnerable groups and micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises The pandemic deepened gender inequalities,
disproportionately affecting women, their livelihoods and access to essential
health services, and increased incidents of gender-based violence  In March
2020, the European Union opened accession negotiations The country’ vision of
sustainable development, the key drivers for reforms and political and public
priorities, are accession to the European Union, sustainable economic growth and
inclusive prosperity The National Strategy for Development and Integration
(NSDI) III is under preparation with interim nationalized Sustainable
Development Goal indicators and targets  This country programme reflects the
comparative advantages of UNDP in supporting national reforms and upholding
values of justice, human rights, equity and gender equality, through coordinated
multisectoral approaches that facilitate systemic reforms Drawing on its
reputation as  United Nations system “integrator” for the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and trusted impartial partner, UNDP will continue to
liaise with the Government, donors and international institutions to mobilize
financing to support economic transformation and eradication of multidimensional
poverty; and establish systems that address risks, disasters and social
injustice within the Sustainable Development Goals Work at the local level and
partnerships within the United Nations and across society position UNDP well to
support aspirations to join the European Union and attain the outcomes of the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)  The
summary7 of the previous country programme’ performance concluded that UNDP
support to development remains highly relevant in Albania It is viewed as an
innovative thought leader drawing on international experiences, with the ability
to convene different stakeholders underpinning its integrator role for the 2030
Agenda through: () technical expertise, offering integrated and cross-sectoral
solutions, combining policy and regulatory advice with capacity development; ()
strong and agile operational presence; () established multi-stakeholder
partnerships on priorities for European Union accession and the Sustainable
Development Goals; and () trusted relations with all institutions
__________________  UNDP, 2020, Human Development Report (link)  INSTAT Labour
Force Survey Ibid  INSTAT Income and Living Conditions Survey, Common Country
Analysis, Voluntary National Review on Sustainable Development Goals, June 2018
(link)  UNDP Albania country programme performance summary  (link) /17
DP/DCP/ALB/  The theory of change underpinning the country programme is that
innovative approaches to inclusive, climate-friendly, gender-sensitive,
sustainable growth in new competitive sectors, coupled with transparent,
accountable governance systems, will boost jobs and businesses, identify
investment opportunities, increase resilience and address interconnected
vulnerabilities of climate, health and social injustice UNDP will focus on
local-level actions that together with national datasets and research, will
inform national strategies and build forward better, particularly for those left
behind  Those left behind include women, children from low-income households,
single parent households, persons with disabilities, the Roma and Egyptian
communities, refugees, migrants, isolated rural communities, the elderly and
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons Women who work in the care
economy and in addition belong to minority groups and lack education, are the
most vulnerable Discrimination, stigmatization and gender-based violence are
prevalent Through  portfolio approach, UNDP will target these groups and
increase social cohesion and social protection, in partnership with national and
local governments, United Nations agencies and civil society UNDP will partner
with United Nations agencies on joint programmes related to leaving no one
behind, strategic policy options for Sustainable Development Goal financing and
ending violence against women  The UNDP integration offer includes innovation,
thematic expertise and financing for renewables and energy efficiency in line
with Government’ plans to provide safe, affordable and clean energy to citizens;
and for raising the national ambitions to combat climate change and increase
resilience to natural and human-induced risks UNDP will promote nature-based
solutions to climate change adaptation and mitigation, not only tackling the
climate crisis, inequality, poverty and food insecurity, but also providing
incentives for new jobs in the maritime, blue and eco-circular economies
Partnering with United Nations agencies, UNDP will implement programmes on
green circular economy and sustainable economic development Economic growth is
too low9 to converge with European Union living standards and achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals With United Nations agencies, UNDP will support
employment measures for vulnerable groups, integrate small and medium-sized
enterprises in global value chains, and support civil society to increase women’
access to careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics There are
few incentives for adoption and innovation in digital technology, but  national
digital data strategy and increasing digitalization are critical to accelerating
the fourth industrial revolution UNDP will focus on integrated solutions that
address cross-cutting problems, , identifying nature- based solutions that
support the transition to  clean green economy, promote ecotourism and create
new jobs in competitive sectors within the Western Balkan Regional Economic Area
Key barriers to effective and efficient provision of services and that impact
public trust are the lack of integrity and accountability of public
institutions, slow progress on judicial reforms and corruption Building on
previous successes, UNDP will work with civil society and the government to
improve human capacities and data systems for performance, transparency and
planning UNDP will work on the quality of services and rule of law, in close
collaboration with United Nations partners With Albania positioning itself as
unifying actor for regional cooperation, security and stability, and taking the
initial steps to establish the national disaster risk management system as
requirement to join the European Union Civil Protection Mechanism, UNDP will
continue to promote knowledge-sharing and relevant practices across the
subregion To the extent possible, UNDP will promote South-South and triangular
cooperation in support of these efforts __________________  Common Country
Analysis, INSTAT Income and Living Conditions Survey  /17 DP/DCP/ALB/ The report
of the United Nations mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support mission to
Albania and the United Nations country team reached consensus on three highly
effective solutions for policy and programming to accelerate progress towards
European Union accession and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals: () human
capital development and social inclusion; () sustainable, resilient and green
economic growth and resource management; () effective, people-centred
governance, human rights, rule of law and gender equality These are translated
into four UNSDCF outcomes, fully adopted by UNDP and underpinned by five cross-
cutting principles of human rights; gender equality; inclusion and equality;
transparent civic participation; and innovation The vision, value proposition
and theory of change, which consolidates  number of past programmatic
investments and proposes new transformative areas of action, were developed in
consultation with over 200 partners representing civil society, private sector,
academia, local and national governments, development partners and United
Nations agencies, and validated in  meeting with over 17 Deputy Ministers II
Programme priorities and partnerships This country programme reflects the
country’ development priorities as articulated in the NSDI and the UNSDCF
2022-In addition, it is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan and contributes to
different European Union acquis chapters10 The Sustainable Development Goal
targets and indicators and national datasets are integral to programme outcomes
and outputs UNDP will contribute to these priorities, and application of its six
signature solutions will help the country accelerate structural transformations
Specifically, UNDP will assist the country in the three main areas described
below Human capital development and social inclusion Albania needs well-
functioning, fully operational and funded social inclusion and protection
policies UNDP will work with national partners to promote social cohesion and
strengthen social protection systems, services and financing mechanisms to
increase coverage and quality for vulnerable groups With United Nations
agencies, UNDP will ensure civic engagement and capacities for dialogue and
implementation of social care plans COVID-19 generated  sense of urgency to
operationalize national policies, strengthen local government capacities and
design and fund inclusive, gender-responsive and evidence- based services To
reach those most left behind, UNDP will expand services at municipal and
national levels in education, health, social care, employment, vocational
training and housing UNDP, with the European Union, will continue investments in
the education sector affected by the 2019 earthquake, adopting European Union
standards and expanding information and communication technology measures as
post-COVID-19 recovery strategy UNDP will technically lead implementation of the
United Nations COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery plan Sustainable, resilient and
green economic growth and resource management UNDP will support policies that
accelerate an inclusive, productive and sustainable economy, enhance climate
resilience and adaptation planning, and transition into  clean green economy, in
line with the Government’ national strategies This will be done through: ()
strengthening governance mechanisms to address climate change, biodiversity
loss, pollution and land degradation; () promoting ecotourism and circular
bioeconomy; () promote  “source-to-sea” approach, and strengthen transboundary
cooperation for water resources management in the Drini River Basin; () address
the skills mismatch of youth and women for innovation and digitalization; and ()
support value chains of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, decent jobs
and inclusive employment, particularly for persons with disabilities and women
UNDP will support industries to become more energy-efficient, increase the
potential of the forestry sector for removal of greenhouse gasses, and support
__________________ 10 , , ,  and /17  DP/DCP/ALB/ the country’ green growth
trajectory UNDP will support promotion of nature-based tourism that sustains
livelihoods and protected areas, while improving ecosystem services and
financial sustainability UNDP will support entities to have improved systems and
capacities to design and implement innovative policies, particularly in relation
to qualitative skills development that promotes  digital economy,
entrepreneurship and competitive green businesses UNDP will focus on integrated
multisectoral solutions that provide: the necessary skills, vocational education
and training; access to decent jobs and innovative technology; sustainable
livelihoods; and business opportunities With young people (aged ) comprising 25
per cent of the population, UNDP will continue to promote youth as productive
human capital and partner with labour-market stakeholders to boost employment
and entrepreneurship UNDP will consolidate reforms, strengthen capacities,
address skills mismatch and increase labour force participation especially for
women and young people, persons with disabilities, Roma and Egyptian communities
and the long-term unemployed With inclusive growth being  key driver for
reducing vulnerability and building resilience, particularly for the poor and
most disadvantaged, UNDP will continue to support policies and measures leading
to an expedited economic recovery and increased competitiveness and productivity
of (female-led) micro, small and medium-sized enterprises UNDP will work towards
improved environments for digital innovation through support for data-driven
innovations, bringing higher education closer to the labour market and
supporting new course curricula for future skills Increasing vocational
education and training to match labour market demands and integrating small and
medium-sized enterprises in global value chains are additional strategies
vision and road maps for green growth and  blue economy will be formulated, thus
ensuring growth that protects natural resources To contribute to  strengthened
risk and disaster management system, UNDP will assist the Government in driving
policies and actions that focus on prevention and reduction of disaster-related
risks, increasing resilience of infrastructures, ecosystems and society, and
enabling adaptive capacities, all as  means to reduce the long-term
vulnerability of the population and protect development investments,
particularly in at-risk areas With  “knowing better, losing less” approach, UNDP
will focus on local-level risk assessments, utilizing data and knowledge in
parallel with prevention measures Raising the national ambition to combat
climate change, increasing resilience to natural and human-induced risk, and
gender-responsive disaster strategies remain priorities Effective, people-
centred governance, human rights, rule of law and gender equality UNDP will
broaden partnerships for  stronger good governance framework, in line with the
National Public Administration Reform Strategy UNDP will foster  citizen-
centred, gender-sensitive, inclusive approach, while further developing
institutional capacities in policymaking and implementation, promoting  culture
of participation and dialogue for development, and increasing transparency,
integrity and accountability Based on its initial successful experiences in
rolling out integrity planning in municipalities, UNDP will build national
capacities to bring to scale and monitor this initiative Innovation and
digitalization will be explored to establish robust, modernized and efficient
service delivery UNDP will support integrated citizen-centred services and
further expand municipal one-stop-shop networks to reach remote, mostly rural
areas UNDP will support legal, policy and institutional reforms related to human
rights commitments and civic engagement; capacity development for policymaking
and monitoring; and access to justice for vulnerable people UNDP will continue
to support the People’ Advocate, and the Commissioners for Information and Data
Protection and Protection from Discrimination UNDP will continue to work towards
ending all forms of domestic, sexual and gender-based violence and unfavourable
social norms and gender stereotypes, supporting coordinated referral mechanisms
and integrated services, safe accommodation and accessible emergency and
specialized support It will continue to  /17 DP/DCP/ALB/ support the Government
to address structural and systemic barriers to gender equality and women’
empowerment in policy formulation and implementation, and to generate quality
gender-disaggregated data for targeted, informed investments and quantifying of
results The programme will support data availability and  more data-driven
culture for strengthened sectoral analysis, evidence-based policymaking and
promotion of  culture of accountability and performance assessment Policy
analysis and formulation will include  gender equality focus and gender-
disaggregated data UNDP will engage gender champions and support increased civic
engagement and dialogue platforms UNDP will continue to work closely with
existing donors, vertical funds and United Nations agencies, diversifying
funding sources by partnering with new donors including on an integrated
national finance framework, while broadening engagement with the private sector,
academia, civil society, national human rights institutions and the media III
Programme and risk management This country programme document (CPD) outlines
UNDP’ contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach
to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects UNDP will participate in joint Government–United Nations coordination
mechanisms Programme and project boards will be established in line with the
social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism The main risk to
the programme relates to the ongoing impact of COVID-19 and an unforeseen impact
on the capacity to implement the programme or achieve its results Possible
changes in the process and requirements for European Union accession may impact
national development policies Natural or man-made hazards, with insufficient
institutional and local preparedness to respond, can impact the ability of UNDP
to support Albania in delivering its development priorities Risks will be
managed through coordination and partnerships; advocacy and policy dialogue;
regular monitoring of risks, project and results; and updating of contingency
plans for the country office and national emergencies IV Monitoring and
evaluation The monitoring and evaluation plan will be implemented following
endorsement of the CPD by the Executive Board The results framework is aligned
with indicators related to European Union accession, the NSDI and the national
indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals This demonstrates
clear linkage between the support provided by UNDP, the programme outcomes and
sustainable development results The planned evaluations will contribute to
accountability, learning and achievement of strategic results They meet all the
required criteria, provide sufficient and balanced coverage of the programme’
areas of engagement and emphasize national ownership and capacity development
Planned project evaluations relate to ongoing projects Results of new projects
will be captured in the midterm review or in future project evaluations added
during yearly /17  DP/DCP/ALB/ reviews of the evaluation plan Socioeconomic,
political and environmental risks were considered during the formulation of the
evaluation plan Ethical practices and lessons learned shape policy advice,
advocacy and project design and implementation An independent country programme
evaluation will be conducted in UNDP will employ national monitoring systems,
official statistical data and reports from line ministries, development partners
and research institutions to measure its contribution to national results Other
data, perception surveys and reports will be used to assess results and
behavioural change The National Statistical Office and other partners will
receive support to continue improving data quality Data for baselines and
targets will be disaggregated by sex, geography and income and increasingly
identify those left behind The programme will reinforce innovative tools to
manage data collection and analysis at the country programme outcome and output
levels  /17 DP/DCP/ALB/ Annex Results and resources framework for Albania ()
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI II Pillar  Investing in human capital and social
cohesion SDGs: , , 10, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026 there is increased
and more equitable investment in people, removing barriers and creating
opportunities for those at risk of exclusion RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() Indicator: Number of () households; (ii)
persons with disabilities (PwD); (iii) percentage of refugees and persons
granted temporary protection covered by social protection system, by sex and age
(SDG ) Baseline: () 66,629 (ii) 72,711 (iii) % Target: () 65,000 (ii) 70,000
(iii) 15% Indicator: Socioeconomic gaps between Roma and non- Roma, by sex
(reflected in rates of employment, registration and access to services)
Baseline: () Employment Non-Roma: 27%; Roma: 18%; Roma females:11% (ii)
Possession of identity cards Non-Roma: 97%; Roma: 90%; Roma females: 91% DATA
SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME ($) • Ministries (Health and Social Regular: 450,000 Other: 55,702,260
Protection, Finance and Economy, Education, Youth and Sports, Reconstruction) •
INSTAT • Albanian School of Public Administration (ASPA) • State Social Services
• People’ Advocate • Commissioner for Protection from Discrimination • Donors
(European Union, Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, Austria, Croatia,) • CSOs •
United Nations agencies • Local Government Units (LGUs) Albanian Institute of
Statistics (INSTAT) UNESCO Regional Roma Survey Output  Social care and
inclusion: Social protection systems and mechanisms are strengthened to increase
the coverage, quality, and monitoring of monitoring of social services and
social inclusion for vulnerable men and women is enhanced Indicator : Number of
men and women at risk of exclusion Baseline (2020): PwD ,000; Risk of exclusion
,Target (2024): PwD ,000; Risk of exclusion ,Data source: UNDP; State Social
Service; Ministry of Health and Social Protection (MoHSP) Indicator : Number of
local governments and subnational authorities with enhanced capacities to plan,
budget, implement and monitor local social care and inclusion policies
(including social housing) for vulnerable groups designed in  collaborative,
evidence- based and gender-sensitive manner Baseline (2020): 24 LGUs;
subnational authorities ; professional staff 100 Target: 40 LGUs; subnational
authorities; professional staff 250 Data source: State Social Service, MoHSP,
UNDP Indicator : Level of implementation of Roma and Egyptian equality,
inclusion and participation action plan and measures Baseline: 68 (2019) Target:
Source: MoHSP /17  DP/DCP/ALB/ (iii) Youth () not in employment, education or
training Non-Roma: 42%; Roma: 78%; Roma females: 90% (iv) Use of preventive
health care Non-Roma: 68%; Roma: 44%; Roma :49% Target: Gap decreased by at
least % Output  Education: Educational institutions have improved
infrastructure, services and tools to offer inclusive learning and skills to
boys and girls, especially from vulnerable groups Indicator : No educational
facilities repaired and reconstructed according to European Union standards; No
children and students (boys and girls) benefiting from improved services in
education sector Baseline:  Target (2023): 58 Source: Certificate of acceptance
of works Baseline:  Target (2023): 20,000 Source: Regional directorate of
education Output  Gender-inclusive community engagement: Communities and CSOs
enjoy greater capacities and working mechanisms to participate in planning,
(pro- poor) service delivery and monitoring to enhance quality of services and
improve access to vulnerable groups Indicator : No of supported initiatives of
civil society organizations representing women, PwD, refugees, migrants, and
Roma and Egyptian minorities that promote participation, human rights, social
cohesion and volunteerism Baseline (2020):  Target: 34 Source: UNDP NATIONAL
PRIORITY: NSDI II Pillar  Economic growth through enhanced competitiveness and
innovation; NSDI II, Pillar : Investing in human capital and social cohesion;
NSDI II Pillar  Growth through sustainable use of resources SDGs , , , , , , ,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026 innovative and
integrated policy solutions accelerate sustainable, productive, and inclusive
economic development, enhancing climate change adaptation and mitigation and
transition to  green and blue economy RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Build
resilience to shocks and crises Indicator: Labour force participation rates, by
sex, age (SDG ; ) INSTAT Baseline:  Output  Environment and Climate Change:
Implement existing legislation more effectively, new commitments, measures
targets, and governance mechanisms to address climate change, biodiversity loss,
waste, pollution, and degradation strengthening systems • Prime Minister’ Office
• Ministries (Tourism and Environment, Infrastructure and Energy) Regular:
700,000 Other: 38,072,908 /17 • National agencies (Water Resources Management,
Protected Areas, Environment Protection, Forestry, Tourism) • LGUs • Academia •
INSTAT • ASPA • CSOs • Donors (Governments of Norway, Italy, Sweden, vertical
funds, development banks, European Union) • Private sector • United Nations
agencies DP/DCP/ALB/ Total: % (2019) Male: % Female: % Young people () Total:
37% Male: 43%; Female: 30% Target: Total: % Male: % Female: % Young people ()
Total: 38% Male: 44%; Female: 31% Proportion of youth (aged 15– 24 years) not in
education, employment, or training, by sex (SDG ) Baseline: Total: 26% Male: 26%
Female: 25% Target: Total: % Male: 21% Female: 22% Indicator: Availability of
enhanced nationally determined contributions (NDCs) to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions (based on Energy and Climate Plan targets) (/) (SDG13) and national
adaptation plan adapt to climate change Baseline (2015): NDC Target: Yes
Indicator: No of new or amended laws, policies, regulations approved for 10 of
protected areas and natural capital to promote ecotourism and circular
bioeconomy Indicator : Strategic and policy interventions developed through
inclusive and transparent process Baseline: NDC submitted in 2016 Target:
Revised NDC informs development of integrated climate and energy
policies/plan/sectors Source: UNFCCC, European Union Energy Community
Secretariat Indicator : Interventions implemented to ensure effective
performance of protected areas system and nature protection Baseline: Management
Effectiveness tracking system in place for all protected areas Target: up to
three National Parks are capacitated to deliver on business plans; all protected
areas to manage their financial effectiveness Source: Ministry of Tourism and
Environment and National Agency of Protected Areas Output  Disaster risk
reduction: Strengthening government efforts on climate proofing, resilience
building, prevention and preparedness for  solid disaster management system
empowering women and bringing together citizens in all their diversity, with
national, regional, local authorities, civil society and private sector working
closely Indicator : Disaster risk management system in place, supported by
strategic policies and planning documents and coordinated platform for
preparedness and response in line with best practices and European Union
requirements includes women and men and gender- disaggregated disaster needs
assessments Baseline: New agency of civil protection in place, existing studies,
and assessments on some risks Target: Disaster Risk Management Strategy,
National Civil Protection Plans and National Coordination Platform in place, as
well as standard methodologies for local DRR strategies and civil protection
developed and implemented in at least  municipalities, Advanced preparations for
accession to the European Union Civil Protection Mechanism Source: Ministry of
Defence and National Agency of Civil Protection INSTAT Government and United
Nations Government and United Nations  DP/DCP/ALB/ environmental protection and
sustainable green and blue growth incorporating gender equity considerations and
sex- disaggregated data Baseline (2020):  Target:  Indicator: Proportion of the
country covered by protected areas and under improved management for
conservation and sustainable use (SDG15, proxy and SDG 14) Baseline: % Target:
23% Indicator11: Availability of () National disaster risk reduction strategy;
updated national emergency plan; and (ii) Proportion of municipalities with
disaster risk reduction strategies in line with Sendai Framework incorporating
gender equity and child rights considerations and sex-disaggregated data
(Yes/No) (SDG ) Baseline (2020): () No (ii) TBD National Agency for Protected
Areas Government and United Nations World Competitiveness Report, World Economic
Forum Indicator : Climate change adaptation planning and preparedness influences
investments, including on nature-based solutions Baseline: National climate
change strategy and legal framework in place Target: National climate adaptation
planning includes climate finance options; funding partnerships Source: Ministry
of Tourism and Environment Output  Water resource management and blue growth:
Promote source-to-sea approach for sustainable water resources management and
strengthened transboundary cooperation while tapping into the potential of blue
growth Indicator : Blue economy programme with  long- term vision Baseline: No
programme or strategy on blue economy/blue growth Target: Blue economy programme
developed; new interventions project fiches developed for implementation in main
subsectors Source: Office of the Prime Minister and line ministries Indicator :
implementation of priority interventions in Drini River basin in line with Drini
Strategic Action Plan Baseline: Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis and Strategic
Action Programme in place for Drini Target: # measures implemented in Drini
Source: Ministry of Tourism and Environment and National Water Resources
Management Agency Output  Employment and Skills Development: Government
institutions increased capacities to strengthen policies and services addressing
skills mismatch and increase labour force participation and decent work,
especially for young people, vulnerable groups, the long term unemployed • Prime
Minister’ Office • Parliament • Ministries and Institutions (Finance and
Economy, Education, Youth and Sports, __________________ 11 UNSDCF outcome
indicator being agreed with the Government  11 DP/DCP/ALB/ Target (2026): () Yes
(ii) TBD Indicator: Research and development index score (World Economic Forum)
Baseline (2019): /100 Target (2026): 35 Health and Social Protection, Protection
of Entrepreneurship) • National agencies (Youth, Employment and Skills,
Vocational Education, Training and Qualifications) • National Councils (Labour,
Vocational Education Training) • INSTAT • Financial Supervisory Authority •
Investment Promotion Agency • Investment Council • General Department of
Taxation • National Business Centre • LGUs • Chambers of Commerce • United
Nations agencies • Regional Youth Cooperation Office • European Investment Fund
• Donors (European Union, Governments of Switzerland, Italy, Netherlands, United
Kingdom, Sweden, EIB, EBRD) • NGOs • Private Sector • Diaspora • Higher
education institutions • World Economic Forum Indicator : The national strategic
document to guide the employment and skill development sector formulated and
adopted Baseline: Current strategy  Target: Yes,  Source: Official Gazette
Indicator : No employment promotion programmes designed and implemented for
vulnerable groups Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):  Source: Official Gazette
Indicator : % of vocational education and training providers accredited or in
the process of accreditation Baseline (2021): % Target (2026): 100% Source:
Ministers Orders published by the National Agency for Vocational Education and
Training and Qualifications Output  Economic Development: Policies and programme
measures developed to promote digital economy, entrepreneurship and growth of
competitive SMEs Indicator : No MSMEs benefiting from improved business advisory
support; share of those led by women, youth Baseline (2020): 15 Target (2026):
500 (at least 100 women-led businesses) Source: UNDP Indicator : No policy
initiatives in support of increased resilience in the private sector Baseline:
Target: At least two policy initiatives drafted and approved Source: Ministry of
Finance and Economy Output  Innovation: Data-driven innovations lead to
financial solutions for the achievement of SDGs 12  DP/DCP/ALB/ Indicator :
Integrated national financial framework (INFF) for SDG achievement is drafted
and approved through an inclusive process Baseline: INFF not in place Target:
INFF approved Source: Government of Albania, Parliament Indicator : No
innovative approaches, including behavioural insights and design thinking,
tested and scaled up with public and private institutions Baseline:  Target: At
least three innovation prototypes and one scaled up Source: UNDP NATIONAL
PRIORITY: NSDI Fundamental Principle - Good Governance, Democracy and Rule of
Law; NSDI II Pillar  Investing in human capital and social cohesion; NSDI II
Priority Delivery of innovative, citizen-centred public services (Improving the
quality of life and the environment for all; Strengthening governance and the
government’ capability to deliver) SDGs , 10, 11, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME:
By 2026, governance is more transparent and accountable, enabling people (women
and girls, men and boys, and persons at risk of exclusion), to enjoy quality,
inclusive services, enhanced rule of law and access to justice in line with
Albania’ human rights commitments RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Trust in Governance
Survey (UNDP) (Annually) Ibid Output  Good Governance, Participation and Voice:
Governance processes are made more effective, accountable, transparent, and
compliant to rule of law, by promoting  participatory culture, making use of
technological advancements, and developing capacities for inclusive and
equitable policy formulation and implementation Indicator : No of civil society
organization initiatives addressing community needs which are funded
(disaggregated by sex and vulnerable target groups to extent possible) Baseline
(2021): 123 Target (2024): 180 Source: European Union and UNDP Indicator : No
public calls for CSOs performed by local governments Baseline (2021): 36 Target
(2024): 58 • Prime Minister' Office • Ministries (Interior, Justice, Health and
Social Protection) • National agencies (Delivery of Regular: 700,000 Other:
12,701,933 Integrated Services, Information Society) • INSTAT • Commissioners
(Right to Information and Data Protection, Protection from Discrimination) •
People’ Advocate • LGUs • Donors (European Union, Governments of Austria,
Sweden, Switzerland, Italy) • Albanian Associations of Municipalities •
Institute for Mediation and Democracy • CSOs Indicator: Proportion of population
who believe institutional transparency () and accountability () are
satisfactory, by sex, age, disability and population group (disaggregated by
central/local level) (SDG  proxy) Baseline (2020): Central: : 35%, : 35% Local:
: 37%, : 37% Target (2026): Central: : 50%, : 60% Local: : 50%, : 60% Indicator:
Proportion of population who believe there are sufficient opportunities to
participate in the decision-  13 Ibid DP/DCP/ALB/ making processes of public
institutions (disaggregated by sex, age group, central/local level) (SDG ,
proxy) Baseline (2020): Central: 28% Local: 39% Target (2026): Central: 40%
Local: 50% Indicator: Proportion of persons who paid  bribe to  public official
or were asked for  bribe by those public officials, during the previous 12
months (disaggregated by sex, age group, central/local level) (SDG16) Baseline
(2020): Central: 32 Local: 32 Target (2026): Central: 10 Local: 15 Source: Local
budgets of partner local government, European Union and UNDP • United Nations
agencies Indicator : Adoption of integrity planning and implementation
instruments at local and central level Baseline (2021):  Target (2024): 30
Source: UNDP reports, National Anticorruption Strategy reports Indicator : No of
regular surveys by year Baseline (2021):  Target (2026): - every year, starting
from 2022 Source: UNDP Output  Data and Evidence: Cooperation Framework partners
increased capacities to generate quality disaggregated data to strengthen
policies and programmes, based on the Integrated Planning System in Albania
(IPSIS) system Indicator : No of municipalities using IPSIS as performance
system Baseline (2020):  Target (2023):  Source: UNDP and municipal reports
Indicator : No of women and men using the one-stop- shop services Baseline
(2020): 26% , 74%  Target (2023): 40% , 60%  Source: UNDP, One-Stop-Shop
Information System (OSSIS) Business Intelligence Indicator : Municipalities
making use of OSSIS data to improve service delivery and staff performance
Baseline (2020): 10 Target (2023): 30 Source: UNDP and municipal reports
Indicator : Knowledge-sharing platform for enhancing system approach in central
and local level is established Baseline (2020):  14  DP/DCP/ALB/ Target (2024):
Platform operational at central and local levels Source: UNDP Output  Public
sector accountability and quality services: Institutions at national and
municipal level enhanced capacities and systems to deliver quality, responsive,
efficient, transparent, inclusive and accessible services that meet the
increasing social demand and perception of corruption in the public sector
Indicator : Level of citizens’ perception and satisfaction on public servants’
equal professional and ethical public (administrative) service delivery Baseline
(2020): 68% Target (2023): 74% Baseline (2020): 73% Target (2023): 82% Source:
Annual Trust in Government Opinion Poll Indicator : No of target local
governments and administrative units providing services through one-stop- shop
offices Baseline (2020): 48 Target (2023): 250 Source: UNDP, OSSIS Business
Intelligence Indicator : Monthly average of applications through one-stop-
shopping per municipality Baseline (2020): 52 Target (2024): 250 Source: UNDP,
OSSIS Business Intelligence Indicator : Level of accountability of central and
local government Baseline (2020): Central Government 35%; Local Government 37%
Target (2023): Central Government 40%; Local Government 42% Source: Annual Trust
in Government Opinion Poll Output  Human rights and access to justice:
Parliament, national human rights institutions, and justice institutions
strengthened capacities and  15 DP/DCP/ALB/ mechanisms to protect human rights,
increase access to justice and remove structural barriers to gender equality and
women' empowerment Indicator : No of vulnerable women and men benefitting from
free legal aid services and reached out through awareness and public legal
education on human rights and protecting mechanisms Baseline (2020): ,372 Target
(2026): ,800 (annually) Source: MoJ Directorate of Free Legal Aid Baseline
(2020): ,700 Target (2026): ,800 (annually) Source: UNDP NATIONAL PRIORITY: NSDI
II: Cross NSDI - Delivery of innovative, citizen-centred public services; NSDI
II Pillar  Investing in human capital and social cohesion SDGs: , , 10, 11,
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME: By 2026, gender responsive governance strengthens
equality and non-discrimination, promotes women’ empowerment and human rights,
and reduces violence against women and children RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development INSTAT
(Annually) Indicator: Proportion of women aged  years subjected to () intimate
partner domestic violence;( ii) non-partner violence; (iii) sexual harassment in
the previous 12 months (SDG ; ) Baseline: () (ii)  (iii)  Target: () 32 (ii)
(iii)  Indicator: Proportion of seats held by women in national parliaments and
local governments (SDG5) and national dialogue mechanisms 16 Regular: 387,000
Other: ,965,100 Output  Legal, policy and institutional reforms enhanced to
remove structural barriers to gender equality and women' empowerment and prevent
and respond to all forms of violence and discrimination against women and girls
Indicator : No of cases of violence against women and girls handled through
coordinated referral mechanisms Baseline (2020): 450 Target (2026): 500
(annually) Source: Recording Violence in Albania online system Indicator : No
legal and policy initiatives developed in line with international treaties and
standards on advancing gender equality and ending violence against women and
girls • Ministries (Health and Social Protection, Education, Youth and Sports) •
INSTAT • ASPA • State Social Services • People’ Advocate • Commissioner for
Protection from Discrimination • Governments of Switzerland, Sweden, Austria) •
CSOs • United Nations agencies • LGUs MoHSP (Annually) National human rights
institutions’ reports (Biannually) United Nations reports (Annually) Baseline
(2020):  laws and policies Target (2026): 14 laws and policies Source: Council
of Ministers, UNDP Indicator : No municipalities supported to provide emergency
services to victims of domestic and sexual violence  Baseline (2019): % Target:
40% Government and United Nations reports Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 15
Source: UNDP DP/DCP/ALB/  17