GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA NUMBER 79 OF 2014 ON NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA, Considering :  to
implement that the provision of Article 11 paragraph () of Law Number 30 of 2007
on Energy, it is deemed necessary to set national energy policy;  of national
energy policy has been that the draft approved by the House of Representatives
of the Republic of Indonesia (DPR) under its Decree Number 01/DPR RI/ III-2014;
that based on the considerations as referred to in the above mentioned letter
and letter , it is necessary to enact Government Regulation on National Energy
Policy; Observing :  Article  paragraph () of the 1945 Constitution of the
Republic of Indonesia;  Law Number 30 of 2007 on Energy (State Gazette of
Indonesia of 2007 Number 96, the Republic of Supplement the Republic of
Indonesia Number 4796); to State Gazette of HAS DECIDED : To Enact : GOVERNMENT
REGULATION ON NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY CHAPTER  GENERAL PROVISION Article  In this
Government Regulation, the following items shall have the meanings indicated:
Energy shall mean  capability to conduct work that could be in the form of heat,
light, mechanics, chemical, and electromagnetic  Energy Sources shall mean
thing that could produce Energy, both directly and through conversion or
transform process  Energy Resources shall mean natural resources that could be
utilized, as Energy Sources and Energy  New Energy Sources shall mean Energy
Sources that can be produced by using new technology, coming from both Renewable
Energy and non- Renewable Energy Sources, among others nuclear, hydrogen, coal
bed methane, liquefied coal, and gasified coal  New Energy shall mean the Energy
coming from New Energy Sources  Renewable Energy Sources shall mean the Energy
Sources produced from sustainable Energy Resources when well managed, such as
geothermal, wind, bioenergy, sunlight, water flow and waterfall, and
hydrokinetic ocean and ocean thermal energies  Renewable Energy shall mean the
Energy deriving from Renewable Energy Sources  Energy Management shall mean an
activity consisting of the supply, enterprise, and utilization of Energy, and
the provision of Strategic Reserves and Energy Resources Conservation  Energy
Independence shall mean the assurance of Energy availability by fully utilizing
the potential source in the country Energy Security shall mean  condition of
ensuring the availability of Energy and access of people to Energy at affordable
prices in the long term with regard to the protection of the Environment Energy
Conservation shall mean  systematic, planned, and integrated effort intended to
preserve domestic Energy Resources and to improve efficiency in their
utilization Energy Resources Energy Resources Management that guarantees their
utilization and supply by continuing to maintain and improve the quality of
their value and diversity Conservation mean shall Environment shall mean
spatial unit with all objects, power, conditions, and living creatures,
including human beings and their behaviors, which influence the sustainable life
and well-being of human beings and other living creatures Independent Energy
Management shall mean  quality of Energy Management which are fully national-
interest oriented to ensure that the Energy, Energy Sources, and Energy
Resources are managed as well as possible for people’ prosperity, by
prioritizing the domestic human resources and industrial capabilities as much as
possible Energy Utilization shall mean the activities to use Energy, both
directly and indirectly from Energy Sources Energy Industry shall mean all of
the industries involved in the production and sale of Energy including Energy
Sources extraction, manufacturing, refining, transmission, and distribution
Energy Supply shall mean any activity or process aimed to provide Energy, both
from domestic and overseas Primary Energy shall mean  form of Energy that is
given by nature and has not been subjected to any further processing Final
Energy is Energy that can be directly consumed by end user Energy Elasticity
shall mean the comparison between the Energy demand growth rate to the economic
growth rate Energy Intensity shall mean the total quantity of Energy consumption
per unit of gross domestic product Energy Reserves shall mean the Energy
Resources whose location, quantity, and quality have been identified Strategic
Reserves shall mean the Energy Reserves for the future Energy Buffer Stock shall
mean the availability quantity of Energy Sources and Energy stored nationally
which is needed to meet the national Energy demand in  given period of time
Energy Diversification shall mean diversifying Energy Sources utilization
Electrification Ratio shall mean the comparison of electrified households to the
total number of households the number of Business Entity shall mean  company in
the form of  legal entity that runs  continuous and permanent business, and is
established in accordance with the prevailing laws and regulations, as well as
has its operation and domicile within the territory of the Unitary State of the
Republic of Indonesia Central Government, hereinafter referred to as Government,
is the President of the Republic of Indonesia who holds the authority to reign
the Republic of Indonesia as referred to in the 1945 Constitution of the
Republic of Indonesia Regional Government shall mean the governor, regent, or
mayor and the regional government instruments as the elements of regional
administration National Energy Council shall mean  national, independent, and
permanent institution in charge of national energy policy Household Gas Use
Ratio shall mean the ratio between the number of households that use gas to the
total number of households Article  National energy policy shall be the policy
on Energy Management based on the principles of fairness, sustainability, and
environmental sound aimed to create Energy Independence and national Energy
Security Article  () The National energy policy as referred to in Article  shall
consist of main policies and supporting policies () The main policies as
referred to in paragraph () shall encompass:  availability of Energy to meet the
national demand;  priority of Energy development;  utilization of national
Energy Resources;  national Energy Reserves () The supporting policies as
referred to in paragraph () shall encompass:  Energy Conservation, Energy
Resources Conservation, and Energy Diversification;  Environment and safety;
pricing, subsidy, and energy incentives;  infrastructure and access of people to
Energy and Energy Industry;  research, development, and application of Energy
technology; and  institutional and funding matters Article  The national energy
policy as referred to in Article  and Article  shall be implemented within the
period of 2014 up to CHAPTER II OBJECTVE AND TARGET Part One Objective Article
The national energy policy is set as  guide to provide the direction of national
Energy Management in order to achieve Energy Independence and national Energy
Security to support the national sustainable development Article  The Energy
Independence and national Energy Security as referred to in Article , shall be
achieved by realizing:  Energy Resources as  national capital development and
not as  mere exports commodity;  Independent Energy Management;  availability of
Energy and fulfilment of domestic Energy Sources demand;  management of Energy
Resources in an optimal, integrated and sustainable way;  efficient Energy
Utilization in all sectors;  access of people to Energy in  fair and equitable
way;  development of domestic technological capability, Energy Industry, and
Energy services to be independent and improve human resource capacity;  creation
of employment; and  preservation of the Environment functions Part Two Target
Article  Energy Sources and/or Energy Resources shall be intended to be capital
development for the greatest welfare of the people, by optimizing their use for
national economic development, the creation of value added in the country and
absorption of manpower Article  The target of supply and utilization of Primary
Energy and Final Energy shall be as follows:  the fulfilment of Primary Energy
supply in 2025 around 400 MTOE (four hundred million tonnes of oil equivalent)
and around 1000 MTOE (one thousand million tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2050;
the achievement of per-capita primary energy utilization around  TOE (one point
four tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2025 and around  TOE (three point two tonnes
of oil equivalent) in 2050; the fulfilment of power generation capacity
provision around 115 GW (one hundred and fifteen giga watts) in 2025 and around
430 GW (four hundred and thirty giga watts) in 2050; and the achievement of per-
capita electricity utilization around ,500 KWh (two thousand five hundred kilo
watt hours) in 2025 and around ,000 KWh (seven thousand kilo watt hours) in
Article  For the fulfilment of Energy Supply and Energy Utilization as referred
to in Article , the achievement of national energy policy targets are required
as follows:  realization of the new paradigm that Energy Sources is  capital of
the national development;  Energy Elasticity achievement shall be less than
(one) in 2025 that comply with the economic growth; reduction in final Energy
Intensity of % (one) percent per year up to 2025;   achievement of
Electrification Ratio of 85% (eighty five percent) in 2015 and close on 100%
(one hundred percent) in 2020;  achievement of the household gas utilization
ratio of 85% (eighty five percent) in 2015; and optimal Primary Energy mix shall
be achieved:  the role of the New Energy and Renewable Energy at least 23%
(twenty three percent) in 2025 and to be at least 31% (thirty one percent) in
2050 provided that its economical fulfilled;   the role of oil shall be less
than 25% (twenty five percent) in 2025 and to be less than 20% (twenty percent)
in 2050;  the role of coal at least 30% (thirty percent) in 2025, and 25%
(twenty five percent) at the minimum in 2050; and  the role of natural gas at
least 22% (twenty two percent) in 2025 and at least 24% (twenty four percent) in
CHAPTER III DIRECTION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Part One The Main Policy
Paragraph  Availability of Energy to meet the National Demand Article 10 ()
Availability of Energy to meet the national demand shall be realized by:
increasing exploration of the resources, potential and/or proven Energy, both
fossil type and New Energy and Renewable Energy;  increasing Energy production
and Energy Sources in the country and/or from overseas;  increasing the
reliability of distribution system of Energy Supply; the production,
transportation, and  reducing fossil Energy exports gradually especially for gas
and coal and to set up the deadline to start stopping the exports;  embodiying
balance between the increase rate of fossil Energy Reserves with  maximum
production rate; and  ensuring the security of the carrying capacity of
Environment to ensure the availability of Energy Sources of water and geothermal
() In realizing the availability of Energy for the national demand as referred
to in paragraph (), if there is an overlap of land use in Energy Supply then the
precedence shall be the one that has higher national defense value and/or
strategic value Paragraph  Priority of Energy Development Article 11 () Priority
of Energy development shall be carried out by way of:  developing Energy by
taking into account the economical of Energy, security of Energy supply, and
preservation of the Environment functions; the balance of  prioritizing Energy
Supply to the people who do not have the access to Energy of electricity,
household gas, and Energy for yet transportation, industry, and agriculture;
developing Energy by prioritizing local Energy Resources;  developing Energy and
Energy Resources shall be prioritized to meet domestic energy demand; and
developing the industry of high Energy demand shall be prioritized to the region
which is rich with Energy Resources () To realize the economic balance of Energy
as referred to in paragraph () letter , priority of the national Energy
development shall be based on the following principles:  maximizing the use of
Renewable Energy by taking into account the economic level;  minimizing the use
of oil;  optimizing utilization of natural gas and New Energy; and  using coal
as the reliable national Energy supply () The provision as referred to in
paragraph () shall be exempted to nuclear Energy that shall be utilized by
taking account the security of the national Energy supply in  large scale,
reducing carbon emission and keep prioritizing the potential of New Energy and
Renewable Energy according to its economical value, as well as to consider it as
the last option by paying close attention to the safety factors Paragraph
Utilization of the National Energy Resources Article 12 () Utilization of the
national Energy Resources shall be performed by the Government and/or Regional
Governments referring to the following strategy:  utilization of Renewable
Energy Sources of the type of water flow and water fall Energy, geothermal
Energy, hydro kinetic ocean and ocean thermal energies, and wind Energy shall be
directed to electric power;  utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of solar
Energy type shall be directed to electric power, and non electric power for
industry, household, and transportation;  utilization of Renewable Energy
Sources of bio-fuel type shall be directed to substitute fuel oil especially for
transportation and industry;  utilization of Renewable Energy Sources of bio-
fuel type shall be performed by keep maintaining food security;  utilization of
Renewable Energy of the biomass and waste type shall be directed for electric
power and transportation;  utilization of oil shall only be performed for
transportation and commercial that are not yet substituted by other Energies or
Energy Sources;  utilization of natural gas Energy Sources for industry,
electric power, household, and transportation, shall be prioritized for the use
of those with highest added value;  utilization of coal Energy Sources shall be
for electric power and industry;  utilization of New Energy Sources in the
liquid form that is liquified coal and hydrogen shall be for transportation;
utilization of New Energy Sources of solid and gas form shall be for electric
power;  utilization of liquid Energy Sources other than liquefied petroleum gas
shall be directed to transportation sector;  utilization of hydrokinetic ocean
and ocean thermal Energy Sources shall be encouraged by constructing pilot
projects that is connected to power grade as an initial step;  increasing
utilization of solar Energy Sources through the use of industry, commercial
building, and in transportation, solar cell household; and  maximization and
obligation of utilizing solar Energy Sources shall be performed with the
condition that all components and the solar Energy generating system from
upstream to downstream shall be produced in stages in the country () Utilization
of the national Energy Resources shall be given the priority to meet the demand
for Energy and raw material () Priority of the national Energy Sources
utilization shall be performed based on the overall considerations on the
capacity, continuity, and the economy as well as the Environment impact
Paragraph  National Energy Reserves Article 13 The national Energy Reserves
shall include:  Strategic Reserves;  Energy Buffer Stock; and  Operational Stock
Article 14 () Strategic Reserves as referred to in Article 13 letter  shall be
regulated and allocated by the Government to ensure long-term Energy Security;
Strategic Reserves as referred to in paragraph () shall only be exploited in
accordance with the time determined or whenever necessary for the national
interest; Further provisions on the management of Strategic Reserves shall be
regulated in  Presidential Regulation () () Article 15 () Energy Buffer Stock as
referred to in Article 13 letter  shall be provided to ensure the national
Energy Security alligned with the national Energy efficiency policy,
particularly through the policy on appropriate-targeted fuel oil and electricity
subsidies Energy Buffer Stock as referred to in paragraph () shall be provided
by the Government under the following provisions:  Energy Buffer Stock is the
stock other than the operational stock () provided by the Business Entity and
Energy Industry;  Energy Buffer Stock shall be used to overcome the Energy
crisis and emergency condition; and  Energy Buffer Stock shall be provided
gradually according to the economic condition and financial capability of the
state () The National Energy Council shall regulate the type, amount, time, and
location of the Energy Buffer Stock The Management of Energy Buffer Stock shall
be conducted according to the provisons of prevailing laws and regulations ()
Article 16 () Business Entity and industry as Energy supplier shall be obliged
to provide operational stock to ensure continuity of Energy supply Further
provisions on the operational stock supply as referred to in paragraph () shall
be regulated by the Government () Part Two Supporting Policy Paragraph  Energy
Conservation, Energy Resources Conservation, and Energy Diversification Article
17 () Energy Conservation shall be conducted from the upstream side through
downstream side, to include management of Energy Resources and the entire stages
of exploration, production, transportation, distribution, and utilization of
Energy and Energy Sources () Management of Energy Resources as referred to in
paragraph () shall the supply and utilization of Energy be directed to ensure
that Resources while maintaining and improving the quality of value and
diversity of the Energy Resources () Energy Resources Conservation shall be
performed by sectoral approach, at least to adjust it to the national spatial
plan and the carrying capacity of the Environment To perform Energy Resources
Conservation as referred to in paragraph (), Energy Supply shall use sustainable
Energy Resources Producer and consumer of Energy shall be obliged to perform
Energy Conservation and efficiency of Energy Resources management so as to
ensure availability of Energy in the long term Energy Conservation in the
industrial sector shall be conducted by taking into account the competitiveness
The Government and/or Regional Government by virtue of its respective authority
shall set  guideline and implementation of Energy Conservation policy in
particular in the field of Energy saving, at least covering the following:
obligation of standardization and labelization of all equipment of the () () ()
() Energy users;  obligation of Energy management including Energy audit to
Energy users;  obligation for using efficient power generating technology and
Energy conversion equipment;  socialization on Energy saving culture;  realizing
investment climate for developing Energy services business as investor and
provider of Energy in efficient way; to accelerate the application and/or
transfer to efficient mass transportation system, both urban and intercity
transportation;   to accelerate the implementation of electronic road pricing so
as to reduce the traffic congestion triggered by private vehicle; and  target-
setting on fuel consumption in the transportation sector shall be measureable
and gradually conducted so as to increase efficiency Article 18 () The
Government and/or Regional Government by virtue of its respective authority
shall be obliged to perform Energy Diversification to increase Energy Resources
Conservation and National Energy Security and/or the regions Energy
Diversification as referred to in paragraph () shall be performed at least
through:  acceleration of supply and utilization of diverse type of New Energy
() Sources and Renewable Energy Sources;  acceleration of substituting fuel oil
with gas in the residential and transportation sectors;  acceleration of
utilizing electric power for the propulsion of motor vehicles;  increased
utilization of low rank coal for mine mouths steam power plant, gasified coal
and liquified coal; and increased utilization of medium and high rank coals for
domestic power plant  Paragraph  Environment and Occupational Safety Article 19
() National Energy Management shall be aligned with the direction of the
sustainable national development, preservation of natural resources, Energy
Resources Conservation, and control of the Environment’ pollution The National
Energy Management activities shall be obliged to take into account health,
occupational safety, and social impact factors while maintaining the Environment
functions Any activities in Energy Supply and Energy Utilization shall be
obliged : the  performing prevention, dwindle, mitigation, and recovery of () ()
impact, and compensation to the parties affected;  minimizing the production of
waste, reuse of waste in the production process, the use of waste for other
benefits, and extract the elements that still have the benefits contained in the
waste, while taking into account the social aspects, Environment and its
economical; and  prioritizing the use of environmental friendly technologies Any
exploitation of nuclear installations shall be obliged to take into account the
safety and the risk of accidents and bear all the indemnity to third parties who
suffer losses caused by nuclear accident Implementation of the Environment
management and implementation of occupational safety under the national Energy
Management activities, Energy Supply, and Energy Utilization as referred to in
paragraph (), paragraph (), paragraph (), and paragraph () shall be carried out
in accordance with the provisions of the prevailing laws and regulations () ()
Paragraph  Energy Prices, Subsidy and Incentives Article 20 () () Energy Price
shall be set on the basis of  Fair Economic value Renewable Energy Price shall
be regulated based on:  the calculation of the Renewable Energy price with the
assumption to compete with Energy price deriving from petroleum Energy Sources
prevailing in an area within  certain time, which is calculated to exclude the
fuel oil subsidy; or  the rational calculation of Energy prices for Renewable
Energy supply from local sources, in order to secure the Energy supply in
certain areas which are in the remote location, under developed facilities and
infrastructure, vulnerable to weather disturbances, or are near to the
territorial border lines of the Unitary States of the Republic of Indonesia ()
The Government shall regulate the price of coal in the country until the
establishment of an efficient market The Government actualize the electricity
market at least through:  price setting of certain Primary Energy such as coal,
gas, water, and () geothermal for power generation;  setting of progressive
electricity tariffs;  application of feed in tariff mechanism in setting the
selling price of Renewable Energy; and  improvement of geothermal Energy
Management by sharing the risk between electricity supply license holders and
developers () The Government shall set Renewable Energy market, including
minimum quota of electricity, liquid fuels, and gas sourced from New Energy and
Renewable Energy Article 21 () shall be provided by Subsidy Governments Subsidy
as referred to in paragraph () shall be provided in terms of:  application of
Fair Economical as referred to in Article 20 paragraph the Government and
Regional () () may not be performed; and/or  Renewable Energy price as referred
to in Article 20 paragraph () letter  is more expensive than the non-subsidized
Energy prices of fuel oil () Provision of subsidy as referred to in paragraph ()
shall be targeted appropriately to groups of less fortunate people Reduction of
subsidies for fuel oil and electricity shall be conducted gradually until the
purchasing power of people is achieved () Article 22 () The Government and
Regional Governments shall provide fiscal and nonfiscal incentives to encourage
diversification program of Energy Sources and development of Renewable Energy
The Government and Regional Governments shall provide incentive for the
development, exploitation, and utilization of Renewable Energy in particular for
the small scale and located in remote areas until its economical value be
competitive with the conventional Energy The Government shall provide incentive
to the producers and consumers of Energy who perform Energy Conservation and
Energy efficiency obligation and give disincentive to those who do not implement
Energy Conservation and Energy efficiency The Government shall provide incentive
to private institutions or individuals who develop the core technology in the
field of New Energy and Renewable Energy The incentives granted by the
Government and Regional Governments shall be realized executed in accordance
with the provisions in the prevailing laws and regulations () () () () Paragraph
Infrastructure, Access of People, and Energy Industry Article 23 () The
development and strengthening of the Energy infrastructure and access of people
to Energy shall be performed by the Government and/or Regional Governments The
development and strengthening of Energy infrastructure as well as access of
people to Energy as referred to in paragraph () shall carried out by:  ()
improving the ability of domestic industry in the provision of Energy
infrastructure;  developing infrastructure while supporting coal industry which
includes transportation, stockpiling, and blending to achieve an efficient
market demand continuously; domestic supply enable and to  accelerating the
provision of supporting infrastructure for oil and gas production, refining
fuel, Energy transportation and distribution, transmission systems, and
distribution of Energy;  accelerating the provision of supporting infrastructure
for New Energy and Renewable Energy; access  providing for people to obtain
Energy information transparently and to obtain Energy easily; and facilitating
access of people to obtain information on the development and strengthening of
Energy infrastructure  () The development of energy infrastructure shall take
into account the geographical condition of Indonesia which are mostly composed
of marine waters, by strengthening the infrastructure of the exploration,
production, transportation, distribution, and transmission within the
archipelago areas Article 24 () The Government shall encourage and strengthen
the development of Energy Industry in order to accelerate the achievement of
Energy Supply and Energy Utilization target, strengthening the national economy
and absorption of employment Strengthening the development of the Energy
Industry as referred to in paragraph () shall include:  () improvement of Energy
Industry and Energy services capability in the country;  uprise of the
development of production equipment industry and utilizers of Renewable Energy
in the country; improvement of the domestic capacity to support the exploration
of geothermal and electric power supporting industry;   encouragement of the
system and components industry for equipment of solar power plant installation
and power generating from the energy of hydro kinetic ocean and ocean thermal;
increasing local content in the national Energy Industry;   development of the
component/equipment industry for wind power plant installation through small and
medium enterprises and/or national industry;  provision of greater opportunities
to the national companies in managing oil, gas, and coal; and  development of
Energy Industry in the country through the purchase of factory license Paragraph
Research, Development, and Application of Energy Technology Article 25 ()
Research, development, and application of Energy technology activities shall be
directed to support the national Energy Industry Funding for research,
development and application of Energy technology as referred to in paragraph ()
shall be facilitated up to commercial stage by: ()  the Government and/or
Regional Governments in accordance with their respective authority; and
Business Entity The Government and/or Regional Governments shall encourage the
creation of  climate for utilization and in favour of the results of research,
development, and application of national Energy technology The Government and/or
Regional Governments shall reinforce the areas on research, development, and
application of Energy at least by:  preparing and upgrading the capability of
human resources in mastery and application of technology as well as safety in
the field of Energy; and/or increasing in mastery of domestic Energy technology
by undertaking research, development, and implementation of efficient Energy
technology () ()  Paragraph  Institutional and Funding Matters Article 26 ()
shall and/or Regional Government The Government perform institutional
strengthening to ensure the achievement of the objectives and targets of the
Energy Supply and Energy Utilization The institutional strengthening as referred
to in paragraph () shall be conducted at least by:  () improving the
institutional system and services of the Government and Regional Governments
bureaucracy and increased inter- agencies coordination in the field of Energy in
order to accelerate the decision-making, licensing process, and development of
Energy infrastructure;  enhancing cooperation and coordination among industry,
policy makers, research and the institutions, universities, community in order
to speed up mastery and Energy Utilization; improving institutional
accountability by adjusting the functions and authority of the central and
regional level institutions; improving the capability of human resources in the
field of Energy in the regions in Energy Management;    strengthening the
capacity of the organizations at the regency/city level which shall be
responsible for planning, development and Energy Management in rural areas;
and/or regionalization of electrical Energy supply in order to reduce
disparities in electrical Energy supply outside Java  () The Government and/or
Regional Governments in accordance with their respective authority shall be
responsible for handling and overcoming the problems of Energy Article 27 () The
Government and/or Regional Governments in setting the Energy Supply growth
target shall take into account the economic growth target In order to achieve
the growth target on Energy Supply as referred to in paragraph (), the
Government and/or Regional Governments shall provide and strengthening of Energy
infrastructure () allocated funding the development adequate for () The
Government and/or Regional Governments shall encourage the the availability of
Energy, strengthening of equilization of Energy infrastructure, equal access of
people to Energy , the development of national Energy Industry, and achievement
the target of Energy Supply and Energy Utilization The Government shall
encourage Business Entities and banks to finance the construction of
infrastructure and Energy Utilization The strengthening of funding as referred
to in paragraph () shall be conducted at least by:  enhancing the role of
national banks in the financing of oil and gas production nationwide, Renewable
Energy development activities, and Energy-saving programs;  applying depletion
premium of funding to ensure () () fossil Energy towards Energy development;
and/or  providing specific budget allocations by the Government and/or Regional
Governments to accelerate equitable access to electricity and Energy ()
Depletion premium as referred to in paragraph () letter  shall be used for oil
and natural gas exploration and development of New Energy and Renewable Energy
Sources, human resource capacity building, research and development, and
development of supporting infrastructure CHAPTER IV SUPERVISION Article 28 The
National Energy Council shall perform supervision on the implementation of the
intersectoral national energy policy CHAPTER  OTHER PROVISIONS Article 29 The
National energy policy may be reviewed within  (five) years at the earliest when
deemed necessary Article 30 The National energy policy shall be the ground of
formulating National Energy Master Plan and National Electricity Master Plan
CHAPTER VI CLOSING PROVISIONS Article 31 At the the time this Government
Regulation comes into effect, all implementing regulations of the Presidential
Regulation Number  of 2006 on National Energy Policy shall remain in effect to
the extent they are not in contradiction with this Government Regulation
ELUCIDATION ON GOVERNMENT REGULATION OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA NUMBER 79 OF
2014 ON NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  GENERAL Energy has an important and strategic
role in the achievement of social, economic and Environmental goal in the
national sustainable development  result of the Energy Demand is projected to
continually increasing as economic growth and the increase of population
Therefore, Energy Management has to be well-implemented in order to meet the
energy supply assurance both for the present and future needs Energy Management
in particular the Energy Resources management is not yet optimal performed to
meet Energy needs in the country  portion of the Primary Energy is still
allocated for export to generate foreign exchange and source of revenue in the
State Budget As  result, the domestic Energy needs both as fuel and raw
materials for the industry are still not optimally fulfilled as mandated in
Article 33 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia In addition,
there are also  number of problems facing the energy sector, among others:
Energy use is not yet efficient;  Energy subsidies are not yet on the proper
target;  Energy prices have not yet reached the economic price;   dependence on
fossil Energy is still high and has not been followed by an interest in
investment is still low; increase balance of reserves supply; limitations of
Energy infrastructure;   Energy infrastructure development has not been
supported by  strong and independent national industry; limitations of the
budget; lack of favours to the domestic technology products;   development of
energy research has not been well integrated; mastery of Energy technology is
still low; lack of Energy development priority setting; access of people to
energy is still low; Energy Management has not applied fully the principle of
sustainability; and the added value of Energy Management is not yet optimal
Looking at the energy current conditions and  number of problems faced in the
Energy sector, the Government deems necessary to perform Energy Management
properly on the supply side management and the demand side management in order
to achieve Energy Independence and national Energy Security Thus, it is
necessary to develop national energy policy that includes the availability of
Energy to meet the national needs, priorities of Energy development, national
Energy Resources utilization and national Energy Buffer Stock The Energy supply
Policy as well as the priority of Energy development and the national Energy
Buffer Stock is directed to ensure the national security of Energy supply
through the utilization of Energy Resources proportionately, both non-fossil
Energy Resources such as geothermal, biomass, water flow and water fall energy,
solar energy, wind power, nuclear power, hydrokinetic ocean and ocean thermal
energies and fossil Energy Resources such as petroleum, coal, natural gas, coal
bed- methane While the policy on Energy Resources utilization, is directed to
the optimal and efficient use of Energy in all consumers sectors Energy
Management paradigm that has been running has placed Energy Resources as exports
commodity to generate foreign exchange These conditions resulted in the domestic
Energy supply can not be secured properly, the opportunity to create new
employment to become one of the sources of economic growth barriers Hence,
Energy Management policy paradigm needs to be changed to make Energy as national
capital development increase of added value is not optimal, and the loss of With
the shift of the aforesaid paradigm, it is expected to increase the state
revenues from the Energy sector that can be partly used to encourage the
development of other sectors of Energy inter alia through searching and
increasing the fossil Energy reserves, the development of the New Energy and
Renewable Energy, Environment functions restoration, and the Energy Resources
Conservation II CHAPTER BY CHAPTER Article  Self-explanatory Article  Self-
explanatory Article  Self-explanatory Article  Self-explanatory Article  Self-
explanatory Article  Self-explanatory Article  Self-explanatory Article  The
supply and utilization target of Primary and Final Energy is obtained by
projecting the national Energy demand up to 2050 to be obtained through the
projection of the Energy demand within  certain period of time taking into
account the influencing parameters and assumptions used In making the projection
of Energy demand through 2050, the main parameters used are economic growth and
population growth Energy demand projections also take into account the potential
savings in future use of Energy both in the demand side and the Supply side of
Energy as  result of advanced efficient technology such as Energy machinery or
equipment and the growing public awareness for Energy saving Energy Demand up to
2050 is formulated by projecting Indonesia to become the new economic power
(emerging economy) in 2025 and become  developed country by Article  Letter
Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-
explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Number  The target of New Energy
and Renewable Energy mix is broken down into types of New Energy and Renewable
Energy in the National Energy Master Plan Number  Self-explanatory Number  Self-
explanatory Number  Self-explanatory Article 10 Paragraph () Letter  Self-
explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Reducing
the fossil Energy exports in stages especially for to prioritize the fossil
Energy gas and coal utilization in particularly gas and coal for fulfilling
domestic demand on raw materials or fuel that will post fossil Energy
particularly gas and coal as the economy mover that will towards the provide
value added and multiplier effect creation of employment opportunity, growing
upstream and downstream supporting industry, empowerment of people in the
surrounding areas, yielding an increase of state revenue from tax and non-tax
which in the end will increase the economic growth and welfare of the people is
meant Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-
explanatory Article 11 Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-
explanatory Paragraph () This provision contains  view that observing the
utilization of nuclear Energy requires high safety and security standards and
considering the effects of nuclear radiation hazards to the Environment, is
considered as the last option in case an in-depth study has been done on the
However, availability of technological development of nuclear Energy for
peaceful purposes, fulfilment of Energy growing demand, the national Energy
Supply in  large scale, reducing carbon emissions, and the urgent national
interest, as such in principle nuclear Energy could be utilized the usage
Article 12 Self-explanatory Article 13 Self-explanatory Article 14 Self-
explanatory Article 15 Self- explanatory Article 16 Paragraph () The Energy
supply industry includes the industries performing business on processing,
transportation, storage and trade of Energy Paragraph () Self-explanatory
Article 17 Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph
() Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory
Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  The
term "Energy management" is meant an integrated activity to control Energy
consumption in order to achieve effective and efficient Energy Utilization to
produce maximum output by applying structured and economic to minimize Energy
Utilization, technical measures including Energy for the production process and
to minimize the consumption of raw material and supporting material Letter  The
term "efficient in this provision is the maximum value resulting from the
comparison between the output and input of Energy in the Energy utilizer
equipment Letter  The term “saving” behaviour of using Energy effectively and
efficiently in this provision is related to the Letter  Self-explanatory Letter
Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Article 18
Self-explanatory Article 19 Self-explanatory Article 20 Paragraph () Self-
explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory
Paragraph () Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  Self-explanatory Letter  The term
“feed-in tariff” in this provision is meant  mechanism of the Renewable Enegy
selling price policy which is designed for expediting the investment on
Renewable Energy technology Letter  Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-
explanatory Article 21 Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Self-
explanatory Paragraph () Self-explanatory Paragraph () Reduction of fuel oil and
electricity subsidies in stages shall be aligned with the development of New
Energy and Renewable Energy with the aim to encourage the development of New
Energy the New Energy and and Renewable Energy ensuring that Renewable Energy
prices are competitive with the fossil Energy prices Article 22 Self-explanatory
Article 23 Self-explanatory Article 24 Self-explanatory Article 25 Self-
explanatory Article 26 Self-explanatory Article 27 Self-explanatory Article 28
Self-explanatory Article 29 Self-explanatory Article 30 Self-explanatory Article
31 Self-explanatory Article 32 Self-explanatory Article 33 Self-explanatory
SUPPLEMENT TO THE STATE GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA NUMBER 5609