 Renewable Energy Roadmap                  :          RENEWABLE ENERGY
PROSPECTS:       INDONESIA           March 2017 © IRENA 2017 Unless otherwise
stated, this publication and material featured herein are the property of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by
IRENA Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied,
reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that all such material is clearly
attributed to IRENA Material contained in this publication attributed to third
parties may be subject to third-party copyright and separate terms of use and
restrictions ISBN -- (Print) ISBN -- (PDF) About IRENA The International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that
supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy future and serves
as the principal platform for international co-operation,  centre of excellence,
and  repository of policy, technology, resource and fi nancial knowledge on
renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of
all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower,
ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy
access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity
Acknowledgements This report has benefi ted from the valuable comments and
guidance of the Indonesian Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR), with
special thanks to Maritje Hutapea and Ezrom Tapparan Additional contributions
during the analysis and review were provided by Gareth Davies (Aquatera), Abdul
Kholik (Azetsurya), Togar Sitanggang (Indonesian Palm Oil Association - GAPKI),
Tjut Devi (German Agency for International Cooperation - GIZ), Bawa Santosa
(Indonesian Renewable Energy Society - METI), Budi Mulyono (Perusahaan Listrik
Negara - PLN) and Carina van der Laan (University of Utrecht) The report benefi
ted signifi cantly from input provided by external expert review by Pradeep
Tharakan (Asian Development Bank), Markus Steigenberger and Daniel Argyropoulos
(Agora Energiewende), Jacob Høgh and Nadeem Niwaz (Danish Energy Agency), Bill
Meade and Ami Indriyanto (USAID-ICED), and Tim Williamson (US Department of
Energy State) The report also benefi ted greatly from input and comments
provided during two expert review workshops held in Jakarta, in April and July
IRENA would like to thank all those that attended for their valuable input IRENA
colleagues Rabia Ferroukhi, Diala Hawila, Yasuko Inoue, Divyam Nagpal and
Nicholas Wagner also provided valuable comments Finally,  special thanks is due
to Andre Susanto, who worked on the report as  consultant and provided
invaluable input and support throughout the project IRENA is grateful for the
generous support of the Federal Ministry for Economic Aff airs and Energy of
Germany, which made the publication of this report  reality Authors: Dolf
Gielen, Deger Saygin and Jasper Rigter (IRENA) For further information or to
provide feedback, please contact the REmap team: REmap@irenaorg Citation IRENA
(2017), Renewable Energy Prospects: Indonesia,  REmap analysis, International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi,  Disclaimer This publication and the
material featured herein are provided “as is” All reasonable precautions have
been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this
publication Neither IRENA nor any of its offi cials, agents, data or other
third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, including as
to the accuracy, completeness or fi tness for  particular purpose or use of such
material, or regarding the non-infringement of third-party rights, and they
accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication
and the material featured therein The information contained herein does not
necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an
endorsement of any project, product or service provider The designations
employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of
any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries FOREWORD Indonesia is the largest
country in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in terms of energy
consumption Across the country’ more than 17,000 islands, energy demand is
growing rapidly Although reliance on domestic coal, as well as imported
petroleum products, has increased in recent years, Indonesia has started adding
more renewable capacity to its energy mix The country aims to achieve 23%
renewable energy use by 2025, and 31% by 2050, as part of its plans to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in line with the objectives of the Paris climate
agreement Along with some of the world’ greatest geothermal and hydropower
potential, Indonesia also possesses abundant resources for solar, wind, ocean
and bioenergy development In addition to power generation, these sources could
support heating, cooling and transport applications To help countries like
Indonesia harness this potential, REmap – the global roadmap from the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) – presents  range of technology
and resource options, as well as key insights on the opportunities and
challenges ahead As this REmap country study shows, Indonesia’ renewable energy
target for 2050 could be achieved as soon as 2030, given the right policies and
investments starting today Beyond power generation, energy end-uses require
closer attention for the full potential of renewables to be achieved At the same
time,  sustainable supply chain needs to be in place to support the expanding
use of modern bioenergy The benefits of such accelerated uptake for Indonesia
would greatly outweigh the costs In economic terms, the net reduction of energy
system costs, combined with the avoidance of air pollution and carbon-dioxide
emissions, would save up to USD 53 billion per year, or an estimated % of
Indonesia’ 2030 GDP But harnessing this potential requires over USD 16 billion
of investments per year for the years between 2015 and 2030, from modest levels
at present Recent market developments suggest that Indonesia is on the right
path, with renewable energy investments already on the rise If Indonesia
continues to follow this course, it can play  leading role, not only regionally
but also internationally, in the advancement of the global energy transition
IRENA stands ready to work closely with Indonesia as the country strives for
sustainable energy future Adnan  Amin Director-General International Renewable
Energy Agency  Table of Contents:  CURRENT SITUATION AND RECENT TRENDS 14: Page:
BARRIERS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY UPTAKE 70    Barriers and
opportunities in the power sector 70 Barriers and opportunities in the end-use
sectors  77 Ensuring the sustainable use of bioenergy  78  SUGGESTIONS FOR
ACCELERATED RENEWABLE ENERGY UPTAKE83 REFERENCES 85 ANNEXES Annex : Summary of
results 93 Annex : Technology cost and performance data assumptions 94 Annex :
Energy price assumptions 95 Annex : Renewable energy resource maps 96 iii List
of Figures Figure ES1: Breakdown of total final energy consumption in Indonesia,
2000, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030  Figure ES2: Fuel mix in primary
energy supply, 2000, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030  Figure ES3: Annual
installations of renewable power in , in the Reference Case for 2030 and with
REmap  Figure ES4: Breakdown of renewable energy in total final energy
consumption in 2030 with REmap   Figure : Growth in GDP and primary energy
supply in Indonesia,   15 Figure : Breakdown of total final energy consumption
in Indonesia, 2013  15 Figure : Breakdown of final energy consumption by carrier
in Indonesia, 2010 and 2014 16 Figure : Breakdown of final energy consumption by
sector in Indonesia, 2010 and 2014  17 Figure : Breakdown of residential final
energy consumption by carrier in Indonesia, 2000, 2010 and 2014  17 Figure :
National trend in household cooking fuel use in Indonesia,  18 Figure :
Breakdown of industrial energy use by carrier in Indonesia 19 Figure : Stocks of
motor vehicles and motorcycles and scooters in Indonesia,   21 Figure :
Indonesian export and domestic consumption of biodiesel,   22 Figure 10:
Indonesian mandatory biodiesel blending targets and actual domestic consumption,
23 Figure 11: On-grid power generation in Indonesia, 2010 and 2014 24 Figure 12:
On-grid power generation capacity in Indonesia, 2014  25 Figure 13: Electricity
network in Indonesia, 2014  32 Figure 14: Electrification rates across
Indonesia, 2015  33 Figure 15: Energy subsidies in Indonesia,   35 Figure 16:
Fuel mix in primary energy supply, 2000, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030
39 Figure 17: Sectoral breakdown of total final energy consumption, 2000, 2014
and in the Reference Case for 2030 39 Figure 18: Modern renewable energy shares
in total final energy consumption, power generation, transport, buildings and
industry in Indonesia, 2014 and in the Reference Case for  40 Figure 19: On-grid
power generation in the Reference Case for 2030 41 Figure 20: Renewable power
generation in Indonesia, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030 41 Figure 21:
Total installed power generation capacity in Indonesia, 2014 and in the
Reference Case for 42 iv Figure 22: Reference Case growth of renewable energy
use in end-use sectors in Indonesia, 2014 and 2030 43 Figure 23: Modelled daily
electricity demand in Indonesia in 2010 46 Figure 24: Current range and weighted
average levelised cost of electricity for various types of power generation in
Indonesia 48 Figure 25: Primary bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia, 2030 50
Figure 26: Primary bioenergy demand in Indonesia, 2014 and 2030  55 Figure 27:
Use of residential and commercial rooftop space for solar technologies in
Indonesia in 2030 with the REmap Options 58 Figure 28: Breakdown of renewable
energy in total final energy consumption with REmap across sectors and
technologies, 2030 61 Figure 29: Increases in modern renewable energy
consumption in total final energy consumption by renewable energy resource 61
Figure 30: Annual installations of renewable power, , in the Reference Case for
2030 and with REmap 63 Figure 31: Renewable energy cost-supply curve by
renewable energy resource in 2030, from the business perspective 66 Figure 32:
Renewable energy cost-supply curve by renewable energy resource in 2030, from
the government perspective66 Figure 33: Total primary energy supply in
Indonesia,   67 Figure 34: Global wind dataset –  kilometre onshore wind speed
at 80 metre height with units in metres per second 96 Figure 35: Global solar
dataset –  kilometre with units in watts per square metre 96  List of Tables
Table : Analysis of energy use in selected industries in Indonesia, 2014 20
Table : Overview of targets, policies and regulation for renewable energy in
Indonesia 34 Table : Renewable energy targets included in RUPTL  and in MEMR:
Revised KEN 2025 38 Table : Renewable power capacity in the Reference Case for
2030 and the total potential of renewable power 44 Table : Technical potential
of various types of agricultural and forestry residues in Indonesia, 2010 49
Table : Bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia based on IRENA estimates and
literature review  51 Table : Supply cost for bioenergy feedstock in Indonesia
in 2030, and prices of selected fossil fuel products  52 Table : Bioenergy
supply potential and demand for bioenergy in the Reference Case for 2030, and an
indication of the potential beyond the Reference Case 56 Table : Breakdown of
renewable energy share by sector  60 Table 10: Indonesia REmap 2030 overview 62
Table 11: Average annual investment needs in renewable capacity in  64 Table 12:
Average substitution cost of REmap Options by sector, 2030 64 Table 13:
Substitution cost and potentials of REmap Options by technology in 2030 65 Table
14: Development of energy-related carbon dioxide emissions (excluding non-carbon
dioxide greenhouse gases),  68 Table 15: Financial indicators for renewable
energy use in Indonesia, from the government perspective 69 Table 16:
Technology-specific barriers and opportunities in the power sector  75 Table 17:
Overview of  comprehensive bioenergy programme for Indonesia  82 List of Boxes
Box : Indonesia’ long history in considering nuclear energy 26 Box : Synergies
between renewable energy and energy efficiency 69   List of abbreviations
degrees Celsius Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ° FAO
ASEAN Centre for Energy ACE Free, Prior and Informed Consent FPIC Association of
Southeast Asian Nations ASEAN Fast Track Program FTP National Nuclear Energy
Agency of Indonesia BATAN hectare ha Indonesian Meteorological Agency BMKG Group
of Twenty G20 Indonesian Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology
BPPT grams of carbon dioxide equivalent gCO2-eq Geo Dipa Energi, state-owned
geothermal producer GDE 10% biodiesel blended with petroleum diesel B10 gross
domestic product GDP 15% biodiesel blended with petroleum diesel B15 Geothermal
Fund Facility GFF 20% biodiesel blended with petroleum diesel German Agency for
International Cooperation B20 GIZ 30% biodiesel blended with petroleum diesel
B30 gigajoule GJ gigawatt GW combined heat and power CHP gigawatt-hour GWh
carbon dioxide CO2 Indonesian rupiah IDR carbon dioxide equivalent CO2-eq
International Energy Agency IEA Twenty-first session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change COP21
indirect land-use change ILUC independent power producer IPP International
Renewable Energy Agency IRENA crude palm oil CPO Indonesian Sustainable Palm Oil
ISPO concentrated solar thermal CST Java-Madura-Bali JAMALI Danish Energy Agency
DEA National Energy Policy KEN German Development Institute DIE kilovolt direct
current kVDC direct land-use change DLUC kilowatt kW 20% ethanol blended with
gasoline E20 kilowatt-hour kWh exajoule EJ liquefied natural gas Energising
Development LNG EnDev European Union liquefied petroleum gas EU LPG vii land-
use, land-use change and forestry purchasing power parity LULUCF ppp square
metre private power utility m2 PPU cubic metre m3 public service obligation PSO
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources MEMR photovoltaic PV research and
development & megajoule MJ reducing emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation REDD million hectare Mha million British thermal units mBtu National
Master Plan for Energy Conservation RIKEN million tonne Mt Roundtable for
Sustainable Palm Oil RSPO megavolt amperes MVA National Electricity General Plan
RUKN megawatt MW Electricity Supply Business Plan RUPTL megawatt-hour MWh Not-
for-profit international development organisation, based in the Netherlands SNV
no date  Nationally Determined Contribution NDC sulphur dioxide SO2 operation
and maintenance & trillion standard cubic feet tscf Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development OECD total final energy consumption TFEC total
primary energy supply TPES Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion OTEC  CPO/ha/yr tonne
of crude palm oil per hectare per Pertamina Geothermal Energy PGE year
Perusahaan Gas Negara, the largest natural gas transportation and distribution
company in Indonesia PGN tonne of oil equivalent toe terawatt-hour TWh petajoule
PJ United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFCCC Perusahaan
Listrik Negara, the state electricity company PLN USAID-ICED United States
Agency for International Development – Indonesia Clean Energy Development
particulate matter 10 micrometres or less in diameter PM10 United States dollar
palm oil mill effluent USD POME power purchase agreement variable renewable
energy PPA VRE  iii EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Rapid growth in energy consumption
Indonesia is among the world’ fastest growing countries in terms of energy
consumption This is fuelled by robust economic development, increasing
urbanisation and steady population growth The country is the largest energy user
in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), accounting for nearly 40%
of total energy use among ASEAN members Between 2000 and 2014, energy
consumption in Indonesia increased by nearly 65% In  business-as-usual outlook
(the “Reference Case” in this study), it is set to grow another 80% by Indonesia
is therefore crucial to  renewable energy transition for the region as  whole
Indonesia’ electricity consumption will more than triple by Economic growth
means rising use of electricity for cookers, fans, air conditioning and other
appliances At the same time, Indonesia is expanding electricity access in remote
areas and islands More than 10% of the country’ population still lacks access to
electricity, but the government is aiming for near-100% electrification by
Transport and industry show the fastest expected growth in energy use For both
sectors, energy consumption is expected to more than double between today and
About  million motor vehicles and  million motorcycles and scooters are added to
Indonesia’ roads every year, further exacerbating the already severe air
pollution in urban centres Industrial energy use is expanding in line with
economic growth, with large industries such as cement, aluminium, paper and
ceramics accounting for  majority of the increase Figure ES1: Breakdown of total
final energy consumption in Indonesia, 2000, 2014 and in the Reference Case for
2030 14 000 % 12 000 10 000 44%     /    000 %  000 36% % 31%  000 34% 19% 28%
000 23% 34% 43%  2000 2014 Reference Case 2030 Buildings Transport Industry
Other  Sustainability concerns amid  changing energy supply mix The use of coal
is rising to meet domestic growth in energy demand At the turn of this century,
only about 10% of Indonesia’ energy needs were met by coal Currently, coal
accounts for almost one-third of the energy supply This rapid expansion is an
outcome of government policy aimed at meeting high growth in energy demand while
reducing imports of petroleum products Indonesia is the fourth largest producer
of coal worldwide and was the largest exporter in Coal increasingly is consumed
domestically amid stagnant domestic production of natural gas and oil Based on
the Reference Case, the use of coal would more than double by 2030 from today’
levels This not only would mean additional greenhouse gas emissions from coal
combustion, but it also would exacerbate air pollution and issues related to
water contamination and scarcity Traditional uses of bioenergy dominate
renewable energy use in Indonesia  majority of renewable energy use in Indonesia
is represented by traditional uses of bioenergy (mainly for cooking) in the
country’ rural areas and remote islands Although the share of traditional
bioenergy uses in the energy supply mix has declined, an estimated million
households (40% of all households) still rely primarily on fuelwood for cooking
This practice results in indoor air pollution which is associated with 165 000
premature deaths in Indonesia per year In the Reference Case, mainly through the
uptake of electricity and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) for cooking, the number
of houses relying on fuelwood would drop to about  million by Liquid biofuel
blending mandates – while advancing the transition to renewable energy sources –
come with supply side challenges Especially for transport, there is  strong
projected increase in the use of liquid biofuels as  result of mandated
biodiesel (B30) and ethanol (E20) blending from 2025 onwards Total liquid
biofuel use per year is projected to increase to 25 billion litres by 2030,
compared to 35 billion litres of biodiesel that was blended in the first half of
Today, biodiesel in Indonesia is produced from palm oil,  crop for which the
government recently renewed  moratorium to prevent additional plantations Figure
ES2: Fuel mix in primary energy supply, 2000, 2014 and in the Reference Case for
2030 % % % % % % % 100% 10% 90% 29% 17% 13% % 80%            70% 12% 19% 16% 60%
50% 30% 20% 40% 42% 30% 20% 33% 31% 10% 10% % 2000 2014 Reference Case 2030 Coal
Oil Natural gas Bioenergy (traditional uses) Bioenergy (modern uses) Geothermal
Hydropower Other renewables  Aiming for an affordable, secure and sustainable
energy system Indonesia already has ambitious targets to increase its use of
renewable energy The country has set an overall target to have modern renewables
(excluding traditional uses of bioenergy) provide 23% of total primary energy
supply (TPES) by 2025, and 31% by The Reference Case, which assumes that these
targets are met, implies  share for renewable energy of 17% in total final
energy consumption (TFEC) by 2030, up from about % today Indonesia could achieve
its 2050 renewable energy targets two decades sooner The International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA) has worked with Indonesia’ Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Resources (MEMR) to develop  roadmap to 2030, highlighting ways to increase the
uptake of renewable energy beyond the country’ present policies and plans Across
sectors and technologies, the additional potentials (“REmap Options” in this
study) increase the share of renewable energy to 23% of TFEC – or 31% of TPES –
by Renewable energy use will continue to be highest in power generation In the
Reference Case, the share of renewable energy in power generation would increase
to 29% by To assess the potential for additional renewable power in Indonesia,
five regions (Java-Bali, Kalimantan, Maluku & Papua, Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara
and Sumatra) were distinguished, and for each, the renewable resource potential
and projected power demand in 2030 was analysed Based on this assessment, the
share of renewable energy in power generation increases to 38% by 2030 with the
REmap Options Solar photovoltaics (PV) offers much greater potential than
current plans for the power sector reflect The REmap Options for hydropower,
geothermal, bioenergy and wind power are modest, given their ambitious increase
in the Reference Case and the geographical mismatch in resource potential and
power demand For solar PV, however, REmap identifies potential for 47 gigawatts
(GW) of installed capacity by 2030, compared to just over  GW in the Reference
Case This includes plans to use solar PV to provide electricity to nearly
million households in remote areas that currently lack adequate access to
electricity Especially in Java-Bali (which accounts for 70% of power demand in
Indonesia) there is enough available space, good infrastructure and additional
need for power to greatly increase both rooftop and utility-scale solar PV
installations Figure ES3: Annual installations of renewable power in , in the
Reference Case for 2030 and with REmap      /               04 Solar PV
Hydropower Geothermal Bioenergy Marine energy Wind  average  average with
Reference Case  average with REmap  Next to power generation, Indonesia’
greatest renewable energy use will be in buildings Including the contribution of
renewable electricity, the share of renewable energy in TFEC in buildings
increases to 37% in 2030, compared to 18% in the Reference Case With REmap,
households that would rely on traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking in the
Reference Case switch to modern cook stoves that use mostly solid biomass, and
to some extent ethanol Based on an assessment of available rooftop space and
realistic deployment potential, solar thermal collectors supply 30% of energy
used for water heating, while solar (thermal) cooling meets % of energy demand
for cooling in buildings Industry will make much greater use of bioenergy and
also could scale up solar thermal systems to supply process heat Through the
assessment of the projected energy use in key industry sectors and the supply
potential of different types of feedstock, the REmap Options identify potential
for an additional 216 petajoules (PJ) per year of bioenergy use in industry
beyond the Reference Case This consists of more use of biogas (from food waste
and palm oil mill effluent), wood residues and waste Combined with the
identified potential of 70 PJ per year for solar thermal collectors to supply
process heat (in the rubber, food and textile industries), the share of
renewable energy in industry TFEC increases to 21% by 2030, compared to 15% by
2030 in the Reference Case and 12% in Bioenergy will continue to play an
important role in the use of renewables in Indonesia With REmap, more than half
of all renewable energy use in Indonesia in 2030 would be in the form of
bioenergy used for process heat in industry or as liquid biofuels in transport
Solar applications (including PV and thermal) account for 15% of renewable
energy use in all sectors in Indonesia as envisaged by REmap, followed by
hydropower (14%) and geothermal power (%) Figure ES4: Breakdown of renewable
energy in total final energy consumption in 2030 with REmap REmap total
renewable energy use:  839 PJ/year Hydropower 14% Onshore wind % Liquid biofuels
– transport 24% Bioenergy power % Solar PV % Transport 24% Power 35% Geothermal
power % Heat and other direct uses 41% Marine energy % Bioenergy for process
heat – industry 27% Solar water heating – buildings % Modern bioenergy –
buildings % Solar process heat – industry % Solar cooling – buildings %
Indonesia could have  million electric four-wheeled vehicles and million
electric two- and three-wheelers on the road by Given the high increase in the
use of liquid biofuel in transport in the Reference Case and the associated
supply-side constraints, the REmap Options in transport focus on electric
mobility With the continued increase in vehicle ownership, nearly % of all four-
wheeled vehicles (consisting mainly of electric cars) and 20% of two- and three-
wheelers would be electric by Combined, they increase the share of renewable
energy in transport TFEC to 18%, from about % today Benefits of renewable energy
greatly outweigh costs Higher renewable energy uptake would reduce the total
costs of the energy system Based on  comparison of the cost of the REmap Options
and the conventional fuels which they replace, the savings to the energy system
in 2030 is estimated at USD  billion per year This is from  government
perspective, which excludes subsidies on energy prices and applies  discount
rate of 10% With  market discount rate of 12% and including energy subsidies,
the additional costs to the energy system are USD  billion per year This shows
the importance of further removing energy subsidies, such as on prices for
electricity and selected petroleum products, as well as of lowering the cost of
capital for renewable energy projects Renewable energy can strengthen Indonesia’
energy security while greatly reducing emissions The REmap Options reduce demand
for fossil fuels by 10% relative to the Reference Case The impact is the largest
for coal (-17%) and oil (-%) and thus would contribute to reducing imports of
petroleum products, which have increased in recent years The reduction in the
use of coal, which is projected to increase in most ASEAN countries, contributes
strongly to avoided carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions with REmap, which are 150
million tonnes (Mt) per year lower than with the Reference Case Indonesia needs
to focus more on energy efficiency and on non-energy emissions in order to
achieve its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in the global effort to
address climate change Indonesia’ NDC aims for  29% (unconditional) reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 compared to  business-as-usual scenario The
REmap Options would account for about half of the targeted energy- related
reductions However, the business-as-usual scenario used to determine the NDC can
be considered conservative, as it does not include any renewable energy
deployment or energy efficiency improvements Furthermore, forestry accounts for
more than half of Indonesia’ overall targeted unconditional reductions
Therefore, reducing emissions through further energy efficiency improvements and
in other sectors – particularly from land use, land-use change and forestry
(LULUCF) – will be crucial as well Scaling up renewables can save Indonesia
between USD billion and USD billion per year when the impacts on air pollution
and climate change are included With REmap, the avoidance of premature deaths
and the savings that come with reduced health costs from reductions in outdoor
air pollution are valued at USD  billion to USD  billion per year Reduced
externalities from indoor air pollution account for another USD billion to USD
billion per year, due to the substitution of traditional uses of bioenergy for
cooking As said, the REmap Options also would lead to  reduction of 150 Mt of
CO2 emissions per year which, with  carbon price of USD 17 to USD 80 per tonne
equates to savings of USD  billion to USD billion per year in The reduced system
costs and externality savings equal % to % of Indonesia’ forecasted gross
domestic product in Greater renewable energy deployment will create more jobs
and stimulate technology transfer Earlier IRENA work has indicated the potential
for  million jobs in the renewable energy sector in Indonesia by 2030, up from
just over 100 000 today Scaling up the market for renewable energy technologies
provides significant opportunities for localising parts of the value chain, such
as through local manufacture of solar panels and electric vehicles, with the
associated technology transfer having the potential to come with additional
positive effects to the economy  Investments in renewable energy need to
accelerate rapidly in Indonesia Annual investment in renewable energy capacity
in the Reference Case is estimated at, on average, USD  billion in 2015-With the
REmap Options this would increase to USD billion The power sector accounts for
USD billion, nearly half of which is for solar PV Given the modest level of
investments today,  rapid acceleration is required for Indonesia to capture its
renewable energy potential Challenges in accelerating renewable energy
deployment For Indonesia to accelerate its uptake of renewable energy, several
challenges have to be addressed These challenges are different for the power
sector and for the energy end-use sectors of transport, buildings and industry
Bioenergy, given its cross-cutting application across sectors and technologies,
warrants its own assessment In the power sector, several broad barriers are
evident, along with technology-specific challenges: ● Grid integration of
variable renewable energy (VRE) might come with challenges given the highly
fragmented nature of Indonesia’ grid, with many small grids in remote locations;
For off-grid areas there is  lack of bankable off-takers, the risk of inadequate
system design, and operational issues due to the insufficient operation and
maintenance (&) of systems; Cost recovery for PLN (the national utility) remains
an issue as feed-in tariffs for renewable energy generally exceed the price that
PLN charges to consumers of electricity; however,  recent Ministerial Degree
will affect feed-in tariff pricing and limit renewable energy tariffs to between
85% and 100% of PLN’ regional production price; Project finance opportunities
for renewable energy projects in Indonesia are limited at present, as local
banks do not allocate sufficient resources to this segment; Land acquisition
issues are common due to  lack of clarity regarding land ownership in many
locations, while the process for acquiring land is often costly and time
consuming; Technology-specific challenges (, for solar PV, wind, etc) include
lack of awareness of solutions, the need to build local capacity,  lack of
streamlined permitting and regulatory frameworks, and the absence of detailed
resource assessments ● ● ● ● ● In the end-use sectors, Indonesia needs to
address key challenges as well: ● Solar thermal for water heating and cooling in
buildings has great potential; however, limited awareness of solutions and  lack
of design standards are holding back the market; Limited awareness in industry
of the potential for solar collectors to supply process heat and their
intermittent supply of energy pose barriers, as well as space limitations which
might be an issue for existing plants; The focus for renewable energy in
transport is on liquid biofuels, whereas electric mobility remains largely
unaddressed  lack of infrastructure and regulatory frameworks is holding back
the identified potential for electric four-wheeled vehicles and two-and-three
wheelers ● ● Challenges can arise for bioenergy on both the supply and demand
sides Concerns about the sustainability of supply, despite the potential of
yield improvements and the use of degraded lands, pose  challenge to Indonesia’
targets for liquid biofuel blending In industry, the potential of using residues
and waste comes with the challenges of high transportation cost, seasonality of
feedstock supply, the lack of  local grid to interconnect (power) projects, and
competition for the feedstock with other uses (, the use of trunks and leaves to
replenish soil) The accelerated use of modern cook stoves – using solid biomass
and ethanol instead of traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking – is challenged
by limited awareness and high required upfront investment  Areas for action
Various solutions are available to promote higher uptake of renewable energy in
Indonesia These can be grouped into three main areas for action:  Intensify
efforts to meet the growing demand for electricity by capturing the full
potential of Indonesia’ vast renewable energy resources Indonesia is endowed
with phenomenal resources for renewable power generation To capture the country’
potential and address the existing challenges, Indonesia’ policy makers and
energy decision makers are encouraged to:  Align the targets for renewable
energy deployment among different stakeholders and incorporate the expected
deployment of VRE in transmission and distribution plans Consider using energy
storage to smooth integration of VRE and introduce priority dispatch for
renewable energy generation Identify funds that can cover the gap between
renewable energy power purchase agreements (PPAs) and the revenues that PLN
receives from consumers The process for PLN to negotiate PPAs directly with
developers for projects should be more standardised and should include more
detailed requirements Establish larger off-grid working areas encompassing
multiple villages to achieve economies of scale for off-grid solutions, and
consider expanding PLN’ responsibilities to build and own distribution networks
in off-grid locations to further reduce the cost to off-grid solution providers
Create an entity responsible for overseeing & of mini-grid systems – involving
local communities – and expand the use of standardised survey methodologies to
ensure that systems are scaled adequately Increase awareness of opportunities
among commercial banks and send clear signals that renewables will receive long-
term, stable policy support Create standard procedures and performance
indicators for project development documents Involve local communities early in
the project development phase and consider providing additional services from
projects (such as providing electricity) to communities Large regional
differences in the cost of land should be reflected more in feed-in tariffs, and
the government could take  more active role in providing lands for projects
Address other barriers specific to each of the renewable power technologies –
which consist mainly of increasing awareness and local capacity building and
maximising local value; streamlining permitting and regulatory frameworks; and
expanding resource assessments       Increase the focus on renewable energy
opportunities in industry, buildings and transport To fully capture the
potential of renewable energy to reduce emissions and air pollution, more
attention to these end-use sectors is recommended Here, Indonesia has several
options:  Consider requirements for solar water heater installations in building
codes and demonstration projects for solar cooling technologies Highlight the
potential for solar thermal energy to substitute for petroleum products, for
example through local demonstration projects Consider solar thermal storage
capacity and/or hybrid solutions in the design and construction of new
industrial plants Combine infrastructure investments (such as charging
infrastructure at large parking lots in cities) with support policies (, tax
exemptions) to expand the market for electric vehicles and electric two- and
three-wheelers Electric mobility, when powered by renewable energy, could play
an important role in reducing air pollution in cities and in reducing the
reliance on liquid fuels in transport Policy support for electric mobility is
crucial given the immaturity of the market in Indonesia and the relatively high
cost compared to conventional cars and electric two- and three-wheelers
Develop an integrated and comprehensive bioenergy programme that captures
Indonesia’ potential and ensures its use in  sustainable manner Indonesia’
abundant resources for bioenergy can be used in multiple applications spanning
all economic sectors The detailed recommendations provided in the report include
this key suggestion:  Develop  comprehensive bioenergy programme with the
objective of maximising the sustainable use of the local resource through
gradually increasing targets across sectors Innovative approaches and
technologies on both the supply side and demand side should be included, while
the sustainability of bioenergy use in Indonesia should be safeguarded Solutions
with  high impact and low cost should be prioritised One example is increasing
the use of biogas produced from palm oil mill effluent, which not only was found
to be  cost-competitive option, but also avoids methane emissions that occur
when the biogas is not used The efforts of the Indonesia Clean Stove Initiative
and the Indonesia Domestic Biogas Programme also should be expanded to advance
the dissemination of modern cook stoves based on bioenergy   THE REMAP PROGRAMME
AND REMAP INDONESIA percentage-point shortfall in relation to the target to
double the global renewables share by 2030 (IRENA, 2016a) Indonesia’ role will
be crucial to accelerate broader regional renewable energy deployment, given
that it is the largest energy user in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN)  IRENA’ REmap programme The REmap programme aims to pave the way to
promoting accelerated renewable energy development through  series of activities
including global, regional and country studies REmap analysis and activity also
informs IRENA publications on specific renewable technologies or energy sectors
In 2015, Indonesia set  target for the country to realise 23% of primary energy
supply from modern renewable energy by 2025, as part of  collective target set
by ASEAN member states Because Indonesia is the largest country in ASEAN,
understanding the role of renewables to meet the country’ growing energy demand
is key for the region With  population of more than 250 million spread out over
more than 17 000 islands, Indonesia faces challenges today in matching energy
demand and supply The largest demand centres are Java and Sumatra in the west,
whereas the main energy resources are in Kalimantan and the eastern provinces
Electrification is on the rise in Indonesia, from 65% in 2008 to % in However,
large differences exist across the country, from less than 40% electrification
in Papua to close to 100% in Jakarta Indonesia’ state utility company PLN
(Perusahaan Listrik Negara) aims for 98% electrification by The REmap programme
collaborates closely with governmental bodies and other institutions which are
responsible for energy planning and renewable energy development The analysis
relies on broad consultations with energy experts and stakeholders from numerous
countries around the world At its inception, REmap emerged as IRENA’ proposal
for  pathway to support the United Nations Sustainable Energy for All initiative
in its objective to double the global share of renewable energy from 18% in 2010
to 36% by 2030 (UN and World Bank, 2016) Since then, the Paris Agreement was
adopted at COP21 in 2015 with  target of minimising the earth’ temperature
increase to below  degrees Celsius (°) by The widespread development of
renewables is  critical lever to fulfilling this objective While plans exist to
expand interconnection, transmission bottlenecks and isolated areas remain
constraints to optimising Indonesia’ energy system and the role of renewables
therein Ambitious fuel support schemes and mandates were introduced in the
transport sector, but results are falling short of ambitions With energy demand
increasing rapidly, expanding the share of modern renewable energy will be
challenging given the country’ infrastructure constraints and its decreasing
reliance on traditional biomass However, the drivers are clear: positive impacts
in terms of socio-economics, public health, and the environment, as well as
energy To double the renewable energy share across the world, REmap takes
bottom-up approach Country-level assessments are carried out to determine the
potential contributions that each country could make to the overall renewable
energy share The first global REmap report, published in 2014, included
detailed analysis of 26 major energy-consuming countries representing around 75%
of global energy demand The REmap programme has since expanded to 40 countries
accounting for 80% of world energy use The REmap evaluation of the national
plans of 40 countries (which could be considered the business-as-usual case)
suggests that under current conditions and policy approaches, the global share
of renewables increases to only 21% This indicates  15  ASEAN member countries
are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’ Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam  security
and technology development, all support an increase in the use of renewables in
Indonesia Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, Cyprus, Denmark,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico,
Morocco, Nigeria, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates,
the United Kingdom, the United States and Uruguay In January 2016, Indonesia
approached the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to start
collaboration in preparation of  specific renewable energy roadmap (REmap)
report for the country, with the desire to develop  practical roadmap that
clearly identifies technology potentials and shows how implementation gaps can
be closed for Indonesia to reach its renewable energy ambitions IRENA’ REmap
work assesses the potential, costs and benefits of renewables beyond national
targets and plans of countries at  sector level REmap is based on close co-
operation and consultation with country experts nominated by each government It
does not investigate multiple scenarios for the future, but instead focuses on
technology options REmap identifies the realistic potential for accelerating
renewable energy deployment This can be fulfilled with existing technologies and
is economically practical and achievable by The REmap analysis starts by
building the energy balance of  country, using 2010 as the base year of the
analysis, based on national data and statistics To the extent that data
availability allows, information for more recent years (in the case of
Indonesia, for 2014) is provided where relevant The country then provides its
latest national energy plans and targets for renewables and fossil fuels,
collated to produce  business-as- usual perspective of the energy system,
referred to as the Reference Case This includes total final energy consumption
(TFEC) for each end-use sector (buildings, industry and transport) and
distinguishes between power, district heating and direct uses of energy with
breakdown by energy carrier for the period 2010-Indonesia has been  part of the
REmap programme since 2013, and the work that was completed prior to the current
study was used as  starting point for the present REmap Indonesia report For
REmap Indonesia, the government highlighted  particular interest in the
following topics: empowering renewables in isolated settings (given the island
structure of Indonesia), integrating variable renewable energy (VRE) generation
and ensuing grid limitations, the potential and approach for utilising
renewables in end- use sectors, and the opportunities for expanding the use of
biofuels The overall objective is to identify how Indonesia can achieve its
ambitions for increasing the share of modern renewables Costs, benefits and
potentials per technology on  sectoral level, and clear policy recommendations
and focus areas for Indonesia are provided Once the Reference Case is ready, the
additional renewable energy potential by technology is investigated for each
sector The potential of these technologies is described as REmap Options2 Each
REmap Option replaces  non-renewable energy technology3 to deliver the same
energy service The resulting case when all of these options are aggregated is
called REmap  The REmap approach Throughout this study, the renewable energy
share is estimated in relation to TFEC4 Modern renewable This section explains
the REmap methodology and summarises the background data used for the Indonesia
analysis The annexes provide more detailed information  An approach based on
options rather than scenarios is deliberate REmap is an exploratory study and
not  target-setting exercise  Non-renewable technologies encompass fossil fuels,
non- sustainable uses of bioenergy (referred to here as traditional bioenergy)
and nuclear power As  supplement to this report’ annexes,  detailed list of
these technologies and related background data are provided on the REmap website
REmap is  roadmap of technology options to increase the global share of
renewables It involves  bottom- up, iterative analysis By March 2016, IRENA’
REmap programme had assessed the potential for renewables in 2030 of 40
countries, which would account for 80% of total global energy demand These are:
Argentina,  TFEC is the energy delivered to consumers as electricity, heat or
fuels that can be used directly as  source of energy This consumption is usually
subdivided into transport, industry, residential, commercial and public
buildings, and agriculture It excludes non-energy uses of fuels   energy
excludes traditional uses of bioenergy5 The share of modern renewable energy in
TFEC is equal to total modern renewable energy consumption in end-use sectors
(including consumption of renewable electricity and district heat, and direct
uses of renewables), divided by TFEC The share of renewables in power generation
also is calculated The renewable energy share also can be expressed in terms of
the direct uses of renewables only The renewable energy use by end-use sector
covers the areas described below REmap methodology (IRENA, 2014a) and is
depicted in the following equation: Cost of Technology/ REmap Options USD/year
in 2030 Equivalent annual capital expenditure USD/year in 2030 Operating
expenditure USD/year in 2030 Fuel cost USD/year in 2030 = + + Cost of For each
REmap Option, the analysis considers the cost substituted of substituting  non-
renewable energy technology to conventional Equivalent Cost of Fuel annual
Technology/ technology Substitution deliver an identical amount of heat,
electricity or energy cost capital REmap cost USD/year in 2030 expenditure
Options USD/year service The cost of each REmap Option is represented USD/GJ in
2030 USD/year USD/year in 2030 in 2030 by its substitution cost6,: Cost of REmap
Options USD/year in 2030 – Operating expenditure USD/year in 2030 in 2030 = = +
+ ● Buildings include the residential, commercial and public sectors Renewable
energy is used in direct applications for heating, cooling or cooking purposes
or as renewable electricity Industry includes the manufacturing and mining
sectors, in which renewable energy is consumed in direct-use applications (,
process heat or refrigeration) and electricity from renewable sources Transport
sector, which can make direct use of renewables through the consumption of
liquid and gaseous biofuels or through electricity generated using renewable
energy technologies Energy substituted by REmap Options GJ/year in 2030 Cost of
substituted conventional technology REmap USD/year in 2030 Options All
technologies Energy substituted by REmap Options GJ/year in 2030 GJ/year in 2030
Cost of REmap Options USD/year in 2030 ● –  Substitution cost System USD/GJ
costs USD/year in 2030 = in 2030 = Substitution cost: government perspective All
technologies USD/GJ in 2030 ● This indicator provides  comparable metric for all
Renewable renewable energy technologies identified in each sector capacity
Substitution installed cost: government Substitution costs are the key
indicators for assessing perspective Total GW the economic viability of REmap
Options They depend All technologies 2016–2030 USD/GJ in 2030 on the type of
conventional technology substituted, energy prices and the characteristics of
the REmap Option The cost can be positive (additional) or negative (savings)
because many renewable energy technologies are or could by 2030 be more cost-
effective than conventional technologies Average REmap capital Options
expenditure All USD/GW technologies 2016–2030 GJ/year in 2030   System Average
costs investment USD/year needs in 2030 = = Metrics for assessing REmap Options
USD/year 2016–2030 To assess the costs of REmap Options, substitution costs are
calculated This report also discusses the costs and savings of renewable energy
deployment and related externalities due to climate change and air pollution
Experts devised four main indicators: substitution costs, system costs, total
investment needs and needs for renewable energy investment support 15 Number of
years 2016–2030 Renewable capacity installed Substitution Total GW cost:
2016–2030 government perspective Average capital expenditure   15 Number of
years 2016–2030 Average investment needs Investment support USD/year for RE
2016–2030 System costs USD/year in 2030 USD/GW REmap 2016–2030 Options = =
Technologies with positive substitution cost Technologies with positive
substitution cost GJ/year in 2030 On the basis of the substitution cost,
inferences can be made as to the effect on system costs This indicator is the
sum of the differences between the total capital and operating expenditures of
all energy technologies based on their deployment in REmap and the Reference
Case USD/year in in 2030 USD/GJ in 2030 Substitution costs Substitution cost:
government perspective REmap Options Investment support for RE  Each renewable
and non-renewable technology has its own individual cost relative to the non-
renewable energy that it replaces This is explained in detail in the =
Technologies with positive substitution cost Technologies with positive
substitution cost GJ/year in 2030 USD/GJ in 2030  The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) defines traditional biomass use as
woodfuels, agricultural by-products and dung burned for cooking and heating
purposes (FAO, 2000) In developing countries, traditional biomass is still
widely harvested and used in an unsustainable, inefficient and unsafe way It is
mostly traded informally and non-commercially Modern biomass, by contrast, is
produced in  sustainable manner from solid wastes and residues from agriculture
and forestry and relies on more efficient methods (IEA and World Bank, 2015)
Substitution cost is the difference between the annualised cost of the REmap
Option and the annualised cost of the substituted non-renewable technology used
to produce the same amount of energy This is divided by the total renewable
energy use substituted by the REmap Option   gigajoule (GJ) = 0238 tonnes of oil
equivalent (toe) = 238 gigacalories = 278 kilowatt-hours (kWh); USD  was on
average equivalent to IDR 13 500 in the first half of Equivalent Cost of Fuel
Operating annual Technology/ = + + cost expenditure capital REmap expenditure
Options USD/year USD/year in 2030 in 2030 USD/year USD/year in 2030 in 2030 Cost
of Cost of REmap substituted – Options conventional USD/year technology
Substitution in 2030 in 2030 = cost USD/year in 2030 USD/GJ Energy substituted
by REmap Options Equivalent Cost of GJ/year in 2030 Fuel Operating annual
Technology/ = + + cost expenditure capital REmap expenditure Options USD/year
USD/year in 2030 in 2030 USD/year USD/year in 2030 in 2030 REmap Substitution
System Options cost: government in 2030 =  costs All perspective Cost of Cost of
REmap USD/year technologies substituted All technologies – Options GJ/year
conventional USD/GJ in 2030 in 2030 USD/year technology Substitution in 2030 in
2030 = cost USD/year in 2030 USD/GJ Renewable capacity installed Average capital
expenditure Energy substituted by REmap Options GJ/year in 2030  Average
investment needs Total GW 2016–2030 USD/GW 2016–2030 = USD/year 2016–2030 if it
has  lower delivered energy service cost than the incumbent option By 2030, this
is an increasing trend REmap Options All technologies GJ/year in 2030
Substitution cost: government perspective All technologies USD/GJ in 2030 15
Number of years 2016–2030 System costs USD/year in 2030 =  Substitution cost:
government perspective REmap Options Investment support for RE  = Technologies
with positive substitution cost Renewable capacity installed Average capital
expenditure Investment needs Technologies with positive substitution cost
USD/year in 2030 Average Cost of Investment needs for renewable energy capacity
investment Fuel Technology/ needs cost REmap also can be assessed The total
investment needs of Options USD/year USD/year technologies in REmap are higher
than in the Reference in 2030 USD/year 2016–2030 in 2030 Case due to the
increased share of renewables On average, these have greater investment needs
than the non-renewable energy technology equivalent The capital investment cost
in USD per kilowatt (kW) of installed capacity in each year is multiplied with
the deployment in that year to arrive at total annual investment costs The
capital investment costs of each year are then added up for the period 2016-Net
incremental investment needs are the sum of the differences between the total
investment costs for all renewable and non-renewable energy technologies in
power generation and stationary applications in REmap and the Reference Case in
the period  for each year This total was then turned into an annual average for
the period Equivalent annual capital expenditure USD/year in 2030 GJ/year in
2030 Operating expenditure USD/year in 2030 15 Number of years 2016–2030 Total
GW 2016–2030 USD/GW 2016–2030 = = + + USD/GJ in 2030 Government and business
perspectives Based on the substitution cost and the potential of each REmap
Option, country cost-supply curves are developed for 2030 from two perspectives:
government and business Cost of substituted conventional technology REmap
USD/year in 2030 Options Cost of REmap Options Substitution USD/year cost: in
2030 government perspective –  Substitution cost Investment support USD/GJ for
RE in 2030 = = Technologies with positive substitution cost Technologies with
positive Energy substituted by REmap Options substitution cost GJ/year in 2030
USD/year in 2030 ● Government perspective: cost estimates exclude energy taxes
and subsidies In the latest global REmap study (IRENA, 2016a),  standard
discount rate of 10% (for non-OECD countries) or % (for OECD countries) was used
This approach allows  comparison across countries and  country cost-benefit
analysis; it shows the cost of the transition as governments would calculate it
Business perspective: this considers national prices (including, for example,
energy taxes, subsidies and the cost of capital) in order to generate  localised
cost curve This approach shows the cost of the transition as businesses or
investors would calculate it  discount rate of 12% is assumed in the case of
Indonesia GJ/year in 2030 USD/GJ in 2030 REmap Options All technologies GJ/year
in 2030 Substitution cost: government perspective All technologies USD/GJ in
2030 System costs USD/year in 2030 =  ● Renewable capacity installed Average
capital expenditure  Average investment needs Total GW 2016–2030 USD/GW
2016–2030 = USD/year 2016–2030 15 Number of years 2016–2030 By estimating the
costs from two perspectives, the analysis shows the effects of accounting for
energy taxes and subsidies while all other parameters are kept the same An
assessment of all additional costs related to complementary infrastructure (,
grid reinforcements, fuel stations) is excluded from this report IRENA analysis
suggests that these would be of secondary importance to countries only just
embarking on their energy system transformation Substitution Renewable energy
investment support needs cost: government perspective REmap Options Investment
support for RE  Renewable energy investment support needs also can be
approximated on the basis of the REmap tool Total requirements for renewable
investment support in all sectors are estimated as the difference in the
delivered energy service cost (, in USD per kWh or USD per GJ from  government
perspective) for the renewable option against the dominant incumbent in This
difference is multiplied by the deployment for that option in that year to
arrive at an investment support total for that technology The differences for
all REmap Options are added together to provide an annual investment support
requirement for renewables The renewable option is not subtracted from the total
= Technologies with positive substitution cost Technologies with positive
substitution cost USD/year in 2030 GJ/year in 2030 USD/GJ in 2030 Externality
analysis Several externality reductions obtained through REmap Options are
considered They include health effects from outdoor or indoor exposure to
pollution in the case   of traditional bioenergy, as well as effects on
agricultural yields In addition, the external costs associated with the social
and economic impacts of carbon dioxide (CO2) are estimated (IRENA, 2016a) —
Finally, as the RUKN power generation target for 2030 exceeds the power
generation target that is included with the KEN scenario of the Energy Outlook
Indonesia 2014, TFEC estimates from the latter were increased, reflecting higher
growth in overall energy demand and  higher share of electricity in energy use
Further documentation and  detailed description of the REmap methodology can be
found at  Further details on metrics for assessing REmap Options can be
consulted in the appendix of the 2016 global report (IRENA, 2016a) ● REmap: This
is based on IRENA’ analysis combined with existing literature on Indonesia and
information obtained through the REmap Indonesia kick-off workshop that was held
in Jakarta on  April For the power sector the analysis for estimating the
additional potentials for renewable generation and capacity are based on
analysis of the above-mentioned five regions  Main sources of information and
assumptions The following key sources have been used to prepare the base year
for the Indonesia analysis (2014), the Reference Case for 2030 and the REmap
Options: Finally, energy supply and demand numbers in this report generally are
provided in petajoules (PJ) or exajoules (EJ), the standard for REmap In
Indonesia, commonly used units are tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) The relevant
conversion factors are listed below: ● Base year 2014: The starting point of the
analysis is Indonesia’ energy balance for The data are based on the Handbook of
Energy & Economic Statistics of Indonesia, as prepared by the Indonesian
Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR, 2015) The same document and
previous editions also are used to estimate historical trends in energy demand
and supply Reference Case: The Reference Case for Indonesia is based on three
main sources: — The National Energy Policy (KEN) scenario of the Energy Outlook
Indonesia 2014 was used to generate  business-as-usual outlook for total final
energy consumption and the breakdown of fuels consumed therein (MEMR, 2014a) ● ●
● ● ● ●  GJ = 0238 toe  GJ = 78 kilowatt-hour (kWh)  PJ = 0238 million toe  PJ =
78 gigawatt-hour (GWh)  EJ = 88 million toe  EJ = 78 terawatt-hour (TWh) ● This
report is structured as follows: Chapter  introduces the overall energy and
power sector context in Indonesia and presents the main renewable energy
developments so far Chapter  provides an overview of the current policy
framework Chapter  describes the renewable energy developments in the Reference
Case Chapter  describes the potential and costs of renewable energy in Indonesia
Chapter  discusses the REmap Options, including their cost and benefits Chapter
includes  discussion on the key barriers and opportunities in Indonesia to
achieve the REmap Options Chapter  provides key recommendations for  larger
renewable energy uptake — The National Electricity General Plan (RUKN)  was used
for the Reference Case for the power sector, whereby Indonesia was split into
five regions: Java-Bali, Kalimantan, Maluku & Papua, Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara
and Sumatra (MEMR, 2016a) The revised KEN 2025 targets for the various renewable
power technologies were used to derive estimates for the installed power
capacity for each by  CURRENT SITUATION AND RECENT TRENDS Key points in recent
years, could be reduced, increasing energy security Finally, renewable energy
can be used to increase energy access, mainly through the use of solar
photovoltaics (PV) and small- scale hydropower in remote locations ● Indonesia
accounts for nearly 40% of TFEC in the ASEAN region Indonesia’ TFEC equalled  EJ
in 2014 across the country’ more than 17 000 islands Across sectors and
applications, energy use in Indonesia is growing rapidly Between 2010 and 2014,
TFEC increased by more than 20%, while power generation increased by 35% Java-
Bali accounts for more than half of TFEC today  Indonesia’ energy system and
recent developments in renewable energy ● Renewable energy use in Indonesia is
dominated by bioenergy use in end-use sectors (industry, buildings and
transport) Traditional uses of bioenergy (mainly for household cooking) account
for 80% of total renewable energy use Modern renewable energy use (excluding
traditional uses of bioenergy) was 426 PJ in 2014, equivalent to % of TFEC With
traditional uses of bioenergy included, renewable energy use in 2014 was  046 PJ
or 28% of TFEC Energy consumption Indonesia is the largest energy user in the
ASEAN region, accounting for 38% of TFEC in 2013 (ACE, 2015a) Across more than
17 000 islands, TFEC in Indonesia amounted to  EJ in 2014 (excluding non-energy
use), an increase of just over 20% since 2010 (MEMR, 2015) Longer term, the
growth in energy consumption in Indonesia is closely related to economic growth
(see figure ) ● Bioenergy use in industry represents the majority of modern
renewable energy use in Indonesia today, at about 65% of the total, followed by
the use of biodiesel in transportation (13%) Renewables in power generation
contribute the remaining 22%, of which hydropower (15 TWh per year), geothermal
power (10 TWh per year) and bioenergy ( TWh per year) accounted for nearly all
The share of renewable power in total power generation was % in More than half
of all modern energy consumption (excluding traditional uses of bioenergy) in
Indonesia takes place on Java, in line with the island’ share of the Indonesian
population (see figure ) Sumatra follows with one-quarter of energy consumption,
and the other islands account for the remaining 19% Energy supply mix Petroleum
products (diesel, gasoline and liquefied petroleum gas – LPG) accounted for the
largest share of TFEC in 2014, at 37% (or  EJ), down from 40% in 2010 (see
figure ) The most important reason for the declining share is the increasing
reliance on coal, due in part to  range of government policies over the past
years in support of the domestic coal industry (EIA, 2015) Coal use therefore
showed the largest increase between 2010 and 2014: from  EJ or 14% of TFEC in
2010, to  EJ or 18% of TFEC in Bioenergy (including traditional uses) had the
second largest share in TFEC in 2014, at close to 27 % (equivalent to ● Drivers
for expanding the renewable energy base in Indonesia are manifold Such expansion
would have significant positive effects on human health and the environment
through the reduction of air and water pollution from mining and burning coal
(and other fossil fuels) Positive macro-economic impacts include the creation of
jobs and the positive impact on gross domestic product (GDP) of using more
renewable energy Imports of petroleum products, which have been increasing
Figure : Growth in GDP and primary energy supply in Indonesia,  Primary energy
supply, annual change (%) GDP (2000 constant price), annual change (%)
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Source:
MEMR, 2015 total demand of  EJ),  vast majority of which was consumed in
buildings (83%, mainly in the form of fuelwood for cooking), followed by
industry (14%) and transport (%) Since 2010, the share of bioenergy has remained
at the same level, although in the longer term its share is decreasing Between
2010 and 2014, electricity consumption increased by 34% Its share of TFEC went
up slightly in the same period, from % to 10%, still representing  low share
compared to the level in developed economies at around 30% (the global average
was 22% in 2013) About two-thirds of electricity is consumed in buildings,
Figure : Breakdown of total final energy consumption in Indonesia, 2013 Share of
TFEC Sumatra Kalimantan Sulawesi Maluku & Papua % % 25% % Java Bali & Nusa
Tenggara 56% % Note: excluding traditional use of bioenergy Source: IRENA
analysis and MEMR, 2015   Figure : Breakdown of final energy consumption by
carrier in Indonesia, 2010 and 2014 45% 40% 40% 37% 2010 2014 35% 30% 28%
27% 25%        18% 20% 14% 15% 10% % % % 10% % % Oil Bioenergy Coal Electricity
Gas Source: IRENA analysis and MEMR, 2015 and about one-third in industry The
electrification rate was 88% in 2015, with  target of 97% for 2019 (MEMR, 2016a)
Finally, natural gas use went up in recent years, but its share in the overall
energy mix declined: from  EJ or % in 2010 to  EJ or % in cooling, water
heating, appliances and lighting In the commercial sector the split is
different: half of energy demand is used for space cooling, with another 30% for
appliances and lighting and the remaining 10% for cooking and water heating The
share of renewable energy (including traditional biomass) in Indonesia’ TFEC has
decreased greatly since the turn of the century: from 59% in 2000 to 37% in 2013
(IRENA, 2016a) This is due to the increasing reliance on modern forms of energy
– based mainly on fossil fuel burning – in meeting growing energy demand, while
the share of bioenergy is declining over time Since 2000 the number of
households in Indonesia has increased by about % per year – to nearly 65 million
by the end of 2014 – with  constant average of around four people per household
Interestingly, energy consumption per household also stayed constant over the
period, at around 10 MWh per household per year The constant level of final
energy demand per household in Indonesia is not an outcome of  stagnating
appetite for energy, but rather is explained by the changing composition of the
fuel mix, with  transition to more efficient forms of energy use (see figure )
Kerosene, used mainly for cooking in Indonesia, had  share of over 20% in
residential TFEC in In recent years it was substituted on  large scale by LPG
due to the phasing out of fuel subsidies and  large-scale conversion programme
by the Indonesian government (PLN and WLPGA, 2015) LPG, which is estimated to be
about 40% to 60% more efficient for cooking than kerosene, accounted for 13% of
residential energy use in Indonesia in 2014, whereas the share of kerosene was
reduced to less than % Buildings Buildings (residential, commercial and public)
account for more than one-third of Indonesia’ TFEC, at  EJ in 2014 (see figure )
Although building energy demand has increased nearly 20% since 2010, its share
in TFEC showed little change Nearly 90% of building energy demand is consumed by
households, with another 10% used in commercial buildings As in the rest of
Southeast Asia, cooking represents  majority of household energy use in
Indonesia and is estimated to account for more than 80% of total residential
energy demand (Daioglou et al, 2012) The remaining 20% is split between space
Figure : Breakdown of final energy consumption by sector in Indonesia, 2010 and
2014               /            2010 2014 Industry Transport Buildings
Agriculture Source: IRENA analysis and MEMR, 2015 Figure : Breakdown of
residential final energy consumption by carrier in Indonesia, 2000, 2010 and
2014 2014  269 PJ 2000  819 PJ 2010  905 PJ 316 115 225 36 186 388 306 89 30
280  404  616 Bioenergy Gas Kerosene LPG Electricity Source: MEMR, 2015   In
contrast, the share of bioenergy use (almost all residential) in building energy
demand in Indonesia remains high, at over 70%, while in absolute terms its use
has increased in recent years (see figure ) In 2013, an estimated million
households (nearly 40% of all households) depended primarily on traditional uses
of bioenergy for cooking (World Bank, 2013) While the number of households
relying on fuelwood – the main form of bioenergy used for cooking – was
overtaken by those relying on LPG (see figure ), fuelwood remains the dominant
source for household cooking in terms of final energy consumption There are
great differences, however, in the use of fuelwood across provinces In Jakarta
less than % of households depend on fuelwood for cooking, whereas in the 13
provinces with the highest poverty rates (mainly in West Nusa Tenggara, Papua
and Sulawesi), nearly two-thirds of households rely primarily on fuelwood as
their cooking fuel estimates that 10 million households would need to use clean
biomass cook stoves by 2020, and 18 million (about 20% of all households) by
Another form of cooking based on modern renewable energy is via the efficient
use of biogas The Indonesia Domestic Biogas Programme (and various related
programmes) spurred the installation of some 12–500 units by Today, some 15 000
biogas digesters are reported to have been installed, out of  long-term target
of  million systems (MEMR, 2016b) Electricity is the fastest-growing carrier of
energy use in buildings, as increasing electrification rates led to  near
tripling in residential electricity consumption from 2000 to Urbanisation was
key factor In 2000, 42% of Indonesia’ population lived in urban areas By 2014,
this had increased to 53% (World Bank, 2016) In the commercial segment,
electricity consumption grew at the same rate and now represents nearly 80% of
total energy use, up from 40% in Air conditioning is estimated to account for
more than half of commercial electricity consumption (-GE, 2013) Sales of air
conditioning units in all sectors are estimated to grow by more than 10% per
year between 2013 and 2018 (BusinessWire, 2014) The Indonesian Clean Stove
Initiative,  collaboration between the Indonesian government and the World Bank
which was initiated in 2012, is the key programme aimed at expanding the use of
clean biomass cook stoves in the country These cook stoves, of which various
types exist, have  higher efficiency and reduce indoor air pollution The
initiative provides  roadmap for  complete phase-out of traditional uses of
bioenergy for cooking by To reach this target, the initiative Water heating
still accounts for  small share of energy use in Indonesia, especially in rural
areas Energy demand Figure : National trend in household cooking fuel use in
Indonesia,  70 60                50 Other resources 40 Firewood 30 Kerosene LPG
20      10  2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Year Source: World Bank, 2013   for
this application is expected to increase, however, due to economic development
and urbanisation Petroleum products and electricity are currently mainly used
for water heating Solar water heaters have not been adopted on  large scale in
Indonesia The country does not include their contribution in its national energy
statistics, nor are they included in international statistics (AEE INTEC, 2015)
cement, ceramics, brick and paper producers are large users of energy in the
country (see table ) As Indonesian manufacturers have yet to adopt geothermal
and solar thermal applications, renewable energy use in industry includes only
bioenergy, which accounted for 22% of industrial energy use in The processing of
palm oil, sugar and wood is fuelled in part by residues, while small-scale kilns
for brick production, for example, often rely on fuelwood and rice husk (Sopingi
and Soemarno, 2015) Industry Industry has the largest share of energy
consumption in Indonesia at  EJ in 2014 (excluding non-energy use), or 36% of
TFEC This represents an increase of % per year since Statistics produced by MEMR
and by the International Energy Agency (IEA) on industrial energy consumption
seem to differ greatly, with the latter’ estimate being nearly  EJ (or 37%)
lower than that of MEMR (IEA, 2015a; MEMR, 2015) The difference is explained
almost entirely through the estimated use of coal, which, according to the IEA,
has decreased significantly since According to government statistics (which are
used for this report) coal remains the primary fuel for industrial energy
consumption, and its use and share in the industrial fuel mix has increased
rapidly in recent years (see figure ) Transport Of the main end-use sectors, the
growth in transport energy consumption has been the fastest in recent years In
2010 transport energy demand stood at  EJ, or 26% of TFEC By 2014 this had
increased to  EJ, with transport’ share in TFEC expanding to 28% In absolute
terms the growth was 30% The growth in motorcycles and motor scooters has been
especially rapid in Indonesia, with the installed stock almost doubling between
2008 and 2015 (see figure ) Currently, there are about 400 two-wheelers in
Indonesia per  000 inhabitants, with about  million units sold in 2015 alone
Domestic production of motorcycles and scooters in 2015 was about  million
units, representing about 85% of domestic sales (ASEAN Automotive Federation,
2016) Compared to  bottom-up analysis of energy use in selected key industrial
sectors in Indonesia reveals that aluminium, Figure : Breakdown of industrial
energy use by carrier in Indonesia Share of ﬁnal energy consumption in industry
14% % 2010 10% 20% 32% % % 2014 10% 22% 51% Oil Electricity Biomass Natural Gas
Coal Source: IRENA analysis and MEMR, 2015   Table : Analysis of energy use in
selected industries in Indonesia, 2014 Pro- duction Electricity use Fuel use
Electricity use Fuel use Main fuel type Process temperature level Degrees
celcius (°) High (>1000 °) High (>1000 °) Natural Gas High (>400 °) High (>1000
°) High (>1000 °) Medium ( °) Unit Mt/yr kWh/ GJ/ PJ/year PJ/year Coal   Cement
Steel (EAF route) Ammonia Aluminium Glass     Coal Coal Coal / Biomass 16  Wood
processing              Plywood Veneer Wood chips Pulp Sawn wood      Medium (
°)  Coal Paper mill  Newsprint Printing+Writing Paper Recovered Paper Other
Paper+Paperboard     Low (150 °) Medium ( °) Medium ( °) Natural Gas Natural
rubber  Oil Food Oil Textile  Cotton spinning Other  High (>1000 °) Coal Coal /
Biomass Other gross ceramics  High (>1000 °)  Bricks Total of selected
industries Total industrial energy use Source: IRENA analysis other Southeast
Asian countries, Indonesia’ sales of two-wheelers are particularly high Sales in
2015 of motorcycles and scooters per  000 inhabitants totalled around 26 in
Indonesia, compared with 13 in Malaysia and  in the Philippines Clearly,
Indonesia is catching up with countries like Malaysia and Thailand which have
even higher rates of two-wheeler penetration (KPMG, 2014) Sales of passenger and
commercial vehicles were just over  million per year on average between 2011 and
While annual sales have grown about % during the same period, Indonesia’ sales
levels are still low compared to other countries in the region In Thailand, for
example, about 800 000 motor vehicles were sold in This is 20% lower than in
Indonesia, but in relative terms it is much higher given that Thailand’
population   Figure : Stocks of motor vehicles and motorcycles and scooters in
Indonesia,  120 103 96 100 88        80 73 80 65 58 60 52     40  28 27 25 24 23
22 21 21 20  2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Motor vehicles Motor cycles
& scooters Source: IRENA analysis; ADB, 2012; ASEAN Automotive Federation, 2016
Energy production is only about one-fourth of Indonesia’ population Overall,
Indonesia’ four-wheeler penetration rate in 2015 remains modest at about 11%,
illustrating the potential for  further increase to be expected due to continued
economic development Fossil fuels Indonesia is  major fossil fuel-producing
country In 2014, Indonesia was the largest exporter of coal and the fourth-
largest coal producer worldwide (IEA, ) Coal reserves were estimated at 32 270
million tonnes (Mt) in the beginning of 2014, more than 80% of which are found
on East Kalimantan and South Sumatra (MEMR, 2015) The estimated coal reserves
would last for another 70 years at current production levels When total coal
resources (hypothetic, inferred, indicated and measured) are considered, this
would be 272 years Coal production stood at 458 Mt in 2014, up from 275 Mt in
2010 and 77 Mt in Exports accounted for 83% of production, with China, India,
Japan and the Republic of Korea accounting for more than half Most of the coal
deposits in Indonesia are medium- and low-calorific varieties of sub-bituminous
coal, with low ash and sulphur content, suitable in particular for power
generation Metallurgical coal, used in iron and steel making, is found less in
Indonesia (GBG Indonesia, 2014) About half of all transport energy use in
Indonesia in 2014 was in the form of gasoline used by road vehicles; another 40%
was consumed in the form of diesel in road vehicles While biodiesel use
increased over the last couple of years (see next section), the total share of
biofuels in transport TFEC remained modest, at about % Electric mobility is
still limited in Indonesia In 2014, electricity used in transport counted for
PJ, or less than 03% of total energy consumption in transport Electric vehicles,
including electric two- and three-wheelers, are not encountered on  large scale
yet in Indonesia due to  lack of government support and regulations Recently,
however, some electric vehicle companies have established  presence in the
country, with  hope that the market will take off in the years to come (Manaturi
and Tabita Diela, 2015; Octama, 2015) In Jakarta, the construction of  rail-
based rapid mass transit system is also under way The first phase of the
project, which is kilometres in length and has the capacity for up to 173 000
passengers per day, is expected to be completed by 2019 (Amindoni, 2016) Natural
gas reserves (proven and potential) in Indonesia amount to 149 trillion standard
cubic feet of gas (tscf),   with production (associated and non-associated)
steady around  tscf per year over the past 15 years About  tscf of domestic
production in 2014 was used in industry and power; another  tscf was consumed by
liquefied natural gas (LNG) plants, and  tscf was exported through gas pipes
Although Indonesia remains Southeast Asia’ largest exporter of gas, Indonesia’
share of the global LNG market has declined (IEA, ) Its global market share was
20% in the early 1990s but had fallen to less than 10% by the end of 2013 (EIA,
2014) Exports accounted for just over half of biodiesel production in 2014 (see
figure ) The share of exports in total production declined greatly in recent
years due to the increase in domestic biodiesel blending Historically, the
European Union (EU) was  key market for Indonesian biodiesel, representing 85%
of total exports in Following anti-dumping duties of nearly 19% (on import
value) imposed by the EU in 2013, this was reduced to virtually zero by 2014
(EC, 2013) Instead, China evolved as the primary market for Indonesian biodiesel
exports at about 55% of total exports in 2014, boosted by China’ elimination of
biodiesel import taxes Malaysia was the second largest market, at about 520
million litres (or just over 30% of total exports) in 2014 (USDA, 2015) Oil
reserves (proven and potential) in Indonesia amounted to  billion barrels in
January Crude oil production has been decreasing in recent years – from 517
million barrels in 2010 to 288 million barrels in 2014 – due to the reliance on
mature oil fields and to  lack of investment in new oil exploration Imports
therefore have increased: between 2000 and 2014, crude oil imports increased
from 79 million barrels to 122 million barrels, while refined product imports
increased from 91 million barrels to 209 million barrels However, 2015 marked
several structural changes in the Indonesian biodiesel sector First, the
domestic blending mandate was again increased, from B10 to B15 Second, amid
sharply falling oil prices in 2014 many Indonesian biodiesel producers faced
heavy financial losses, as the Indonesian biodiesel reference price was based on
gasoil benchmark price (Mean of Platts Singapore) This led to  new pricing
formula for biodiesel in Indonesia, based on the market price of crude palm oil
and allowing for  % margin over the biodiesel production cost Finally, to
support local oil companies in adopting the new B15 blending mandate,  new
agency (the Indonesian Palm Oil Estate Fund) was introduced to collect funds
from palm oil producers through an export levy of USD  per tonne of crude palm
oil Nevertheless, due to administrative issues in the establishment of Biofuels
Indonesia was the world’ fourth largest producer of biodiesel in 2014, behind
the United States, Brazil and Germany (REN21, 2015) The production of biodiesel
in Indonesia increased rapidly in the years up to In 2009, production was
estimated at 190 million litres; by 2014 this had increased to  961 million
litres (MEMR, 2016b) The number of bio-refineries increased from  to 26 in the
same time frame (USDA, 2015) Figure : Indonesian export and domestic consumption
of biodiesel,   000  500     /        000  845  500  048  000 669   359  500
000   757  629 915  552  453 500 329 223 119 70 20  2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
2009 2010 Export Domestic consumption Source: MEMR, 2016b   this new agency and
in the collecting and managing of funds for subsidy, biodiesel production in
Indonesia dropped sharply In 2015 just over  billion litres of biodiesel were
produced, making Indonesia the eleventh largest producer of biofuels globally
that year (down from its position as fourth the year before) (REN21, 2016) Lower
oil prices globally meant that exports decreased significantly, while the
domestic blending mandate was not fulfilled overall target for blended biodiesel
(of  billion litres) will likely not be met in 2016, which also has been the
case in previous years (see figure 10) Nearly all biodiesel used in Indonesia is
produced from palm oil The total area of palm oil plantations in Indonesia is
estimated at approximately 11 million hectares (Mha) today,  rapid increase from
just  Mha in 2000 (Indonesia Investments, 2016a) Crude palm oil used for
domestic biodiesel production accounted for only % of the crop’ total production
in Indonesia in 2008, but by 2014 this had increased to more than 10% Land
clearing for palm oil production is associated with adverse environmental
outcomes, such as carbon dioxide emissions as  result of forest fires8 In May
2011, the government imposed  moratorium on new palm oil concessions, which was
reported to be extended by another five years in July 2016 (Indonesia
Investments, 2016b) By the first quarter of 2016, it seemed that some of the
major subsidy issues had been resolved, and biodiesel production increased again
The government implemented B20 (and B30 for the power sector), and compensation
was provided by the Indonesian Palm Oil Estate Fund for subsidised biodiesel
(Public Service Obligation – PSO), which is blended for use in transport The
target for subsidised biodiesel was set at  billion litres for the full year
2016,  sharp increase from In the first half of 2016,  billion litres of
subsidised biodiesel were blended (KOMPAS, 2016) For the non-subsidised
biodiesel (non-PSO, for commerce, industry and power generation),  target of
billion litres was set for In the first half of 2016, however, only 50 million
litres were blended This implies that the Even though Indonesia also has
blending mandates for ethanol (% for transport PSO, and % for transport non-PSO
and for industry), subsidies have been implemented only for biodiesel The
Indonesian ethanol subsidy programme was ended in 2010 due to pricing schemes
that provided insufficient incentives to Figure 10: Indonesian mandatory
biodiesel blending targets and actual domestic consumption,   500  000  000
/        500  000  500  017  845    000  641      500  297  048  076   000 669
359 223 500  2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Mandate target Domestic consumption
Source: MEMR, 2016b; USDA, 2015  For more on the topic see  Wicke et al (2008),
Casson et al (2014), Mukherjee and Sovacool (2014), FAO 2014, WRI (2015), and
Koplitz et al (2016)   producers Although some ethanol fuel is produced in
Indonesia, it is at  small scale and is mainly exported (USDA, 2015) Renewable
energy accounted for 11% of Indonesia’ total on-grid power generation in 2014,
down from 16% in 2010 due to the fact that additional electricity demand was met
largely by coal-fired power Hydropower and geothermal generated 15 TWh and 10
TWh, respectively, of electricity that was fed into the grid in Other renewables
played  small role in on-grid power generation Power generation Total on-grid
power generation in Indonesia was 229 TWh in 2014 (MEMR, 2015) About 77% of this
was generated by assets belonging to the national utility PLN, with the
remainder coming from private power utilities (PPUs) and independent power
producers (IPPs) The monopoly position of PLN in power generation has been
reduced since 2000, when PLN accounted for 92% of total on-grid power generated
in Indonesia In recent years, however, PLN has expanded generation at  similar
pace as PPUs and IPPs, explaining the minimal change of its share in total
generation since On-grid power generation capacity stood at GW at the end of
Since 2010, nearly 20 GW of generation capacity has been added to the grid, most
of which (13 GW) was new coal power capacity Geographically, more than 70% of
on-grid power generation capacity is on Java-Bali, with  total of GW of on-grid
generation capacity found there (see figure 12) The share of coal-fired power
capacity, at about 55%, on Java-Bali is higher than in other regions Renewable
power has  higher share in Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara (39%) and Sumatra (17%), due
mainly to the utilisation of hydropower resources Oil-fired power generation
plays  larger role on the islands of Kalimantan and in Maluku & Papua, where the
use of smaller-scale diesel generators is still widespread Coal represented
majority of Indonesia’ on-grid power generation in 2014 at about 53%, or 120 TWh
(see figure 11) This share has increased rapidly; in 2010 the share of coal in
power generation was just 40% Natural gas accounts for another 25% of power
generation, with modest changes in its use since Petroleum products have  share
of 10% in power generation While the share of petroleum products has been stable
in recent years, in the longer term it has been shrinking (down from 14% in
2000) This includes rental contracts with the private sector for about  GW of
diesel generators (mainly in eastern parts of Indonesia), the use of which is
planned to be reduced further (PLN, 2016) Hydropower On-grid hydropower capacity
stood at  GW by the end of 2014,  substantial increase from  GW in Almost all of
the capacity was large-scale hydropower (larger than 50 MW by IRENA definition)
and was based on Java-Bali, Sumatra and Sulawesi & Nusa Teggara The Figure 11:
On-grid power generation in Indonesia, 2010 and 2014 140 2010 2014 120 120 100
/    80 68 57 55 60 40 23 19 17 15 20 10     Coal Gas Oil Hydropower Geothermal
Other RE Source: IRENA analysis and MEMR, 2015   Figure 12: On-grid power
generation capacity in Indonesia, 2014 MW installed Sumatra Kalimantan 31 122
513 578 680  731 Maluku & Papua 64 10 704 245 Coal Oil Gas Hydro  021  508 293
Coal Oil Gas Hydro Coal Oil Gas Hydro Geothermal Java-Bali  224  567  328
Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara 93 20 997  029  108  396 212 633 Coal Oil Gas Hydro
Geothermal Coal Oil Gas Hydro Geothermal Source: IRENA analysis largest hydro
plant in Indonesia has  GW of capacity, was constructed between 1984 and 1988,
and is located at the Cirata Dam in West Java (Indonesia Hydro Consult, 2015)
Small-scale installations increased from just 14 MW in 2010 to 170 MW by the end
of 2014, on the back of specific feed-in tariffs for hydropower plants up to 10
MW (MEMR, 2015) The feed-in tariff regulation for hydropower plants up to 10 MW
was updated in July 2015, with  new feed-in tariff that exceeds PLN’ average
cost of power production geothermal capacity more quickly: in 2010 the target
for 2014 was set at  000 MW from 44 additional plants (Allard, 2010) While
feed-in tariff was introduced in 2012 for geothermal power, progress has been
slow due to institutional, regulatory and tariff constraints (ADB and World
Bank, 2015) Java accounts for 85% of installed geothermal capacity, at  GW
Starting in January 2016, more than  GW of geothermal power projects over eight
working areas were scheduled to be tendered during 2016 and 2017 (Sundaryani,
2016a) Geothermal Bioenergy The installed capacity of geothermal power has grown
modestly in recent years, from  GW in 2010 to  GW by the end of This was despite
ambitions to grow Of  total of  GW of bioenergy power capacity (mainly from
residues and waste in the palm and paper industries), 92 MW was grid-connected
in The   Box : Indonesia’ long history in considering nuclear energy Indonesia
has  long history in assessing the potential of nuclear energy in meeting the
country’ rapidly growing demand for energy The National Nuclear Energy Agency of
Indonesia (BATAN) was founded more than five decades ago in 1958, and in the
decades since it has led various research and development (&) initiatives,
including the construction of small-scale atomic reactors, fabrication and fuel
research, reactor safety testing and radioactive waste management (BATAN, 2016)
In 1996, the first comprehensive feasibility study was conducted for  large-
scale nuclear power plant in Indonesia (in central Java) While plans for an
initial plant were deferred the year after, renewed interest in the potential of
nuclear emerged in the early 2000s, with  power generation strategy showing the
option for  GW to be developed by In 2006 it was decided that an IPP could be
awarded  project for building and operating nuclear plants, with sites on the
central-north coast of Java being considered Plans for tenders in 2008 were then
put on hold, and in mid-2010 three sites were being considered in central and
west Java and in Bangka Island (off the southern coast of Sumatra) For the
latter location, BATAN undertook  feasibility study during  and identified as
much as 10 GW of potential for meeting electricity demand in Sumatra, Java and
Bali However, after  change in provincial government, the identified sites on
Bangka Island were no longer considered Subsequently, BATAN shifted its focus to
West Kalimantan, assessing the potential for small reactor units and stating
that an initial 30 MW experimental nuclear power reactor could potentially be in
operation by In April 2015 the Russian company Rusatom, responsible for
promoting Russian nuclear technologies overseas, announced that  consortium of
Russian and Indonesian companies won  contract for the preliminary design of  10
MW high-temperature reactor in Indonesia (World Nuclear Association, 2015) At
present, the Draft General Plan of Electricity (RUKN)  does not include any
target for nuclear energy until 2025 (MEMR, 2016a) The 2030 Reference Case for
Indonesia, as presented in this report, also excludes nuclear energy as part of
the energy mix, given recent statements by the government that nuclear is not
expected to play  part in the country’ energy mix in 2025 and 2050 (Prakoso,
2015)Indonesia has  long history in assessing the potential of nuclear energy in
meeting the country’ rapidly growing demand for energy The National Nuclear
Energy Agency of Indonesia (BATAN) was founded more than five decades ago in
1958, and in the decades since it has led various research and development (&)
initiatives, including the construction of small-scale atomic reactors,
fabrication and fuel research, reactor safety testing and radioactive waste
management (BATAN, 2016) In 1996, the first comprehensive feasibility study was
conducted for  large-scale nuclear power plant in Indonesia (in central Java)
While plans for an initial plant were deferred the year after, renewed interest
in the potential of nuclear emerged in the early 2000s, with  power generation
strategy showing the option for  GW to be developed by In 2006 it was decided
that an IPP could be awarded  project for building and operating nuclear plants,
with sites on the central-north coast of Java being considered Plans for tenders
in 2008 were then put on hold, and in mid-2010 three sites were being considered
in central and west Java and in Bangka Island (off the southern coast of
Sumatra) For the latter location, BATAN undertook  feasibility study during  and
identified as much as 10 GW of potential for meeting electricity demand in
Sumatra, Java and Bali However, after  change in provincial government, the
identified sites on Bangka Island were no longer considered Subsequently, BATAN
shifted its focus to West Kalimantan, assessing the potential for small reactor
units and stating that an initial 30 MW experimental nuclear power reactor could
potentially be in operation by In April 2015 the Russian company Rusatom,
responsible for promoting Russian nuclear technologies overseas, announced that
consortium of Russian and Indonesian companies won  contract for the preliminary
design of  10 MW high-temperature reactor in Indonesia (World Nuclear
Association, 2015) At present, the Draft General Plan of Electricity (RUKN)
does not include any target for nuclear energy until 2025 (MEMR, 2016a) The 2030
Reference Case for Indonesia, as presented in this report, also excludes nuclear
energy as part of the energy mix, given recent statements by the government that
nuclear is not expected to play  part in the country’ energy mix in 2025 and
2050 (Prakoso, 2015)   government is actively stimulating more power from
bioenergy to be connected to the grid, which was less than 20 MW in Specific
feed-in tariffs for biomass, biogas and municipal solid waste were put in place
to support this ambition (Kusdiana, 2014) bioenergy power capacity that was
located in the paper (955 MW) and palm (450 MW) industries Geographically, more
than 80% was located on Sumatra (Kusdiana, 2014) The remaining on-site
industrial capacity includes waste heat, coal, oil and gas Furthermore, it was
estimated that about 30 000 diesel gen-sets are in operation in rural areas of
Indonesia, in addition to the  600 diesel gen-sets that PLN operates (Blocks,
2013) This form of off-grid rural power generation is estimated to represent
about 900 MW This is somewhat below an estimate for 2007 in which decentralised
diesel power plant capacity amounted to 987 MW that year (Schmidt et al, 2013)
Solar PV Estimates of total solar PV capacity in Indonesia vary, from 42 MW by
the end of 2012 (MEMR, 2014b) to 80 MW installed in 2010 and 2011 alone (IEA,
2015b) For the on-grid component, the installed capacity is estimated at around
10 MW The largest power plants are located in Bali ( MW), Kupang ( MW) and
Gorontalo ( MW) By mid-2016 there was over 700 MW in memorandums of
understanding as well as commitments by PLN to develop utility-scale solar PV
systems in Indonesia Some involve private sector developers such as Savills,
Quantum Energy Indonesia and Akuo Energy, as well as Indonesia’ state-owned
Pertamina (Kurniawan, 2016) The announcement in July 2016 of  new feed-in tariff
to support 250 MW of solar PV installation is likely to further support the
market in the coming years (Susanto, 2016) The Energising Development (EnDev)
partnership states that it has supported 286 micro hydropower and 222 solar PV
mini-grid installations in Indonesia to date, at  reported size ranging from  kW
to 400 kW (EnDev, 2015) Most of these were funded by the government, and many
have been turned over to local governments or local communities IRENA estimates
that this accounts for about 30 MW of micro hydropower and 10 MW of solar PV
Finally, an estimated 264 000 solar home systems were installed in Indonesia by
the end of 2010 (IRENA, 2015a) As the common solar home system in Indonesia at
the time came with  50 Watt module (Sudradjat, 2011), this would imply about 13
MW of installed off-grid solar PV capacity by the end of Starting in 2012 MEMR
has funded the installation of about 500 off-grid centralised solar PV systems
in remote villages These off-grid systems range in size from  kW to 150 kW
Aggregate data on biogas plants in rural areas and small-scale wind systems are
not available Wind The installed wind power capacity is estimated at  MW in
early 2016 (WHyPGen, 2016) In the first nine months of 2016, three PPAs were
signed for the development of wind farms in Indonesia: 50 MW in Samas (Java), 60
MW in Jeneponto (Sulawesi) and 70 MW in Sidrap (Sulawesi), which recently
achieved financial close (Ver-Bruggen, 2016) At the same time more than 500 MW
in projects was in negotiation for PPA or was in the feasibility study/data
validation stages (WHyPGen, 2016) Clearly, renewables already play an important
role in the off-grid power segment in Indonesia, and more potential (in
particular for solar PV) has been identified to electrify remote villages that
are unlikely to be connected to larger grids anytime soon Off-grid power
Different estimates exist for the power capacity that is not tied to the main
grids operated by PLN This off-grid capacity consists of on-site industrial
power capacity, mini-grids and stand-alone generation in rural areas (based on
diesel generators, micro hydropower, solar PV, biogas plants and micro-wind),
and solar home systems  Drivers for renewable energy Indonesia has set ambitious
targets for renewable energy, which should account for  23% share of modern
renewable energy in TPES by 2025, compared to less than % in Indonesia, like 163
other countries that had national-level renewable energy targets in 2015, is
recognising the many benefits that accelerating IRENA estimates the on-site
industrial power capacity at about  GW in This includes  GW of   renewable
energy deployment can have for the country (IRENA, 2015b)  brief overview of
these is provided below Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion
were estimated at 322 Mt CO2 in 2005, and further increased to 425 Mt CO2 by
2013 (IEA, 2015c) Nearly 40% of emissions in 2013 were related to power
generation, with another one-third caused by transport Indonesia’ Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) sets an unconditional target for greenhouse gas
emissions reductions by 2030 of 29% below business-as-usual, as well as
conditional 41% reduction subject to the provision of international support
(UNFCCC, 2016) Health and environmental impacts In 2012 an estimated  million
people worldwide died prematurely from illness related to household air
pollution, and another  million premature deaths were caused by ambient
(outdoor) air pollution (WHO, 2014) In Indonesia both outdoor and indoor
pollution present major problems to human health, and fossil fuel combustion is
significant contributor It is estimated that existing coal plants in Indonesia
were responsible for ,500 premature deaths, with each additional  GW coal power
plant expected to cost around 600 more lives per year (Boren, 2015) Indeed, the
combustion of coal for power generation and industrial processes accounts for
three-quarters of energy-related sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions in Southeast
Asia today, and Indonesia accounts for half of the emissions from coal- fired
power generation in the region (IEA, 2016a) At  local level, coal mining in
Indonesia is having direct negative impacts on the environment, including
contributing to water pollution and desertification  study by Greenpeace on the
effects of coal mining on water quality in South Kalimantan concluded that 45%
of the region’ rivers are at risk of toxic pollution from coal concessions
(Greenpeace, 2014) The rapidly increasing coal mining activities across
Kalimantan and the ensuing water pollution is already affecting local
agriculture (, leakage of wastewater into rice paddies) and aquaculture
operations (Ives, 2015) The rapid increase in the use of motorised vehicles also
is contributing to poor levels of air quality, particularly in Indonesia’ major
cities In Jakarta the average cost of air pollution illnesses in 2010 alone was
estimated at USD 535 million, with PM10 concentrations that historically have
been twice as high as World Health Organization guidelines (ICCT, 2014) The
premature deaths per year in Indonesia related to negative health impacts from
indoor air pollution due to traditional bioenergy use for cooking are estimated
at 165 000, making clear the urgency for  transition to modern cooking
technologies (World Bank, 2013) The demand for water for cooling coal power
plants presents another issue Despite the abundance of fresh water ( trillion m2
of internal renewable water resources, or about 20% of total freshwater in the
Asia-Pacific region), 37 million Indonesians lack access to safe water as
result of insufficient infrastructure and distribution networks (Hooley, 2016)
Based on 2013 data it was estimated that  GW of coal power capacity in Indonesia
was planned in red-list areas (defined as areas where baseline water stress
exceeds 100%), or about 12% of the total planned coal power capacity in
Indonesia at that time Fossil fuel combustion in Indonesia also contributed
greatly to global warming Greenhouse gas emissions in Indonesia were estimated
at  800 Mt CO2-eq in 2005, an increase of 400 Mt CO2-eq from Of total greenhouse
gas emissions in 2005, land- use change (including related to fossil fuel
resource extraction) and peat and forest fires accounted for an estimated 63%,
and another 19% was directly related to fossil fuel combustion Also in 2015,
forest fires from land clearing (as discussed in section ) accounted for more
than 850 Mt of CO2 emissions, with daily emissions during the times of fire
exceeding total daily emissions across the 28 countries of the EU (Huijnen et
al, 2016) Macro-economic impacts The macroeconomic benefits of renewable energy
are demonstrated by the positive impact on indicators such as GDP, trade,
employment and welfare (IRENA, 2016b) For Indonesia, IRENA estimates that
accelerated renewable energy deployment could increase Indonesia’ GDP by between
% and % in 2030, mainly as  result of higher overall levels of investment in the
energy sector The trade balance of Indonesia could improve by an estimated % to
% in the same year At the same time, the number of renewable energy-related jobs
in Indonesia could increase to  million by 2030, up from 101 800 in 2015 (IRENA,
2016c) At present, more than 90%   of the renewable energy jobs are in the
labour-intensive palm oil-based biodiesel industry, but this would be more
diversified if investments in other areas increase Finally, the impact on
overall welfare –  broader indicator that includes not only the economic
dimension but also social and environmental factors – is estimated to be between
% and % in 2030 (IRENA, 2016b) green technologies and knowledge (UNIDO and GGGI,
2015) Energy security and access Despite the fact that Indonesia is  large
producer of fossil fuels, imports of petroleum products into the country have
been increasing in recent years, mainly to meet the rapidly growing demand for
petroleum and diesel for transport The government has identified the additional
use of domestic natural gas, coal and renewables to reduce dependence on energy
imports The government and PLN are already actively lowering petroleum-based
fuel use in power generation, with an aim to lower its share of PLN’ generation
to below % in 2016 (Sundaryani, 2016b) Given the detrimental impacts of coal
mining and burning on human health and the environment, and to ensure the
continuation of revenues from LNG exports, increasing the use of renewable
energy presents  clear alternative Moreover, renewables have been identified as
key technology in increasing electrification, particularly for connecting
remote, rural areas of Indonesia The use and manufacture of renewable energy
technologies also could lead to technology transfer, with additional positive
indirect effects on the economy Already, technology and innovation have been
identified as key pillars to the country’ economic growth strategy, illustrated
by the initiative to establish and develop 100 science and technology parks
across the country (INNO SMES, 2015) To support the creation of green jobs in
Indonesia, skill development is reported as  focus area due to  large under-
educated labour force living in rural areas (causing information lags of green
knowledge transfer); to green technologies not being included in technical
education curriculums; to underutilised and unclear targeting of vocational
training centres; and to  lack of educating the public on    CURRENT POLICY
FRAMEWORK  Background in the form of bilateral co-operation on technology
development and transfer, capacity building, payment for performance mechanism,
technical co-operation and access to financial resources The energy sector in
Indonesia continues to be heavily regulated by the government While the power
sector opened up initially in 1985 by allowing private sector participation in
power generation, the Asian financial crisis in the 1990s hit Indonesia hard and
many PPAs were abandoned or renegotiated In the first decade of the 2000s,
private sector participation gradually increased again The first phase of the
Fast Track Program (FTP) in 2006 aimed to build 10 GW of power capacity to meet
rapidly growing electricity demand, allowing for direct tendering of projects
with inclusion of the private sector The 2009 Electricity Law strengthened the
regulatory framework with  greater role for the private sector in power
generation, resulting in more focus on the use of IPPs in the second phase of
the FTP, which was launched in Furthermore, the NDC states Indonesia’ strong
commitment to implement the planned climate change mitigation and adaptation
activities to be led and co-ordinated among various stakeholders including
governmental institutions and the newly established Directorate General of
Climate Change, under the Ministry of Environment and Forestry Regulation No 21
addresses emission regulations in Indonesia, such as the requirement for thermal
power plants to install emissions monitoring systems and prepare an emission
inventory While improvements have been made, it is reported that there is no
consolidated review of impacts, and monitoring and enforcement of the regulation
may be insufficient at present (UNEP, 2016) At present, state-owned enterprise
PLN is responsible for transmission and distribution of electricity in
Indonesia, while electricity prices are set by the government (PWC, 2013) The
government plays  large role in other sectors as well Domestic prices for fuels
and electricity are directly set by the government, while state-owned
enterprises like Pertamina (oil and natural gas production and exports), PGN
(natural gas transportation and distribution) and PGE and GDE (both geothermal
energy) continue to be dominant players in their respective industries (ADB,
2015a) Overall renewable energy targets In October 2014 the revised National
Energy Plan was issued as government regulation No 79, replacing the 2006
National Energy Plan This plan included the ambition to reach  renewable energy
share of 23% in TPES (excluding traditional uses of bioenergy) by 2025 and at
least 31% by 2050, targets which also were stated in the country’ NDC Exports of
coal and natural gas were stipulated to be reduced gradually due to concerns
related to energy security (IEA, 2014) The Indonesian target matches the region-
wide ASEAN target for  23% renewable energy share in TPES by 2025, as announced
in October 2015 (ACE, 2015b) Indonesia has an important role to play in enabling
the ASEAN region to reach this target, given that the country accounts for
nearly 40% of the region’ total energy demand  Renewable energy targets and
policies Indonesia’ Nationally Determined Contribution In its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC), Indonesia pledges to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions unconditionally by 29% by 2030, compared to  business-as-usual
scenario with projected emissions of  869 Mt CO2-eq in the same year (UNFCCC,
2016) In addition, the NDC includes  conditional 41% reduction, which is subject
to the provision of international support Power sector targets The draft
National Electricity General Plan (RUKN) 2015- 2034, prepared by MEMR, includes
specific targets for various renewable energy technologies by In total,
renewable energy capacity installed in 2025 is targeted to be 45 GW, up from  GW
in 2015 (MEMR, 2016a)   Hydropower represents the largest share, with 21 GW
installed (of which  GW is envisioned to be in the form of small-scale
hydropower, defined as having less than 10 MW of capacity per plant), followed
by geothermal power (target of  GW by 2025), solar PV ( GW), bioenergy power (
GW), ocean power ( GW) and wind ( GW) region’ PLN production cost Adjustments
are made to the feed-in tariff based on differentiations between the national
and regional production cost (Jakarta Post, 2017) To streamline interconnections
of renewable generation, PLN issued in 2014 its guidelines for connecting to
PLN’ renewable energy generation plants distribution system These guidelines,
applicable to new non-PLN owned renewable energy plants that are less than 10 MW
in size, specified two tracks for connection review and analysis The fast-track
review applies to smaller projects (< MW in Java-Bali, <200 kW outside Java-
Bali) that meet certain eligibility criteria (not exceeding 25% of feeder peak
load, compatible line configuration, etc) For other projects, PLN requires
project developers, in addition, to conduct  connection feasibility study,
distribution system impact study and  connection facilities study (PLN, 2014a)
Power sector regulations The establishment of MEMR Regulation No 31 in 2009
provided PLN with  legal basis for buying renewably generated power from IPPs
Regulation No  in 2012 superseded this regulation, setting specific feed-in
tariffs for bioenergy power (biomass, municipal solid waste and landfill gas)
and hydropower projects up to 10 MW that vary based on the region where the
project was installed Since then, more detailed regulations have been
implemented for various renewable energy technologies (see table ) For larger-
scale projects, such as hydropower and more recently wind power, PLN negotiates
directly with project developers for  PPA For most small-scale renewable energy
projects (up to 10 MW), feed-in tariffs are the policy mechanism of choice in
Indonesia, although auctions for small-scale solar PV projects also were used in
the past (Irfany, 2015) PLN states that power system planning is based on
achieving  lowest net present value of electricity supply cost (which is similar
to achieving the lowest levelised cost of electricity), while meeting certain
reliability criteria such as loss of load probability less than one day per
year, with reserve margins of % in Java-Bali and 40% in the rest of the country
Renewable energy generation capacity additions are treated as “fixed systems”
and are permitted to enter the grid with no economic optimisation For small non-
interconnected or isolated systems, PLN does not apply the economic optimisation
process, but rather uses  deterministic method with  criteria that the minimum
reserve must be greater than the two largest generation units (PLN, 2014b) In
2015 the Indonesian Supreme Court issued  decision requiring MEMR to revoke
previous auction regulation for solar PV, based on  case by the Indonesian Solar
Module Association Until then, seven tenders had been conducted for the purchase
of solar power (Baker and McKenzie, 2015) As  result of this process, seven
solar tenders, totalling 15 MW, were awarded in the provinces of East Nusa
Tenggara (five locations), Gorantalo (one location) and South Kalimantan (one
location) (Susanto, 2015) The bids were won with tariffs ranging from USD 18 per
kWh to USD 25 per kWh In July 2016  new regulation on the purchase of power from
solar PV was announced (Susanto, 2016) Transmission and distribution PLN takes
sole responsibility for transmission and distribution planning in Indonesia PLN
is responsible for expanding transmission capacity and maintains  de facto
monopoly on distribution expansion through  right-of-first-refusal for projects
(ADB, 2015a) Transmission and distribution plans are captured in PLN’ annually
updated Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL), of which the  edition is the
latest version (PLN, 2015) Currently Indonesia has about 40 000 circuit-
kilometres of transmission lines across eight interconnected networks and 600
isolated grids (ADB, 2015a) PLN distinguishes three regions for its In February
of 2017 it was announced that the Energy and Mineral Resources Ministry had
issued the latest feed-in tariff policy regime for renewable energy The
regulation, Minister Decree No 12 of 2017, covers all renewable energy types and
sets  price based on negotiations between independent power producers and PLN
Importantly it sets  feed-in tariff for projects in  region that range from 85%
up to equal cost of that   Figure 13: Electricity network in Indonesia, 2014
SUMATRA: Generation: 554 MW (16%) 275 kV: 028 kmc 150 kV: 753 kmc 70 kV:332 kmc
JTM:94 957 kmc JTR:93 757 kmc KALIMANTAN: Generation: 943 MW (%) 150 kV: 477 kmc
70 kV:123 kmc JTM:25 457 kmc JTR:25 019 kmc SULAWESI: Generation: 332 MW (%) 150
kV: 450 kmc 70 kV:534 kmc JTM:27 105 kmc JTR:31 441 kmc Paciﬁc Ocean Indian
Ocean MALUKU: Generation:269 MW (%) JTM: 852 kmc JTR: 780 kmc PAPUA:
Generation:237 MW (%) JTM: 126 kmc JTR: 916 kmc JAMALI: Generation:33 568 MW
(72%) 500 kV: 052 kmc 150 kV:13 100 kmc 70 kV: 239 kmc JTM:148 080 kmc JTR:262
584 kmc NUSA TANGGARA: Generation:527 MW (%) JTM: 441 kmc JTR: 390 kmc km 400
800 This map is without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any
territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries, and to
the name of any territory, city or area Note: kmc = kilometre of circuit; JTM =
medium-voltage network; JTR = low-voltage network Factories indicate presence of
major power generation plants Source: IEA, 2015b operations: Java-Madura-Bali
(“JAMALI”), Sumatra and East Indonesia (EY, 2015) Expansion plans for the period
up to 2025 would more than double transmission capacity by adding about 67 900
kilometres of transmission across the country, where Sumatra (25 435 kilometres)
and JAMALI (18 471 kilometres) account for nearly two-thirds of the total (PLN,
2016) is also under way, while  connection between Sabah (Malaysia) and North
Kalimantan is in the planning stages These projects are part of  larger effort
to increase interconnections between countries in ASEAN, as part of the ASEAN
Power Grid initiative This initiative aims to expand cross-border
interconnections in the ASEAN region from  today to more than 30 beyond 2020
(Hermawanto, 2016) Included in the plans for transmission expansion is the 500
kilovolt direct current (kVDC) interconnection between Sumatra and Java in the
coming years, to allow for additional coal-fired power capacity on Sumatra to
meet rapidly growing electricity demand in Java and to better distribute
electricity and alleviate frequent blackouts on the two islands (Dahrul, 2014)
Plans for other interconnection between Indonesia’ islands are not included in
current plans At the beginning of 2016 the first power trading between Indonesia
and Malaysia started with the interconnection between Sarawak (Malaysia) and
West Kalimantan (FMT, 2016)  project to connect Malacca (Malaysia) and Sumatra
Up to 2025, distribution capacity also is set to nearly double with the addition
of 44 000 MVA in transformer capacity, 159 000 kilometres of medium-voltage
lines and 133 000 kilometres of low-voltage lines This is in addition to the 46
800 MVA of capacity that PLN operated in 2014, with 925 300 circuit-kilometres
of distribution lines It should be noted that power system expansions as planned
by PLN are often held back by  lack of financing as well as time-consuming
approvals for rights of way and substations (ADB, 2015a)  recent regulation
allows for the shared use of both transmission and distribution networks
Typically, these transmission   and distribution lines are owned and operated by
PLN This power wheeling regulation opens the possibility for power plants to
have captive consumers and provide electricity to those consumers by utilising
PLN’ existing transmission and distribution lines While the details, such as
wheeling fees, have yet to be announced in the upcoming implementing
regulations, it provides the overall framework for power wheeling in Indonesia
will be  combination of providing interconnection to existing grids and
developing new mini-grids For the latter, distributed solar PV has been
identified as  key resource, with the potential for electrifying close to  000
villages (representing about  million households) in this way by Targets for
end-use sectors and energy efficiency Electrification Beyond the power sector,
mandates for biofuel blending are  priority area for the Indonesian government
in promoting renewables Biodiesel targets especially have been ambitious, with
mandate for 20% blending in diesel for 2016 and  targeted 30% by These targets
include not only transport, but also diesel use in industry and power generation
For ethanol, blending mandates have not been implemented to date, due to
infrastructure shortcomings, feedstock supply gaps and an overall focus on
biodiesel (USDA, 2015) Nevertheless, ambitious targets for 20% ethanol blending
in industry, power and transport are set for In addition, the By 2015 the
overall electrification rate in Indonesia was estimated at 88%, up from just 67%
in 2010 (MEMR, 2016a) The target of the Indonesian government is to reach 97% by
2019 and % by Great differences exist across the various islands of Indonesia
(see figure 14) While more densely populated and economic developed provinces on
Java already have electrification rates higher than 90%, provinces mainly in the
east of Indonesia, such as East Nusa Tenggara and Papua, are less developed and
face electrification rates below 60% Electrification in these more remote
locations Figure 14: Electrification rates across Indonesia, 2015 Electriﬁcation
rate (% of population) KALTIM 95 NAD 95 KALTARA 73 JAMBI 85 GORONTALO 79 SUMUT
93 KEPRI 74 SULUT 89 MALUT 94 KALBAR 82 RIAU 89 SULTENG 80 PABAR 83 BABEL 100
PAPUA 46 SULBAR 77 SUMBAR 83 DKI JAKARTA 100 JATENG 91 KALTENG 70 MALUKU 85
KALSEL 87 BENGKULU 87 SULSEL 88 SULTRA 69 SUMSEL 80 JABAR 94 JATIM 87 LAMPUNG 85
DIY 86 NTB 73 BALI 89 NTT 59 BANTEN 96 Source: MEMR, 2016a   Table : Overview of
targets, policies and regulation for renewable energy in Indonesia Targets for
2025 Current policy framework and instruments Regulation Overall targets
Renewable energy in TPES (excluding traditional uses of bioenergy) Renewable
energy in power generation Power sector targets Large hydropower 23% Government
Regulation No 79 25% Draft RUKN  (plan, no regulation) GW Regulation allows for
power purchase through MEMR No 03 direct selection or direct appointment without
the minister’ approval as long as the tariff does not exceed the levelised base
cost at the power plant’ busbar Small hydropower  GW Different feed-in-tariff
for projects up to 250 kW MEMR No 19 (low voltage) and 10 MW (medium voltage)
for 20 years Rates vary for years - and -20, and between locations (60% premium
for Papua, for example) Tariff range is indexed at USD /kWh for the first  years
and USD /kWh for years -Bioenergy power  GW Feed-in tariffs in the range of
about USD 108- MEMR No 21 (biomass and biogas) and MEMR No 44 (municipal waste)
272/kWh depending on location, voltage (low/ medium) and type of bioenergy
(biomass, biogas, municipal solid waste) Acceleration of municipal solid waste
power plants are done for seven specific cities and include, as an example, ease
of permitting and the use of government funds to pay for the feasibility studies
Presidential Decree No 18 (municipal solid waste) Geothermal power  GW Direct
geothermal within conservation forests only MEMR No 17 allowed when used for
nature tourism activities For indirect geothermal (power) need permit from
Ministry of Forestry if location is in forest areas Tariff range of USD /kWh
dependent on year of commercial operation and area in which project is located
Republic of Indonesia Law No 21 MEMR No 19  GW Feed-in tariff for 250 MW of
capacity, with 150 MW in Java and the remaining 100 MW spread over other
locations Feed-in tariffs range from USD 145/kWh in Java to USD 25/kWh in Papua
for 20 years Solar PV  GW Not covered by specific regulation at the moment, Wind
although  feed-in tariff is under discussion Current projects directly
negotiated with PLN  GW Not covered by specific regulation Ocean power Ethanol
blending Transportation 20% % blending mandate in transportation (PSO), % in
non-PSO transportation for % blending mandate for MEMR No 12 20% MEMR No 12
Industry Biodiesel blending Transportation Industry Electricity Aviation
blending 30% 30% 30% % (2020) 20% blending mandate for 20% blending mandate for
30% blending mandate for Alternative biofuel for aircraft, % blending mandate
for MEMR No 12 MEMR No 12 MEMR No 12 MEMR No 12   Indonesia State Action Plan to
Reduce Emissions in the Aviation Sector proposed in 2013 to achieve  % blend for
aircrafts by 2018, and % by 2020 (Gona, 2013) the total energy subsidies in
Indonesia at USD 36 billion in 2012, compared to USD 29 billion as estimated by
the IEA (ADB, 2015b) Energy efficiency represents another important focus area
for Indonesia In 2005, the National Master Plan for Energy Conservation (RIKEN)
identified the potential to reduce energy intensity by % per year until An
updated draft version of the RIKEN is awaiting approval, which includes targets
for industry (17% reduction in final energy consumption from  business-as-usual
scenario), transport (-20%) and the commercial and residential sectors (-15%)
(IEA, 2016b) More recently, the government has taken active steps to reduce
subsidies on oil products, as the country is increasing its reliance on imports
of oil products amid declining domestic oil production and increasing demand
Prices for gasoline and diesel prices were first increased by nearly 40% in
November In January 2015 the government announced that subsidies on gasoline
would be removed altogether, and that diesel prices subsidies are reduced to
fixed gap of IDR  000 (about USD 08) per litre Energy subsidies included in the
2016 budget for Indonesia therefore were lowered to USD  billion, although it is
unclear how this breaks down into subsidies for various energy carriers  Energy
subsidies Total energy subsidies in Indonesia were estimated at USD billion in
2014 (about % of GDP), almost % of the USD 493 billion in global subsidies to
fossil fuels in the same year (IEA, 2016c) About 70% of subsidies were on oil
products (see figure 15), with the remainder spent on electricity (mainly for
low-voltage residential, business and industrial connections) Price caps for
consumers of diesel, gasoline, LPG and electricity explain the vast majority of
subsidies Due to the difficulties with estimating fossil fuel subsidies,
historical estimates for the total subsidy vary somewhat: the Asian Development
Bank, for example, estimated In 2015 the revised state budget included USD
billion in energy subsidies (ADB, 2015b) Interestingly, the original allocation
for oil subsidies was USD 22 billion in 2015; the reforms, in combination with
rapidly falling oil prices, thus had  substantial and immediate effect (IISD,
2015) Outside of subsidies on diesel and gasoline, subsidies on LPG in Indonesia
were estimated at nearly USD  billion in The subsidies are applied to the sales
of  kilogram cylinders, to support energy access for low-income households LPG
use for cooking was supported by the Indonesian government on  large Figure 15:
Energy subsidies in Indonesia,  25 23 20 19 20     /   15     10          2012
2013 2014 Electricity Oil Source: IEA, 2016c   scale, to mitigate health damages
from the use of traditional bioenergy for cooking Prices for  kilogram LPG
canisters, which have not changed since 2010, are among the lowest in the world
(IISD, 2016) users While the high end of the electricity price range is in line
with the market price as estimated by PLN, small-scale users of electricity thus
continue to enjoy subsidised tariffs (IISD, 2015) Electricity subsidies
increased until 2014, from USD  billion in 2012 to USD  billion in 2014, an
increase of 47% As electricity sales during the same time went up by just %
(MEMR, 2015), the subsidy on electricity increased from USD 033 per kWh in 2012
to USD 042 per kWh in 2014 (in nominal terms) This is despite an increase in
electricity prices of 15% in 2013, where households consuming  volt-amperes were
not included Besides increasing sales, escalating prices for fossil fuel inputs
and exchange rate revisions are named as main causes for the increasing
subsidies on electricity Apart from price caps, some subsidies to PLN in the
form of soft loans and loan guarantees were provided, but they represent only
small fraction of the total (about USD 72 million in 2013) (ADB, 2015b) All in
all, the removal of subsidies on gasoline and the large reduction in diesel
subsidies, with estimated public savings of USD 15 billion in 2015, shows that
the Indonesian government is making progress towards implementing its G20 pledge
on phasing out subsidies on energy prices Important to note is that potential
subsidies associated with the government programme to add 35 GW of power
generation capacity by 2019,  large part of which is coal-fired, is not (yet)
reflected in energy subsidy estimates It is reported that public finance and
guarantees might be included in these plans as well (ODI, 2015) While the
Indonesian law does not allow for the earmarking of specific funds, the subsidy
removals have allowed for the development of the Energy Resiliency Fund
(Alvionitasari, 2016) The regulation for the framework of this fund is being
developed, although it is said that the process is currently on hold Renewable
energy support and rural electrification could be part of the programmes that
are envisioned to be supported by this fund, while some of the resources would
be set aside to guard against oil price fluctuations During 2014 and early 2015
the government continued to increase electricity prices, mainly for large
residential, industrial and governmental users Electricity prices vary greatly
between different types of users, from IDR 415 per kWh (about USD 03 per kWh)
for small residential users to nearly IDR  500 per kWh (USD 11 per kWh) for
large-scale industrial and government    REFERENCE CASE DEVELOPMENTS TO 2030 Key
points for % of total power generation, with the highest share in Maluku & Papua
(at 15%) due to the ambitious plans there for scaling up solar PV ● Indonesia
has  target for (modern) renewable energy to represent 23% of TPES by This
target is reflected in the National Energy Policy (KEN) scenario of the Energy
Outlook Indonesia 2014 and the National Electricity General Plan (RUKN)  from
the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources, which were used to develop
business-as-usual scenario for 2030 (referred to in this study as the “Reference
Case”) ● More than 70% of renewable energy use in 2030 is represented by the
modern use of bioenergy Bioenergy use in industry increases in line with the
sector’ overall increase in energy use, up to 656 PJ, which is more than
doubling from today’ levels In buildings, 602 PJ of bioenergy use is projected
for 2030, down from  620 PJ in This shift is mainly because of households
shifting from using fuelwood for cooking to using electricity and LPG instead ●
The projections show  strong overall increase in energy use TFEC increases by
nearly 80% in  to reach more than 13 EJ per year The Reference Case takes
Indonesia’ modern renewable energy share in TFEC to % by In terms of the share
of renewables in TPES, the increase is from % in 2014 to % in 2030 (based on the
“physical energy content” calculation method for TPES) In absolute terms, the
use of modern renewable energy increases more than five-fold, up to nearly  200
PJ per year ● In transport, there is  strong increase in the absolute use and
relative share of liquid biofuels, as  result of projected B30 and E20 blending
mandates from 2025 onwards Total use of liquid biofuels in transport increases
from 57 PJ ( billion litres) in 2014 to 700 PJ (25 billion litres) in 2030,
resulting in  % share for renewable energy in TFEC in transport (from % in 2014)
This could come with significant supply-side challenges; the additional
potential for sustainable production from energy crops is limited ● Power
generation increases from 240 TWh in 2014 – including 15 TWh of off-grid
generation – to 826 TWh in The share of renewable energy in total power
generation increases to % – or 236 TWh per year – in the Reference Case
Hydropower accounts for the largest source of renewable power (at 107 TWh per
year), followed by geothermal power (62 TWh per year), bioenergy power (32 TWh
per year), marine energy (16 TWh per year), solar PV (13 TWh per year) and wind
power ( TWh per year) This chapter discusses the Reference Case developments in
Indonesia The Reference Case represents the developments in Indonesia’ entire
energy system until 2030 based on current government outlooks The Reference Case
for Indonesia is based on three main sources: ● The National Energy Policy (KEN)
scenario of the MEMR Energy Outlook Indonesia 2014 was used to generate
business-as-usual outlook for TFEC and the breakdown of fuels consumed therein
(MEMR, 2014a) ● Java-Bali accounts for about 70% of total power generation, but
only 16% of renewable power generation, in the Reference Case Instead, the
highest shares for renewable power are in Sulawesi & Nusa-Tenggara and
Kalimantan, mainly because of the availability of hydropower Variable renewable
power (solar, wind, marine) accounts ● The National Electricity General Plan
(RUKN)  was used for the Reference Case   for the power sector, where five
regions were distinguished: Java-Bali, Kalimantan, Maluku & Papua, Sulawesi &
Nusa Tenggara and Sumatra (MEMR, 2016a) The revised KEN 2025 targets for the
various renewable power technologies were used to derive estimates for the
installed power capacity for each by 2030, mainly as  result of increased gas
use in industry The share of oil, on the other hand, will further decline to
account for just 20% of TPES by 2030, as its use in power generation decreases
while the blending of liquid biofuels (mainly in transport) increases The share
of modern renewable energy will increase from % in 2014 to % by The latter is
somewhat higher than Indonesia’ renewable energy target for 2025, which is for
23% share of modern renewable energy in TPES that year This is due to the
continued growth in renewables that is assumed in 2025-Geothermal and modern
uses of bioenergy account for nearly 90% of total modern renewable energy use in
primary energy terms ● Finally, as the RUKN power generation target for 2030
exceeds the power generation target that is included with the KEN scenario of
the Energy Outlook Indonesia 2014, TFEC estimates from the latter were
increased, reflecting higher growth in overall energy demand and  higher share
of electricity in energy use Based on the Reference Case, Indonesia’ TFEC will
increase to 13 EJ in 2030, an increase of 78% from  EJ in 2014 (see figure 17)
The largest increase is in industry, which will grow by 114% from 2014, to
account for 44% of TFEC in Transport follows with  100% increase to account for
31% of Indonesia’ TFEC in Energy consumption in buildings increases less, and
its share shrinks to 23% of TFEC in The substitution of traditional bioenergy
used for cooking by more efficient cooking fuels explains this trend Agriculture
accounts for the remainder, at about % of total TFEC It should be noted that, as
table  illustrates, there is  significant discrepancy in the outlook for
renewable energy in the power sector included in the National Electricity
General Plan from MEMR and the latest Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL)
from PLN (PLN, 2016) The targets of MEMR for 2025 for all renewable energy
technologies – which are taken into account to develop the Reference Case for
2030 – are significantly higher than those as incorporated by PLN into their
plans Therefore the Reference Case 2030, based on the outlook of MEMR, can be
considered ambitious in terms of renewable power, although recent policies (,
the solar PV feed-in tariff) do indicate the intent of the government to further
accelerate deployment Figure 18 shows the development of the renewable energy
shares in TFEC and power generation in Indonesia based on the Reference Case In
total, the share of renewable energy (excluding traditional uses of bioenergy)
in TFEC increases from close to % in 2014 to % in This is lower than the share
of renewable energy in TPES, due mainly to the low conversion efficiency assumed
for geothermal power (10%) as per the physical energy content method As shown in
figure 16, Indonesia’ fuel mix is expected to change significantly in the
Reference Case Of the conventional fuels, the share of natural gas is projected
to increase the most, from 12% of TPES in 2014 to 19% in Table : Renewable
energy targets included in RUPTL  and in MEMR: Revised KEN 2025 2025 Target
(cumulative capacity in GW) PLN: RUPTL    *    MEMR: Revised KEN 2025
Geothermal Large hydropower (>10 MW) Small hydropower (<10 MW) Solar PV Wind
Bioenergy Marine energy *The RUPTL  also mentions that there is  plan to develop
GW of solar PV by 2025, but this has not been allocated to specific regions
Hence, only the 444 MW that is specifically allocated is included in the table
Figure 16: Fuel mix in primary energy supply, 2000, 2014 and in the Reference
Case for 2030 % % % % % % % 100% 10% 90% 29% 17% 13% % 80%            70% 12%
19% 16% 60% 50% 30% 20% 40% 42% 30% 20% 33% 31% 10% 10% % 2000 2014 Reference
Case 2030 Coal Oil Natural gas Bioenergy (traditional uses) Bioenergy (modern
uses) Geothermal Hydropower Other renewables Note: the physical energy content
method was used to calculate primary energy supply, including  10% conversion
efficiency for geothermal power and 100% for hydropower These differ from
historical conversion efficiencies as applied by MEMR, which are in the range of
% for geothermal power and % for hydropower Source: IRENA analysis Figure 17:
Sectoral breakdown of total final energy consumption, 2000, 2014 and in the
Reference Case for 2030 14 000 % 12 000 10 000 44%     /    000 %  000 36% % 31%
000 34% 19% 28%  000 23% 34% 43%  2014 Reference Case 2030 2000 Buildings
Transport Industry Other Source: IRENA analysis   Figure 18: Modern renewable
energy shares in total final energy consumption, power generation, transport,
buildings and industry in Indonesia, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030
Modern renewable energy share in TFEC (%) % % % % % % % % % % Total Power
Buildings Transport Industry 2014 Reference Case 2030 Source: IRENA analysis
Among the end-use sectors, the largest increase in the share of renewables in
TFEC is in buildings: from % in 2014 to % in 2030, due to  reduction of
traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking and increasing electrification Without
the share of electricity consumption that is generated by renewable power, the
share would be just % by In transport the share of renewable energy also
increases significantly, from % in 2014 to % in 2030, due to increasing blending
mandates for biofuels In industry, the renewable energy share increases from %
in 2014 to % in 2030, due to the increased reliance on bioenergy and electricity
for meeting growing energy demand is projected to be the highest in Maluku &
Papua at 15%, due to  relatively high level of planned installations of solar PV
there Total power generation increases from 240 TWh in 2014 to 824 TWh in The
share of off-grid power generation decreases in the same time frame, from close
to % to just % Renewable power generation increases more than eight-fold, from
29 TWh in 2014 to 235 TWh in This includes both on-grid and off-grid generation,
with the latter including mini-grids and off- grid solutions based on solar PV,
micro hydropower and bioenergy power used exclusively for own consumption Off-
grid renewable power generation accounts for less than % of total renewable
power generation in in power generation The share of renewables increases from %
in 2014 to % in Based on the projections for the various renewable energy
technologies, the share of renewable energy in power generation varies among
regions in 2030 (see figure 19) Java-Bali, which accounts for 70% of total
energy generation in Indonesia in 2030, would have  16% share of renewables in
power generation In contrast, in Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara the renewables share
is projected to be 71% in 2030, while in Kalimantan it will be 55% This is due
mainly to the fact that most of the hydropower potential that is planned to be
exploited is not found on Java-Bali The share of VRE in power generation will be
% for Indonesia as  whole, while it Hydropower maintains the largest source of
renewable power generation at TWh in 2030, representing  more than six-fold
increase from 2014 (see figure 20) Geothermal generation (TWh in 2030) and
bioenergy (TWh) grow five-fold and six-fold from 2014, respectively Finally, VRE
generation technologies are projected to account for nearly 35 TWh by 2030
(about % of total power generation), explained by TWh of marine energy, 13 TWh
of solar PV and  TWh of wind energy The significant contribution of marine
energy is due to the ambitious outlook for the technology in the revised KEN
targets ( GW by 2025)   Figure 19: On-grid power generation in the Reference
Case for 2030 Kalimantan Total generation: 31 TWh Sumatra Total generation: 143
TWh % % 45% 47% 51% 43% Java-Bali Total generation: 569 TWh % 14% Sulawesi &
Nusa Tenggara Total generation: 56 TWh Maluku & Papua Total generation: 12 TWh
10% 15% 30% 54% 31% 84% 61% VRE Other RE Non RE Source: IRENA analysis Figure
20: Renewable power generation in Indonesia, 2014 and in the Reference Case for
2030 /      Hydropower Geothermal Bioenergy Marine energy Solar PV Wind 2014
Reference Case 2030 Source: IRENA analysis   and to its relatively high capacity
factor (40%) Lower average capacity factors – in addition to the respective KEN
targets (see table ) – for solar PV (16%) and wind power (25%) explain their
more modest contributions remains minimal in the Reference Case at just 15 PJ,
or % of transport TFEC The contribution to total renewable energy use in
transport from renewable power generation is therefore small at around % In the
Reference Case there will be 199 GW of power capacity, of which 138 GW is
conventional and 61 GW is renewable generation capacity (see figure 21) Coal
will continue to account for most of the installed power generation capacity at
nearly 90 GW, implying annual installations of nearly  GW per year until Only
700 MW of on-grid diesel power generation capacity (500 MW of which is off-grid)
is assumed in the Reference Case for Of the renewable technologies, hydropower
will have the highest installed capacity at GW, followed by solar PV at  GW In
buildings, 602 PJ (35 million tonnes) of bioenergy use is projected for 2030,
down from  620 PJ (95 million tonnes) in The shift is due in particular to
decrease in the number of households relying on fuelwood for cooking: from
around 24 million households in 2014 to an estimated  million by Traditional
uses of bioenergy for cooking would still account for nearly 90% of total
bioenergy used in buildings in The remainder consists mainly of commercial use
of liquid biofuels, and an estimated  million households using biogas digesters
for cooking The reduction in bioenergy use is explained mainly by the increase
in LPG and electricity for cooking LPG is estimated to be the primary cooking
fuel for 70% of households in 2030 (up from 62% today), while 19% of households
use electric cooking (compared to % in 2014) The transport sector is projected
to have the second highest share of renewable energy in final energy consumption
by 2030 at % Out of 894 PJ of total liquid biofuels consumption by 2030 (see
figure 22), 699 PJ (or nearly 80% of the total) will be consumed in transport
This projection is based on the blending mandates of 20% for ethanol and 30% for
biodiesel targeted for 2025, which are assumed to be maintained until As
result, about 13 billion litres of biodiesel and 12 billion litres of ethanol
are required to meet these targets This represents  big increase; for 2016 the
targeted domestic biofuel consumption is estimated at around  billion litres of
biodiesel Electric mobility Industrial energy demand for process heat generation
will increase to  EJ by 2030, up from  EJ in The implied annual growth is %, in
line with historical growth in industrial heating demand (% per year between
2010 and 2014) Bioenergy use in industry increases to 656 PJ (39 million
tonnes), an increase of 240% from More than 90% of bioenergy use consists of
solid biomass (91%), with the remaining % Figure 21: Total installed power
generation capacity in Indonesia, 2014 and in the Reference Case for 2030
Coal Natural gas Oil Hydropower Solar PV Geo- thermal Bioenergy Marine energy
Wind 2014 Reference Case 2030 Source: IRENA analysis   Figure 22: Reference Case
growth of renewable energy use in end-use sectors in Indonesia, 2014 and 2030
620     /   894 625 524 277 57 Liquid & gaseous biofuels Modern use of solid
biofuels Traditional use of bioenergy (cooking) 2014 Reference Case 2030 Source:
IRENA analysis coming from liquid and gaseous biofuels The share of bioenergy in
total heating demand is projected to increase modestly in the same time frame,
from % in 2014 to % in Paper, pulp and printing, as well as cement, ceramics,
bricks and food continue to be key industrial sectors for energy use in industry
Combined they account for about one-third of total industrial bioenergy use in
RENEWABLE ENERGY POTENTIAL AND COST  Power generation and how this correlates
with the demand for power and the projected renewable energy deployment for each
region in the Reference Case Sumatra, Kalimantan and Maluku & Papua together
account for more than 75% of the renewable energy power potential Java-Bali is
where 70% of power demand will be in 2030, while it has direct access to only
10% of the total renewable potential for power generation in Indonesia Based on
available data, an estimated 716 GW of theoretical potential for renewable
energy-based power generation has been identified in Indonesia (see table ) The
potentials shown take into consideration the supply-side constraints of resource
and land availability, but not other constraints such as limitations imposed by
insufficient power demand nearby and/ or transmission networks Therefore,
capturing all of these resources is unlikely to be feasible, but these figures
do provide an indication of the magnitude of the total potential The figures
provided are based on the resource potential identified in existing studies; for
marine and wind, such resource mapping is ongoing and therefore their
theoretical potential is likely to be higher than what is shown Based on the
potential for each of the regions and on available roadmaps for some of the
renewable technologies (, solar PV, hydropower, geothermal), the second column
in table  shows what the assumed renewable power capacity for each of the
regions is in the Reference Case for Comparing these planned deployment levels
with the theoretical potential per renewable resource and the total demand for
power in each of the regions provides the initial basis for the estimation of
the REmap Options However, important constraints and other considerations also
are taken Five regions have been distinguished to develop an understanding of
where the theoretical potential is based Table : Renewable power capacity in the
Reference Case for 2030 and the total potential of renewable power Reference
Case 2030                        Theoretical potential by renewable energy power
technology                           )        (
GW                                                         -       -   )      (
Total Indonesia Sumatra Java-Bali Kaliman- tan Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara Maluku &
Papua             –               Source: IRENA analysis and inputs received
from MEMR during the REmap Workshop in Jakarta,  April 2016   into account in
their derivation; an overview of this by technology is provided next might limit
the potential for renewables and in particular solar PV (without any storage),
due to the mismatch between the peak in demand and the time of day when solar PV
produces at its peak However, the anticipated rapidly increasing demand for
cooling in buildings (from 29% of electricity consumption in 2014 to 35% in
2030) is likely to flatten electricity demand, increasing the opportunity for
solar PV to match electricity demand in buildings Solar PV Solar PV has the
highest resource potential in Indonesia at GW, explained by the high solar
resource across Indonesia, which is in the range of - kWh/m2 and averages
kWh/m2 (Veldhuis and Reinders, 2013) The estimated potential for different
regions is partially  result of these differences in resource across the country
(which is somewhat higher in the eastern part of the country), but is mainly an
outcome of differences in the availability of land and rooftops (IRENA, )
Hydropower Based on  study of  249 locations, the resource potential for large
hydropower in Indonesia has been estimated at 75 GW (MEMR, 2016c) Of this, GW is
targeted for exploration until 2025 (MEMR, 2016d) In the Reference Case this
will increase further to GW by 2030, nearly one-third of the total potential
Table  shows, however, that nearly three-quarters of the potential is based in
regions with lower levels of power demand: Kalimantan, Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara
and Maluku & Papua Indeed, these regions combined account for only 12% of the
estimated power generation in Indonesia in Lacking  detailed deployment roadmap
for large-scale hydropower, it is therefore assumed in the Reference Case that
all of the potential in Java-Bali and about 60% of the potential in Sumatra
already have been captured by Solar PV is expected to be used on  significant
scale by 2030 in three ways: in utility-scale plants, on residential and
commercial rooftops, and in off-grid settings for electrification in remote
areas or to displace costly diesel-powered generation The off-grid potential for
solar PV has been estimated by MEMR at  GW, with the largest potential
represented by Maluku & Papua (95 GW) and Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara (42 GW) In
the Reference Case, it is assumed that this potential will have been fully
exploited by 2030 through active efforts by the government and PLN to use solar
PV to provide electricity to  million households currently not electrified With
an overall target of  GW of solar PV installed by 2025, the Reference Case for
2030 assumes that the market continues to grow until 2030 to reach  GW of
installed capacity in that year With  GW of this assumed to be related to the
off-grid solar segment,  GW is allocated to grid-tied solar PV As the
theoretical potential for solar PV exceeds 500 GW, this implies that less than %
of this will be captured by 2030, despite abundant potential across the
different regions of Indonesia For small hydropower the potential was estimated
at GW, most of it in Kalimantan (42% of total resource) and Sumatra (30% of
total resource) In the Reference Case, about 20% of the total potential for
small hydropower, or nearly  GW, will be grid-connected by Another 300 MW is
assumed to be used off-grid or in mini-grids It is important to note that  large
share of the hydropower resource is based in protected forest areas or might
come with  high number of resettlements In  2011 study that focused on 26 GW of
existing, planned, ongoing and potential projects (which all passed the third
screening of the Second Hydro Power Potential Study conducted in ) it was
estimated that only  GW could be developed by 2027 if no projects located in
protected areas would be considered  “policy-oriented scenario” estimated that
GW would be developed by the same year, but 20 projects would be located in
protected areas (MEMR, PLN and JICA, 2011) Others have estimated the
economically From the distribution of daily electricity demand throughout the
day, it becomes obvious that there is  relatively sharp evening peak, explained
mainly by the use of rice cookers at that time (see figure 23) This  These
calculations include an estimate of the future electricity use per household at
kW, which is significantly higher than current levels of electricity use in
rural households Due to this conservative assumption – in terms of not
underestimating future electricity needs – on the part of MEMR, this implies
that the deployment of off-grid solar PV in terms of power capacity could thus
be lower   Figure 23: Modelled daily electricity demand in Indonesia in 2010 40
000    30 000               20 000 10 000
:                :              :           : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : :
: : : Other Residential Rice Cooker Air conditioning Lighting Standbypower Fan
Commercial Industrial Refrigration Televisions Source: SEAD, 2015 Geothermal
feasible hydropower potential at 40 TWh/year, or around 10 GW (IHA, 2015)
Clearly the hydropower targets set by the government are ambitious in light of
these considerations An estimated 40% of the world’ geothermal reserves are
found in Indonesia, and the potential use for power generation is estimated at
GW (MEMR, 2016e) Of the total potential,  GW has already been exploited ( GW of
which is on Java), GW is labelled as “reserve” (which implies that it is based
on  detailed investigation), and GW is classified as “speculative and
hypothetical resource” Given that  large number of possible sites are found in
forest areas, and since their assessed potentials could be overestimated, the
country’ realistic deployment potential by 2030 might be lower (ADB and World
Bank, 2015) The government target for 2030 – included in the Reference Case – is
to reach  GW of geothermal power capacity Based on detailed plans until 2025,
most additional capacity is expected in Java-Bali ( GW by 2030 in the Reference
Case), which is home to about one-third of the total geothermal potential and
nearly 40% of the currently unexploited “reserve” of GW Next is Sumatra ( GW
installed by 2030 in the Reference Case), which Bioenergy The total potential
for power generation from bioenergy is estimated at GW, nearly half of which is
on Sumatra (MEMR, 2016b) Palm oil represents about GW of the total potential,
with the remainder coming from rice husk ( GW), natural rubber ( GW), municipal
solid waste ( GW), corn ( GW), solid wood ( GW), sugar cane ( GW), cow dung (
GW), cassava ( GW) and coconut ( GW) In the Reference Case,  GW, or about 22% of
the potential, is utilised by With the government’ ambition to increase
bioenergy power generation on the grid, the assumption is that 60% of the
installed capacity will be grid-tied, with another 40% used for captive power
is also where the highest resource potential is found, at about 44% of the total
wind power potential is on Java-Bali, Sulawesi and Nusa Tenggara The government
targets  GW of installed wind capacity by 2025, with capacity factors estimated
at % Marine energy Marine energy is an emerging technology, with 547 MW
installed globally by the end of 2015 (IRENA, 2016d) While none of this was
based in Indonesia, the government has set  target to reach  GW of installed
marine energy capacity by 2025 (MEMR, 2016d) This can be considered ambitious
given the immaturity of the technology In the Reference Case, it is assumed that
the market would continue with the same level of deployment in  as before, and
the installed capacity would reach  GW by The Reference Case assumes that the
level of deployment continues at the same pace as before Hence, the installed
capacity further expands to  GW by 2030, 28% of the total potential identified
so far Most of this (74%) is assumed to be on Java-Bali, given the combination
of good wind resources (many sites with more wind speeds above  metres per
second, mainly along the coastline) and high electricity demand (IRENA, )
Offshore wind energy thus far has not been included in Indonesia’ renewable
energy ambitions Its application is not considered viable at present, given that
the potential is mainly in the Indian Ocean, where costs are anticipated to be
high due to the sea depth As of today only the potential of ocean currents has
been measured The total potential (from 10 locations) of tidal energy has been
estimated at 18 GW (MEMR, 2016f) The Riau islands (included with Sumatra in
table ) and the Alas Strait (in Western Nusa Tenggara) account for nearly GW, or
about 70% of the total tidal potential While current velocity across the
locations varies from 39 to 00 metres per second (or 38 to 84 kW/m2) this lasts
for only about two hours of the day, which in combination with the remoteness of
key resources limits the potential of tidal energy Ocean Thermal Energy
Conversion (OTEC) – which uses the difference in temperature between (cooler)
deep and (warmer) surface water to generate electricity – is thought to have
high potential as well, even though the exact resource has not been assessed in
detail yet Therefore, the assumptions for the Reference Case are based on the
tidal energy potential alone, with most of the installed capacity by 2030
estimated to be on Java-Bali ( GW) and Sumatra ( GW) Generation cost There is
wide range in the estimated cost of renewable power generation in Indonesia
across technologies, depending on the type of application, project size and
capacity factors (see figure 24) The wide ranges across technologies are
explained by the difference in cost encountered for larger-scale projects in
easily accessible locations (, on Java) and smaller projects in remote locations
Generally, hydropower and geothermal have some of the lowest generation costs
For geothermal power this is explained by the high capacity factor (about 80%
historically), even though there is  wide range in project capital cost that is
site-specific For hydropower the capacity factor is lower in Indonesia
(historically at %), but large-scale projects come at  relatively low cost per
installed kW New projects in perhaps less-suitable locations than those
exploited to date are likely to come with higher project cost, however For
bioenergy power the main variables explaining the spread in the estimated
generation cost are the project capital cost, which varies significantly by
case, and the estimated capacity factor For captive power, the latter is assumed
to be just 26% based on historical data, while for on-grid bioenergy power,
based on the average observed capacity factor for the Asia region (excluding
China), this is assumed to be 66% Wind The total potential for onshore wind
energy was estimated at  GW in Indonesia (MEMR, 2016g) Of this, about 960 MW has
been identified as ready for development immediately, with half of this found to
be on Java-Bali and another 25% on Sulawesi Measurement of the wind resource was
first started by the National Institute of Aeronautics and is ongoing, with 171
sites evaluated up to now at  typical measurement height of 50 metres Based on
the distribution of the evaluated sites and the identified short-term potential
across wind locations, it is estimated that nearly 85% of the Wind (onshore) and
especially solar PV show considerable ranges in generation cost, explained by
their application (grid-tied versus off-grid in remote   Figure 24: Current
range and weighted average levelised cost of electricity for various types of
power generation in Indonesia 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50  = Weighted
average Generation cost for fossil fuel capacity    /    Wind (onshore) Solar PV
Bioenergy power Hydropower Geothermal power Source: IRENA analysis locations),
project size (utility-scale versus small distributed cases) and resource
differentials (especially in the case of wind) The costs for new larger-scale
solar PV projects are likely to be at the lower end of this range, or even below
This is because the estimates shown are based on completed projects, which often
have incurred learning costs since (larger-scale) solar PV projects are still
relatively rare in Indonesia Furthermore, there exists large potential for
global cost reductions for solar PV, and the levelised cost for Indonesia – also
considering the country’ relatively high levels of insolation (16% average
capacity factor) – could be much lower as the local industry and market mature
for residues for bioenergy was estimated at 756 PJ (see table ) Palm oil, rice
and sugar accounted for nearly half of the potential for using agricultural
residues, while residues in the wood industry accounted for nearly 60% of total
forestry residue potential However, many other potential feedstocks for
bioenergy in Indonesia have been identified that are not included in this
assessment, including jatropha curcas, pongame pinnata, calophyllum inophyllum
(nyamplung), and candle nut (for biodiesel production) and sago, sugar palm,
cassava and sorghum (for ethanol production) (Prastowo, 2011) Used cooking oil
also could be used to supply increasing biodiesel production targets, with the
minimum potential availability from food processors estimated at 84 000 tonnes
per year, while the potential collections from restaurants and food stall
vendors adds another 562 364 tonnes per year (Ecofys, 2013) Currently about 120
000 tonnes of used cooking oil are collected by Indonesia’ three main
collectors, and smaller collectors gather another 65 000 tonnes The large
collectors export the oil (mainly to the EU), where most of it is already being
used for biodiesel production Small collectors are using  majority of the used
cooking oil for non-energy purposes In general, in comparing the cost ranges for
renewables with the current cost of non-renewable power generation, it is clear
that the potential for deployment in Indonesia based on competitive grounds
already exists for renewable energy power The business case for renewables will
only strengthen based on further cost reductions and technology innovations
Bioenergy Supply potential Bioenergy is  key resource for all types of energy in
Indonesia, including heating, power generation and transport Based on historical
data on agricultural and forestry production in Indonesia, the technical
potential For biogas in households, the potential for usage in Indonesia was
estimated at  million household bio- digesters, based on  feasibility study by
the Netherlands Development Organisation (SNV) in 2008 that took   Table :
Technical potential of various types of agricultural and forestry residues in
Indonesia, 2010 Planted area (2010)  430 026 Yield (MJ/ha/year) Technical
potential (PJ) Agricultural residue Residue type Palm oil Fruit empty bunches
Palm shell 32 800  500  808 263 Coconut Shell Fibre Small log Bagasse Husk Cob
600 12 700  445 121 448 745 12 147 637  131 676 Rubber Sugar Rice Corn Solid
agricultural biomass 288 800 11 800 17 300 Residues (Million tonnes/year)
Technical potential (PJ) Forestry residue Years  average  average  average Log-
cutting residues Saw timber Wood industry Solid forest biomass Note: the table
shows total technical potential from bioenergy resources for all sectors in
2010; the estimates for GW of power generation as mentioned in section
therefore are included in these numbers Source: Prastowo, 2011 into account both
supply- and demand-side factors By 2030 the potential could be significantly
higher Farmers on Java especially could substantially reduce spending on cooking
fuels by switching to biogas, although awareness in the communities of the
potential returns is lacking (World Bank, 2013) In additional, the easily
available potential for biogas in industry based on palm oil mill effluent is
estimated at 32 PJ per year today (Stichnothe, 2016) 595 PJ to 673 PJ per year,
significantly higher than the estimate based on historical data This is due in
part to the included potential of recycling wood waste (231- 262 PJ per year),
which is not included in the estimates in table , as well as rising levels of
production until The potential for agricultural residues (harvesting and
processing) is estimated at 589 PJ to  338 PJ per year The average of the range
(963 PJ per year) is about 50% higher than the estimate for 2010 as provided in
table , explained in part by the increasing levels of agricultural production
expected until The potential for animal manure and waste by 2030 is estimated at
PJ per year This includes the potential for using palm oil mill effluent as
biogas, which is estimated to range from 119 PJ to 204 PJ per year in 2030,
based on the current potential for biogas and  range in the growth projection
for palm oil production in Indonesia For 2030, IRENA estimates that the total
sustainable bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia ranges from  039 PJ to  449
PJ per year (see figure 25)The highest potential is for fuelwood at  556 PJ to
608 PJ per year This indicates that there is enough fuelwood available that is
suitable for use in modern bioenergy cook stoves, and can be collected without
anticipated effects on land-use change The potential for wood residue (logging
and processing) and wood waste (construction, demolition and furniture) ranges
from Energy crops from non-forest land have  more limited potential by 2030, at
162 PJ per year, which is estimated as the current production of energy crops
(palm oil for biodiesel) increased by the expected yield increase of 10  full
explanation of IRENA’ methodology for assessing bioenergy supply potential can
be found at  IRENA_REmap_2030_Biomass_paper_2014pdf   Figure 25: Primary
bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia, 2030 PJ/year Total:  039- 449  162
556- 608  Energy crop from non-forest land Fuel wood Wood logging and processing
residue Wood construction, demolition and furniture waste Harvesting residue
Agro processing residue Animal manure & post consumer household waste Note:
sizes as shown in circle diagram are based on an average of low and high
estimates Source: IRENA analysis % per year Given the government moratoriums on
palm oil concession (which should be in effect until 2021), as well as the
expansion of agricultural lands to meet the increasing demand for food and palm
oil, no additional land is assumed to be available sustainably for energy crops
until year, when taking into account the bioenergy potential of residues from
other crops as well For energy crops, IRENA’ estimate for the potential is
somewhat higher than what was found in the literature, which is due to the fact
that energy crops (biodiesel from palm oil) already have increased significantly
in recent years beyond the sustainable supply potential that was estimated
historically Estimates for the potential of bioenergy supply in Indonesia vary
based on methodology and the assumptions made Table  shows the potentials as
estimated by IRENA, and as found in other literature For residues, IRENA’
estimates are within the range as estimated before  recent study estimated the
sustainable potential from palm oil residues in Indonesia at 491 PJ (mainly from
trunk and fibre) in 2030 in  business-as-usual scenario (IEE, 2016) This seems
to be in line with IRENA estimates for agricultural residues (589 PJ to  338 PJ)
for the same One area for potential that is not included in IRENA’ assessment is
for woody crops on surplus and marginal agricultural land, which could be used
for the production of advanced biofuels Based on existing literature, the
potential for this category is estimated at  008 PJ to  321 PJ per year Given
the rapid increase in liquid biofuel demand and the relatively limited potential
for sustainable energy crops, advanced biofuels from woody crops might present
an opportunity towards meeting   Table : Bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia
based on IRENA estimates and literature review Other literature IRENA Average
Agricultural biomass, land dependent (PJ) Woody crops on surplus agricultural
land Woody crops and grasses on marginal land Total perennial lignocellulosic
feedstocks Low High  Other first-generation biomass resources (PJ) Oil crops on
marginal/degraded land Sugar cane Total first-generation crops Low High Average
Residues, land independent and current data (PJ) Forestry industry processing
residues (primary mill) Forestry industry processing residues (secondary mill)
Logging and site-clearing residues Forest thinning / fuel treatments Total
forestry residues Low High Average  Agricultural residues, land independent (PJ)
Crop residues Wasted grain Food processing residues Livestock manure Municipal
solid waste, landfill gas Total agricultural residues Low High   Average
Total bioenergy supply potential in Indonesia (PJ)  10 Source: IRENA analysis
and literature review from Batidzirai et al, 2012 blending targets while
ensuring the sustainability of the bioenergy feedstock supply chain canister LPG
prices also shows the extent to which they are subsidised (close to 60%) Without
the subsidies, modern bioenergy cook stoves would offer  much better economic
case to potential buyers, as would solar thermal collectors Supply cost The
supply cost of bioenergy feedstock in Indonesia is estimated to range from as
low as USD  per GJ for agricultural processing residues, to USD per GJ for wood
residues and waste (see table ) The average cost of supply of bioenergy in
Indonesia is USD  per GJ, taking into account the feedstock mix Comparing these
supply costs with prices for fossil fuel products in Indonesia,  few things
stand out Second, steam coal prices in Indonesia are at low levels, but the
supply cost of agro-processing residues and animal manure and post-consumer
household waste are in fact lower The use of harvesting residues, for which
significant potential has been identified, is likely to be competitive when used
to substitute petroleum products and natural gas in industry Natural gas prices
paid by industry are relatively high in Indonesia It was reported in March 2016,
for example, that the ceramics industry in Indonesia paid on average USD  per
million thermal units (mBtu) for natural gas, compared to around USD  per mBtu
in countries such as Singapore and Thailand (Sinaga, 2016) First, the supply
cost of energy crops from forest land is high compared to the subsidised price
of  kilogram LPG canisters which are used by many smaller households for cooking
Comparing the  kilogram canister LPG prices with the (unsubsidised)  kilogram
Table : Supply cost for bioenergy feedstock in Indonesia in 2030, and prices of
selected fossil fuel products USD/GJ        Energy crop from non-forest land
Harvesting residue Agro-processing residue Animal manure and post-consumer
household waste Fuelwood Wood logging and processing residue Wood construction,
demolition and furniture waste Steam coal price (2015 average) Natural gas price
(USD /mBtu) Oil price (USD 50/barrel) LPG price ( kg canister) (January 2016)
LPG price ( kg canister) (January 2016) Note: biomass supply costs include the
cost of production, collection and transportation (to processor and end-user)
For full methodology, see:  Source: supply cost figures based on IRENA estimates
REMAP OPTIONS FOR INDONESIA Key points the share of renewable energy in
transport TFEC (including renewable electricity) to % (versus % in the Reference
Case) ● Options for additional renewable energy use (“REmap Options”) have been
identified to increase the share of modern renewable energy to % of TFEC and %
of TPES in This includes full substitution of traditional uses of bioenergy for
cooking by modern cook stoves using bioenergy ● To assess the potential for
additional renewable power in Indonesia, five regions (Java-Bali, Kalimantan,
Maluku & Papua, Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara and Sumatra) were distinguished, and
for each the resource potential for different renewables and the projected
demand for power in 2030 was analysed Based on this assessment, the share of
renewable energy in power generation increases to % with REmap ● Of the end-use
sectors, the share of modern renewables is the highest in buildings at 35%
(excluding renewable electricity), compared to % in the Reference Case With
REmap, all households still relying on traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking
in the Reference Case (estimated at nearly  million) switch to modern cook
stoves that use solid biomass or ethanol Based on an assessment of available
rooftop space and realistic deployment potential, solar thermal collectors cover
30% of energy demand for water heating, while % of energy demand for cooling in
buildings is met by solar (thermal) cooling ● REmap Options for hydropower,
geothermal, bioenergy power and wind power are modest, given their ambitious
increase in the Reference Case and the geographical mismatch in resource
potential and power demand For solar PV REmap identifies potential for GW of
installed capacity by 2030, compared to  GW in the Reference Case Especially in
Java-Bali (which accounts for 70% of power demand in Indonesia) there is enough
available space (both land and rooftops) and demand for power to increase the
use of solar PV beyond the Reference Case ● Through the assessment of the
projected energy use in Indonesia’ main industry sectors and the supply
potential of different types of bioenergy feedstock, the REmap Options identify
216 PJ of additional bioenergy use in industry This consists of additional
potential for the use of biogas (from food waste and palm oil mill effluent),
wood residues and waste Combined with the identified potential of 70 PJ per year
for solar thermal collectors to supply process heat (in the rubber, food and
textile industries), the share of renewables in industry increases to % ● Annual
investment needs for all renewables in the Reference Case are estimated at, on
average, USD  billion between 2015 and With the REmap Options this would
increase to USD billion The power sector accounts for USD billion of this,
nearly half of which is for solar PV ● Implementing all REmap Options implies an
average substitution cost in 2030 of USD  per GJ of final renewable energy, when
compared to the annualised cost of the substituted conventional fuel This is
from  business perspective which includes taxes and subsidies on energy prices
and  12% discount rate The substitution cost of the REmap Options in the power
sector are negative (at USD - per GJ), as hydropower, geothermal power and solar
PV are expected to ● Given the high increase of liquid biofuels use in transport
in the Reference Case, the REmap Options in this sector focus on electric
mobility With the expected continued increase in vehicle ownership, nearly % of
all four-wheeled vehicles and 20% of all two- and three-wheelers would be
electric by Combined, they increase   be competitive with coal-fired power
generation (which is substituted)  Fuel prices were forecasted based on existing
literature and IRENA estimates Technology cost and performance criteria (,
capacity factors) were estimated to reflect conditions particular to Indonesia
Additional renewable energy options for all end- use sectors and the power
sector were analysed based on various studies and assessments  ● From
government perspective, the average substitution cost reflects savings of USD -
per GJ This is due to the application of  lower discount rate (at 10%) and the
exclusion of subsidies on energy prices (on residential electricity and small
LPG canisters for low-income households)  This chapter is divided into six
subsections Section  describes the REmap Options for each of the technologies
Section  provides an overview of the combined impact of the REmap Options on
total renewable energy deployed and its share in the energy mix, both in
aggregate and per sector In section  the investment needs of the REmap Options
are provided, and in section  the cost supply curves of the REmap Options are
provided Finally, section  discusses the benefits in terms of reduced
externalities, as well as the overall costs and benefits of the REmap Options ●
The REmap Options reduce the cost of Indonesia’ energy system in 2030 by an
estimated USD  billion per year (versus the Reference Case) from  government
perspective In addition, the savings from externalities related to outdoor air
pollution range from USD  billion to USD  billion per year Reduced externalities
from indoor air pollution account for another USD billion to USD billion per
year due to the substitution of traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking
Renewable energy technologies ● Reduced externalities from climate change
account for another USD  billion to USD billion per year as the REmap Options
would lead to  reduction of 150 Mt of CO2 per year in 2030,  reduction of 12%
compared to the Reference Case Reductions in CO2 emissions from power generation
account for more than two-thirds of this In sum, the REmap Options reduce system
costs and achieve savings from reduced externalities of USD billion to USD
billion per year in This represents about % to % of Indonesia’ forecasted GDP
for Bioenergy In 2014 most of the bioenergy use in Indonesia was explained by
traditional cooking methods using fuelwood, accounting for  620 PJ or nearly 80%
of the total primary demand for bioenergy that year (see figure 26) Another 277
PJ was used in industry, while transport and power generation combined
represented less than 10% of the total demand for bioenergy demand The Reference
Case for 2030 shows  shift, however, in the total use and distribution of
bioenergy use in Indonesia The traditional use of bioenergy for cooking is
projected to shrink, as households increasingly are adopting more modern cooking
methods and fuels Transportation is projected to increase to more than 40% of
total primary energy demand in 2030, on the back of ambitious blending mandates
for both ethanol and biodiesel (about 13 billion litres of biodiesel and 12
billion litres of ethanol consumed per year in 2030)Bioenergy use in industry
will grow by more than 150%, particularly as  result of strong overall economic
The Reference Case analysis for Indonesia utilises an internally developed REmap
tool11 that incorporates the data, assumptions and approach, as summarised in
section  The tool allows IRENA to enter additional potentials for renewable
energy technologies (“REmap Options”) in the end-use sectors of industry,
buildings and transport, as well as for power generation and district heat The
process for deriving the REmap Options was as follows:   Reference Case was
created for 2030 11 More information on the tool can be found at
org/remap/REmap_energy_system_models_chapter_3_2015pdf 12 Bioenergy use in
transport is assumed to have  50% conversion efficiency   Figure 26: Primary
bioenergy demand in Indonesia, 2014 and 2030 PJ/year Reference Case 2030 2014
Total:  310 Total:  064 390 716 54 277 166 113 636  620  400 Industry Transport
Buildings Agriculture Power Source: IRENA analysis growth and fuel use in
industry, while targets for the power sector imply an eight-fold increase of
bioenergy use there Combined, modern bioenergy use (excluding traditional use of
bioenergy for cooking) will increase more than six-fold, from 436 PJ in 2014 to
768 PJ in sustainable energy crops to produce first-generation liquid biofuels
will meet less than 10% of the estimated demand in This implies that the
remaining 90% would have to be provided by advanced biofuels, for which woody
crops on surplus and marginal agricultural lands could be used as feedstock, or
through the use of more degraded land and by improving yields on current
plantations Given these considerations, and the ambitious targets for liquid
biofuels in the Reference Case, no additional REmap Options for biofuels are
included The top part of table  shows an allocation of the demand for bioenergy
in the Reference Case for various feedstock based on the supply potentials as
presented in section  The bottom part of the table indicates the potential for
each of the technologies and bioenergy feedstock beyond the Reference Case The
green cells highlight where more potential is, while red highlights where the
resource availability poses constraints Finally, orange indicates potentials,
but at  higher cost Due to the constrained supply potential of agricultural
processing and harvesting residues beyond the Reference Case, the REmap Options
for bioenergy use in industry include only higher levels for the use of food
waste, palm oil mill effluent, and wood waste and residue In total the REmap
Options include 216 PJ of additional bioenergy (final energy) consumption in
industry About 35% (or 75 PJ) of this is solid biomass The ambitious demand
projections for bioenergy in the Reference Case imply constraints on the supply
side, particularly for liquid biofuels The potential for   Table : Bioenergy
supply potential and demand for bioenergy in the Reference Case for 2030, and an
indication of the potential beyond the Reference Case     &
,
In 2030 (PJ)                    -                                        Supply
potential 162 162 162 Average Low High 638 422 853 326 167 485 403 137 668  582
556  608 387 364 410 247 232 263  165  008  321 Demand (Reference Case 2030)
Liquid biofuels Ethanol Biodiesel Solid biomass in industry Modern cookstoves
based on solid biomass Modern cookstoves based on biogas Biogas in industry
Power generation  751 Total 545 288 24 28 45 105   751 660  092  751 660  092
598 314 134   45 10   28    28     19   19        391  231  154           Supply
potential Average Low High 162 162 162 638 422 853 326 167 485 403 137 668  582
556  608 387 364 410 247 232 263  165  008  321 Demand (Reference Case 2030)
Liquid biofuels Ethanol Total  751 545 288 24 28 45 105   751 660 Re- source
con- strained Avail- able, higher cost Biodiesel  092 Resource constrained
Available, higher cost Solid biomass in industry Modern cookstoves based on
solid biomass Modern cookstoves based on biogas Biogas in industry 598 Low cost
28 19 Low cost, not con- strained  Resource constrained Available, higher cost
Power generation 391 Note: excluding traditional uses of bioenergy Source: IRENA
analysis from wood waste used in boilers (in wood processing) and used in the
form of briquettes in furnaces in glass and ceramics production, and brick
making These potentials are estimated based on the outlook for total   Solar
fuel use for each industrial sectors, the share that is expected to be supplied
by bioenergy in the Reference Case, and the additional potential that can be
realistically captured within the 2030 time frame Another 35% (or 73 PJ) of the
REmap Options is in the form of additional use of wood residues in combined heat
and power (CHP) in the paper industry, and another 30% (or 68 PJ) is from the
use of biogas The largest potential for renewable power beyond the Reference
Case has been identified for solar PV With the Reference Case  GW would be
installed by 2030; with the REmap Options this would be GW This number is
considered feasible based on the ability for Indonesia to ramp up annual
installations (to  GW per year installed on average until 2030), the amount of
available space for ground-mounted and rooftop solar PV, and the ability of
grids to deal with the supply of variable renewable energy Of the REmap Options
for biogas, 80% is in the form of biogas in CHP derived from palm oil mill
effluent (POME) Expanding the use of POME in particular comes with the
additional benefit of avoiding emissions that would occur anyway, even in the
absence of combustion for heat or power generation When biogas from effluent
lagoons escapes freely into the atmosphere, not only is the potential energy
content wasted, but methane with high global warming potential is released into
the atmosphere The additional biogas potential outside of POME is related to the
use of food waste in CHP in the food processing industry The additional CHP
capacity relying on bioenergy is  GW, which comes in addition to the  GW of
bioenergy for power generation that is included in the Reference Case for The
share of VRE generation (including solar PV, wind and marine) in total
generation is assumed not to exceed 15% within any of the five regions The
latter is taken as an upper limit in estimating REmap Options for VRE in It is
higher than the 10% assumption that the Indonesian Agency for the Assessment and
Application of Technology (BPPT) currently uses in its energy modelling in
Indonesia and the 10% daytime peak load based on PLN requirements to project
developers However, with planned grid developments, and based on the experience
of other countries, it was assumed that 15% should be feasible by In fact, grids
in many countries are already dealing with higher shares, and the 15% is not
binding technical boundary Instead, given the limited availability of data on
actual grid conditions, the 15% is taken as  conservative upper limit Based on
the Reference Case, about  million households (about % of total households) in
Indonesia would still rely on traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking in 2030,
or 525 PJ in final energy terms With the REmap Options, it is assumed that these
households would instead use modern cook stoves In the Reference Case for 2030,
already  million households use biogas for cooking (up from about 15 000 today),
exceeding the demand-side potential of  million households as explained in
section  Therefore, no REmap Options for biogas cooking are included Instead,
with the REmap Options 95% of the households that would still rely on
traditional uses of bioenergy in 2030 are assumed to switch to modern cook
stoves using solid biomass (fuelwood) These modern cook stoves are up to four
times more efficient compared with traditional cooking methods, reduce cooking
times and mitigate indoor air pollution The remaining % (or about 390 000
households) are assumed to rely on ethanol gels for cooking,  fuel that is
already used at scale in various African countries Hence, with the REmap Options
11% (or close to 10 million households) rely on modern uses of bioenergy for
cooking, while the remainder use LPG, electricity and natural gas Most of the
additional solar PV installations are assumed to be in Java-Bali (to reach GW by
2030, about 85% of the total theoretical potential for solar PV there), due to
the resource availability close to demand centres and the modest share of VRE in
power generation in the Reference Case at % With the REmap Options, Java-Bali
will have an 11% VRE share Based on the assessment of available rooftop space in
2030, less than one-third of the installed solar PV capacity is estimated to be
deployed in the form of rooftop solar PV Commercial rooftop space in particular
is more limited (see figure 27) Hence, 95% of rooftop solar PV is assumed to be
installed on residential rooftops Based on the projected growth in rooftop space
in Indonesia, this implies that 10% of residential rooftops and % of commercial
rooftops will be covered by solar PV in The potential for direct use of solar
technologies in residential and commercial buildings in Indonesia   Figure 27:
Use of residential and commercial rooftop space for solar technologies in
Indonesia in 2030 with the REmap Options Residential rooftop space Commercial
rooftop space  million m2 17 140    90  202 Solar water heating Solar cooling
Solar PV Remainder Source: IRENA analysis includes applications for solar water
heating and solar cooling Water heating demand is projected to increase
significantly by 2030, from an estimated 127 PJ in 2014 to 313 PJ in This is due
to increasing energy demand in cities and to the above-average growth in energy
use in commercial buildings (responsible for 25% of water heating demand in
2030) The REmap Options assume that 40% of water heating could be met by solar
collectors in Indonesia by 2030, equal to 109 PJ of final energy consumption
This is in line with the business-as-usual outlook for China, which currently
accounts for more than half of all solar water heating globally Although the
market for solar water collectors in Indonesia is not as mature as it is China,
the solar resource in Indonesia is higher on average, making solar water
collectors an interesting option for substituting petroleum products for water
heating As shown in figure 27, the required rooftop space amounts to million m2
for residential solar water collectors (about -% of total residential rooftop
space in 2030) and  million m2 of commercial rooftops (about -% of total
commercial rooftop space in 2030) about 28% of total energy demand in buildings
The implied annual increase of nearly % per year is in line with the rapid
expected growth in air conditioning sales, which are estimated to increase 10%
per year between 2013 and 2018 (BusinessWire, 2014) Just over 70% of cooling
demand is in commercial buildings, which account for nearly 80% of the increase
in total cooling demand between now and Of the increase in energy demand for
cooling, absorption chillers using hot water from solar collectors are assumed
to cover % Assuming that the systems provide cooling for about three hours per
day, this equates to 22 PJ in final energy terms in The total space required for
these installations is estimated at  million m2, less than % of available
rooftop space Given the already significant increase in rooftop solar PV (for
electricity generation), no REmap Options for stand-alone solar PV cooling are
included Finally, in industry  20% penetration rate for solar thermal is
considered feasible by 2030 for the natural rubber, food and textile industries,
which rely on low (150 °) and medium ( °) heat This results in 70 PJ of
substituted heat (from petroleum products) in the same year Demand for cooling
in buildings is projected to increase from 214 PJ in 2014 to 826 PJ in 2030, to
represent   Hydropower the identified potential for wind power in Indonesia The
addition of  GW beyond the Reference Case is assumed to be on Java-Bali, where
the best wind resources have been identified and where the grid is most likely
to be able to absorb the additional VRE The additional wind power capacity can
be considered conservative given the maturity and cost competitiveness of the
technology However, it is based on currently availability resource assessments
and takes into account power demand limitations Additional resource mapping,
which is ongoing, might highlight additional potential in new locations
Hydropower capacity will be significantly expanded in the Reference Case (up to
GW by 2030, from  GW in 2014) Most of the hydropower resource potential is found
outside Java-Bali where lower demand for electricity is  constraint to
increasing installations Hence, the REmap Options only include the additional
exploitation of small hydropower of  GW, mainly on Sumatra, where 35% of the
resource potential is assumed to be used by 2030 (compared to 21% in the
Reference Case) The large hydropower resource on Java-Bali is already assumed to
be exploited fully by This, along with the fact that for the other regions there
are demand constraints as well as sustainability concerns associated with
exploiting the resource (, deforestation, displacement of  high number of
people), explain why no REmap Options for large hydropower are included Based on
the Reference Case GW already is assumed to be added between now and 2030,
exceeding the estimated 10 GW of economically feasible hydropower potential as
explained in section  At an average expected project size of 150 MW (based on
projects that were under construction or in feasibility study/planning phases in
2015), this implies that nearly 130 projects are required to achieve this Based
on existing assessments of potential sites, these projects are likely to be
distributed across  large number of rivers and reservoirs on the different
islands of Indonesia (MEMR, PLN and JICA, 2011) Electric mobility For electric
mobility, significant potential beyond the Reference Case is identified The
REmap Options for electric vehicles and electric two- and three-wheelers amount
to TWh (or PJ) of final energy consumption in Passenger and commercial vehicles
(four-wheelers) account for nearly two-thirds of the total potential Based on
the expected sales of cars until 2030 and on  gradually increasing market share
for electric vehicles, it is estimated that about % of the total vehicle stock
in Indonesia would be electric in In the same year, electric vehicles would have
25% market share in the passenger cars segment and  10% market share in
commercial vehicle sales For electric motorcycles and scooters the feasible
penetration is higher by 2030; 20% of all two- and three- wheelers could be
electric by 2030 based on  roadmap gradually reaching  75% market share in total
two- and three-wheelers sales in the same year This totals about million
electric two- and three-wheelers on the road by 2030 and average sales of about
million of these between now and The case of China shows that this is feasible:
about 200 million electric two- and three-wheelers were in use there in 2012,
and sales are expected to exceed 10 million per year on average up to 2030
(IRENA, 2014b) Geothermal In the Reference Case, geothermal capacity is set to
grow quickly, from  GW in 2014 to  GW in Beyond this ambitious projection, the
REmap Options include  GW of additional geothermal power, to reach GW of
installed capacity in Java-Bali accounts for 800 MW of the REmap Options;
Sumatra accounts for the remainder As  result, 60% of the resource potential in
Java-Bali will have been exploited by 2030, and 30% of the potential in Sumatra
Outside of these two regions, demand constraints and resource accessibility are
assumed to limit  further increase of geothermal installations beyond the
Reference Case Electric vehicles, scooters and motorcycles also can play an
important role in providing energy storage Most of the time they will not be
used, and during this time their batteries have the potential to charge and
discharge to balance the demand and variable supply of power (, from solar PV)
Based on REmap, the storage provided in this way amounts to GWh per year Total
electric storage stands at GWh per year; the difference Wind With the REmap
Options the installed capacity of wind power (all onshore) will reach  GW in
2030 – 45% of   is explained by GWh per year of electric storage provided by
batteries that are installed with rooftop solar PV Although overall the electric
storage capacity remains modest (GWh per year represents about % of total
variable power generation with REmap), in and around large cities where most of
the electric mobility can be expected this could be  useful flexibility option
generation the REmap Options imply an additional 92 TWh of additional power
generated by renewables, increasing the total renewable energy share to %, from
% in the Reference Case Bioenergy will continue to be the dominant source of
renewable energy in Indonesia with REmap, accounting for more than half of total
renewable energy use in the country (see figure 28) The total use of bioenergy
equates to just over  EJ, or 15% of TFEC This represents an increase of  EJ from
2014, when modern uses of bioenergy accounted for less than % of TFEC Hydropower
is next, and contributes 308 PJ to TFEC in 2030, up from 47 PJ in  Summary of
results With the REmap Options, the share of (modern) renewable energy in TPES
increases to %, up from % in the Reference Case and around % today The renewable
energy share in TFEC increases to % with the REmap Options (see table ) Among
the end-use sectors, buildings demonstrate the highest potential for renewable
energy penetration, at % (including the contribution of renewable electricity)
Industry is the second highest sector, where the REmap Options take the
renewable energy share to % of the sector’ TFEC in In absolute terms, industry
has the highest potential for renewables and represents nearly 40% of total
renewable energy use With the addition of the REmap Options, 881 PJ of heat is
supplied by bioenergy and solar thermal collectors, while another 294 PJ is used
in the form of electricity supplied by renewable power generation In transport,
the blending mandates and the additional electric vehicles with the REmap
Options result in an % renewable share in the sector’ TFEC for The contribution
from renewable electricity remains modest, at 24 PJ In power The largest
additions with the REmap Options are for solar energy (including both PV and
thermal) (see figure 29) In the Reference Case, solar power supplies about % of
total renewable energy use; with the REmap Options this would increase to 15%
Geothermal power increases nearly seven-fold from 2014, to about 210 PJ or % of
total renewable energy use in The contributions of marine and wind energy remain
limited, with their combined share in total renewable energy use at below %
Figure 30 shows the implications for the power sector in terms of annual
installations for renewable energy technologies It is obvious that compared to
recent market trends, in both the Reference Case as well as with the REmap
Options deployment across renewable technologies would need to be accelerated
With the REmap Options, the largest market will be for solar Table : Breakdown
of renewable energy share by sector 2030 Share of renewable energy in final
energy consumption / power generation RE use REmap (PJ/year) 2014 Reference Case
% % % % % % % % % REmap Heat only Including renewable electricity Heat only
Including renewable electricity Fuels only Including renewable electricity % % %
% % % % % % % % % % % % % % % 881  175 331 940 700 724  180  839  713 Industry
Buildings Transport Power Share in total final energy consumption Share in total
primary energy supply Source: IRENA analysis   Figure 28: Breakdown of renewable
energy in total final energy consumption with REmap across sectors and
technologies, 2030 REmap total renewable energy use:  839 PJ/year Hydropower 14%
Onshore wind % Liquid biofuels – transport 24% Bioenergy power % Solar PV %
Transport 24% Power 35% Geothermal power % Heat and other direct uses 41% Marine
energy % Bioenergy for process heat – industry 27% Solar water heating –
buildings % Modern bioenergy – buildings % Solar process heat – industry % Solar
cooling – buildings % Source: IRENA analysis Figure 29: Increases in modern
renewable energy consumption in total final energy consumption by renewable
energy resource  000  500     /    000 500  Bioenergy Hydropower Solar
Geothermal Marine energy Wind (onshore) 2014 Reference Case 2030 REmap Note:
excludes traditional uses of bioenergy Source: IRENA analysis   Table 10:
Indonesia REmap analysis overview Reference Case Units 2014 REmap Power
Installed Capacity Hydropower GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW GW
Large hydropower (>10 MW) Small hydropower (<10 MW) Pumped hydropower Wind
(onshore) Solar PV Utility scale (on-grid) Rooftop (on-grid) Off-grid Bioenergy
Geothermal Flash steam, dry steam Binary Marine energy (tidal) Total installed
power capacity Generation Hydropower Wind (onshore) Solar PV Bioenergy
Geothermal Marine energy (tidal) Total power generation Share of renewable
energy in power generation Battery storage (incl EVs and / wheelers) Transport
Electric vehicles TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh % GWh     12%   29%   38% million
vehicles million vehicles million vehicles million vehicles billion liters
billion liters billion liters billion liters billion liters
Passenger vehicles Commercial vehicles Electric / wheelers Bioliquids
Conventional biogasoline Advanced biogasoline Conventional biodiesel Advanced
biodiesel (incl bio jet kerosene, drop-in) Industry Bioenergy heat (incl CHP)
PJ/yr PJ/yr PJ/yr PJ/yr PJ/yr million m2 277 243 33    657 448 150   811 448 236
68 Agricultural residues Forestry products Biogas Liquid biofuels Solar thermal
– flat plate, evacuated tube Buildings Bioenergy – traditional cooking Bioenergy
– advanced cooking Traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking Modern bioenergy
based cookstoves PJ/yr PJ/yr million households million households million
households million households million households million m2 million m2  612  02
02    525 19         139       Solid biomass Biogas Ethanol gel Solar thermal –
water heating Solar thermal – cooling   Figure 30: Annual installations of
renewable power, , in the Reference Case for 2030 and with REmap      /
04 Solar PV Hydropower Geothermal Bioenergy Marine energy Wind  average  average
with Reference Case  average with REmap Source: IRENA analysis PV at  GW per
year from 2016 to 2030, to reach 47 GW of installed capacity by For the other
technologies, the Reference Case presents an ambitious outlook compared to
historical deployment levels, and the REmap Options show  more limited increase
For hydropower,  GW per year would need to be installed, up from about 300 MW
per year on average in 2011-It should be noted that hydropower has been the only
renewable technology for which  significant increase in capacity was witnessed
in recent years For geothermal power the REmap Options imply annual
installations of  GW for installed capacity to reach GW by Bioenergy, marine
energy and wind power together would account for another  GW annual market the
transport sector is the highest at USD  billion per year, the capital
expenditure associated with expanding biofuel production capacity Additional
investments in industry comprise capital expenditures to achieve the higher
levels of bioenergy use in the sector With the REmap Options, the required
investment increases to USD billion per year for the years 2015- While no
additional investments are required in transport (electric vehicles and
infrastructure are not included, since they do not represent direct capital
expenditure for renewable energy), investment needs in industry more than double
The increase is explained due to identified potential for more bioenergy and
solar thermal installations In buildings, investment needs increase to USD
billion per year, of which 98% is explained by the identified potential for
solar thermal water heating and cooling applications The remaining %, or about
USD 222 million up to 2030, would be required to pay for modern cook stoves for
the  million households that would still rely on traditional uses of bioenergy
for cooking in 2030 with the Reference Case Clearly, the capital intensity of
modernising cooking across Indonesia is very low compared to achieving higher
levels of renewable energy use in other sectors Investments in renewable power
would need to increase to USD billion per year on average in  to  Investment
needs To achieve the renewable targets as included in the Reference Case, the
required investment amounts to USD  billion per year in  (see table 11) Of the
total, the power sector accounts for almost 85% of the investment required
Hydropower represents the largest amount at USD  billion per year, nearly one-
third of overall required investment in renewable power capacity Of the end-use
sectors, required investment in   Table 11: Average annual investment needs in
renewable capacity in  Reference Case USD bn/year                  REmap USD
bn/year               By sector Buildings Industry Transport Power Power sector
Hydropower Large hydropower (>10 MW) Small hydropower (<10 MW) Geothermal Solar
PV Utility scale (on-grid) Rooftop (on-grid) Off-grid Wind Marine energy
Bioenergy Source: IRENA analysis achieve the REmap Options Solar PV shows the
largest increase, up to USD  billion per year, explained by the high level of
additional potential that has been identified for both utility-scale and rooftop
solar PV explained in section , only subsidies on residential electricity prices
and LPG use in households are included for The government perspective excludes
taxes and subsidies in energy prices and assumes  standardised 10% discount rate
In both the business and government perspectives, the REmap Options in the power
sector are cost-effective Across all sectors, the average substitution costs for
the REmap Options are USD  per GJ and USD - per GJ, respectively, for the
business and government perspectives The difference is due mainly to fossil fuel
subsidies: without these the REmap Options are indeed viable (as shown by the
negative substitution cost in the government perspective)  Cost of REmap Options
Table 12 provides an overview of substitution costs by sector for 2030 based on
business and government perspective In the business perspective,  12% discount
rate for Indonesia is assumed and taxes and subsidies in energy prices are
included Given the government’ recent efforts to phase out fossil fuel
subsidies, as Table 12: Average substitution cost of REmap Options by sector,
2030 Business perspective USD/GJ    -  Government perspective USD/GJ  - - -
Industry Buildings Transport Power Average of all sectors Source: IRENA analysis
The cost-effectiveness of the REmap Options in power generation is explained
mainly by the cost competiveness of hydropower and geothermal power, as well as
of utility-scale solar PV (see table 13) While geothermal and (small) hydropower
already present low-cost opportunities Indonesia, global cost in reductions in
solar PV are expected to continue, and lower specific costs for Indonesia are
anticipated due to the scale-up of the solar market there At the same time, coal
prices (coal is the fuel which the renewable power technologies are assumed to
substitute) are expected to increase to about USD 100 per tonne by 2030 – from
about USD 70 per tonne in October 2016 – in line with the Outlook Energi
Indonesia 2015 of BPPT (BPPT, 2015) This further improves the viability of
renewable power generation in Indonesia solar thermal in industry and increased
use of CHP provide viable solutions to further increase the share of renewables
in industry While the substitution cost for transport options (in electric
mobility) are generally positive, it is important to realise that these
calculations do not yet account for reductions in externalities Taking into
account the high associated cost of air pollution in many of Indonesia’ cities
greatly improves their viability In buildings, the displacement of subsidised
LPG by solar thermal for water heating and modern cook stoves using solid
biomass provide  particularly good business case Figure 31 and figure 32 rank
the costs of each REmap Op tion and show their contributions to the increase in
the share of renewable energy in the business and government perspective,
respectively The dark green bars show that in the Reference Case the share of
modern renewables (excluding traditional uses of Of the end-use sectors, the
REmap Options in industry and transport have positive substitution costs
However, Table 13: Substitution cost and potentials of REmap Options by
technology in 2030 REmap Option Business perspective USD/GJ Government
perspective USD/GJ PJ/year Power Geothermal Hydro (small) Solar PV (utility)
Wind onshore Solar PV (rooftop) ---   ---   Industry Bioenergy CHP (biogas)
Solar thermal Bioenergy CHP (wood waste) Biomass boilers Biomass gasification
-- -  ---  Transport Battery-electric two-wheeler (passenger road) Battery-
electric (passenger road vehicles) Battery-electric (public road vehicles)   --
Buildings Water heating: solar (thermosiphon) Cooking biomass (solid) Cooking
ethanol Space cooling: solar  - -  --  Note: large hydropower and marine energy
are not included in this table as they are not included as REmap Options (so,
they no additional potential beyond the Reference Case) Source: IRENA analysis
Figure 31: Renewable energy cost-supply curve by renewable energy resource in
2030, from the business perspective )   /    (                             Solar
cooling 32 27 22 17 12    - Biomass (gasiﬁcation) BEV (passenger vehicles)
Cooking ethanol PV (rooftop) Electric -wheelers Wind (onshore) Biomass (boilers)
- -13 -18 -23 -28 -33 -38 -43 -48 -53 -58 -63 -68 Cooking biomass Solar water
heating Reference Case 2030 2014 Solar thermal (industry) PV (utility) Wood
waste (CHP) Hydropower (small) Biogas (CHP)         BEV (public vehicles)
Geothermal      10 12  16 18 20 22 Share of renewable energy use in total ﬁnal
energy consumption (%) Source: IRENA analysis Figure 32: Renewable energy cost-
supply curve by renewable energy resource in 2030, from the government
perspective )   /    (                             Solar cooling 40 35 Biomass
(gasiﬁcation) 30 BEV (public vehicles) 25 20 BEV (passenger vehicles) 15 Cooking
ethanol 10 PV (rooftop) Biomass (boilers)  Wind (onshore)  Cooking biomass -
Wood waste (CHP) Electric -wheelers -10 PV (utility) Solar thermal (industry)
-15 Hydropower (small) Reference Case 2030 2014         -20 Geothermal Biogas
(CHP) Solar water heating -25      10 12 14 16 18 20 22 Share of renewable
energy use in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Source: IRENA analysis
bioenergy) increases to %, from % in With the REmap Options this would further
increase to %, whereby the substitution costs range from USD -per GJ to USD per
GJ in the business perspective, and from USD -per GJ to USD per GJ in the
government perspective Considering merely the cost-effective REmap Options would
take the share of renewables to 21% (the end of the light- green bars) However,
these calculations do not include the associated benefits of reduced air
pollution and CO2 emissions, which are detailed in the next section In the
government perspective, this analysis shows, additional use of biogas, solar
water heating and geothermal power are among the most cost-effective options to
increase the share of renewable energy beyond the Reference Case  EJ in Oil use
also increases due to fast growth in transport energy demand, although the
increase is somewhat more limited (+47%) due to oil’ lower share in meeting
energy demand in power generation and industry With the REmap Options, fossil
fuel demand will be cut by 10% compared with the Reference Case, based on  17%
reduction in coal use and  % reduction in oil use At the same time, traditional
uses of bioenergy will be phased out completely, due to the uptake of modern
cook stoves using bioenergy Modern renewable energy will represent 32% of TPES,
compared to 25% in the Reference Case The reduction of fossil fuel use cuts
projected CO2 emissions Based on  bottom-up estimate of the sectors covered in
this analysis, CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion for energy services in
2014 accounted for 584 Mt CO2/year (or about  tonnes per capita), of which power
generation contributed nearly 40% (see table 14) According to the Reference
Case, energy- related CO2 emissions increase to  253 Mt CO2/year by 2030, more
than  doubling from The share of power generation increases to nearly half of
the total With the REmap Options, 150 Mt CO2/year are avoided, representing  12%
reduction from the Reference Case  Benefits of REmap Options As shown in figure
33, the primary energy supply of fossil fuels is expected to more than double
between 2014 and 2030 in the Reference Case Coal experiences the highest
increase of about  EJ – from  EJ in 2014 to  EJ in 2030 – due to its greater use
in power generation and industry Natural gas use increases the most in relative
terms, rising 160% from  EJ in 2014 to Figure 33: Total primary energy supply in
Indonesia,  25 000 20 000 15 000     /   10 000  000  Reference Case REmap 2014
2030 Modern renewable energy Bioenergy (traditional uses) Oil Gas Coal Source:
IRENA analysis   In its NDC, Indonesia pledges to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions 29% by 2030 compared to  business- as-usual scenario that results in
projected emissions of  869 Mt CO2-eq in the same year (UNFCCC, 2016) Of this,
669 Mt CO2-eq/year are energy-related emissions To compare this to IRENA’
Reference Case this should be reduced by about 15%, to exclude non- CO2
greenhouse gas emissions, non-energy use and sectors not included in IRENA’
estimates The resulting comparable level of energy-related CO2 emissions of  400
Mt CO2-eq/year is higher than the  253 Mt CO2/ year as estimated for IRENA’
Reference Case The difference is explained mainly by the assumption in the NDC’
business-as-usual scenario that coal is the main energy source for power plants
and that there is no implementation of liquid biofuel blending mandates in the
transport sector In IRENA’ Reference Case, Indonesia’ renewable energy target
for 23% in TPES by 2025 is already included (LULUCF), will also be crucial The
business-as-usual outlook in Indonesia’ NDC does not include any energy
efficiency improvements Furthermore, in Indonesia’ business-as-usual outlook
greenhouse gas emissions from forestry (including from peat fires) are 714 Mt
CO2-eq/year in The reduction in the unconditional mitigation scenario for
emissions from forestry is 497 Mt CO2-eq/year, higher than the ambition for
reductions in the energy sector Table 15 outlines several broad financial
indicators implementation of the REmap associated with Options First, costs of
the energy system would be reduced by USD  billion per year overall compared to
the Reference Case The power sector accounts for the largest savings (of about
USD  billion per year) followed by cost reductions in residential and commercial
buildings of USD  billion per year While cost levels in industry and transport
would be higher, it is important to put these into perspective given the high
savings from reduced externalities With the REmap Options about USD 16 billion
to USD 52 billion per year would be saved from reduced externalities With the
Reference Case and including the REmap Options, the energy-related CO2 emissions
are likely to be below those targeted by Indonesia in the unconditional and
conditional mitigation scenarios The reduction in the unconditional mitigation
scenario for the energy sector in Indonesia’ NDC is 314 Mt CO2-eq/ year by The
emission reductions of the REmap Options (150 Mt CO2/year) thus account for
nearly half of this The conditional target of Indonesia to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions 41% by 2030 versus the business-as-usual scenario comes with 398 Mt
CO2-eq/ year by 2030, of which the REmap Options would account for nearly 40%
majority of this, USD billion to USD billion per year, is related to the
reduction of indoor air pollution caused by the traditional use of bioenergy for
cooking Given the relatively low level of investment required for implementation
(as mentioned, about USD 220 million for the required number of cook stoves),
this presents  high-impact opportunity when externalities are accounted for
Outdoor air pollution savings account for another USD  billion to USD  billion
per year About USD  billion to USD  billion per year of this is related to
reduced air pollution due to electric mobility Reducing emissions through
further energy efficiency improvements (see box ) and in other sectors,
particularly from land use, land-use change and forestry Table 14: Development
of energy-related carbon dioxide emissions (excluding non-carbon dioxide
greenhouse gases),  2014 2030 Avoided with REmap Options 107 17 16 10 150
Mt/year Power generation Industry Transport Buildings Total Reference Case 605
336 256 56  253 REmap 497 320 240 46  103 226 176 153 29 584 Note: excluding
non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions, non-energy use and other sectors Source: IRENA
analysis   Box : Synergies between renewable energy and energy efficiency Energy
intensity in Indonesia has been declining in recent years Between 1990 and 2010
the decline in energy intensity (defined as primary energy use in MJ / GDP PPP
in USD) was -% per year; between 2010 and 2012 it accelerated further to -% per
year (IEA and World Bank, 2015) Until 2025, Indonesia targets an annual change
of -% in energy intensity, as per the National Energy Conservation Master Plan
(which is currently being updated) In the Reference Case, energy intensity will
further decrease between 2014 and 2030 by -% per year While primary energy
supply will continue to increase (by % per year), the projected growth in real
GDP of % per year (as per the Outlook Energi Indonesia 2014) implies that there
is  significant reduction in energy used per unit of GDP With the REmap Options,
energy intensity will change by -% per year over the same period, due to the
lower primary energy supply as  result of additional renewable energy in the mix
In general renewables come with  higher conversion efficiency compared with
their conventional counterparts and thus contribute to Indonesia’ targets for
reducing energy intensity as well However, more potential for improving energy
efficiency exists in the long run In the Outlook Energi Indonesia 2015,  high-
efficiency scenario (which also includes significantly more renewables)
indicates the potential for the change in energy intensity to be -% per year
until 2030 (MEMR, 2016h) These additional energy efficiency improvements and
conservation efforts can further contribute to lowering CO2 emissions and
putting Indonesia on its NDC path Accelerating the deployment of renewable
energy thus should be complemented by driving energy efficiency improvements
Given that the additional costs to the transport energy cost are USD  billion
per year, this illustrates the viability of the REmap Options for electric
mobility Finally, reduced CO2 emissions imply additional savings of USD  billion
to USD billion per year This is based on  value of CO2 of between USD 17 and USD
80 per tonne (IRENA, 2016a) USD  billion per year in This is  substantial
amount, but it is small in comparison to the overall USD to USD billion per year
in reduced energy system costs and externalities that come with the REmap
Options This represents about % to % of Indonesia’ forecasted GDP for 2030,
which is estimated to reach USD  trillion by that year (IHS, 2016) The
additional jobs created in the renewable energy sector as well as the positive
externalities related to capacity building and technology transfer come in
addition to these benefits To implement the REmap Options, the incremental
government support needs are estimated at Table 15: Financial indicators for
renewable energy use in Indonesia, from the government perspective Annual energy
system costs and savings in 2030 (REmap vs Reference Case) (USD billion per year
in 2030) System costs from REmap Options -  -  - to to  to  to -to - Industry
Buildings Transport Power Savings from reduced externalities Reduced
externalities from outdoor air pollution Reduced externalities from indoor air
pollution (traditional biomass) Reduced externalities from climate change System
costs from REmap Options and reduced externalities Incremental government
support needs (without externalities) Source: IRENA analysis    BARRIERS AND
OPPORTUNITIES FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY UPTAKE of installed capacity In the isolated
grid systems such as West Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan and many others, grid
sizes are much smaller, and these also often include much older power plants In
addition, generation forecasting or requirements for centralised monitoring and
access to power plants are limited at the moment This means that it will be
difficult to increase the penetration of variable renewables in the grid in the
short term  Barriers and opportunities in the power sector By 2030, power
generation capacity in Indonesia is set to increase to GW, up from GW at the end
of Renewable power capacity in the Reference Case will be 61 GW, compared to
just  GW today With the REmap Options, the renewable energy power capacity would
increase further to 107 GW by Several barriers are currently holding back growth
for renewable power in Indonesia, while other challenges are anticipated to
arise in implementing the REmap Options These barriers, as well as opportunities
to mitigate them, are grouped into key topics of: grid integration, cost
recovery for PLN, off-grid deployment, project financing, and land acquisition
and community involvement These are discussed below, after which technology-
specific barriers and opportunities are discussed for solar PV, hydropower,
geothermal power, bioenergy power, marine energy and wind power Another
bottleneck is PLN’ distribution system, which is unlikely to be able to
accommodate high amounts of distributed solar PV power without additional
investments For rooftop PV systems this could pose challenges, as connecting to
the transmission substation is unusual at present and might come with
significant additional cost At the same time, the fact that solar power is
available when the demand for air conditioning is high might reduce pressure on
the grid in times of high demand For wind power preliminary results from  grid
impact study for Sulawesi suggest that there might be less capacity to
interconnect than initially thought South Sulawesi was selected by many project
developers due to the relatively inexpensive land cost, the fairly sizeable grid
and expected growth in power consumption, and because it has one of the highest
wind resources in Indonesia Grid integration Indonesia’ electrical grid system
is fragmented, given the archipelagic nature of the country More than 600
isolated grid systems are in operation, not including the smaller grids
supplying small cities and villages Many of the large cities located on the same
island still operate on independent and isolated grids The relatively small size
of the grids, even when they serve cities with significant population, limits
how much VRE (solar, wind, marine energy) can be installed Today,  limit of 10%
VRE penetration from the daytime peak load is imposed by PLN to ensure grid
stability With this requirement, the potential for VRE is limited, both in terms
of plant size and in terms of the number of suitable locations PLN issues an
annual document called the Electricity Supply Business Plan (RUPTL) that
outlines in detail the long-term plans for generation, distribution and
transmission growth In many cases the document includes specific projects,
especially for generation projects above 10 MW and for transmission projects
Distribution planning and generation projects below 10 MW generally are done by
regional PLN offices and fall fully under their authority While the plan is
detailed and includes specific figures for geothermal and hydropower capacity by
location, it does not provide this level of detail for the other renewable
energy technologies Furthermore, as shown in table , the renewable energy
targets included for 2025 are significantly below those set by MEMR This implies
that current long-term Because of the number of isolated grid systems as well as
the grid sizes, it is difficult to generalise the grid condition and to create
policy or  plan that works well across all regions The largest grid system at
present is the Java-Bali system, with about 40 GW   grid plans of PLN are not
designed for achieving the ambitions of REmap, or even the Reference Case
Residential and commercial storage options can be implemented with appropriate
support mechanisms, as has been done in various other countries (, Germany) The
potential for more electric vehicles and electric two- and three- wheelers and
being able to use them as energy storage provides another solution Vehicle- to-
grid technology can be implemented for grid-stabilising storage as well as time-
shifting storage Finally, current procurement strategies (such as high
contracted hours from non-renewable IPP generations, take-or-pay gas supply
contracts, and diesel equipment rental contracts) discourage dispatch strategies
that favour renewable energy generation These contracting strategies result in
dispatch merit orders that are likely to curtail renewable energy generation ●
Capacity building with relevant stakeholders (in particular PLN) in Indonesia
for how to plan for an electricity system with higher levels of VRE in the grid
is recommended The Danish Energy Agency (DEA) and the United States Agency for
International Development – Indonesia Clean Energy Development (USAID-ICED)
project have already started this effort DEA is currently conducting  study on
wind power integration into the power system, to address challenges concerning
the integration of VRE and to make detailed recommendations on, for example,
required changes to policies and regulations USAID-ICED is conducting  specific
study of the South Sulawesi grid to incorporate  planned 200+ MW of wind power
plants (USAID, 2015) Opportunities ● Targets for renewable power technologies
should be aligned between PLN and MEMR Detailed plans for individual grids and
their potential to absorb VRE are recommended given the fragmented nature of
Indonesia’ electricity system PLN will need to incorporate specifically in its
plans the expected increase in VRE by technology and location, and also could
consider developing  plan for transmission and distribution requirements across
locations for  case of high VRE uptake, such as the one suggested by REmap ●
Important for VRE integration is developing sound market conditions as well as
grid management practices and dispatch strategies that incorporate the concept
of spinning reserves based on generation forecasting of VRE power plants In the
short term, VRE power plants could be required to submit 48-hour, 36-hour and
24-hour generation forecasts These reports can then be used to plan PLN’
dispatch orders so that there is always available spinning reserve Cost recovery
for PLN Another major issue today relates to the costs to PLN that come with
renewable energy projects Currently, PLN has two main sources of income:
payments from consumers and government compensation for subsidies to consumers
reflected in lower electricity prices No additional compensation is provided to
PLN for the feed-in tariffs for renewable energy projects, which generally
exceed the electricity prices that PLN charges to consumers The compensation to
PLN for subsidies to electricity consumers is calculated based on the difference
between the (subsidised) prices and the estimated production cost for PLN (which
includes generation, transmission and distribution, and overhead cost) This
compensation is  legal term specified in the Ministry of Finance’ regulation and
has  specific methodology for calculations; it currently cannot be used to cover
PLN’ additional costs for mandated renewable energy feed-in tariffs Furthermore,
PLN is under pressure to lower its dependency on income from this compensation
and to reduce its overall production ● PLN could introduce  different
procurement strategy that will take advantage of cost savings of the use of
renewable energy sources and that provides for priority dispatch of VRE
Contracts with non-renewable IPPs could be more flexible instead of locking in
high number of contracted hours In general, PLN needs to integrate its
procurement strategies with system planning and grid management protocols to
allow for the prioritisation of renewable energy use ● The addition of energy
storage can help stabilise the grid while incorporating higher levels of VRE
cost base These dynamics limit PLN’ ability to sign PPAs for renewable projects
under existing feed-in tariff programmes developers submit It also should be
clarified where funding will come from and in what time frame, to reduce
uncertainty in the market As long as the process is clear and transparent, this
will allow more renewable energy projects to be developed and implemented at an
appropriate tariff and reduces the issue of cost recovery to PLN As mentioned in
section , PLN also is negotiating PPA agreements directly with developers,
mainly for larger- scale projects While there is  document from PLN that
outlines this process, it is still lacking in describing the requirements for
different stages of the development process (PLN, 2013) As an example, one of
the steps is called “Proposal Evaluation”, but the document does not mention
what the criteria are for projects to move to the next stage in the process For
the required feasibility studies  suggested table of contents is provided, but
no specific criteria beyond this are outlined ●  consumer tariff structure based
on the level of electricity consumption could be considered, with higher prices
for larger users This would encourage larger energy users both to implement
energy efficiency measures and to use renewable energy (such as rooftop solar
PV) to reduce their grid energy consumption Furthermore, part of the project
approval process by PLN includes  financial viability assessment, where the
return on equity to investors is capped at 14% If the outcome of the assessment
is that the PPA is higher than the current production cost at the site, then
PLN’ recommendation to MEMR is to conditionally reject the project This
recommendation includes the additional costs that will be required to cover the
gap between the required tariff and the cost of generation If MEMR then agrees
to fund the gap, PLN will accept the project, although as of now it is not clear
where the funds will come from Off-grid deployment There are significant
opportunities for off-grid deployment of renewables in rural areas, as over 12
000 villages are currently not yet electrified In the Reference Case, it is
assumed that  GW of additional solar PV mini-grids will be installed through
active efforts by the government and PLN to provide electricity to  million
households, in addition to about 300 MW of off-grid and mini-grids based on
hydropower Remote areas in Maluku & Papua and Sulawesi & Nusa Tenggara represent
majority of planned deployment Opportunities In achieving this ambitious target,
the lack of bankable off-takers represents  key barrier While some project
developers might be willing to accept tariff payments directly from communities,
this would come with challenges related to economic viability, given the high
number of fragmented un-electrified villages with low levels of demand and
because people are unable to pay the electricity price that is required to cover
capital expenditures and operational expenses ●  new scheme or fund is
recommended for renewable energy projects that covers the gap between the
mandated renewable energy feed- in tariffs and the revenues that PLN receives
from consumers This would allow for PLN to purchase more renewable energy
through feed- in tariff regulations Feed-in tariffs need to be high enough to
attract early investors, while PLN needs assurance that the additional costs
will be borne by the government Setting up this fund should involve not only PLN
and MEMR, but also the Ministry of Finance Several hundred solar PV- and micro-
hydro-based micro-grids have been installed in Indonesia in recent years This
has been the result of several programmes, including innovative uses of public-
private partnerships, that have been supported by international organisations,
foreign governments and various Indonesian ministries and agencies This has led
to an active market for micro hydro where communities, local private fabricators
and equipment suppliers have formed an ecosystem for sustaining  market However,
issues have emerged ● The process for PLN to negotiate agreements directly with
developers for renewable energy projects should be more standardised Detailed
requirements for feasibility and interconnection studies should be provided to
ensure that projects meet standards while streamlining what different   as well
Some systems experienced failures within  short time of commissioning Despite
efforts by the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) to train many
of the villages in the basic & of the systems, there is still  lack of capacity
in being able to troubleshoot and fix more complicated failures to supply
electricity for this area This allows for lower system installation cost, while
also allowing for the latest technologies to be used that are only economically
viable at scale ● There is  need for an entity that is responsible for
overseeing the continuing & of the system, including troubleshooting and
component replacement It is important that local community members are involved,
for example to perform basic & Local engineers and technicians from the regions
could be trained to provide support on more complicated troubleshooting and
operational issues Furthermore, as communities get access to electricity, their
consumption is likely to increase Often this can be significant, as each
household might add more electrical equipment such as fans, televisions and
refrigerators This brings about issues related to the scaling of off-grid
solutions and has resulted in discrepancies between the size of the power system
installed and the increasing local energy demand over time Further scaling
capacity might be challenging for micro hydro in particular, whereas for solar
PV this is less of an issue ● Standardised survey methodologies to design off-
grid systems on  community level are recommended  standard energy needs
requirement survey and  resource assessment survey will need to be performed on
each community and incorporated in key design elements (for example, size and
technology) of the off-grid system Expected additional growth in electricity
consumption should be factored into the design of systems and technology choice,
as certain technologies are more flexible to scale up (, solar PV) than others
(, micro hydro) Finally, in many cases, the public grid will eventually arrive
and the community is faced with  choice between the micro-grid and the public
grid In many countries this has posed challenges to the continued financial
viability of the micro-grid, as villages have an incentive to connect to the
main grid instead if this comes with lower electricity prices (IRENA, 2015c,
2016e) Opportunities ● Increasing PLN’ Public Service Obligation budgets to
build and own distribution networks in the locations where off-grid projects are
implemented could be considered These budgets are now typically used for grid
extension projects to reach currently un-electrified communities However,
significant portion of an off-grid project’ capital expenses come from
installing the distribution network and the household connections If PLN is able
to provide the funding or even to build the distribution network and household
connections, this can reduce the capital investment required by project
developers ● To avoid stranded micro-grid assets, the strengthening of
regulatory frameworks to allow for integration of mini-grids with the public
grid should be considered One approach could be to introduce  concession model,
where developers can obtain  concession for  number of years of operation,
within which all assets are depreciated Should the grid arrive before assets are
fully depreciated then the developers are guaranteed compensation at  pre-
determined level (IRENA, 2015c) Other options should be considered as well to
increase participation of the private sector, such as including multiple exit
options on arrival of the grid, in line with recent draft guidelines for micro-
grids in India (MNRE, 2016) ● To further improve the business case of off-grid
renewables to project developers, establishing larger off-grid working areas or
concession areas that encompass multiple villages could be considered The
concession areas could be determined by PLN and MEMR and could provide project
developers with the first right of refusal Project finance In general, financing
costs are high in Indonesia, and this presents another challenge for renewable
energy   projects which typically come with long-term PPAs The typical
commercial cost of capital in Indonesia is higher than 10% for the local
currency, and also for USD- or Euro-based lending This results in  relatively
high PPA tariff to ensure that the projects are financially viable to investors
At present, larger projects are funded through foreign equity and lending
institutions, often through development funds and private equity Recently, the
government has indexed many of its latest renewable energy tariff regulations to
the USD, which helps in making projects more accessible to funds that are USD-
based ● Creating  standard procedure and performance indicators for project
development documents will be important to ensure that projects can be financed
In addition, providing funds for project development (, in the form of
convertible loans) could vastly increase project development activities in
Indonesia, which would increase the utilisation of international climate funds
for renewable energy projects Careful consideration will have to be made to
ensure that the deliverables of the project development phase meet international
standards and industry best practices, while developers need to be accountable
and transparent about the cost incurred With the increase in recent years in
international climate funds, significant additional capital should be available
through these channels for renewable energy projects in Indonesia The primary
barrier holding back the use of these funds is the current lack of bankable
projects Most funds will only finance projects with signed PPAs, and few
projects with signed PPAs are currently available (due in part to cost recovery
issues for PLN, as discussed above) This also is due to the lack of project
development equity to properly develop projects with high-quality site surveys,
pre-feasibility studies, grid interconnection studies and other crucial steps to
reach  signed PPA ● loan Alternatively, providing government guarantees larger
projects could be considered to lower risk to investors (IRENA, 2016f) This
could be especially interesting for projects/ technologies where the lack of
project financing is  main bottleneck Once successful projects have materialised
the need for loan guarantees will decrease for Land acquisition and community
involvement Many renewable energy technologies require relatively large areas of
land, which is especially the case for solar PV projects However, there are
still issues around legal land ownership Recently, for example, the Jakarta
government questioned the purchase of land from  private owner and later found
that it already owned the land since the 1960s (Anya, 2016) In more-rural areas
where documentation and administration are still not electronically processed
and recorded, it is even more difficult to track land ownership In addition to
the high cost of capital, for both equity and loans, there is  shortage of local
project financing capacity Efforts are under way to train local bankers (through
programmes of, for example, DIE and ACE), by using learnings from projects in
Thailand and Malaysia However, banks in Indonesia still have only  few people
assigned as assessors of renewable energy projects For smaller projects, the
types of local financing that are available are mostly collateral-based In some
cases, the project sponsor’ balance sheet is the collateral, effectively
becoming corporate loans The cost of land can be  significant portion of the
project cost Regions where the grid can accept more VRE typically are relatively
more economically developed, such as Java Therefore, land costs in Java are
significantly higher than in Papua, for example However, in Papua, the potential
for VRE is relatively more limited due to constraints on the demand side These
considerations are not reflected in current feed-in tariff regulations for
renewables, which generally are lower for projects in, for example, Java than in
more remote locations Opportunities ● Further strengthening local project
finance capabilities will be an important step for the renewables accelerated
deployment of Increasing awareness at commercial banks about the opportunities,
as well as providing clear signals from the government regarding long-term
support for renewables, could help banks to assign more resources to renewable
energy project finance Also, local communities play  large role in the land
acquisition process, and it can take  long time for   project developers to
obtain the required land There also have been reports of asking prices for land
going up significantly when developers make clear their intention to develop the
land for projects Community involvement therefore is an important part of the
development process ● Local communities need to be involved early in the project
development phase by engaging with the community leaders and local government
Whenever possible, local community members should be employed by the project
Also, providing additional services on behalf of the project to the surrounding
communities – such as additional electricity, clean water and sanitation
facilities – will be important to increase community buy-in and increase the
probability of acquiring land Existing agricultural lands could allow for the
addition of solar panels and wind turbines on-site, increasing revenues to local
farmers and reducing land acquisition issues Opportunities ● Cost-of-land
differences across different locations in Indonesia could be reflected more in
feed-in tariffs Alternatively, the government can take  more active role in
providing lands, especially in locations with  large potential for renewables
(such as Java and Sumatra) Specific plots of (non-productive) lands could be
acquired and provided for renewable energy projects, ideally with
interconnection points on-site as well as pre-approved environmental impact
assessments This would reduce not only the land acquisition cost, but also the
interconnection cost, and would simplify the permitting process Technology-
specific barriers and opportunities Beyond the above-mentioned barriers that
apply to all renewable energy technologies, there are additional barriers that
relate to specific technologies An overview of these barriers and opportunities
is provided in table Table 16: Technology-specific barriers and opportunities in
the power sector Technology Solar PV Barriers ● Complicated permitting
procedures for ground-mounted projects add to project development cost
Opportunities ● Simplify permitting procedures for ground- mounted systems ●
Provide additional compensation to excess electricity sold to the grid from
rooftop systems (, allow for payment of the minimum monthly charge through the
credit mechanism) ●  net metering system for rooftop solar PV is in place, but
no compensation is provided beyond (future) own consumption, and  minimum
payment is charged each month for having  grid connection ● Project-specific
issues relate to access to the project site, environmental impact and social
issues, catchment area protection, as well as water rights management ●
Strengthen capacity with local companies to ensure that studies are based on
industry best practice and are bankable for project finance Hydropower ● The
Indonesian Meteorological Agency (BMKG) could install additional monitoring
equipment and collect information regularly These data could be made openly
available to any project developer to be used as the basis for project
assessment ● Historical data are often lacking at  regional level; in many
locations there are no flow data or flood and groundwater data beyond the last
-10 years ● Hydropower projects are planned involving different levels of
government, while advantages of hydropower projects to local communities might
not be optimally communicated ● Highlight the large opportunity for local
employment and industry creation to local authorities to increase local interest
continued on next page   Technology Bioenergy Barriers ● High administrative
costs and permitting procedures make it challenging for industry to interconnect
bioenergy power to the grid Opportunities ● Reduce permitting procedures and
administrative costs for interconnection of bioenergy power generation by
industry ● Increase awareness among industries about the potential that
bioenergy offers and stimulate the use of CHP-based bioenergy ● MEMR could
consider increasing the maximum size of bioenergy power projects to qualify for
the feed-in tariff to beyond 10 MW to allow for economies of scale to reduce
generation cost ● Potential producers often do not consider bioenergy power
generation as part of their core business and/or are not aware of the potential
for bioenergy power to reduce fossil fuel consumption, limiting the deployment
of bioenergy capacity ● The feed-in tariff for biomass power projects currently
does not apply to projects larger than 10 MW, which reduces the potential for
producers that do intend to connect to the grid to reach economies of scale ●
High upfront exploration cost and risk are ● Engage in knowledge and capacity
building with relevant stakeholders to ensure that projects can be implemented
within budget and on time Geothermal power associated with projects ● Geothermal
tenders have often attracted unqualified bidders, which delayed the execution of
projects ● The GFF needs to be able to allow projects with  higher risk profile
to be eligible for funding ● Approvals from the Geothermal Fund Facility (GFF)
for exploration or projects have been very limited to date ● Other options
include government guarantees loans), or developing  revolving (on fund sharing
the cost of the exploration and discovery/confirmation stages of  geothermal
project ● The realistic deployment potential for the different types of marine
energy around the many islands of Indonesia is not fully understood as of yet,
also taking into account the availability of local grids and estimated project
costs ● Expand assessment of the resource potential and economic deployment
potential of marine energy in the short and long terms; identify separately the
potential for smaller-scale (off- grid) projects and larger-scale projects
Marine energy ● Focus on smaller-scale projects close to land first to build
local capacity and demonstrate the technology potential ● Marine energy is an
emerging technology without  mature global market, posing technology risks to
achieving the targets in the 2030 time frame ● Consider expanding & efforts with
focus on developing innovative applications of marine energy for remote
communities (such as water pumping, desalination, ice making) continued on next
page   Opportunities ● Consider including wind power in feed-in tariff
programmes Alternatively, introduce auction schemes that are transparent, simple
and fair to increase the confidence of project developers* Technology Wind power
Barriers ● There is no feed-in tariff for wind power, and projects under way
have been negotiated directly with PLN Without  transparent competitive bidding
process in place, potential issues (, not selecting the best parties for
projects and/or at  price that is too high) could get worse as the availability
of good sites (, with wind speeds above  metres per second near grids with
significant load) is limited ● Provide developers with  clear understanding of
upcoming project opportunities and transparency on the process for selecting
winners ● Some developers are investing significantly in project development
efforts in Indonesia – such as the installation of meteorological instrument
masts – without  clear understanding of the risk/rewards This could lead to
disappointment in the future if projects are not awarded to these companies, and
could reduce overall interest in the Indonesian market * For an analysis of
auction design options, best practices on implementation, and policy
recommendations, see
DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Auctions_Guide_2015_2_policiespdf
Barriers and opportunities in the end-use sectors that require new buildings –
especially larger ones – to install collectors ● As the global market for solar
cooling is at  more nascent stage, stimulating demonstration projects on
commercial and public buildings to create awareness of its local potential would
be advisable For residential buildings, where the cooling demand is generally
smaller,  separate programme is needed Buildings The REmap Options indicate the
potential for solar thermal collectors to meet 40% of solar water heating energy
demand by Solar thermal collectors for water heating are already very popular in
other parts of Asia, most notably in China In Indonesia, limited awareness among
building owners and  lack of design standards are seen as main barriers to
deployment Solar cooling technologies (both active and passive) hold potential
towards meeting the rapidly growing demand for air conditioning in urban areas,
but awareness among building owners of its potential is currently lacking in
Indonesia Industry In industry the REmap Options consist of solar thermal and
the additional use of bioenergy for process heat (discussed in section ) For
solar thermal the potential is mainly in the natural rubber, food and textile
industries that are characterised by low-temperature process heat While these
industries are less energy-intensive per plant, in aggregate they represent
large energy- consuming industries that rely on low and medium heat for their
processes, particularly suitable for solar thermal The total potential for solar
thermal heating in industry is estimated at 70 PJ, representing 20% of the total
energy use for heat in above-mentioned Opportunities ● Additional efforts to
capture the potential of solar water heating by national and local governments
are needed, for example through the inclusion in building codes Many cities
around the world already have in place solar thermal ordinances   Opportunities
industries Similar to the residential and commercial segments, limited awareness
of the potential for solar collectors to supply heat for industrial processes
poses  significant barrier While the demand for heating in industry is
continuous, solar thermal collectors provide an intermittent supply of energy
For existing plants, space limitations might pose another barrier, especially if
the buildings are not able to accommodate collectors on their rooftops or if
there is no sufficient on-site area ● To accelerate the uptake of electric
vehicles and electric two- and three-wheelers, several actions should be
considered Infrastructure investments, such as charging infrastructure for
electric vehicles and electric two- and three- wheelers at large parking lots in
cities, should be combined with support policies (, tax incentives to reduce the
cost of electric vehicles) to kick-start the market This could happen at the
national government level, but also at the local government or city level, as
has been the case in many countries around the world Opportunities ●  specific
programme to build local awareness and capacity, particularly highlighting the
potential for solar thermal energy to substitute costly petroleum products, is
needed In turn, this could improve the competitiveness of Indonesia’ industry
Local demonstration projects would be  good option to consider as  first step ●
To maximise the potential of localisation benefits (such as job creation and
human capital building), the domestic industry should be involved early on
Indeed, almost as many cars, motorcycles and scooters are produced and sold in
Indonesia every year (ASEAN Automotive Federation, 2016) Incentivising local
industry with the production of electric vehicles, motorcycles and scooters for
the local market could be an effective way to achieve faster market growth ●
Consider solar thermal storage capacity and/or hybrid solutions (with fossil
fuels) in the design and construction of new industrial plants For existing
plants, concentrated solar thermal (CST) solutions can be an option given that
they use less space, but that will depend on whether there is demand for higher-
temperature steam and on the cost of the incumbent, since CST is often more
expensive  Ensuring the sustainable use of bioenergy Bioenergy plays  major role
in Indonesia’ energy system across all sectors – primarily in the form of liquid
biofuels in transport, waste and residues for process heat in industry – and it
is used by many households for cooking Indonesia’ rich endowment of bioenergy
resources provides significant opportunities for reducing fossil fuel use and
adding economic value However, barriers on both the supply and demand side will
have to be addressed for the potential to be used in  sustainable way Transport
The ambitious blending mandates for ethanol (20%) and biodiesel (30%) for 2025
onwards currently dominate the Indonesian outlook for renewables in transport
(further elaborated in the next section) However, electric vehicles and two- and
three-wheelers provide major opportunities that are currently unaddressed With
the REmap Options the potential by 2030 for % of the vehicle stock and 20% of
all motorcycles and scooters to be electric has been identified, based on the
expectation of  rapid continued increase in vehicle penetration In remote areas
and islands, electric vehicles and electric two- and three-wheelers are good
solutions given the relatively short travelling distances In larger cities
electric mobility can play an important role in mitigating air pollution
However, at present the infrastructure is lacking to support the increased use
of electric mobility, and only  few companies sell electric cars, scooters and
motorcycles Supply side Biodiesel The blending mandates that are targeted for
2025 onwards (E20 and B30) are assumed to materialise in the Reference Case,
resulting in the need for about 25 billion litres of liquid biofuels (13 billion
litres of biodiesel and 12 billion litres of ethanol) in 2030, based   on
projections for total gasoline and diesel use These ambitious policies will
significantly reduce fossil fuel dependence in transport While degraded lands
certainly provide opportunities, barriers exist to fully utilise degraded lands
for biofuel production, especially within the 2030 time frame The degraded lands
often are scattered plots of less than  000 ha each, which is below the required
000 ha required for one palm oil mill Without economies of scale, this reduces
the economic viability to larger plantations and limits their interest in
exploiting these lands The regulatory frameworks and capacity to implement at
the district level also are reported to be insufficient for the sustainable use
of many of the degraded lands, especially with concerns over land-use rights
Furthermore, there is competition over these degraded lands with other crops,
most notably rubber and rice, for which demand is also growing fast Indonesia
has  long history in the production of biodiesel In 2015 less than  billion
litres of biodiesel was blended but the expectation for 2016 is that this could
increase to  billion litres Biodiesel is currently produced at scale from palm
oil However, based on the assessment of the sustainable bioenergy supply
potential, there is no potential for energy crops (palm oil, but also other
crops) on suitable lands (as per the FAO definition) beyond those that are
currently used This is because forests cover large parts of the remaining
suitable land (and are excluded) and because agricultural lands are expected to
expand to meet the increasing demand for other crops With the expected yield
increase of % per year for palm oil up to 2030, the implied supply potential
(162 PJ) in that year translates into  billion litres of biodiesel, below the
expected production level of biodiesel for To meet the growing demand for
biodiesel from palm oil in Indonesia, two sources of additional production are
considered: using degraded lands and further increasing yield improvements
Improving yields will be important to increase the production of palm oil based
on lands currently in use Yields have already improved in various locations in
recent years through replanting and improved practices On average, yields in
Indonesia are currently around   CPO/ha/yr, although  big difference in average
yields exists between smallholders – about   CPO/ ha/yr – and large holders – at
about   CPO/ha/yr  yield of   CPO/ha/yr was observed on plots with best-
management practices on six plantations across Sumatra and Kalimantan between
2006 and 2011 (IFC, 2013) If by 2030 all palm oil plantations would be achieving
yield of   CPO/ha/yr – instead of the   CPO/ha/yr in the baseline projection
based on an annual yield increase of % – an additional 27 million tonnes of
crude palm oil could be produced per year If, for example, half of this would be
used for the production of biodiesel, an additional billion litres of biodiesel
could be supplied There is  lot of degraded land in Indonesia, with estimates
ranging between 12 Mha and 74 Mha depending on different definitions and
suitability criteria (Wicke et al, 2008) In recent years, more region-specific
studies have shed new light on the specific potential for energy crops on such
lands For degraded lands suitable for palm oil, between  Mha and  Mha of land in
West and Central Kalimantan was identified The wide range is due to the degree
of suitability and sustainability criteria (WRI, 2012) Another study on North
and East Kalimantan found the potential for an additional  Mha to  Mha from
responsible land zoning and potential agricultural development on underutilised
lands (Van der Laan et al, 2016) At the low end of the range (with  higher
probability of ensuring sustainable practices) this implies about  million Mha
of potentially suitable degraded lands on Kalimantan for palm oil production At
current average yields of  tonnes of crude palm oil per hectare per year (
CPO/ha/year), this theoretically could be used to produce about  billion
additional litres of biodiesel from palm oil Additional potential for degraded
lands is likely to exist on Indonesia’ other islands as well, mainly on Papua
and Sumatra This shows why the further increase of yields has  lot of potential
However, increasing average yields to this level, especially by 2030, would come
with challenges Reaching the large number of smallholders, where most of the
potential to increase yields exists, will be  first challenge Although exact
estimates on the number of smallholders are unavailable, there could be as many
as  million in operation today (Rainforest Alliance, 2016) Combined they account
for about 40% of the total production of palm oil in Indonesia If they all could
be reached, convincing them all to implement different practices would be cost-
and time-intensive Also, improving yields will come with   Demand side funding
requirements, and many smallholders have limited access to finance and are
unlikely to be able to cover the upfront investment The challenges on the demand
side for liquid biofuels relate mainly to the compensation required for
blending, and to some extent to technical limitations With low oil prices today,
blenders in Indonesia require compensation given the higher production cost of
liquid biofuels  fund currently is in place to provide this compensation for
biodiesel in transport, but not for its use in other sectors  subsidy is
currently unavailable for ethanol There also are concerns that the funding for
subsidised biodiesel will be inadequate if oil prices remain at low levels
(Asmarini, 2016) For Indonesia to fulfil its blending mandates across sectors,
these compensation issues would need to be addressed Some concerns also exist
over the technical challenges that come with the blending of liquid biofuels PLN
stated that using B30 could cause damage to its power generators (Munthe and
Asmarini, 2016) Although BPPT has confirmed that B20 is safe for use in
automotive applications, the automotive industry voiced concerns over how
engines might be affected (Cahyafitri and Yulisman, 2015; Paryanto, 2015)
Ethanol There exists large potential to scale up the production of ethanol in
Indonesia Ethanol is currently produced at  small scale in Indonesia, despite
the blending mandates in place and the ambitious targets for the future (E20 in
2025) Sugar cane is currently the main feedstock for ethanol production,
although cassava also has potential For both, there is competition over the
crop’ use for food The production of advanced ethanol – for which grasses and
woody crops on degraded lands could be used – has significant potential,
although cost competitiveness is an issue today Currently more than 90 projects
for the production of advanced biofuels around the world are at various stages
of development (IRENA, 2016g) Although none of these is based in Indonesia, and
only one is based in Southeast Asia, these industry development play an
important role to improve conversion technologies and reduce cost In industry
the financial viability of projects and the lack of access to grids pose
barriers to the accelerated use of bioenergy For using palm oil residues, new
mills have boilers that can use the biomass waste from the mill (such as empty
fruit bunches and kernel shells), but old mills do not have this capability
Retrofitting comes with significant cost, which with today’ low oil prices puts
pressure on its business case For biogas from palm oil mill effluent, REmap has
identified significant potential, and the recently signed PPA with PLN for   MW
biogas plant from POME brings positive news (Sewatama, 2016) In many locations,
however, the lack of access to grids remains an issue; IPP projects are the main
way for POME-based biogas projects to be viable Industry Beyond the use of
liquid biofuels, bioenergy use in industry (mainly from solid biomass) will more
than double in the Reference Case, while with the REmap Options it would nearly
triple The large contribution of bioenergy to supply process heat in Indonesia
is encouraging, as industry remains  difficult sector in many countries in terms
of increasing the penetration of renewable energy The increased use of bioenergy
in industrial processes in Indonesia comes with some barriers though
Agricultural residues form the largest feedstock for industrial bioenergy use in
Indonesia The seasonality of feedstock supply and the continuous energy demand
of plants is  challenge, especially if storage space is unavailable Another
barrier is the relatively high transportation cost for feedstocks to maximise
the use of bioenergy use across different locations Palm oil residues have great
potential for bioenergy but compete with other uses Trunks and leaves generally
are left on the ground to replenish the topsoil and act as  natural fertiliser
Limiting the potential for using wood waste for bioenergy, for which the REmap
Options also have identified considerable potential, are regulations on wood
recycling which are currently lacking (Sutapa, 2014) Finally, with the REmap
Options an additional  million households – who would still rely on traditional
uses of bioenergy for cooking in the Reference Case – will use modern cook
stoves using solid biomass and ethanol While these modern cook stoves (such as
rocket stoves and ethanol cook stoves, which have been  popular option in parts
of Africa) come with  significant upfront investment (around IDR 30 000) for
low-income households, over time this is offset by reduced fuel cost and health
benefits The accelerated deployment of biogas digesters also will come with
challenges While   the barriers and opportunities are largely similar to those
for cook stoves that use solid biomass or ethanol, there is additional negative
social stigma for the use of biogas, for example from public toilets Although
the Indonesia Domestic Biogas Programme is making progress, the number of
installed biogas digesters in the country – at around 15 000 by the end of 2015
– is still modest compared to the potential For all modern cook stoves using
bioenergy, the subsidised price of LPG canisters for low-income households is an
additional barrier is an area where Indonesia could leverage its experience in
biofuels while focusing & efforts on the local commercialisation of such
technology ● Other innovative supply-side approaches are also recommended For
example, there is the potential for ethanol production from the pulp produced as
residues of cassava starch – instead of using the edible tuber parts – to avoid
competition with the demand for cassava as food (Hermiati et al, 2012) The saps
of the oil palm trunks that currently are left after trees are felled – and that
emit  large volume of greenhouse gases in the form of methane – could be used to
produce ethanol as well as other biomaterials, as they have  high glucose
content (Kosugi et al, 2010)  diffusion of such types of practical and climate-
smart technologies and practices also will contribute to Indonesia’ zero-
deforestation policies Opportunities ● To ensure the sustainable use of
bioenergy, the development of  comprehensive Indonesian bioenergy programme is
recommended (see table 17) This should not only focus on the production of
liquid biofuels but have  broader scope, as there are many interlinkages between
sectors Palm oil producers, for example, not only supply feedstock for biodiesel
production, but also play an important role in increasing the use of residues
and waste in the production of heat and electricity ● For industry, adequate
planning based on anticipated heating demand and customised storage solutions
for bioenergy feedstock for new are industrial plants In addition,  detailed
plan is recommended to identify where the main feedstock sources are for the use
of bioenergy in industry, taking into account also access to the power grid
incorporating PLN’ transmission and distribution expansion plans up to
Government rebates for retrofitting boilers to use biomass waste from mills
could be considered recommended, especially ● The objectives of the programme
should include  review of biofuel blending mandates for Indonesia, addressing
current barriers on both the demand and supply side One of the outcomes of such
an assessment would be  more gradual roadmap for increasing blending mandates
over time, with  more detailed assessment for each step as to how the increase
is to be achieved in  sustainable manner ● On the demand side, funding for
liquid biofuel blending should be allocated in line with the targeted increase
in blending mandates, increase of fuel usage, and oil price expectations
Concerns over technical limitations on using liquid biofuels should be taken
into account and addressed early on Programmes to reduce food waste would
increase the potential for using local agricultural produce as bioenergy
feedstock, and expanding the regulatory framework for wood recycling could
support the additional use of wood waste for bioenergy ● Similar long-term plans
with intermediate targets (either  percentage mandate or  volumetric target of
consumption) and monitoring towards these targets is required for the use of
solid bioenergy and biogas in industry and the power sector Policies should be
evaluated and adapted as required on  regular basis towards meeting the targets
● On the supply side, advanced biofuels should be  part of the solution As
mentioned, significant potential has been identified for perennial
lignocellulosic feedstock which can be used for the production of advanced
ethanol This ● To expand the modern use of bioenergy for cooking, the efforts of
the Indonesia Clean   Stove Initiative – undertaken by the World Bank and MEMR –
should be expedited Phase III of this programme, which includes  scaled-up
national programme for clean biomass cook stoves, was envisioned to begin in
2014 but has not started to date Creating awareness of the viability of the
solutions available in addition to expanding efforts in testing, setting
standards and strengthening supply chains (especially in remote areas) will be
crucial for the accelerated uptake of modern cook stoves Local capacity building
and options for local manufacturing are important for creating buy-in at the
community level The Indonesia Domestic Biogas Programme also would need to be
scaled up further if the ambitions in the Reference Case (an estimated  million
biogas digesters to be in use by 2030) are to be achieved Reducing subsidies on
LPG canisters over time could support the accelerated uptake of modern cook
stoves using bioenergy their processes, key companies responsible for the
blending and distribution of fuels, as well as automotive companies and PLN On
the supply side this includes biodiesel producers, large producers and sector
representatives of bioenergy feedstock, as well as researchers and organisations
involved in the assessment of the potential for using different feedstock
Government bodies that should be part of the discussions are, among others,
MEMR, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Land and Spatial Planning,
the Ministry of Environment and Forestry and the Ministry of Research,
Technology, and Higher Education ● it will be difficult to satisfy all Although
stakeholders, ultimately the objective should be to maximise the benefits to
society of the large bioenergy resources that Indonesia is endowed with The
indicators as developed by the Global Bioenergy Partnership and the
recommendations from the pilot test in Indonesia should be incorporated to
ensure the environmental, social and economic sustainability of bioenergy use in
Indonesia ● Broad alignment among different stakeholders on the demand side,
supply side and in government is required On the demand side this includes
relevant industries that can use bioenergy in Table 17: Overview of
comprehensive bioenergy programme for Indonesia Demand side Supply side Maximise
the benefits to society of Indonesia’ endowment of bioenergy resources Objective
Roadmap with gradually increasing targets for bioenergy use across sectors
Assessment of different feedstock to set targets while ensuring sustainability
Target setting Support policies (, to reduce financing cost) as well as
mandates, including the periodic review of effectiveness Regulations to address
bottlenecks (, land-use rights), support yield increases and use of degraded
lands Regulation Programs focusing on, , reduction of food waste, demonstration
projects for biogas from palm oil mill effluent, etc Targeting for advanced
biofuels, promotion of innovative feedstock uses (, ethanol from cassava pulp),
expansion of & Innovation Relevant industries, biofuel blenders, car
manufacturers, PLN Biofuel producers, agro industry representatives, research
institutions Stakeholders MEMR, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Land and
Spatial Planning, Ministry of Environment and Forestry, Ministry of Research,
Technology, and Higher Education    SUGGESTIONS FOR ACCELERATED RENEWABLE ENERGY
UPTAKE REmap has identified significant potential for renewable energy in
Indonesia across sectors and technologies To accelerate the uptake of renewable
energy, several challenges need to be addressed Below is provided  summary of
these challenges and related policy suggestions In the power sector, barriers in
key areas need to be addressed, along with some technology- specific challenges
feasibility and interconnection studies to ensure that projects meet predefined
standards Off-grid areas have been identified as having great potential for
solar PV to electrify remote villages The lack of bankable off-takers,
operational issues due to the insufficient & of systems, inadequate scaling of
systems, and the risk to the viability of systems when the main grid arrives are
key challenges in this area Grid integration of VRE needs to be  focus area
given the highly fragmented nature of Indonesia’ grid, with many small grids in
remote locations Detailed transmission and distribution expansion plans are
provided on an annual basis by PLN, but location- specific plans for VRE (solar,
wind and marine) are not included The projected deployment for each of the
renewable energy technologies is also below the ambition set forth by the
government  Establish larger off-grid working areas that include multiple
villages to achieve economies of scale and consider expanding PLN’
responsibility to build and own distribution networks in these areas The
creation of an entity to oversee & of systems, involving local communities,
expanding the use of standardised survey methodologies to ensure that systems
are scaled adequately, and strengthening regulatory frameworks on the
integration of mini- grids with the public grid are also recommended  Align
targets for renewable energy deployment and incorporate the expected deployment
of VRE in transmission and distribution plans Consider the potential of energy
storage (including from electric vehicles) for the smoother integration of VRE
and introduce priority dispatch for renewable energy generation by changing the
structure of non-renewable energy IPPs Project finance opportunities for
renewable energy projects in Indonesia are limited at present, as local banks do
not allocate large resources to this segment The inflow of international climate
funds is also limited, due mainly to the lack of project development equity to
develop projects with proper site surveys, pre-feasibility studies and grid
interconnection studies to reach  signed PPA Cost recovery for PLN remains an
issue as feed-in tariffs for renewable energy generally exceed the price that
PLN charges to consumers of electricity PLN is also negotiating PPA agreements
directly with renewable energy project developers, but requirements for parts of
the approval process are not standardised Furthermore, it is unclear if and when
funding for these projects will be provided  Increasing awareness at commercial
banks of opportunities and clear signals from the government on long-term
support for renewables could help banks to assign more resources to renewable
energy project finance Creating standard procedures and performance indicators
for project developers will be important to ensure that projects can be financed
Loan guarantees can be considered by the government to further lower the risk to
investors  Identify funds that that could cover the gap between renewable energy
PPAs/feed-in tariffs and the revenues that PLN receives from consumers The
process for PLN to negotiate PPAs directly with developers for projects should
be more standardised and should include detailed requirements for Land
acquisition and community involvement issues revolve around  lack of clarity on
land ownership in many locations, as well as costly and time-consuming
processes to acquire land, partly as  result of limited community buy-in for
renewable energy projects thermal storage capacity and/or hybrid solutions in
the design and construction of new industrial plants should be considered  Local
communities need to be involved early in the project development phase, and
providing additional services to communities (such as additional electricity,
clean water) could be considered Large differences in the cost of land should be
reflected more in the regional feed-in tariffs, and the government could
consider taking an active role in providing lands for projects Existing
agricultural lands might have potential to integrate solar panels or wind
turbines In transport the focus for renewable energy is on liquid biofuels,
while electric vehicles remain largely unaddressed  lack of infrastructure and
regulatory frameworks is holding back the potential that REmap has identified
for electric vehicles and electric two- and three-wheelers  Infrastructure
investments, such as charging infrastructure at in cities, should be combined
with support policies (, tax exemptions) to expand the market for electric
vehicles and electric two- and three-wheelers The local vehicle manufacturing
base should be involved early on to kick-start the market and maximise
localisation benefits lots large parking Technology-specific requirements (for
solar PV, hydropower, geothermal power, bioenergy power, wind and marine energy)
consist of, for example, increasing awareness of solutions, building local
capacity and maximising local added value, streamlining permitting and
regulatory frameworks, and expanding resource assessments Finally, challenges on
both the supply and demand side related to bioenergy across sectors and
applications need to be addressed Ambitious mandates for liquid biofuel blending
come with sustainability-of-supply concerns, and yield improvements and use of
degraded lands alone might not be enough to meet the targets For the use of
residues and waste, challenges include the seasonality of supply, high
transportation cost, financial viability and lack of grids to interconnect
projects, and competition with other uses The potential for the use of modern
cook stoves using solid biomass and ethanol instead of traditional uses of
bioenergy for cooking was also identified, but limited awareness and relatively
high upfront investments required pose barriers for their uptake  Beyond the
power sector, REmap suggests large potential for increasing the share of
renewable energy in the end-use sectors, with specific challenges for renewables
in buildings, industry and transport Buildings have the highest share of
renewable energy according to REmap This consists mainly of bioenergy Solar
thermal for water heating and cooling has great potential as well, but limited
awareness and  lack of design standards are holding back the market
Requirements for solar water heaters could be included in building codes, in
line with the experience of many other countries Demonstration projects for
nascent solar cooling technologies should be considered   comprehensive
bioenergy programme for Indonesia that includes relevant stakeholders on the
supply and demand sides is recommended The objective should be to maximise the
sustainable use of Indonesia’ bioenergy resource through the development of
gradually increasing targets across sectors Innovative approaches and
technologies on both the supply side and demand side should be included, while
the environmental, social and economic sustainability of bioenergy use in
Indonesia should be safeguarded The efforts of the Indonesia Clean Stove
Initiative and the Indonesia Domestic Biogas Programme should be expanded to
advance the dissemination of modern cook stoves based on bioenergy Industry has
high renewable energy potential through the additional use of bioenergy and
solar thermal for process heat Limited awareness of the potential for solar
collectors to supply heat for industrial processes and the intermittent supply
of energy pose barriers, as well as space limitations that might be an issue for
existing plants  The potential for solar thermal energy to substitute for
petroleum products should be highlighted, for example through local
demonstration projects Solar   REFERENCES ACE (ASEAN Centre for Energy) (2015a),
The 4th ASEAN Energy Outlook , ACE, Jakarta, Indonesia ASEAN Automotive
Federation (2016), ASEAN Automotive Federation Statistics,
autofedcom/statisticshtml Asmarini,  (2016), Indonesia cannot cover 2016
biodiesel subsidy on low crude, Reuters, 21 January ACE (2015b), Development of
Renewable Energy Outlook for ASEAN –  REmap 2030 Analysis, ACE, Jakarta,
Indonesia Baker and McKenzie (2015), Indonesian Supreme Court Revokes Solar
Power Regulation, Jakarta, Indonesia ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2012),
Indonesia, Transport Sector Assessment, Strategy, and Road Map, ADB, Manila,
Philippines BATAN (National Nuclear Energy Agency of Indonesia) (2016), History,
home-en/history ADB (2015a), Summary of Indonesia’ Energy Sector Assessment, ADB
Papers on Indonesia, ADB, Manila, Philippines Batidzirai, , Smeets, , Faaij,
(2012), Harmonising bioenergy resource potentials – Methodological lessons from
review of state of the art bioenergy potential assessments Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, volume 16, 6598–ADB (2015b), Fossil Fuel Subsidies
in Indonesia Trends, Impacts, and Reforms, ADB, Manila, Philippines ADB and
World Bank (2015), Unlocking Indonesia’ Geothermal Potential, ADB and World
Bank, Manila, Philippines and Washington, , USA Blocks,  (2013), Business
Assessment for Diesel Hybrid Systems in Indonesia,  downloads/giz2013-en-
blocks1-pep-workshop-indonesien- pv-hybridsystemepdf AEE INTEC (AEE – Institute
for Sustainable Technologies) (2015), Solar Heat Worldwide – Market and
Contribution to the Energy Supply 2013, AEE INTEC, Gleisdorf, Austria Boren,
(2015), Indonesia air pollution: tens of thousands of lives at risk from new
coal plants, Energydesk, 13 August,  org/indonesia-air-pollution-tens-of-
thousands- of-lives-at-risk-from-new-coal-plants/ Allard,  (2010), Indonesia’
hot terrain set to power its future, The Age,  May,  environment/indonesias-hot-
terrain-set-to-power-its- future-20100430-tzd2html BPPT (Indonesian Agency for
the Assessment and Application of Technology) (2015), Outlook Energi Indonesia
2015, BPPT, Jakarta, Indonesia Alvionitasari,  (2016), Energy Resilience Fund
set in motion, Tempoco: Indonesian News Portal, 27 February,  Energy-Resilience-
Fund-Set-in-Motion BusinessWire (2014), Research and Markets: Indonesia Air
Conditioners Market Forecast and Opportunities,  2018,
20140307005644/en/Research-Markets-Indonesia- Air-Conditioners-Market-Forecast
Amindoni,  (2016), MRT Jakarta: digging the city, The Jakarta Post,  April
Cahyafitri,  and Yulisman,  (2015), Carmakers worry higher biofuel mix could
damage engines, The Jakarta Post, 16 April Anya,  (2016), City ‘buys’ land it
has owned since the 60s for $50 million, The Jakarta Post, 29 June   Carlson,
et al (2014), Influence of watershed- climate interactions on stream
temperature, sediment yield, and metabolism along  land use intensity gradient
in Indonesian Borneo, Journal of Geophysical Research, 119 (), pp 1110–FMT
(2016), Malaysia begins exporting electricity to Indonesia, Free Malaysia Today,
13 May GBG Indonesia (2014), Energy & mining: the coal sector in Indonesia,
Global Business Guide Indonesia,   coal_sector_in_indonesiaphp Casson,  et al
(2014), Large-scale plantations, bioenergy developments and land use change in
Indonesia, Working Paper, Center for International Forestry Research, Bogor,
Indonesia Gona,  (2013), The Indonesia initiatives on reducing emissions of GHG
state action plan in the air transport sector and aviation biofuels policy and
progress,   cs3/alb/pdf/20100_yusfandri_gonapdf Dahrul,  (2014), Indonesia plans
$ bln Sumatra-Java undersea electricity cable, Reuters, 19 June GRAS (2016),
Land Use Change Map, Indonesia,  gst-prodgras-
systemorg/webui/indexhtml#/country/ Indonesia Daioglou,  et al (2012), Model
projections for household energy use in developing countries, Energy, 37, pp
601–Greenpeace (2014), Coal Mines Polluting South Kalimantan’ Water, Greenpeace
Southeast Asia – Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia EC (European Commission) (2013),
EU to impose definitive anti-dumping duties on biodiesel from Argentina and
Indonesia, press release, Brussels, Belgium, 21 November Hermawanto,  (2016),
ASEAN Power Grid: Route to Multilateral Electricity Trade, presentation at Asian
Clean Energy Forum 2016, Manilla, Philippines,  June Ecofys (Ecofys Netherlands
) (2013), Low ILUC Potential of Wastes and Residues for Biofuels, Ecofys,
Utrecht, Netherlands Hermiati,  et al (2012), Potential utilization of cassava
pulp for ethanol production in Indonesia , Scientific Research and Essays,  (),
pp 100–EIA (United States Energy Information Administration) (2014), Indonesia’
share of global LNG supply declines due to global and domestic demand growth,
EIA, Washington, , USA, 10 March Hooley,  (2016), The water-energy nexus in the
Indian Ocean region, Future Directions International, 17 May,  nexus-indian-
ocean-region/ Indonesia,  EIA (2015), international/analysiscfm?iso=IDN Huijnen,
et al (2016), Fire carbon emissions over maritime southeast Asia in 2015 largest
since 1997, Nature, Scientific Reports  EnDev (Energising Development) (2015),
Indonesia,  EY (Ernst & Young) (2015), Opportunities and Challenges of the
Indonesian Electrification Drive, EY, Jakarta, Indonesia Hydropower & Dams
(Hydropower & Dams International Journal) (2014), World Atlas 2014, pp 13–ICCT
(International Council on Clean Transportation) (2014), Opportunities to Reduce
Vehicle Emissions in Jakarta, ICCT FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations) (2000), Environment and Natural Resources Working Paper, Working
Paper No , FAO, Rome, Italy IEA (International Energy Agency) (2014), Indonesia
National Energy Policy (Government Regulation No 79), OECD/IEA, Paris FAO
(2014), Pilot Testing of GBEP Sustainability Indicators for Bioenergy in
Indonesia, FAO, Rome, Italy   IEA (2015a), World Energy Balances 2015 Edition,
OECD/ IEA, Paris IISD (2016), International Experiences with LPG Subsidy Reform,
IISD, Winniperg, Canada IEA (2015b), Indonesia 2015, OECD/IEA, Paris Indonesia
Hydro Consult (2015), Large Scale Hydropower Indonesia,  Plants
OnePane/basicviewer/indexhtml?appid=65ed8bc86 2bd4af09c375d49f9d389d4 in IEA
(2015c), CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2015 Edition Highlights, OECD/IEA,
Paris Indonesia Investments (2016a), Palm Oil in Indonesia – Indonesian CPO
Production & Export,  indonesia-investmentscom/business/commodities/ palm-
oil/item166 IEA (2016a), Energy and Air Pollution, World Energy Outlook, Special
Report, OECD/IEA, Paris IEA (2016b), Indonesia – National Master Plan for Energy
Conservation (RIKEN), IEA Policies & Measures Database,
pams/indonesia/name-23643-enphp Indonesia Investments (2016b), Palm oil industry
Indonesia: five-year moratorium on new concessions, 16 July,  headlines/palm-
oil-industry-indonesia-five-year- moratorium-on-new-concessions/item7006 IEA
(2016c), Fossil Fuel Subsidy Database,
worldenergyoutlookorg/resources/energysubsidies/ fossilfuelsubsidydatabase/ INNO
SMES (Indonesian National Innovation System Resource Center) (2015), Puan
Maharani to give directives at kick off meeting of Indonesia’ National STP
Program,  May,  president-joko-widodo-to-give-directives-ad-kick-off- meeting-
of-indonesias-national-science-and- technology-park/#more-6724 IEA (), Indonesia
(association country),  ieaorg/countries/non-membercountries/indonesia/ IEA and
World Bank (2015), Sustainable Energy for All 2015 – Progress Toward Sustainable
Energy, World Bank, Global Tracking Framework, Washington, , USA IRENA
(International Renewable Energy Agency) (2014a),  Renewable Energy Roadmap
(REmap 2030): Cost Methodology, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IEE (Intelligent Energy Europe)
(2016), BioTrade2020plus – Supporting  Sustainable European Bioenergy Trade
Strategy – Assessment of sustainable lignocellulosic biomass export potentials
from Indonesia to the European Union, IEE, Brussels, Belgium IRENA (2014b),
Renewable Energy Prospects: China, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2015a), Off-grid
Renewable Energy Systems: Status and Methodological Issues, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IFC
(International Finance Corporation) (2013), Diagnostic Study on Indonesian Oil
Palm Smallholders, IFC, Washington, , USA IRENA (2015b), Renewable Energy Target
Setting, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IHA (International Hydropower Association) (2015),
Hydropower Status Report 2015, IHA, London, United Kingdom IRENA (2015c),
Accelerating Off-Grid Renewable Energy – IOREC 2014: Key Findings and
Recommendations, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IHS (2016), Emerging markets in Asia Pacific
offer brightest prospects for global FDI, IHS study finds, press release, IHS,
Vienna, Austria, 14 April IRENA (2016a), REmap: Roadmap for  Renewable Energy
Future: 2016 Edition, IRENA, Abu Dhabi (International for Sustainable IISD
Development) (2015), Indonesia Energy Subsidy Review, Volume , IISD, Winnipeg,
Canada Institute IRENA (2016b), Renewable Energy Benefits: Measuring the
Economics, IRENA, Abu Dhabi   IRENA (2016c), Renewable Energy and Jobs Annual
Review 2016, IRENA, Abu Dhabi Indonesia’ Automotive Industry: KPMG (2014),
Navigating 2014, KPMG, Amsterdam, Netherlands IRENA (2016d), Renewable Energy
Capacity Statistics 2016, IRENA, Abu Dhabi Kurniawan,  (2016), Pertamina to
build ,000 MW of solar power plant, Rambu Energy,  March,
rambuenergycom/pertamina-to-build-1000- mw-of-solar-power-plant/ IRENA (2016e),
Policies and Regulations for Private Sector Renewable Energy Mini-grids, IRENA,
Abu Dhabi Kusdiana,  (2014), Bioenergy Policies and Regulations in Indonesia,
presentation at GIZ-EKONID Business Forum on “Innovative Technology to Tap
Indonesia’ Bioenergy Potential”, Jakarta, Indonesia, 17 November,     : //
/ fi        / international/Indonesia__Bioenergy_Policies_and_ regulationspdf
IRENA (2016f), Unlocking Renewable Energy Investment: The Role of Risk
Mitigation and Structured Finance, IRENA, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2016g), Innovation
Technology Outlook for Advanced Liquid Biofuels, IRENA, Abu Dhabi Manaturi,  and
Tabita Diela (2015), Tesla set to ride into Indonesian market in Model , Jakarta
Globe,  jakartaglobeberitasatucom/business/tesla-set-ride- indonesian-market-
model-/ IRENA (), Global Atlas for Renewable Energy,  irenamasdaracae/ Irfany,
(2015), Energy Ministry set to auction 109 solar power plant projects, Tempoco:
Indonesian News Portal, 15 December,  12/Energy-Ministry-Set-to-Auction-
109-Solar-Power-Plant-Projects MEMR (Indonesia Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Resources) (2014a), Outlook Energi Indonesia 2014, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia MEMR
(2014b), Solar PV Feed in Tariff in Indonesia: Regulation and Framework
Conditions, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia Ives,  (2015), Indonesian coal mining boom
is leaving trail of destruction, Yale Environment 360, 17 December Jakarta Post
(2017), In search of an affordable feed-in tariffs for green energy, The Jakarta
Post, 13 February  2017, 2017/in-search-of-affordable-feedin-tariffs-for- green-
energyhtml MEMR (2015), Handbook of Energy & Economics Statistics of Indonesia,
2015, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia MEMR (2016a), Government Policy on Development of
Power Supply Infrastructure, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia KOMPAS (2016), Mandatory
biofuel policy not fully implemented, KOMPAS, 16 June,  com/baca/Mandatory-
Biofuel-Policy-Not- Fully-Implemented MEMR (2016b), Potential of Bioenergy
Development in Indonesia, presentation at REmap Indonesia Workshop, Jakarta,
Indonesia,  April MEMR (2016c), Solar & Hydro Potential in Indonesia,
presentation at REmap Indonesia Workshop, Jakarta, Indonesia,  April Koplitz,
et al (2016), Public health impacts of the severe haze in Equatorial Asia in
September–October 2015: demonstration of  new framework for informing fire
management strategies to reduce downwind smoke exposure, Environmental Research
Letters, 11 (),  MEMR (2016d), Revised KEN 2025, presentation at REmap Indonesia
Workshop, Jakarta, Indonesia,  April Kosugi,  et al (2010), Ethanol and lactic
acid production using sap squeezed from old oil palm trunks felled for
replanting, Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 110 (), pp 322–MEMR
(2016e), Indonesia’ Geothermal Development, presentation at REmap Indonesia
Workshop, Jakarta, Indonesia,  April MEMR (2016f), Potential of Marine Energy,
presentation at REmap Indonesia Workshop, Jakarta, Indonesia,  April PLN
(2014b), Electricity Supply Effort Plan PT PLN (Persero) ,
02electrcitylaw/0140713plnpdf PLN (2015), Electricity Supply Effort Plan PT PLN
(Persero) ,  RUPTL/RUPTL%20PLN%202015-pdf MEMR (2016g), Potential of Wind Energy
in Indonesia, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia MEMR (2016h), Outlook Energi Indonesia
2015, MEMR, Jakarta, Indonesia PLN (2016), Electricity Supply Effort Plan PT PLN
(Persero) ,  Kepmen%205899%20Tahun%202016_Pengesahan%20
RUPTL%20PLN%202016-2025_Salinan%20Sesuai%20 Aslinyapdf MEMR, PLN and JICA (MEMR,
PLN and Japan International Cooperation Agency) (2011), Project for the Master
Plan Study of Hydropower Development in Indonesia,  pdf PLN and WLPGA (World LPG
Association) (2015), Kerosene to LP Gas Conversion Programme in Indonesia –
Case Study of Domestic Energy, PLN ad WLPGA, Jakarta, Indonesia, and Paris,
France MNRE (India Ministry of New and Renewable Energy) (2016), Draft National
Policy on RE based Mini/Micro grids, MNRE, SPV division, New Delhi, India
Prakoso,  (2015), Indonesia vows no nuclear power until 2050, Jakarta Globe, 12
December Mukherjee,  and Sovacool,  (2014), Palm oil-based biofuels and
sustainability in southeast Asia:  review of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 37, pp –Prastowo,  (2011), Biomass
resource in Indonesia: Indonesia’ solid biomass energy potential Indonesian
Center for Estate Crops Research and Development Munthe,  and Asmarini,  (2016),
State power firm PLN says biofuel regulation unworkable, Jakarta Globe, 11 July
PWC (PriceWaterhouseCoopers) (2013), Power in Indonesia Investment and Taxation
Guide,  pwccom/id/en/publications/assets/electricity-guide- pdf Octama,  (2015),
Zero motorcyle hits Indonesian roads, Jakarta Globe,  business/zero-motorcyle-
hits-indonesian-roads/ Rainforest Alliance (2016), Smallholder Palm Oil
Financing in Indonesia, Rainforest Alliance, New York, USA ODI (Overseas
Development Institute) (2015), Empty Promises G20 Subsidies to Oil, Gas and Coal
production, ODI, London REN21 (Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st
Century (2015), Renewables Global Status Report 2015, REN21, Paris Paryanto,
(2015), Indonesian Policy Toward High Blend of Biodiesel for Transportation and
Market Experience,  BPPTpdf REN21 (2016), Renewables Global Status Report 2016,
REN21, Paris Salim,  (2014), One-map policy helps resolve land disputes,
overlapping permits, The Jakarta Post, 12 December PLN (2013), Independent Power
Producers Business in PT PLN (Persero), IPP Procurement Division, PT PLN
(Persero), bookletipppdf Schmidt,  et al (2013), Attracting private investments
into rural electrification –  case study on renewable energy based village grids
in Indonesia, Energy for Sustainable Development, 17, pp 581–PLN (2014a), The
Guidelines for Connecting Renewable Energy Generation Plants to PLN’
Distribution System   11591/new-government-decree-accelerate-indonesian- solar-
market/ SEAD (Super-efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment Initiative)
(2015), Paying Attention to the Peak: Indonesia, Clean Energy Ministerial,
Washington, , USA Sutapa,    (2014), Energetic and Industrial Use of Wood in
Indonesia – An Overview, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany Sewatama
(2016), Sewatama signed biogas plant power purchase agreement with PLN, press
release, Jakarta, Indonesia, 25 April UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme) (2016), UNEP – air quality policies Indonesia,
org/Transport/Airquality/Indonesiapdf -GE (Switzerland Global Enterprise)
(2013), Market study on clean technology in Indonesia, -GE, Zurich, Switzerland
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2016), Nationally
Determined Contribution, Republic of Indonesia, UNFCC, Bonn, Germany Sinaga,
(2016), Indonesia’ Q1-2016 ceramic sales flat, hope on Keramika & lower gas
price, Indonesia Investments, 23 March,  investmentscom/news/todays-
headlines/indonesia-- q1-2016-ceramic-sales-flat-hope-on-keramika-lower- gas-
price/item6630 (United Nations UNIDO and GGGI Industrial Development
Organization and Global Green Gowth Initiative) (2015), Global Green Growth:
Clean Energy Industrial Investments and Expanding Job Opportunities Volume II:
Experiences of Brazil, Germany, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea and South
Africa, UNIDO and GGGI, Vienna, Austria, and Seoul, Korea Sopingi,  and
Soemarno,  (2015), Efficiency analysis in small industry of tiles and bricks
production (case study in Nganjuk District), World Environment,  (), pp 39–UN
and World Bank (2016), Sustainable Energy for All,  Stichnothe,  (2016), Palm
Oil Residues for Biogas Production, presentation at IEA Bioenergy Workshop,
Rome, Italy, 17 May USAID (United States Agency for International Development)
(2015), Wind Integration of Sulawesi System – Indonesia Wind Sector Impact
Assessment, presentation prepared by Indonesia Clean Energy Development (ICED)
project,  sites/-windenergycom/files/page-uploads/USAID- TetraTech-IWE-
Draftreportpdf Sudradjat,  (2011), Status of Solar Power Technology Development
in Indonesia, presentation at Renewable Energy Conference Green Supply for
Growing Demand, German – Indonesian Renewable Energy Days, Jakarta,  October,
ahk_indonesien/PAST_EVENTS/RENERGY2011/        AY/      /   -
development_in_Indonesiapdf USDA (United States Department of Agriculture)
(2015), Indonesia Biofuels Annual Report 2015, USDA, Washington, , USA
Sundaryani,  (2016a), More geothermal power projects up for tender, The Jakarta
Post, 20 April Van der Laan,  et al (2016), Mitigation of unwanted direct and
indirect land-use change – an integrated approach illustrated for palm oil,
pulpwood, rubber and rice production in North and East Kalimantan, Indonesia,
GCB Bioenergy Sundaryani,  (2016b), RI cuts petroleum-based fuel at plants, The
Jakarta Post,  April Susanto,  (2015), Indonesia’ solar PV tenders and current
news, LinkedIn, 17 October Veldhuis,  and     Reinders (2013), Reviewing the
potential and cost-effectivess of grid-connected solar PV in Indonesia on
provincial level, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 27, pp 315–Susanto,
(2016), New government decree to accelerate the Indonesian solar market,
Solarplaza, 22 July,    World Bank (The World Bank) (2013), Indonesia, Toward
Universal Access to Clean Cooking, East Asia and Pacific Clean Stove Initiative
Series, World Bank, Washington, , USA Ver-Bruggen,  (2016), Vestas to supply
Indonesia’ first wind projects, Wind Power Monthly, 20 September,  WHO (World
Health Organization) (2014), Fact sheet: Ambient (outdoor) Air Quality and
Health, WHO, Geneva, Switzerland World Bank (2016), Urban population (% of
total),  WHyPGen (2016), Indonesian Wind Energy Potential, presentation at REmap
Indonesia Workshop, Jakarta, Indonesia,  April World Nuclear Association (2015),
Nuclear power in Indonesia,  library/country-profiles/countries--/indonesiaaspx
Wicke,  et al (2008), Drivers of Land Use Change and the Role of Palm Oil
Production in Indonesia and Malaysia, Universiteit Utrecht, Copernicus
Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands WRI (World Resources Institute) (2012), How to
Identify Degraded Land for Sustainable Palm Oil in Indonesia, WRI, Washington, ,
USA Wicke, , Sikkema, , Dornburg, , Junginger, , Faaij, , Drivers of land use
change and the role of palm oil production Indonesia and Malaysia Universiteit
Utrecht, Copernicus Institute WRI (2015), Land and forest fires in Indonesia
reach crisis levels, 16 September, WRI blog,  org/blog/land-and-forest-fires-
indonesia- reach-crisis-levels in     ANNEXES Annex : Summary of results
Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030 Unit 2010 2014 Total final energy consumption –
TFEC Total renewable energy consumption (incl electricity and direct uses; incl
traditional biomass) Total renewable energy consumption (incl electricity and
direct uses; excl traditional biomass) Share of renewable energy in final energy
consumption of direct uses (excl electricity; incl traditional biomass) Share of
renewable energy in final energy consumption of direct uses (excl electricity;
excl traditional biomass) Share of total renewable energy use (incl traditional
biomass) in TFEC Share of total renewable energy use (excl traditional biomass)
in TFEC PJ  031  317 13 064 12 726     PJ  835  233  724  839 PJ 376 669  169
839 % 32% 32% 19% 19%                     % % % 14% 19% % 30% 31% 21% 23% % % %
17% 23%   Annex : Technology cost and performance data assumptions Renewable
Energy Technologies, in 2030 Reference capacity or annual mileage Capacity
Factor Overnight capital cost & costs Conversion efficiency Lifetime (USD/
kW/yr) 84 50 INDUSTRY SECTOR (%) (years) (kW) (USD/kW) (%) Solar thermal Biomass
boilers Biomass gasification Bioenergy CHP (electricity part) 14 85 80 25 25 25
500 500 500 300 580  000 100 88 85 50 25 10 000 231 775 (USD/ kW/yr) BUILDINGS
SECTOR (%) (years) (kW) (USD/kW) (%) Water heating: Solar (thermosiphon) Space
Cooling: Solar Cooking biogas (from AD) Cooking biomass (solid) Cooking
bioethanol 12 20 82 150  100 12 10 10 10 20 25 20 20      350 39 15 10    (USD/
vehicle/ yr) 85 50 40 50 (MJ/ passenger- km) (passenger-km/ yr/vehicle) (USD /
vehicle) TRANSPORT SECTOR (%) (years) First generation bioethanol (passenger
road vehicles) Second generation bioethanol (passenger road vehicles) Biodiesel
(passenger road vehicles) Battery electric (passenger road vehicles) Battery
electric (public road vehicles) Battery Electric Two-wheeler (passenger road) /
12 15 000 28 000  800  / 12 15 000 28 000  800  / 12 15 000 30 000  000  / 12 15
000 32 000  880  / 15 60 000 48 500 13 000  /   000  100 400  (USD/ kW/yr) 56 30
60 14 10 30 124 67 POWER SECTOR (%) (years) (kW) (USD/kW) (%) Hydro (Small)
Hydro (Large) Wind onshore Solar PV (Rooftop) Solar PV (Utility) Biomass power
Geothermal Tide, wave, ocean 65 39 25 16 16 66 80 40 40 60 30 30 30 25 50 25
100 100   50 25   500  500  500  400  000  750  500  500 100 100 100 100 100 25
10 100 Source: IRENA analysis   Annex : Energy price assumptions 2030 government
prices (excluding taxes and subsidies) Commodity name Unit Steam coal USD/GJ
Electricity household USD/kWh 11 Electricity industry USD/kWh 12 Natural gas
household USD/GJ Natural gas industry USD/GJ Petroleum products for heating /
electricity USD/GJ Gasoline for transport USD/GJ Diesel for transport USD/GJ
Conventional liquid biofuels for transport USD/GJ Advanced liquid biofuels for
transport USD/GJ Biomethane USD/GJ Primary bioenergy USD/GJ Bioenergy residues
USD/GJ  Traditional uses of bioenergy USD/GJ  Waste USD/GJ  Source: IRENA
analysis   Annex : Renewable energy resource maps Figure 34: Global wind dataset
–  kilometre onshore wind speed at 80 metre height with units in metres per
second  /  /  /  /  /  /  /  / Source: © VAISALA Global Wind Dataset 5km onshore
wind speed at 80m height, extracted from IRENA Global Atlas  GlobalAtlas Figure
35: Global solar dataset –  kilometre with units in watts per square metre /m2
/m2 /m2 /m2 /m2 /m2 /m2 /m2 Source: © METEOTEST; based on  extracted from IRENA
Global Atlas  IRENA Headquarters   ox 236, Abu Dha bi  nit   Ara  Emira te  IR
ENA  nnovati   and Techn ol  gy Ce ntr  Rob   -Schum an- Pla tz  531 75   nn
Germ  ny ww irena rg   IRENA Headquarters   Box 236, Abu Dhabi Un it   Arab
Emirates IR EN  In novati on and Techn ol ogy Centr  Rob   - Schuman- Platz
53175  onn Germ any ww irena rg                  :
Copyright © IRENA 2017