Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/IDN/ /  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework  An emerging middle-income country and one of the world’
largest democracies, Indonesia has achieved remarkable progress over the last
two decades In 2018, it reached the high human development category with  human
development index (HDI) of 707 and  ranking of 111 out of 189 countries and
territories Poverty has been halved over the past two decades, down to  per cent
in However, nearly 40 per cent of the population remains vulnerable to poverty,
and income, gender, and regional and urban/rural inequalities remain marked
Those most at risk of being left behind include people living in remote islands,
especially in Eastern Indonesia, people living with disabilities, rural and
coastal communities closely tied to agriculture, forestry and fisheries, and
women and young people without access to modern skills  Despite many challenges,
the status of women in Indonesian society has been improving gradually The
gender development index has slowly increased over recent years, reaching 937 in
2018 (from 923 in 2010), while the gender inequality index has declined from 451
to 486 in the same period  The Government is committed to the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development The national
mid-term development plan() articulates the need to ensure justice,
sustainability, and gender equality while developing  strong, resilient and low-
carbon economy with reduced regional inequalities Having ratified the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, Indonesia is committed to addressing climate change
and to reducing its emission levels  This five-year country programme is derived
from the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, , and is
based on  theory of change drawing on evidence from the common country analysis
The Cooperation Framework includes four outcomes: () inclusive human
development; () economic transformation; () climate resilience; and ()
innovation for Sustainable Development Goals acceleration  The UNDP contribution
to the Cooperation Framework reflects its comparative advantages and the unique
value proposition it brings to the United Nations development system, leading
working groups on the Goals, climate finance, and innovation Contributing to the
Cooperation Framework, UNDP will: () apply an integrated cross-sectoral approach
that builds complementarities between United Nations technical agencies as
connector to mobilize its wide networks with NextGen UNDP; () leverage
innovation for new development approaches and solutions; () support public
sector reform to strengthen governance effectiveness across government
institutions and support implementation of the Cooperation Framework; ()
facilitate formulation and implementation of national and local development
plans and policies and their alignment to the 2030 Agenda and the Goals; ()
support engagement in the global development debate and South-South cooperation
on issues of mutual interest; () reposition, as part of the Decade of Action,
the United Nations development system to offer platforms for Sustainable
Development Goals acceleration through new partnerships and instruments,
knowledge sharing, and innovation  The independent country programme evaluation
2020 confirms that UNDP has had significant influence on  range of programmes
and policies through system-wide interventions and community-level work The
evaluation found evidence of concrete gains in the capacity of the Supreme
Court,  stronger response to the growing phenomenon of violent extremism, and
improvement in coordination among development actors in Papua and West Papua
Health outcomes have improved through UNDP support to the administration of
grants from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria UNDP made
notable contributions in  Human Development Report, Government of Indonesia,
Indonesia common country analysis, Refer to sec : Cooperation Framework,
Indonesia, for socioeconomic data  Paraphrased from the national medium-term
development plan, 2020-DP/DCP/IDN/ supporting the establishment of the Peatland
Restoration Agency, increasing the conservation of Sumatran tigers, and
establishing the national infrastructure for reducing emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) UNDP supported the Government to
raise $ billion from its first sovereign green Islamic bond  As recommended by
the evaluation, UNDP will build on its work on emerging financial challenges by
exploring alternative and innovative sources of financing To maintain its
relevance, UNDP will continue to provide high-level advice and expertise in
demand-driven areas Monitoring and evaluation of gender-related outcomes will be
enhanced to obtain insights into the country office’ gender mainstreaming
efforts II Programme priorities and partnerships  This country programme has
been developed through extensive consultations with the Government and partners
across sectors It includes four programme priorities that are directly derived
from the Cooperation Framework outcomes and that translate the Strategic Plan,
2018- 2021, at country level The country programme is closely aligned to the
national medium-term development plan, , and Indonesia Vision  UNDP will apply
six implementation principles that focus on: () developing innovative solutions
with multiplier effects across the 2030 Agenda; () promoting  whole-of-
government and whole-of-society approach; () maximizing synergies through
vertical and horizontal linkages across sectors and issues; () prioritizing the
leave no one behind agenda; () investing in enhancing gender equality; () acting
as  global and  local partner to facilitate Indonesia’ aspirations at the global
and regional levels UNDP will work with United Nations organizations in response
to the 2016 quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system (General Assembly resolution 71),
including by implementing the common chapter of the strategic plans, , of the
United Nations Children' Fund (UNICEF), UNDP, UNFPA and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) This will
include working jointly on social protection, data, gender-based violence,
advancing the rights of people with disabilities, disaster preparedness and
response, and the Covid-19 response As an integrator across the Goals, UNDP will
use its expertise and tools to evaluate the benefits of alternative policies and
investment decisions, and quantify economic, social and environmental benefits
from investments in human development Outcome  Inclusive human development The
theory of change underpinning the UNDP contribution to this area is that if
people living in Indonesia, especially those at risk of being left behind, have
access to quality services and if they are protected from violence, have
increased access to justice, accountability mechanisms, and are able to promote
tolerance, and if they can claim and are provided with opportunities regardless
of gender, disability or any other factor, then progress will be made towards
developing the human capital needed for an equitable and prosperous society
Initiatives will contribute to several Goals, including , 10, 11 and 16 and will
apply UNDP signature solutions , ,  and  UNDP will foster social cohesion
through programmes that promote respect for diversity and the prevention of
violent extremism This work will include research to fill knowledge gaps, policy
analysis and innovative on-the-ground actions implemented with  nation-wide
network of over 30 religious and academic institutions active at the community
level Emphasis will be placed on young women’ initiatives and their role in
promoting peace and tolerance narratives UNDP will support the Sustainable
Development Goals Academy,  learning platform towards localization of the Goals
and support innovation with emphasis on law, justice and human rights This
includes support for legal aid and restorative justice processes UNDP will focus
on Goals acceleration in Eastern Indonesia, including Papua, by strengthening
the Papua  DP/DCP/IDN/ / Platform as  mechanism for planning, budgeting,
coordination and monitoring, involving government, non-government and
development partners UNDP will help expand citizens’ participation, through
-governance-based citizens’ feedback mechanisms, ensuring equal access to women,
people with disabilities, and people living in remote areas This work will be
done closely with civil society organizations and will strengthen transparency,
accountability and integrity at national and sub-national levels, thereby
building trust in national and local institutions To improve the quality and
quantity of public participation, UNDP will work closely with civil society
organizations UNDP will invest in multi-sectoral, integrated approaches to
prevent and respond to sexual exploitation and abuse and gender-based violence,
upholding women’ legal rights and equal access to justice and other public
services Integrated response mechanisms and services for victims of violence
will be strengthened at the community level and in health facilities UNDP will
continue to contribute to strengthening service delivery systems to achieve
national priorities, such as reducing HIV and tuberculosis incidence rates,
eliminating malaria, and responding to Covid-19 through effective delivery of
vaccines, through innovation, better planning, procurement, storage, quality
assurance, and the dissemination of real-time information across all cold chain
points UNDP complementarities with the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), UN-Women, and others, will drive forward  cohesive United Nations
development system UNDP will maintain its close relations with development
partners, including the European Union, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the GAVI
Foundation and Global Fund Outcome  Economic transformation The theory of change
underlying UNDP contributions in this outcome area is that if the policy
environment can harness technologies, improve skills development, promote
circular economy to reduce the environmental impact and ensure equitable access
to energy; if women have equal access to economic opportunities; if small and
medium-sized enterprises are enabled to generate livelihoods ensuring inclusion
of people living with disabilities, HIV and people living in underdeveloped
regions, then Indonesia will be able to accelerate economic transformation for
low-carbon, sustainable and inclusive growth Actions under this outcome area
will contribute to Goals , , , , , , 10, 12 and 17 and apply UNDP signature
solutions , ,  and  In line with Indonesia’ nationally determined contributions,
UNDP will initiate the development of innovative economic models, such as
circular economy, to create jobs and increase private sector investments and
profits, with  focus on the five subsectors of food and beverages, textiles and
apparel, automotive, and chemicals It will contribute to prioritizing and
financing  low carbon economy and develop integrated models for green growth
through programmes such as the Partnership for Acton on Green Economy (PAGE)
with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) Regulatory bottlenecks will be
addressed through the twin strategies of partnering with the Government and the
private sector to attract new investments and mainstream responsible business
and human rights in the corporate sector, especially in the post-Covid-19
recovery phase UNDP will contribute to improving carbon market preparedness,
access to clean energy for local development and communities, and adoption of
sustainable technologies such as electric cars UNDP will also assist in the
identification of bankable energy projects and their de-risking under the
Sustainable Development Goals Indonesia One Fund established by the Government
UNDP will focus on ensuring an inclusive energy transition, targeting deprived
communities and improving energy sources, such as solar and micro-hydro power
plants with  focus on the poorest parts of the country To harness benefits of
Industry , or the fourth industrial revolution, UNDP will partner with the
Government, private sector and civil society to forecast future labour needs for
new types of jobs and skills needed to adapt existing jobs Together with United
Nations  DP/DCP/IDN/ organizations, UNDP will support skills development through
training systems that continually adapt and re-train workers, with targeted
initiatives and incentives for women and girls, and introduce  culture of re-
skilling among job seekers UNDP will assist partners to strengthen micro, small
and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) sector through policy analysis, design and
implementation of regulatory frameworks for an ecosystem of start-ups,  creative
economy and easier access to financing for MSMEs and social enterprises,
especially those headed by women It will prioritize the skills development of
young and women entrepreneurs, including those from Eastern Indonesia, through
bootcamps for start-ups and the ImpactAim Venture Accelerator that enables the
growth of social enterprises UNDP will support poverty eradication efforts
through  multi-dimensional approach to reduce vulnerabilities of people slipping
back into poverty, linking poverty to governance, environment protection and
climate adaptation, and strengthening systems for improved delivery of services
It will focus on disadvantaged areas by restoring local livelihoods through the
rehabilitation of productive infrastructure and the strengthening of local value
chains, with an emphasis on leaving no one behind UNDP will prioritize projects
for local economic development and access to markets in poor districts in Papua
and West Papua Outcome  Resilience to climate change and disasters UNDP
contributions to this outcome are guided by the underlying theory of change that
if policies and institutions address environmental concerns and reduce the
impact of geological and climate-induced disasters, and if effective use of
resilience-building systems is established, there will then be increased
sustainability in natural resources management and adaptation to climate change,
reduced greenhouse gas emissions through low carbon development strategies and
reduced land degradation, enhanced management of terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems and habitats, and strengthened preparedness for and resilience to
disasters The UNDP contribution of resources and expertise to the achievement of
this outcome is aligned with Goals , , , , , 13, 14 and 15 and UNDP signature
solutions , , ,  and  UNDP will support the reconstruction and recovery of
disaster-affected areas, including areas struck by the earthquake and tsunami in
As  member of the humanitarian country team, UNDP will contribute to disaster
preparedness at national and local levels, with focus on people living with
disabilities and women In partnership with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the National Disaster Agency,
UNDP will work to ensure effective humanitarian-development transition by
focussing on strengthening the capacity of disaster authorities and the public,
through gender-responsive disaster management UNDP will help restore and protect
land and marine ecosystems through strengthened management of protected areas
for the conservation of threatened species and sustainable land- use practices
and livelihoods through nature-based tourism, promoting local wisdom and
addressing illegal wildlife trade UNDP will assist communities to improve
social, economic and ecological resilience and adaptive seascape management in
coastal areas UNDP will support  transboundary response to over-exploited marine
resources and the rising pressures on the globally significant biodiversity in
the region of Arafura and Timor seas UNDP will support green commodities,
sustainable crops and supply chains for palm oil, coffee, cocoa, cashew and rice
to encourage climate mitigation by preventing loss of forests UNDP will support
platforms for the formulation and implementation of policies and national
actions plans for sustainable farming UNDP will assist rural farming communities
facing climate change-related risks through  long-term strategy for climate
change adaptation, capacity building and access to finance for small holding
farmers to adopt climate smart agricultural practices Key counterparts for
outcomes  and  will include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Development
Planning, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Industry, the Ministry of
DP/DCP/IDN/ / Commerce, the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, local
governments and  large network of civil society organizations, business
associations, entrepreneurs, investors, academia and training institutions in
Indonesia and abroad Outcome  Innovations for accelerating the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals The theory of change underpinning the UNDP
contribution to this outcome area is that if business-as-usual approaches are
replaced with innovative processes and partnerships, if  robust digital
infrastructure is in place, if investments are made in innovations that have the
ability to overcome physical and locational constraints, then an inclusive and
sustainable growth paradigm can be harnessed for improving the lives of people,
especially those most at risk of being left behind UNDP contributions under this
outcome area align particularly with Goals , 13 and 17 and across all six
signature solutions of UNDP In line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on
financing for development and the Secretary-General’ Strategy and Road Map for
Financing the 2030 Agenda, UNDP, together with the United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) and UN-Women will support
the Government in developing an integrated national financing framework, to
implement targeted policies and reforms in order to reach the Goals The UNDP
Innovative Financing Lab will continue to leverage new finance flows and to
pilot and scale up mechanisms such as blended finance, green/blue finance,
religious/Islamic finance and social impact investments UNDP will support the
Sustainable Development Goals Financing Hub of the Government and financing
instruments such as the Sustainable Development Goals Impact Fund and Social
Impact Bonds As  platform, the UNDP Innovative Financing Lab will address policy
issues to leverage international financing institutions and private sector
capital and to improve transparency in financing policies UNDP will explore the
use of big data and disruptive technologies in association with Pulse Lab
Jakarta, United Nations partners, academic and science institutions to develop
real-time insights into issues relevant to the country programme Innovative
technology solutions will be tested and adopted for improved public service
delivery, such as immunization, post-Covid-19 recovery, climate and disaster
risk management and preparedness, and reduction of harmful chemicals In
partnership with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, UNDP will support South-South
and triangular cooperation and global and regional development exchanges UNDP
will assist the Indonesian Aid Agency established in 2019 with institutional
capacity building and enhanced effectiveness of national development cooperation
UNDP will also support Indonesia as  champion of innovative finance on the
international development stage through global and regional events III Programme
and risk management The country programme outlines UNDP contributions to
national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
country level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the
organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures and internal
control framework The programme will be nationally executed If necessary,
national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the
programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash
transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects  DP/DCP/IDN/ Donor funding may reduce owing to the emerging middle-
income status of Indonesia UNDP will adopt  diversification approach to resource
mobilization, through renewed partnerships with donors at country and regional
level, increased private sector engagement, pursuing Government financing and
fostering new partnerships UNDP will ensure that its business processes are
efficient and cost-effective, and the staffing structure is fit-for-purpose
Disasters may reduce ability of communities and stakeholders to stay engaged in
development initiatives Mitigating actions will include disaster preparedness
and  business continuity plan for uninterrupted programme delivery developed
with United Nations partners, government and communities Risk management will
include re-programming options as required Covid-19 response and recovery
initiative will be implemented in partnership with the Government and United
Nations partners, and across outcome areas This will support initiatives which
mitigate risks of reduced budgetary allocations, prevent the spread of
infection, strengthen resilience of health systems and multi-sectoral
coordination, and mitigate socioeconomic impact on vulnerable groups Digital
solutions and big data analysis will be applied to enhance the national response
Regular monitoring of the political economy will inform modifications in the
theory of change, while adhering to the UNDP social and environmental standards
and accountability mechanism UNDP will use risk monitoring as  tool for early
warning, risk management, risk mitigation and decision making IV Monitoring and
evaluation In alignment with the Cooperation Framework and the national five-
year plan, UNDP will use national data for reporting In case of challenges with
specific national data sets, national statistical capacities will be enhanced in
partnership with United Nations organizations Innovative methods will be used
for monitoring and to support real-time decision making Annual planning and
multi-year goal setting will be undertaken in partnership with the Government
For monitoring, UNDP will support implementing partners to collect local data
through spot visits and surveys The evaluation plan indicates key project,
programme and thematic evaluations to be undertaken, as per guidelines to ensure
learning and accountability Gender-related interventions and their monitoring
will be supported by an investment of at least 15 per cent of the programme
budget At least  per cent each of the total budget will be made available for
monitoring, evaluation and communication of results, and promoting policy
dialogue  multi-year research agenda will produce policy and issues briefs,
discussion papers and periodic reports  DP/DCP/IDN/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Indonesia () NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic resilience; human
resources development; strengthen politic, law and security stability; and
public services transformation UNSDCF1 Outcome /UNDP OUTCOME : People living in
Indonesia, especially those at risk of being left furthest behind, are empowered
to fulfil their human development potential as members of  pluralistic,
tolerant, inclusive and just society, free of gender and all other forms of
discrimination STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome  INDICATIVE RESOURCES (United
States dollars) UNSDCF OUTCOME INDICATOR() DATA SOURCE, FREQUENCY INDICATIVE
COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS MAJOR PARTNERS Indicator  (Goal ()) Anti- corruption
behaviour index Baseline: 70 (2019) Target: 14 (2025) Statistics Indonesia
(annual) Output  Public institutions are capable of responsive, inclusive,
participatory and representative decision-making (Strategic Plan output )
Regular: $668,100 Other: $47 million Ministries of Health, National Development
Planning, Religious Affairs, State Apparatus and Bureaucracy Reform;
Coordinating Ministry for Human Development, Coordinating Ministry for
Political, Legal and Security affairs; National Counter Terrorism Agency,
District and sub-district government Indicator  Percentage of citizen
satisfaction rate, including for people with disabilities, with the national
integrated complaint handling system Baseline 2020: 72% Target 2025: 90% Data
source: Ministry of Administrative and Bureaucracy Reforms Indicator  Index of
religious harmony Baseline: (2019) Target: (2025) Ministry of Religious Affairs
(annual) Indicator  Number of provinces with capacities to accelerate
Sustainable Development Goals localization in the Decade of Action Baseline
2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Ministry of National Development Planning
Indicator  Prevalence of violence against women of age  years in the last 12
months Baseline: % (2016) Target: % (2025) Statistics Indonesia (once in five
years) Indicator  Wider stakeholder participation to improve policy coherence
across different levels/sectors working on Tanah-Papua development acceleration
Baseline 2020:  (Very partially: Existing Papua Platform functions only at
national level and consists only of government and development partners) Target
2025:  (Largely: Platform to include private sector and CSOs, made functional at
subnational level) Data source: Approved meeting minutes UN-Women, UNODC, The
Joint United Nations Programme om HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the World Health
Organization (WHO), UNFPA, United Nations Volunteers (UNV)  United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework DP/DCP/IDN/ Output  national and
subnational level capacities strengthened to promote inclusive local development
and service delivery (Strategic Plan output ) Organizations working on Islamic
education and socio- religious development in Indonesia, Lembaga Bantuan Hukum
Masyarakat (the Community Legal Aid Institute), Indonesia AIDS Coalition
Indicator  Systems in place for quality assurance and financial management of
Global Fund programmes Baseline 2020:  (Very partially: Financial management
information system deemed obsolete) Target 2025:  (Largely: Quality of financial
reporting meets Global Fund standards) Data source: Global Fund secretariat
Indicator  Percentage of community health centres reports of stockouts of
immunization vaccines in the past six months Baseline 2020: 50% Target 2025: 75%
Data source: Ministry of Health Indicator  Integrated service delivery in place
to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence Baseline 2018:  (Very
partially: Enabling legislation exists) Target 2025:  (Largely: Multi-sectoral
services, including justice and security upscaled platforms for raising
awareness and social mobilization initiated) Data source: Ministry of Women and
Child Protection, National Commission on Women Output  Enhanced regulatory
framework and community awareness to promote sustainable peace and social
cohesion (Strategic Plan output ) Indicator  Regulatory frameworks available for
implementation of national plans of action for peacebuilding and prevention of
violent extremism Baseline 2019:  Target 2025:  Data source: Ministry of
Education, National Counter Terrorism Agency Indicator  Number of enabling
mechanisms for civil society contribution to sustainable peace Baseline 2020:
(Very partially: Limited communication forums) Target 2025:  (Largely: () Early
warning system in three cities and 20 institutions; and () Social media
platforms for countering extremist narratives))  DP/DCP/IDN/ / Data source:
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Religious Affairs, National Counter Terrorism
Agency, digital analytics reports Indicator  Cumulative number of citizens who
participated in learning and communication initiatives on prevention of violent
extremism Baseline 2020: ,000,000 Target 2025: 12,000,000 Data source: digital
analytics reports, attendance sheets NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic resilience
UNSDCF Outcome /UNDP OUTCOME : Institutions and people contribute more
effectively to advance  higher value-added and inclusive economic transformation
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome  Regular: $445,400 Other: $37 million Indicator
(Goal ) Proportion of value added from the non-oil and gas manufacturing sector
to gross domestic product Baseline: % (2019) Target: % (2025) Statistics
Indonesia (annual) Output  Vulnerable groups supported to build productive
capacities and to benefit from sustainable livelihoods (Strategic Plan output1)
Ministries of Environment and Forestry, Industry, Agriculture, Marine Affairs
and Fisheries, Energy, Youth and Sports, Coordinating Economic Affairs; National
Agency for Technology Assessment and Application Indicator  Number of value
chains strengthened at subnational levels Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data
source: Project steering committee reports Indicator  (Goal ()) Proportion of
MSMEs that have access to financial services Baseline: % (2019) Target: (2025)
Financial Services Authority (annual) Indicator  Number of small-holding farmers
benefitting from financial inclusion Baseline 2020:  Target 2025: 150,000 Data
source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry The United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), UNIDO, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD),
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), UNOPS, the
United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), UNICEF, The World Bank, UNFPA,
UNV Statistics Indonesia (annual) Indicator  Number of businesses, led by young
people, which accelerate their capacity to create Sustainable Development Goals
impact Baseline 2019: 30 Target 2025: 150 Data source: Country office and
partner monitoring reports Indicator  (Goal *) Gini coefficient Baseline: 382
(2019) Target: 360 (2025) Statistics Indonesia (annual) Output  National
counterparts have enhanced technical capacities to formulate and implement
future strategies (Industry , circular economy) that are inclusive and job rich
(Strategic Plan output1) Indicator  (Goal *) Unemployment rate by sex Baseline:
28%, 26% (), 40% () (2019) Target: 34% (2025) Indicator  Policy preparedness to
implement circular economy Baseline 2020:  (Very partially: Analytical report on
potential of introducing circular economy) 10 DP/DCP/IDN/ Ministry of Energy and
Mineral Resources (annual) Target 2025:  (Largely: Existence of national
circular economy strategy and action plan) Data source: Analysis report;
endorsed action plan Indicator  (Goal *) Primary energy intensity (constant
price 2010, BoE billion Rupiah) Baseline: 141 (2019) Target: (2025) Platform
Usaha Sosial, Indonesian Future Leaders, Plan International Indicator  Extent to
which regulatory frameworks for responsible business are implemented Baseline
2011:  (Very partially: regulation decreed by govts) Target 2025:  (Largely:
self-assessments by private sector and informal negotiations for conflict
settlements established) Data source: Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs,
self- assessment reports, CSO reports financial institutions, energy sector
corporations, air conditioning and cooling system industries, artisanal and
small-scale gold miners, fashion and textile industries, plastic manufacturers,
Chamber of Commerce Indicator  Percentage of renewable energy in national energy
mix Baseline: 55% (2019) Target: 23% (2025) Ministry of Energy and Mineral
Resources (annual) Indicator  Extent to which institutions are prepared to
harness the development potential of Industry4 for SME-friendly growth pathways
Baseline:  (Very partially: Sector-wide information on impact of artificial
intelligence/automation available) Target:  (Largely: Digital infrastructure
available, regulatory obstacles addressed, micro and macro-policies for
harnessing opportunities, and increased budget for ICT and science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) education, especially for girls) Data source:
Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Corporate Affairs Output  Low emission and
climate-resilient objectives addressed in development plans and policies to
promote economic diversification and green growth (Strategic Plan output )
Indicator  Fourth National Communication submitted to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Baseline 2019: No/Not available,
only the Third National Communication is completed Target 2023: Yes, the Fourth
National Communication completed Data source: Ministry of National Development
Planning Indicator  Number of strategies for sustainable market diffusion of
renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:
Data source: Agreements with financial service providers Indicator  Number of
people with access to sustainable energy Baseline 2020: 562,885 Target 2025:
697,725 Data source: Minister of Energy 11 DP/DCP/IDN/ / NATIONAL PRIORITY:
Climate and disaster resilience UNSDCF Outcome /UNDP OUTCOME : Institutions,
communities and people actively apply and implement low carbon development,
sustainable natural resources management, and disaster resilience approaches
that are all gender sensitive STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome  – Resilience
National Disaster Management Agency (annual) Output  Gender-responsive measures
in place for conservation, and sustainable use of natural resources,
biodiversity and ecosystems (Strategic Plan output ) Regular: $445,400 Other:
$17 million Indicator  Number of high disaster risk provinces Baseline: 18
(2019) Target: 15 (2025) Ministries of Environment and Forests, Industry, Marine
Affairs and Fisheries, Agriculture, Energy and Mineral Resources; National
Development Planning Agency, National Disaster Management Agency, National
Agency for Technology Assessment and Application Indicator  Greenhouse gas
emissions mitigated from reduced deforestation Baseline 2017: approximately 650
million metric tons (deforestation rate  million hectares/year) Target 2025:
approximately 35 million metric tons annually Data source: Ministry of
Environment and Forests Indicator  (Goal *) Biennial Update Report Indonesia
Baseline:  (2019) Target:  (2025) Ministry of Environment and Forestry Frequency
(once in two years) Indicator  Reliable data on density of key endangered
species available Baseline 2020:  (Very partially: Density data on 25 endangered
species scattered, not standardized) Target 2025:  (Largely: Improved data
quality of five key endangered species available) Data source: Ministry of
Environment and Forestry Indicator  (Goal *) Total area of marine conservation
(million hectares) Baseline: (2019) Target: (2025) UNEP, FAO, UNIDO, UNV
Ministry of Environment and Forestry (annual) Partnerships in environmental
management for the seas of East Asia Indicator  Number of men and women who have
benefitted from improved governance of commodities productions at land and sea
Baseline (2019): 10,133 (30% women) Target 2025: 229,970 (30% women) Data
source: Ministry of Environment and Forests, Ministry of Maritime Affairs and
Fisheries IKEA, Unilever, Trans Jakarta, Blue Birds, Ocean Clean Up Output
Strengthened and expanded protection, governance and management of terrestrial
and aquatic ecosystems, habitats and species (Strategic Plan output1) Indicator
Non-protected areas brought under improved management for conservation and
sustainable use Baseline 2020: 42 million hectares of forest area with high
value of biodiversity not protected Target 2025:  million hectares of forest
outside protected area is designated as essential ecosystem area Data source:
Ministry of Environment and Forestry Indicator  Advance progress in fisheries
sector towards globally recognized certification 12 DP/DCP/IDN/ Baseline:  (Very
partially: Negligible progress in fisheries sector toward sustainable
certification) Target:  (Largely: Preparedness of three fisheries towards
certification) Data sources:  Indicator  Ecosystem approach to fisheries
management score for fisheries management area in Arafura sea Baseline 2019: 167
(moderate) Target 2025: 250 (good) Data source: Directorate General of Marine,
Coasts and Small Islands Output  Strengthened preparedness of institutions and
communities to climate change and disasters risks, including deployment of
sustainable solutions (Strategic Plan output ) Indicator  Improved multi-hazard
risk assessment and mapping Baseline 2020:  (Very partially: emphasis only on
risks related to geological disasters, flooding) Target 2025:  (Largely:
convergence methodology adopted (risks and vulnerabilities from geological and
climate induced disasters combined)) Data source: Indonesian risk assessment
information, National Disaster Management Authority Indicator  Number of high-
risk districts capacitated to identify, implement and monitor locally
appropriate risk management solutions, including for women and people living
with disabilities Baseline 2020: 12 Target 2025: 22 Data source: Indonesia
disaster risk index, National Disaster Management Authority Indicator  Number of
farmers who benefit from adaptive farming technology and access to credit and
market for climate smart agriculture Baseline 2020: ,864 (20% women) Target
2025: 250,000 (40% women) Data source: Ministry of Economic Affairs Output
Conservation and resilience strategies with local priorities (income and food
security) contribute to global environment benefits (Strategic Plan output ) 13
DP/DCP/IDN/ / Indicator  Number of adaptive landscape management strategies that
build social, economic and ecological resilience tested/adopted at the district
level Baseline 2020:  Target 2025: 10 Data source: Ministry of Environment and
Forestry Indicator  Number of Innovative incentives tested to reduce long- term
threat or actual estate-crop driven deforestation operational Baseline 2020:
Target 2025:  Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry NATIONAL
PRIORITY: Economic resilience; human resources development; climate and disaster
resilience UNSDCF Outcome /UNDP OUTCOME : Stakeholders adopt innovative and
integrated development solutions to accelerate advancement towards the
Sustainable Development Goals STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome  Regular: $668,100
Other: $57 million Indicator  Rank of global innovation index Baseline: 85
(2019) Target: 75 (2025) World Intellectual Property Organization (annual)
Output  Stronger alignment of existing financial flows and new investors with
sustainable development initiatives in Indonesia (Strategic Plan output )
Indonesia AID; Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Finance, Industry, Health, Social
Affairs; National Agency for Technology Assessment and Application, National
Zakat Agency Indicator  Number of blended financing initiatives initiated
Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Innovative Financing Lab Indicator
(Goal ) Proportion of expenditure on research and development in the national
budget Baseline: 25% (2019) Target: 42% (2025) UNESCO Institute for Statistics
(annual) Indicator  Number of religious institutions contributing to Sustainable
Development Goals funding gap Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Signed
agreements OCHA, UNICEF, UNEP, UN-Women, UNIDO, UNCDF, WFP, UNV Indonesian Aid
(annual) Indicator  (Goal ) Value of financial and technical assistance through
South- South and triangular cooperation (in trillions of rupiah) Baseline: 112
(2019) Target: 190 (2025) Indicator  Volume of resources for Sustainable
Development Goals raised through innovative public and private financing
(billions of United States dollars) Baseline 2019: 06 Target 2025:  Data source:
signed agreements Alliance of Indigenous Community Indonesia, organizations
working on disability issues Output  Policy environment strengthened to expand
public and private financing for the Sustainable Development Goals (Strategic
Plan output ) banks and financial institutions 14 DP/DCP/IDN/ Indicator  Number
of financing schemes initiated to support green, low-emission and sustainable
development Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Various ministries
Indicator  Percentage of government and private sector officials satisfied with
trainings for localizing the Sustainable Development Goals Baseline 2020: TBD
Target 2025: 80% (of total 30000 trained, 30%women) Data source: Pre/post
training surveys Output  Innovative technology solutions adopted for improved
public service delivery (Strategic Plan output ) Indicator  Number of provincial
governments using technology for delivery of immunization services Baseline
2020: 10 Target 2025: 34 Data source: Ministry of Health Indicator  Number of
technological solutions for climate and disaster risk management and
preparedness adopted by target groups, including people living with disabilities
Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Mobile application stores, digital
platforms Indicator  Number of technology solutions used for management of
harmful chemicals Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Ministries of
Industry, Ministry of Environment and Forestry Output  Partnerships strengthened
for innovative and inclusive South-South and triangular cooperation (Strategic
Plan output ) Indicator  Number of regulatory frameworks available for
governance of the Indonesian International Development Cooperation Baseline
2020:  Target 2025:  Data source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 15 DP/DCP/IDN/ /
Indicator  Number of thematic South-South and triangular cooperation platforms
functional Baseline 2020:  Target 2025:  Data Source: Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, Ministry of Finance Indicator  Number of countries receiving technical
support from centres of excellence for disaster management Baseline 2020:
Target 2025: 36 Data source: National Disaster Management Authority 16