NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY (Presidential Regulation No /2006 dated January 25, 2006)
WITH THE GRACE OF THE ALMIGHTY GOD THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBUC OF INDONESIA, To
stipulate: PRESIDENTIAL REGULATION ON NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Considering: ,
that, to ensure sufficiency of domestic energy sup- ply and to support
sustainable development, it is nec- essary to stipulate National Energy Policy
as guide- lines for national energy management; CHAPTER  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article  Hereinafter referred   as: , Energy is power exploited to do various
activities con- sisting of electricity, mechanics, and heat  that, based on the
considerations as meant in para- graph , it is necessary to stipulate
Presidential Regu- lation on National Energy Policy;  Source of Energy is part
of natural resources, amongst others, oil and gas, coal, water, geothermal, peat
moss, biomass, etc, directly or indirectly exploited as energy   view of:
Article  paragraph () of Constitution of 1945;  Certain sources of alternative
energy are certain  Law No 11 on General Rules on Mining Affairs (Statute Book
of 1967 No 22, Supplement   Stat- ute Book No 2831); sources of energy as
substitutes of oil fuel  New Energy is energy produced by new technology,
whether from renewable energy or unrenewable en- ergy, amongst others, hydrogen;
coal bed methane, liquefied coal, gasified coal, and nuclear +  Law No 15 on
Electricity (Statute Book of 1985 No 74, Supplement to Statute Book No 3317);
Law No 10 on Nuclear Power (Statute Book of 1997 No 23, Supplement to Statute
Book No 3676);  Renewable Energy is source of energy produced'from energy
sources, which will not naturally be used up and sustainable if managed
properly, amongst others, geothermal, biofuel, river flow, solar heat, wind,
bio- mass, biogas, sea waves, and sea-depth temperature,  Law No 22 on Oil and
Gas (Statute Book of 2001 No 136, Supplement to Statute Book No 41 52) as
already amended by Decision of the Constitutional Council No 002/PUU-/2003 dated
December 21, 2004 (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia No /2005);  ,
Energy Diversification is diversification of supply and exploitation of various
sources of energy in the frame- work of energy supply optimization  Energy
Conversion is exploitation of energy efficiently and rationally without reducing
exploitation of im- portant energy, which is really needed  Law No 27 on
Geothermal Power (Statute Book of 2003 No, 115, Supplement to Statute Book No,
4327);  ~      Elasticity is ratio between energy consump-  Law No 25 on
National Development Planning System (Statute Book of 2004 No 104, Supplement
Statute Book No 4421); tion and economic growth,  Economic Price is cost
production of per unit of energy including cost of environment and cost of
margin,        : CHAPTER     Business News 7323110--2006 CHAPTER II PURPOSES AND
TARGETS OF NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Article  ()The goal of the National Energy
Policy is to direct efforts to the creation of sufficiency of domestic en-
Stipulation of policy on energy price adjusted to- ward economic price in
tonsideration of the abil- ity of small enterprises and aid to the poor within
certain period  Environmental conservation by application of sus- tainable
development principles ergy supply ()The supporting policy as meant in paragraph
() con- ()Targets of the National Energy Policy are: sists of:  Development of
energy infrastructure including  Achievement of energy elasticity of less than
one () in 2005; increase of consumers access to energy;  Creation of mix
(printer) energy optimally in 2020, namely the role of each type of energy in
na- tional energy consumption: ) Oil becomes less than twenty percent (20%); )
Gas becomes less than thirty percent (30%); ) Coal becomes less than thirty-
three percent  Partnership between government and business world;  Social
empowerment;  Development of research and development and education and training
(33%); Biofuel becomes more than five percent (%); Geothermal becomes more than
five percent (%); Other new energy and renewable energy, par- ticularly biomass,
nuclear, hydropower, solar power, and wind power becomes more than five percent
(%); Article  ()The Minister of Energy and Mineral Resources shall stipulate
National Energy Management Blueprint af- ter being discussed in the National
Energy Coordi- nating Board ()The National Energy Management Blueprint as meant
in paragraph () shall at least contain:  Policy regarding assurance of
sufficiency of do- ) Liquified coal becomes more than two percent (%) mestic
energy supply;  Public service obligation policy;  Management of energy sources
and the exploita- CHAPTER 111 POLICY STEPS Article  ()The targets as meant in
Article  paragraph () shall be achieved through main policy and supporting
policy tion thereof ()The blueprint as meant in paragraph () shall be- come
foundation for arrangement of policy for de- velopment and exploitation of each
kind of energy ()The main policy as meant in paragraph () consists CHAPTER
ENERGY PRICE Article  ()Price of energy shall be adjusted gradually until  of:
Energy supply, by: ) Assurance of availability of domestic energy supply; )
Optimization of energy production; ) Realization of energy conversion certain
time toward its economic price ()The gradual adjustment of price as meant in
para- graph () must create an optimal effect on energy diversification  Energy
exploitation, by: ) Energy exploitation efficiency;  ) Energy diversification /)
Further     Business News 7323--2006 ()Further provisions regarding the giving
of facilities and incentives as meant in paragraph () will be stipu- lated in
regulations of the relevant Ministers ()Further provisions regarding energy
price as meant in paragraphs () and () and support to low-eco- nomic society as
meant in Article  paragraph () clause  shall be realized pursuant to the
applicable laws CHAPTER VI CLOSING PROVISIONS Article  CHAPTER  FACILITfES AND
INCENTIVES Article  ()The Minister of Energy and Minerat Resources shall This
Regulation shall be valid from the date it is stipulated Stipulated in Jakarta
On January 25, 2006 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA Sgd DR  SUSILO
BAMBANG YUDHOYONO decide certain alternative energy sources' ()The government
may give facilities and incentives to operators of energy conservation and
developers of certain alternative energy sources as meant in para- graph () ----
---(  )===-