A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search
Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search
Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or
sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All A
Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All                                 World
Energy Outlook Special Report                              Download pdf This
report is part of  World Energy Outlook 2023
Overview                                                      About this report
Nearly one in three people, the vast majority of them in the poorest regions of
the world, still lack access to clean cooking facilities, with major
ramifications for public health, local environments and socio-economic
development. Inhaling hazardous smoke from traditional stoves and open fires
causes millions of premature deaths annually, disproportionately affecting women
and children. The arduous task of collecting firewood also hinders educational
and employment opportunities and strains natural resources – compounding costs
for vulnerable populations. The International Energy Agency (IEA) and the
African Development Bank Group have joined forces to address this critical issue
in a special report, A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All. While covering
global trends, the report pays special attention to the needs in Africa, where
they are most pressing. It sheds light on the current state of clean cooking,
the costs of inaction, and the benefits of boosting access in line with United
Nations Sustainable Development Goal 7. Countries like China, India and
Indonesia have made commendable strides in disseminating clean cooking
technologies. Yet in sub-Saharan Africa, there are a rising number of people
without access to cleaner stoves and fuels, largely because population growth is
outpacing gains. This could hinder broader development efforts, making it
imperative to elevate clean cooking as a policy priority. The report presents
country-by-country assessments and an outlook for clean cooking under existing
policies, offering a roadmap towards universal access. By identifying the
required policies, technologies, investments and implementation efforts, the
report seeks to galvanise international support for clean cooking initiatives,
informing conversations ahead of the UN Sustainable Development Goal Summit, the
African Climate Action Summit, and the COP28 Climate Change Conference taking
place later in 2023.  Published July 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share
Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online 2.0
Graphic: Differences in clean cooking technologies read Read online
Related content      All results circle-arrow World Energy Outlook 2022
Flagship report — October 2022                  The Energy Mix Get updates on
the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2023),  A Vision for Clean Cooking Access for All , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/a-vision-for-clean-cooking-access-for-all, Licence:
CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter
Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email
Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.