Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members – Analysis - IEA IEA
Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in
G7 Members Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members  is a new report by the
International Energy Agency that focuses on the implementation of policies aimed
at drastically lowering CO 2  emissions from heavy industries in the G7 and
beyond. This work, requested by Germany’s 2022 G7 Presidency, builds on analysis
from the IEA’s  Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector . It
follows  Achieving Net Zero Electricity Sectors in G7 Members , produced as an
input to the UK’s G7 Presidency in 2021. This report focuses on two key areas
for achieving net zero heavy industry sectors in G7 members, both of which are
priority areas for Germany’s 2022 G7 Presidency. The first is a toolbox of
policies and financing mechanisms to initiate and sustain the industry sector
transition. The second is a series of common and practicable definitions of what
constitutes near zero emission steel and cement production, a key step to
establishing future policy mechanisms, irrespective of the exact mitigation
pathway or the specific technologies chosen. The report is designed to inform
policy makers, material producers and consumers, investors, leading sectoral
initiatives and the research community in the lead up to the G7 Climate and
Energy Ministerial in May 2022, and beyond. Published May 2022 License CC BY 4.0
Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read
Read online 2.0  Recommendations for the G7 read Read online The Energy Mix Get
updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  Achieving Net Zero Heavy Industry Sectors in G7 Members ,
IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/achieving-net-zero-heavy-industry-
sectors-in-g7-members, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report
Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on
LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription
successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any
time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.