Advancing Decarbonisation through Clean Electricity Procurement – Analysis - IEA
IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Advancing Decarbonisation through Clean
Electricity Procurement Advancing Decarbonisation through Clean Electricity
Procurement Download pdf                             Overview
About this report The number of corporations announcing clean electricity
pledges has increased substantially in recent years, with many companies setting
specific goals to meet some or all of their electricity demand with clean
supply. These goals can support new capacity in clean generation, helping to
boost overall shares in power systems. Increasingly, clean electricity goals can
be specified in different ways; this can have implications for the clean
technologies procured, the amount and location of procurement, and the resulting
emissions reduction. In some regions, corporates have a range of options to
choose from when purchasing clean electricity; in other regions, legal and
regulatory barriers still constrain engagement in corporate procurement.  This
report examines the options available and the ways in which they contribute to
decarbonisation and, ultimately, net zero electricity goals. Using the IEA’s
regional power system models for India and Indonesia, the report applies
quantitative analysis to examine the implications of different procurement
strategies for emissions reduction, procurement costs and technology deployment.
A key finding is that when companies set more granular goals – such as matching
their electricity demand hourly (rather than annually as has been the dominant
practice) – it can stimulate deployment of the wider portfolio of flexible
technologies needed for net zero transitions in the power sector. The report
aims to guide corporates in choosing impactful ways to procure clean
electricity. It also highlights the roles of policy makers, regulators, system
operators and network owners and operators in increasing the availability and
impact of corporate procurement options. The final chapter offers targeted
recommendations for different stakeholder groups. Published November 2022
License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary
read Read online The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis,
data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our
other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes
Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events
Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Advancing
Decarbonisation through Clean Electricity Procurement , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/advancing-decarbonisation-through-clean-electricity-
procurement, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog
Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.