Bottlenecks & Breakthroughs: Advancing Gender Equity in African Clean Energy |
Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet Skip to main content   Menu
Close                       Who We Are                      About GEAPP Our Team
Our Board Our Partners GEAPP Leadership Council                       What We Do
How We Work Where We Work Our Impact Our Solutions                       News
All News Press Releases Blogs Reports Multimedia Events
Who We Are                      About GEAPP Our Team Our Board Our Partners
GEAPP Leadership Council                       What We Do
How We Work Where We Work Our Impact Our Solutions                       News
All News Press Releases Blogs Reports Multimedia Events Get Involved Learn more
about how you can support the mission of the Global Energy Alliance for People
and Planet.   General Inquiries info@energyalliance.org Media Inquiries
media@energyalliance.org Career Opportunities careers@energyalliance.org
Bottlenecks & Breakthroughs: Advancing Gender Equity in African Clean Energy
Reports                   Global                  14.09.2023 Shortlist Summary
Historically, employees in the African clean energy sector have been
predominantly male – but that is slowly changing. Clean energy companies across
Africa are making concerted efforts to diversify their workforces, making a
particular effort to attract, hire, and retain women. Companies have broadened
marketing approaches, innovated in how they manage applications and interviews,
investigated biases in outreach and hiring, developed gender action plans, and
looked for other ways to increase female workforce representation. These efforts
have been driven by greater pushes from investors and funders, as well as a
growing body of research showing that diverse teams perform better. Shortlist
has sought to accelerate this trend, implementing a range of gender-lensed
talent programs over the last five years with female representation over 50%,
well above the current industry benchmark of 32% female employees. Under
Shortlist’s inaugural “Women For Green Jobs” program, funded by The Global
Energy Alliance for People & Planet (GEAPP), we are supporting more than 750
women transitioning into clean energy careers, and working with Value For Women
and other partners to promote gender equity in clean energy workspaces and
success on the job. Through this work we will give young women critical first-
hand work experience, offer job search support, and train hundreds of women with
the technical skill needed to take on roles in finance, operations and
maintenance, and engineering. Despite this progress, women still face unique
barriers and bottlenecks to accessing jobs in the clean energy sector. This
report tries to further illuminate these challenges, highlighting the voices and
experience of women who are breaking into the clean energy sector, and draws
upon the broader literature on the topic as well as our own hands-on hiring and
program experience and conversations with dozens of sector employees and
experts. Within this report, readers will find a framework for understanding the
causes of gender inequity in African clean energy, as well as stories and
perspectives from current, former, and prospective female employees in the clean
energy sector to better understand how such barriers hinder access and success
to clean energy jobs, while also hinting at the types of approaches and
interventions which may help. Finally, we draw conclusions on some areas of
opportunity as we seek to create a more equitable and inclusive clean energy
sector for female employees, and all under-represented candidate segments. We
hope that these insights help companies, investors and donors reflect on which
gender bottlenecks their work is addressing and where there may be opportunities
to further enhance gender equity in the clean energy workforce. Key Facts This
report was funded by The Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet, as part
of the “Women for Green Jobs” (W4GJ) programme implemented by Shortlist with
support from Value for Women. The goal of W4GJ is to ensure that more women are
accessing and succeeding in clean energy careers in Africa, specifically
targeting job placements, career support, and employer-level interventions
across seven countries in sub-Saharan Africa.                       Download PDF
Explore More View all Blog Empowering Change: Transforming Gender Dynamics in
Africa’s Clean Energy Sector Empowering Change: Transforming Gender Dynamics in
Africa’s Clean Energy Sector 13.09.2023               Global              Press
Release Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet forges critical
partnerships in India to Accelerate Clean Energy Transition Global Energy
Alliance for People and Planet forges critical partnerships in India to
Accelerate Clean Energy Transition 03.05.2023               India
Press Release Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet launches energy
program in Malawi to achieve universal energy access… Global Energy Alliance for
People and Planet launches energy program in Malawi to achieve universal energy
access… 18.10.2022               Malawi              View all
Media Center                            Privacy Policy
FAQ                            Financial Statements              Contact General
Inquiries                   info@energyalliance.org                  Media
Inquiries                   media@energyalliance.org                  Career
Opportunities                   careers@energyalliance.org                  Stay
Connected               © 2024 Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet