CCUS Legal and Regulatory Database – Data Tools - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free All data explorers chevron-left-20 CCUS Legal and
Regulatory Database                 Database of laws and regulations that
support a framework for CCUS development
Last updated  7 Jul 2022                                      Cite Share Cite
data tool Close dialog IEA (2022),  CCUS Legal and Regulatory Database , IEA,
Paris https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/ccus-legal-and-
regulatory-database Copy to clipboard Share this data tool Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Context Successful deployment of
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) relies on the establishment of
legal and regulatory frameworks to ensure the effective stewardship of CCUS
activities and the safe and secure storage of CO 2 . Several countries have
already developed comprehensive legal and regulatory frameworks for CCUS. These
form a valuable knowledge base for the growing number of countries that have
identified a role for CCUS in meeting their climate goals.   Overview The IEA
CCUS legal and regulatory database provides examples of legislative approaches
to CCUS from around the world. It is organised by priority issues impacting CCUS
activities - such as permitting and authorisation or long-term liability -
across various regions, countries and states/ provinces. Where applicable, the
base legislation from which the relevant law or regulation is derived is
referenced and linked. The database supports Legal and Regulatory Frameworks for
CCUS: An IEA CCUS Handbook, a resource on establishing and updating legal and
regulatory frameworks for CCUS. The Handbook identifies priority issues that
frameworks should address for CCUS deployment, presenting global case studies
and examining how different jurisdictions have approached these issues.
Acknowledgements and disclaimer The IEA would like to thank the SciencesPo
University Legal Clinic for undertaking substantial research and analysis to
support this database. Disclaimer: This database is intended to be a resource of
CCUS legal and regulatory approaches. Though comprehensive, the database is not
meant to be an exhaustive catalogue of all legislation and regulation related to
CCUS, nor is it meant to stand in place of the cited legislation. As such, users
should consult the original legislation linked in the entries for further
information.         Analysis      All analysis circle-arrow Technology report
Legal and Regulatory Frameworks for CCUS An IEA CCUS Handbook         July 2022
The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for
subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom
of any IEA newsletter.