Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2021 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2021
Clean Energy Transitions Programme 2021                                 Annual
report 2021                              Download pdf
Overview                                                      About this report
The Clean Energy Transitions Programme (CETP) has enabled the International
Energy Agency (IEA) to significantly expand and deepen its global engagement and
to support emerging economies’ transition to clean, resilient, sustainable
energy systems. In 2021 the CETP marked its fourth full year since its launch at
the 2017 IEA Ministerial Meeting, and the programme has steadily grown in size
and impact. The CETP Annual Report 2021 aims to provide all CETP donors and
partners with insights on the programme’s accomplishments, outputs and efforts
across all areas of work. The report highlights activities and achievements for
each priority country and region (Brazil, Mexico, Latin America, the People’s
Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Southeast Asia and Africa). It then
discusses cross-cutting activities, implemented globally. Recognising the
excellent results achieved under the CETP, which are presented in the Annual
Report 2021 and previous editions, at the IEA Ministerial Meeting in March 2022
representatives from 15 IEA member countries and the European Commission, on
behalf of the European Union, reaffirmed their commitment through the CETP to
further strengthen IEA capabilities to accelerate the transformation towards a
global net zero energy system, in line with the IEA’s strengthened clean energy
mandates and Programme of Work. Published March 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share
Cite The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and
events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Clean Energy
Transitions Programme 2021 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/clean-
energy-transitions-programme-2021, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share
this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.