Credible pathways to 1.5°C – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Credible pathways to 1.5°C Credible pathways
to 1.5°C                                 Four pillars for action in the 2020s
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report To support preparations for upcoming major events such as the
COP28 Climate Change Conference, the IEA is releasing  Credible Pathways to 1.5
°C: Four pillars for action in the 2020s , a new report on the key actions
needed to keep within reach the Paris Agreement’s target of limiting the global
temperature rise to 1.5 °C. That possibility is narrowing rapidly, with energy-
related CO2 emissions continuing to rise in 2022 despite declining costs for
clean energy technologies and the dynamic deployment of renewables, electric
cars and other solutions.  Declining costs for clean energy technologies and new
policies have shaved around 1 °C from projected 2100 warming compared to the
pre‐Paris baseline. The ambitions that countries have put on the table go a
significant way to meeting the 1.5 °C goal. If implemented on time and in full,
countries’ net zero pledges would be sufficient to hold warming to around 1.7 °C
in 2100. The key question is therefore what needs to be done now to strengthen
near‐term action to put the world on a credible pathway consistent with the 1.5
°C goal. Four pillars are key: In the energy sector, decarbonising electricity,
accelerating energy efficiency and electrification are the critical tools.
Capacity additions of renewables need to triple from 2022 levels by 2030,
reaching around 1 200 GW annually, representing on average 90% of new generation
capacity each year. Electric car sales should reach a market share of around 60%
by 2030, while zero emissions medium and heavy freight trucks should reach a
market share of around 35% by the same year. Reducing deforestation to net zero
by 2030  – in line with The Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and Land Use
– provides the largest share of CO2 emissions reductions from the land‐use
sector. Tackling non‐CO2 emissions  is vital to limiting peak warming. Assuming
strong action on CO2, meeting or exceeding commitments like the Kigali Amendment
on HFCs and the Global Methane Pledge, and acting on non‐CO2 emissions from
agriculture, could make the difference between a scenario which substantially
overshoots 1.5 °C, risking triggering irreversible climate tipping points, and
one which does not. Even in a low overshoot scenario,  carbon capture and
storage and atmospheric carbon dioxide removal  will be required to mitigate and
compensate hard‐to‐abate residual emissions. Projects capturing around 1.2 Gt
CO2 by 2030 need to be implemented, against the roughly 0.3 Gt CO2 currently
planned for 2030. A credible pathway to the 1.5 °C goal needs strong, immediate
action on each of these four pillars, to deliver immediate and rapid emissions
reductions; strong contributions from all countries, especially advanced and
major economies; and clear policy signals to enable actors to anticipate and
achieve change.    Published April 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Related content      All Reports News & Commentaries All results circle-arrow
Global heat pump sales continue double-digit growth
Commentary — 31 March 2023                  CO2 Emissions in 2022
Flagship report — March 2023                  Energy Technology Perspectives
2023                     Flagship report — January 2023                  The
Future of Heat Pumps                     Technology report — November 2022
World Energy Outlook 2022                     Flagship report — October 2022
What does net-zero emissions by 2050 mean for bioenergy and land use?
Report — 31 May 2021                  Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2023),  Credible pathways to 1.5°C , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/credible-pathways-to-150c, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy
to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.