Introducing the Critical Minerals Policy Tracker – Analysis - IEA IEA Close
Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Introducing the Critical Minerals Policy
Tracker Introducing the Critical Minerals Policy Tracker This report is part of
Critical Minerals                             Overview
Methodology                                                      About this
report As the world transitions towards net zero emissions, the rapid scale-up
of clean energy technologies is expected to boost demand for many minerals and
metals, including lithium, nickel, cobalt, graphite, copper, aluminium and rare
earth elements. To ensure that supplies are secure, reliable, sustainable and
responsible enough to support clean energy transitions, governments will need to
implement effective policies and regulations to create incentives for companies
along the clean energy supply chain. This Critical Minerals Policy Tracker is
intended as a tool to help governments explore new critical mineral policies in
the three key policy areas of: Ensuring supply reliability and resiliency.
Promoting exploration, production and innovation. Encouraging sustainable and
responsible practices. Published November 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Online table of contents 1.0  Key findings read Read online 2.0  Ensuring supply
reliability and resiliency read Read online 3.0  Promoting exploration,
production and innovation read Read online 4.0  Encouraging sustainable and
responsible practices read Read online 5.0  Acknowledgements read Read online
Critical Minerals Policy Tracker  Since its launch in November 2022 covering 25
countries and 200 policies, the Tracker has expanded to include over 35
countries and 450 polices, with the expansion focusing on the third policy area
on reducing environmental, social and governance impacts. Though not exhaustive,
it aims to offer a valuable overview of evolving mineral supply chain
governance. Updated yearly. Use data explorer card data set We have identified
policies, laws and regulations for inclusion in the Tracker through desk
research and stakeholder submissions. Research has focused on identifying
policies in place within each of the focus countries and regions. For the 2023
update, we circulated a questionnaire among all IEA member countries via the
IEA’s Working Party on Critical Minerals (CMWP) to identify potential policies
for inclusion. The dataset was further refined following feedback from country
delegates and external researchers. Download the methodology circle-arrow Policy
Tracker Methodology         Related content      All Data Reports All results
circle-arrow Sustainable and Responsible Critical Mineral Supply Chains Guidance
for policy makers                     Technology report — December 2023
Critical Minerals Policy Tracker Explore key policies related to critical
minerals needed for the energy transition Data explorer card data set World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Critical Minerals Market Review 2023                     Flagship report — July
2023                  The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions
Flagship report — May 2021                  Previous slide Next slide The Energy
Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered
twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse
Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data &
statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs
arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook
linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report
Close dialog IEA (2022),  Introducing the Critical Minerals Policy Tracker ,
IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/introducing-the-critical-minerals-policy-
tracker, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog
Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.