Demand-side Data and Energy Efficiency Indicators – Analysis - IEA IEA Close
Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation
Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology
or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport
Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon
Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics
Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary
Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's
War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy
Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the
energy system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium
Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland
Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Demand-side Data and Energy Efficiency
Indicators Demand-side Data and Energy Efficiency Indicators
A guide to designing a national roadmap                              Download
pdf                             Overview
About this report Energy efficiency indicators are key to tracking energy
efficiency progress for a variety of purposes (e.g. policy making, monitoring
targets, making energy projections, developing scenarios and planning, and
benchmarking). This guide is for professionals and decision makers, describing
options and good practices for the collection of energy end-use data and the
development of energy efficiency indicators at the national level. In parallel,
it can also be used as an assessment tool, helping countries/economies to locate
their starting point, and to identify appropriate targets according to their
respective national interests and priorities.  The roadmap presented here
encompasses the results of a consultation exercise across countries and presents
good practices and practical tips. It acknowledges that there is no single
solution, but a number of possible pathways instead, depending on national
contexts and priorities. The roadmap is a strategic document looking at the
whole value chain in the development of efficiency indicators, from the initial
point where the need for data and indicators arises up to the later
dissemination and data use stages, and is meant to be a useful resource for
practitioners across the globe in the development of energy efficiency
indicators. Published February 2023 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite Related
publications Energy Efficiency Indicators manuals circle-arrow Additional
downloads                                     Full report (Russian)
Download "Full report (Russian)"         Related content      All results
circle-arrow Energy End-uses and Efficiency Indicators Data Explorer Explore
energy and emission data by country, end-uses and product, from 2000 onwards in
four sectors (residential, services, industry and transport) for IEA member
countries and beyond Data explorer card data set National Data Collection
Practices Methodologies to collect data on energy end-uses across sectors
(transport, industry, residential, services) Data explorer card data set
Previous slide Next slide The Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news,
analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample
Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system
Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries
Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east
Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024
Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Demand-side Data
and Energy Efficiency Indicators , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/demand-side-data-and-energy-efficiency-indicators,
Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on
Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn
Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful Close
dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking
the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.