Direct Air Capture 2022 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search About News
Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy system  Chevron
down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector Fossil Fuels
Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry Buildings Energy
Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation
Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and
Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron down Understand
the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate Change Global
Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global
Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions
Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency
Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access Energy and
Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy system by
country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia
Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea
Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic
Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom United States
Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia Association
countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal
Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data Chevron
down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand and
manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data sets
Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for download
Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government policies and
measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart published across all
IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron down Read the latest
analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024                     Fuel
report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast
to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024                  World
Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Direct Air Capture 2022 Direct Air Capture
2022                                 A key technology for net zero
Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Direct air capture plays an important and growing role in net
zero pathways. Capturing CO 2  directly from the air and permanently storing it
removes the CO 2  from the atmosphere, providing a way to balance emissions that
are difficult to avoid, including from long-distance transport and heavy
industry, as well as offering a solution for legacy emissions. Air-captured CO 2
can also be used as a climate-neutral feedstock for a range of products that
require a source of carbon. In the IEA Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario,
direct air capture technologies capture more than 85 Mt of CO 2  in 2030 and
around 980 MtCO 2  in 2050, requiring a large and accelerated scale-up from
almost 0.01 MtCO 2  today. Currently 18 direct air capture facilities are
operating in Canada, Europe and the United States. The first large-scale direct
air capture plant of up to 1 MtCO 2 /year is in advanced development and is
expected to be operating in the United States by the mid-2020s. This report
explores the growing momentum behind direct air capture, together with the
opportunities and challenges for scaling up the deployment of direct air capture
technologies consistent with net zero goals. It considers the current status of
these technologies, their potential for cost reductions, their future energy
needs, and the optimal locations for direct air capture facilities. Finally, the
report identifies the key drivers for direct air capture investment and
priorities for policy action. Published April 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share Cite
Online table of contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice
monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics
Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics
Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-
east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin
youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close
dialog IEA (2022),  Direct Air Capture 2022 , IEA, Paris
https://www.iea.org/reports/direct-air-capture-2022, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to
clipboard Share this report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on
Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on
Print   Print Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing.
You can unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.