Energy Technology Perspectives 2023 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Energy Technology Perspectives 2023 Energy
Technology Perspectives 2023 Download pdf                             Overview
Previous editions
10 About this report The Covid-19 pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have
led to major disruptions to global energy and technology supply chains. Soaring
prices for energy and materials, and shortages of critical minerals,
semiconductors and other components are posing potential roadblocks for the
energy transition. Against this backdrop,  Energy Technology Perspectives 2023
( ETP-2023 ) provides analysis on the risks and opportunities surrounding the
development and scaling up of clean energy and technology supply chains in the
years ahead, viewed through the lenses of energy security, resilience and
sustainability. Building on the latest energy, commodity and technology data –
as well as recent energy, climate and industrial policy announcements –
ETP-2023  explores critical questions around clean energy and technology supply
chains. What are the main bottlenecks for efforts to scale up those supply
chains sustainably and at the pace needed? How might governments shape their
industrial policy in response to new energy security concerns for clean energy
transitions? Which clean technology areas are at greatest risk of failing to
develop secure and resilient supply chains? And what can governments do to
mitigate such risks while meeting broader development goals? The  Energy
Technology Perspectives  series is the IEA’s flagship technology publication,
which has been key source of insights on all matters relating to energy
technology since 2006.  ETP-2023  will be an indispensable guidebook for
decision-makers in governments and industry seeking to tap into the
opportunities offered by the emerging new energy economy, while navigating
uncertainties and safeguarding energy security.  Published January 2023 License
CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Executive
summary read Read online 2.0  Energy supply chains between transition and
disruption read Read online 3.0  Clean energy supply chains vulnerabilities read
Read online 4.0  Mining and materials production read Read online 5.0
Technology manufacturing and installation read Read online 6.0  Enabling
infrastructure read Read online 7.0  Policy priorities to address supply chain
risks read Read online The energy world's new industrial dawn ETP Clean Energy
Technology Guide  The ETP Clean Energy Technology Guide is an interactive
framework that contains information for over 650 individual technology designs
and components across the whole energy system that contribute to achieving the
goal of net-zero emissions. Use data explorer card data set         Previous
editions                                      Energy Technology Perspectives
2020                              arrow-right
Clean Energy Innovation                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2017                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2016                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2015                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2014                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2012                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2010                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2008                              arrow-right
Energy Technology Perspectives 2006                              arrow-right The
Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2023),  Energy Technology
Perspectives 2023 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-technology-
perspectives-2023, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.