Facilitating a Cleaner and Energy Efficient Phosphate Chemicals Industry in
China | United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
China
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get involved
Global                                                                 Nav
toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get involved
Locations         Home China Projects         Facilitating a Cleaner and Energy
Efficient Phosphate Chemicals Industry in China              PhosChemEE
Facilitating a Cleaner and Energy Efficient Phosphate Chemicals Industry in
China                 Summary       In cooperation with the Ministry of Industry
& Information Technology and the Ministry of Natural Resources, the objective of
the Facilitating Cleaner and Energy Efficient Phosphate Chemicals Industry in
China (PhosChemEE) Project is the facilitation of the application of low carbon
and energy efficient technologies in the phosphate chemicals industry (PCI) in
China. The strategy is to remove the barriers that hinder the promotion and
deployment of these technologies, including applicable energy efficient
techniques, measures and practices in cleaner production in the three sub-
sectors of China's PCI, namely: (1) phosphate ore mining and refining; (2)
phosphate chemicals production; and (3) the processing of by-products and waste
from phosphate mining/refining, and phosphate chemicals production. The project
is comprised of three components, one for each sub-sector. Each project
component is comprised of activities addressing the various barriers (i.e.,
policy/regulatory, institutional, technical, financial, information and
awareness) to the application of low carbon and energy efficient technologies in
each sub-sector of the Chinese PCI. Achieving the project’s objectives will
contribute to China’s climate change mitigation targets and the United Nations
2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), specifically SDG 3: Good health and
well-being; SDG 7: Sustainable Energy; SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and
Infrastructure; and SDG 13: Climate Action.         Background       The PCI in
China faces several challenges in in its three main sub-sectors including
phosphate mining, chemical production process, and utilization of the industry
by-products. The sector’s carbon emissions in China is manifested in three
aspects, which are also the key problems to be solved in this project.
1)Phosphate rock mining is facing severe challenges because of its ecological
environment impact; 2) phosphate chemicals production is facing severe
challenges because of high energy consumption and CO2 emissions; 3) the
utilization of the industry by-products, particularly phosphogypsum is
insufficient.                   Project Outcome       Green and low carbon
development and operation of phosphate mines Green and low carbon design and
operation of phosphate chemicals production facilities Green and low carbon
design and operation of waste management systems in the phosphate chemicals
industry                   GESI Component       GEN2: The project has integrated
a gender-responsive and inclusive perspective into project management and
implementation procedures. The project has taken GESI strictly into
consideration and has prioritized its focus on women, the poor and the elderly.
    Related Materials Project Identification Form Download Purchase Order
Summary Read more Project Results Read more Project Tenders Read more Activity
Web Page Read more Impact START DATE December 2020 END DATE December 2022 STATUS
Completed PROJECT OFFICE China IMPLEMENTING PARTNER United Nations Development
Programme DONORS Global Environment Fund Trustee TOTAL CONTRIBUTIONS $312,811
DELIVERY IN PREVIOUS YEARS 2021 $80,509 2022 $118,270 Full Project information
Search           Found  0  results.            Did you mean   ?             Sort
by            Relevancy Date This site All UNDP United Nations Development
Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                             Our Team
Legal Framework
Funding                                                            Our Partners
What we do                                                      Our Focus
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Impact                                                      News Centre
Publications                                                            Projects
Blogs                                                            Stories
Get involved                                                      Careers
Procurement                                                            Contact
Us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit social or
environmental link Scam alert Terms of Use twitter wechat weibo youtube youtube
© 2024 United Nations Development Programme