Global Supply Chains of EV Batteries – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Global Supply Chains of EV Batteries Global
Supply Chains of EV Batteries Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Electric car sales powered through 2021 and have remained
strong so far in 2022, but ensuring future growth will demand greater efforts to
diversify battery manufacturing and critical mineral supplies to reduce the
risks of bottlenecks and price rises. In the short term, the greatest obstacles
to continued strong EV sales are soaring prices for some critical minerals
essential for battery manufacturing, as well as supply chain disruptions caused
by Russia’s attack on Ukraine and by continued Covid-19 lockdowns in some parts
of China. In the longer term, greater efforts are needed to roll out enough
charging infrastructure to service the expected growth in electric car sales.
This special report by the International Energy Agency that examines EV battery
supply chains from raw materials all the way to the finished product, spanning
different segments of manufacturing steps: materials, components, cells and
electric vehicles. It focuses on the challenges and opportunities that arise
when developing secure, resilient and sustainable supply chains for electric
vehicle batteries and reviews government targets and strategies in this area.
This special report serves as input to the special report on  Securing Clean
Energy Technology Supply Chains . Published July 2022 License CC BY 4.0 Share
Cite         Related content      All results circle-arrow Securing Clean Energy
Technology Supply Chains                     Technology report — July 2022
Solar PV Global Supply Chains An IEA Special Report                     Fuel
report — July 2022                  Global EV Outlook 2022
Technology report — May 2022                  Previous slide Next slide The
Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Global Supply Chains
of EV Batteries , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/global-supply-chains-
of-ev-batteries, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.