Interoperability of distributed energy resources: Benefits, challenges, and
solutions | The Carbon Trust       Skip to main content      Global Europe
(English) Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America (English)
Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Main Menu Who we are Overview Our
global experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career opportunities
Overview Internships What we do Overview Net Zero transition planning and
delivery Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation Climate action
and Net Zero planning Climate change risks, opportunities and TCFD alignment
Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting and reporting Implementation planning and
execution Organisational verification Plastic Packaging Framework Route to Net
Zero Standard Supply chain engagement Sustainable finance Target setting The
Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to Landfill Product carbon footprint
labelling Overview Carbon neutral verification Footprint label – certified
organisations PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint label Market transformation
Overview Buildings and construction Clean energy access Clean hydrogen Climate
policy E-mobility Energy efficiency Energy Erneuerbare Energie Heat
decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and metals Offshore wind
Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work and impact Overview
Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview 从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News
and insights News Events Insights Tenders Net Zero Intelligence Unit Contact
Global Europe (English) Europa (Deutsch) Africa (English) Latin America
(English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国 Search Search Who we are
Overview Our global experts Our history Our values and commitments Our career
opportunities Overview Internships What we do Overview Net Zero transition
planning and delivery Overview Avoided emissions Beyond value chain mitigation
Climate action and Net Zero planning Climate change risks, opportunities and
TCFD alignment Decarbonisation strategy Footprinting and reporting
Implementation planning and execution Organisational verification Plastic
Packaging Framework Route to Net Zero Standard Supply chain engagement
Sustainable finance Target setting The Carbon Trust Standard for Zero Waste to
Landfill Product carbon footprint labelling Overview Carbon neutral verification
Footprint label – certified organisations PAS 2080 Product carbon footprint
label Market transformation Overview Buildings and construction Clean energy
access Clean hydrogen Climate policy E-mobility Energy efficiency Energy
Erneuerbare Energie Heat decarbonisation Heat networks Industry Mining and
metals Offshore wind Sustainable cooling Transport Venture acceleration Our work
and impact Overview Impact stories Guides, reports and tools Overview
从英国能源技术清单（ETL）看英国节能技术推广 News and insights News Events Insights Tenders Net Zero
Intelligence Unit Contact Global Europe (English) Europa (Deutsch) Africa
(English) Latin America (English) Latinoamérica (Español) Asia (English) 中国
Breadcrumb Home Our work and impact                       Interoperability of
distributed energy resources: Benefits, challenges, and solutions
Our work and impact Interoperability of distributed energy resources: Benefits,
challenges, and solutions Global overview of interoperability challenges facing
energy transitions. This report was produced for Integrate to Zero as part of
their broader work to accelerate energy transitions. Image   Share Overview This
report considers the benefits of interoperable distributed energy resources
(DERs) for residential and commercial consumers and the interoperability
challenges that these users face when integrating devices with the grid, or for
specific use-cases (grid-trade, back-up power, ancillary services). DERs are
integral to the energy transition and play an increasingly important role in the
modern power grid. With DERs installed, consumers can experience a range of
benefits such as lower energy bills, cheaper EV refuelling, and access to backup
power in a blackout. DERs can also provide a range of grid-side benefits, from
balancing variable supply and demand, to providing black start capability. 
However, to maximise the benefits available to the consumer and the grid, DERs
must also be to some extent ‘interoperable’ – capable of communicating and
coordinating with other pieces of hardware, software, and various energy market
actors. Interoperability is widely considered a pre-requisite for a reliable,
resilient, and sustainable energy system. However, consumers, product
developers, and energy market actors currently face a range of interoperability
challenges, often due to DERs that are not designed ‘from the ground up’ to be
interoperable.  Manufacturers are often hesitant to develop interoperable
solutions because of cybersecurity concerns, existing market advantages, and
added development costs.  Yet, policymakers have also played a considerable part
in determining the level of guaranteed or certified interoperability, with
varying levels of success globally. Noting the prevalence of such
interoperability challenges, and the issues of reduced functionality that can
arise from limited interoperability, this report offers advice and possible
solutions to consumers and policymakers. File   Interoperability of distributed
energy resources report Key findings: Consumers must make informed choices
depending on the complexity of their system and the level of functionality and
‘futureproofing’ they desire. Interoperability of DERs on-site and on-road
becomes a greater issue for consumers when there is a need for grid integration.
Where you live can have a big difference on the level of consumer choice, system
value, and interoperability that is available. This is true even within
countries like the United States. Over-the-air software updates are sold as a
key feature of EVSEs, inverters, and batteries which could increase
interoperability as new standards are released. It isn’t always clear to
consumers where products will be updated or if hardware restrictions preclude
this. Interoperability challenges vary considerably between devices and use-
cases. Interoperability is less of an issue for solar-inverter or generation-
only set-ups, but there are more challenges when incorporating EVSEs and
batteries for storage or back-up power.   Resource Download Form Download your
copy Complete the form below to access this resource (the download will appear
at the bottom of this page). First name Last name Your email Telephone Job title
Organisation Sector - None - Agriculture, Food & Drink Construction, Property &
Infrastructure Clothing & Footwear Energy & Power Financial Services ICT &
Electronics Pharma & Chemicals Paper & Packaging Retail - Service-focused Retail
- Manufacturing-focused Transport & Logistics Other - Service-focused Other-
Manufacturing-focused Local government Other - Public sector Voluntary & Third
sector Country * Country * - None - Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa
Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua & Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba
Ascension Island Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh
Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia &
Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory British
Virgin Islands Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada
Canary Islands Cape Verde Caribbean Netherlands Cayman Islands Central African
Republic Ceuta & Melilla Chad Chile China Christmas Island Clipperton Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo - Brazzaville Congo - Kinshasa
Cook Islands Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czechia Côte d’Ivoire
Denmark Diego Garcia Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El
Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Falkland Islands
Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern
Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland
Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti
Heard & McDonald Islands Honduras Hong Kong SAR China Hungary Iceland India
Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan
Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho
Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao SAR China Madagascar
Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania
Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro
Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar (Burma) Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue
Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman
Outlying Oceania Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territories Panama Papua New Guinea
Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar
Romania Russia Rwanda Réunion Samoa San Marino Sark Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia
Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands
Somalia South Africa South Georgia & South Sandwich Islands South Korea South
Sudan Spain Sri Lanka St. Barthélemy St. Helena St. Kitts & Nevis St. Lucia St.
Martin St. Pierre & Miquelon St. Vincent & Grenadines Sudan Suriname Svalbard &
Jan Mayen Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé & Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan
Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad & Tobago Tristan da
Cunha Tunisia Turkmenistan Turks & Caicos Islands Tuvalu Türkiye U.S. Outlying
Islands U.S. Virgin Islands Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom
United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Wallis &
Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Åland Islands Once you have entered
your contact details, the resource will appear at the bottom of this page. We
may also contact you with information about services that are related to the
resource. You can find out how we use personal information in our  privacy
notice. * Required field Subscribe to the Carbon Trust’s monthly newsletter Stay
updated Receive the latest news, insights and events from the Carbon Trust
directly to your inbox. Subscribe Contact us Get in touch to see how our experts
can help you. Contact us © 2024 The Carbon Trust Careers Contact us Privacy
notice Cookies notice Website terms Modern slavery statement Sitemap