Monitoring energy efficiency in Latin America NACIONES UNIDAS CEPAL  English
Español   Português  ACERCA DE  Acerca de este repositorio Términos de uso
Acerca de la CEPAL   REPOSITORIO DIGITAL Comisión Económica para América Latina
y el Caribe   REPOSITORIO DIGITAL Comisión Económica para América Latina y el
Caribe Temas   ASUNTOS DE GÉNERO  COMERCIO INTERNACIONAL E INTEGRACIÓN
DESARROLLO ECONÓMICO  DESARROLLO PRODUCTIVO Y EMPRESARIAL  DESARROLLO SOCIAL
DESARROLLO SOSTENIBLE Y ASENTAMIENTOS HUMANOS  ESTADÍSTICAS  PLANIFICACIÓN PARA
EL DESARROLLO  POBLACIÓN Y DESARROLLO  RECURSOS NATURALES Eventos Proyectos
Región/Países Más...  Colecciones Envíos Recientes Signatura ONU  Vaciar lista
 Monitoring energy efficiency in Latin America Document in English    Compartir
Título de la revista   ISSN de la revista   Título del volumen   Traducción
Español  Símbolo ONU  LC/W.709    Citación    Página completa del ítem
Monitoring energy efficiency in Latin America Fecha  2016-11    Autores  NU.
CEPAL    Resumen After analyzing the strengths and weaknesses of the energy
efficiency programmes that the region's countries have been implementing, the
Natural Resources and Infrastructure Division's (DRNI) Natural Resources Unit
(NRU) has reached the conclusion that one of the main obstacles has been the
lack of information and indicators to facilitate a quantitative, full and
integrated analysis of the evolution of said policies with the objective of
making policy interventions based on solid information. The quality of the
statistics and the performance indicators to quantify results of national energy
efficiency programmes in Latin American and Caribbean countries has been
deficient. As a way to overcome this shortcoming, the ECLAC has created the
Regional Program BIEE (Energy Efficiency Indicators Database for Latin America
and the Caribbean). Más... TIPO DE DOCUMENTO  Documentos de proyectos e
investigación    SERIE  Documentos de Proyectos    Tabla de Contenido Summary
.-- Introduction .-- I. Energy consumption and intensity trends .-- II. Energy
efficiency trends in the energy sector .-- III. Energy efficiency trends for
households .-- IV. Energy efficiency trends in transport .-- V.  Energy
efficiency trends in industry .-- VI. Energy efficiency trends in services .--
VII.  Energy efficiency in agriculture. Más... URI
https://hdl.handle.net/11362/40809   Temas ONU  RECURSOS ENERGETICOS     CONSUMO
DE ENERGIA     RENDIMIENTO ENERGETICO     INDUSTRIA ENERGETICA     VIVIENDA
TRANSPORTE     INDUSTRIA     SECTOR TERCIARIO     AGRICULTURA     ESTADISTICAS
DE ENERGIA    Más... Temas CEPAL  ENERGÍA     RECURSOS NATURALES    Más...
País/Región  AMERICA LATINA     Descripción   Tabla de Contenido  Resumen  After
analyzing the strengths and weaknesses of the energy efficiency programmes that
the region's countries have been implementing, the Natural Resources and
Infrastructure Division's (DRNI) Natural Resources Unit (NRU) has reached the
conclusion that one of the main obstacles has been the lack of information and
indicators to facilitate a quantitative, full and integrated analysis of the
evolution of said policies with the objective of making policy interventions
based on solid information. The quality of the statistics and the performance
indicators to quantify results of national energy efficiency programmes in Latin
American and Caribbean countries has been deficient. As a way to overcome this
shortcoming, the ECLAC has created the Regional Program BIEE (Energy Efficiency
Indicators Database for Latin America and the Caribbean).    Más...  Summary .--
Introduction .-- I. Energy consumption and intensity trends .-- II. Energy
efficiency trends in the energy sector .-- III. Energy efficiency trends for
households .-- IV. Energy efficiency trends in transport .-- V.  Energy
efficiency trends in industry .-- VI. Energy efficiency trends in services .--
VII.  Energy efficiency in agriculture.     Subtemas ONU   Subtópicos CEPAL
Región/País  Temas ONU  RECURSOS ENERGETICOS     CONSUMO DE ENERGIA
RENDIMIENTO ENERGETICO     INDUSTRIA ENERGETICA     VIVIENDA     TRANSPORTE
INDUSTRIA     SECTOR TERCIARIO     AGRICULTURA     ESTADISTICAS DE ENERGIA
Más... Temas CEPAL  ENERGÍA     RECURSOS NATURALES    Más... País/Región
AMERICA LATINA    Evento   Proyecto   Colecciones Documentos de Proyectos
Cargando... Av. Dag Hammarskj˝ld 3477, Vitacura, Santiago de Chile Corporativo
MCS, Blv. Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra #193 piso 12, 11520 México D.F., México
1 Chancery Lane, P.O. Box 1113 Puerto Espańa, Trinidad y Tobago  .  |