Pandemic-resilient communities powered by DRE - The Alliance for Rural
Electrification Become a member About About us Team Governance Contact us
Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our Members say Become a Member
Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What our Partners say Become a
Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification Hub Innovation for
Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub Sustainability for
Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE Publications Project database
Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit Member login About About us
Team Governance Contact us Membership Our Members Why become a Member? What our
Members say Become a Member Partnerships Our Partners Why partner with us? What
our Partners say Become a Partner Strategic Pillars Finance for Electrification
Hub Innovation for Electrification Hub Markets for Electrification Hub
Sustainability for Electrification Hub Knowledge Centre Discover DRE
Publications Project database Job platform News & Events News Events Media kit
Member login Become a member
Download
Publication 25 October, 2022 Pandemic-resilient communities powered by DRE
COVID-19 has magnified social inequalities and compromised the path towards
affordable, reliable and sustainable universal energy access. At the
intersection of energy access, climate change and socio-economic development,
DRE is as an essential piece for rural communities to recover faster and better.
In this year of hope and major political focus on green recovery, the time is
now for international funding partners, politicians, government officials,
investors and other relevant stakeholders around the world to integrate DRE as a
core element of their green recovery plans, allocating the full range of
financial solutions at hand and helping build an enabling environment to
facilitate the massive deployment of DRE solutions on the ground. The portfolio
of case studies showcases innovative solutions and best practices from
successful projects supporting rural communities recover better and faster from
the pandemic, with a particular focus on climate change mitigation, adaptation
and resilience. Statutes Terms & conditions Privacy Policy Alliance for Rural
Electrification Renewable Energy House Rue d'Arlon 63-67 1040 Brussels Belgium
are[at]ruralelec.org +32 2 400 10 00 Follow along Facebook Twitter LinkedIn
YouTube Flickr Newsletter Get in-depth analyses, market intelligence & insights
from the rural electrification sector in your inbox every second month. For
free. Subscribe                                                         Â©2024
Alliance for Rural Electrification
Made by  Novel We use cookies to improve your experience on our website. By
browsing this website, you agree to our use of cookies. Accept