Renewable Energy Manufacturing: Opportunities for Southeast Asia | Sustainable
Energy for All   Skip to main content Main navigation Who we are Governance &
accountability Our funders & partners Our team Work with us Support us Our work
Initiatives & projects Global advocacy & diplomacy Research & analysis Country
engagement About SDG7 Impact areas Ending energy poverty Fighting climate change
Creating jobs Empowering women & youth Improving health News and events Global
Forum 2024 News & stories Events & webinars Media centre Campaigns Open social
media links dialog Stay in touch Search                     Sign up to our
newsletter                    Our work / Research & analysis Renewable Energy
Manufacturing: Opportunities for Southeast Asia Research    24 Aug 2023 Share
this page     Download This report, by the Asian Development Bank,
Bloomberg Philanthropies, ClimateWorks Foundation and Sustainable Energy for
All, presents an assessment of the potential of renewable energy manufacturing
in Southeast Asia across three sectors: solar photovoltaic (PV), batteries, and
electric two-wheelers. It also proposes potential ambition and outcomes for each
sector and identifies key opportunities for intraregional collaboration.
Southeast Asia will be impacted disproportionately by climate change. Five out
of its 10 economies rank among the world’s  top 20 countries most vulnerable to
climate change, and the region could lose up to 30 percent of its gross domestic
product by 2050 due to increases in global temperature and extreme weather
events. Greenhouse gas emissions in Southeast Asia must be reduced by 10 percent
to 25 percent by 2030 (relative to its current trajectory) to limit global
warming to a 1.5°C pathway. Substantial and collective action by governments and
businesses is required. As of today, about half of all governments within the
region have committed to net-zero targets. Against this backdrop, the region’s
energy consumption is also expected to grow significantly. The International
Energy Agency (IEA) projects that between 2020 and 2050, Southeast Asia’s
electricity demand will grow by 2.5x, and its energy consumption for transport
will more than double. A major push to electrify transportation and deploy
renewable energy will be essential for the region to meet its
decarbonization commitments. This is reflected in the energy strategies
across the member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
This has the potential to achieve dual objectives in Southeast Asia. Firstly, it
would enable the region to meet rising energy demand while lowering carbon
emissions. Secondly, the development of local manufacturing capabilities
could support job creation and economic growth. In Southeast Asia, low-carbon
mobility and clean power have the potential to contribute USD 90 billion to USD
100 billion in revenues by 2030, while 6 million renewable energy jobs are
expected to be created by 2050.         Related content        Research 01 Feb
2024 State of the Market Report for Healthcare Facility Electrification Case
study 03 Dec 2023 Climate Finance for Powering Healthcare Research 06 Nov 2023
Examining the Experience of Using Electric Pressure Cookers in Urban Households
in Kigali, Rwanda  Research 18 Oct 2023 Health Facility Electrification Capital
Landscape Sign up to our newsletter Keep up-to-speed with what's happening at
SEforALL and across the sustainable energy movement. We'll send you our monthly
update, plus special news and event invites. Sign up Footer menu Media centre
Contact us Careers Stay in touch         Sustainable Energy for All is funded by
Austrian Development Agency                Bloomberg Philanthropies
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation                Clean Cooling Collaborative
ClimateWorks Foundation                German Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development (BMZ)                Global Energy Alliance for
People and Planet                Google                IBM                IKEA
Foundation                Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iceland
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark                Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation Italy                OPEC Fund
Power Africa                Rockefeller Foundation                Shell
Foundation                Swedish Postcode Foundation                Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)                Transforming Energy
Access                UK Aid                USAID        Terms and conditions
Privacy policy