SEforALL Analysis of SDG7 Progress - 2023 | Sustainable Energy for All   Skip to
main content Main navigation Who we are Governance & accountability Our funders
& partners Our team Work with us Support us Our work Initiatives & projects
Global advocacy & diplomacy Research & analysis Country engagement About SDG7
Impact areas Ending energy poverty Fighting climate change Creating jobs
Empowering women & youth Improving health News and events Global Forum 2024 News
& stories Events & webinars Media centre Campaigns Open social media links
dialog Stay in touch Search                     Sign up to our newsletter
Our work / Research & analysis SEforALL Analysis of SDG7 Progress - 2023 Data
analysis    15 Aug 2023 Share this page   Download the full report Utilizing the
latest data from the  Tracking SDG7: The Energy Progress Report 2023 , SEforALL
has conducted a deep-dive analysis to provide a snapshot of the world’s current
situation across the four targets of SDG7: electricity access (7.1.1), clean
cooking access (7.1.2), renewable energy (7.2) and energy efficiency (7.3). This
analysis builds on the  Tracking SDG7 Report  with an additional perspective on
regions and high-impact countries. We are lagging behind in providing access to
both electricity and clean cooking, and much more needs to be done for
increasing efficiency and renewable energy consumption SOURCES: World Bank /
ESMAP; 2023 Tracking SDG7, IEA 2022 World Energy Outlook, SEforALL analysis
Overall progress Electricity access is growing, but progress is uneven - Africa
needs stronger action The number of unelectrified people reduced from 1.14
billion in 2010 to 675 million in 2021.  Asia was the major driver of this
decline, as the deficit there shrank from 516 million in 2010 to 69 million in
2021. Meanwhile, Africa saw only a marginal reduction of its unelectrified
population, from 591 million to 586 million during the same period, influenced
by its rapidly increasing population. 2021 saw the strongest annual improvement
in electricity access (9.0 percentage points) since 2010 but it was mainly made
in Asia. Africa needs accelerated electrification effforts. Differences in rural
and urban electrification persist and should be factored into tailored country
strategies to achieve universal access by 2030. Lack of clean cooking access
will persist at a massive scale if the current pace of progress continues 2.3
billion people in 2021 - approximately a third of the world’s population - were
still unable to cook cleanly and safely.  Considering expected
population growth, the annual increase in the number of people gaining access to
clean cooking in both Asia and Africa needs to be significantly accelerated.
Sub-Saharan African countries require much stronger and focused actions.
Countries with large populations without electricity and clean cooking access
overlap. Electric cooking could be an option for solving both access challenges.
Renewable energy potential should be pursued in both electrification and clean
cooking and usage in industry, transport and building A slow pace in
renewable energy uptake has been observed, and has not changed in both renewable
energy in general (renewable share in total final energy consumption went from
16.0% in 2010 to 19.1% in 2020) and modern renewables (8.7% in 2010 to 12.5% in
2020). While we should continue accelerating renewable electricity, the increase
of renewables in heat and transport fuel energy consumptions, which are much
larger than electricity consumption, is necessary with the uptake of modern
renewables in industry, building and the transport sectors. Energy efficiency
improvement has slowed down A continuing decline in the pace of progress on
energy efficiency since 2015 has not changed, which makes the annual average
improvement rate between 2010 and 2020 only 1.8%, far from the originally
targeted 2.6%. The 2020 annual improvement rate was a mere 0.4%. This has made
achieving the SDG 7.3 target very difficult. Both Africa and Asia have higher
energy intensity than the world average and require a stronger focus for
improvement, especially since economic development in these regions is expected
to continue. Focus on countries in the top 20 energy-consuming countries with
higher energy intensity and/or low improvement rate will be effective as well.
Based on current trends, we are not on track to achieve SDG 7.1.1 by 2030 We are
not on track to achieve universal electricity access by 2030, with approximately
660 to 674 million people expected to remain unelectrified in 2030 based on a
projection with the current trend and stated policy package scenario. Efforts to
electrify countries with large unelectrified populations, low electrification
rates, and/or without significant progress in the past few years need to be
strengthened. Additionally, countries with smaller numbers of unelectrified
populations but low electrification rates also need immediate actions based on
sound strategies to leave no one behind. As Asia is moving toward higher
electrification rates, the strongest policy and investment focus needs to be on
Sub-Saharan Africa. Based on current trends, we are not on track to achieve SDG
7.1.2 by 2030 Projections show that we are not on track to achieve universal
access to clean fuels and technologies for cooking by 2030, with approximately
1.8 and 1.9 billion people expected to remain without clean cooking access based
on current trends. Countries with large populations without access, such as
India, China, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Ethiopia, should be a priority
for stronger actions, while countries with low access rates with very weak
improvement, many in Africa, also need to be prioritized.  Based on current
trends, we expect to see only moderate gains in the share of renewables and that
of modern renewable in the energy mix by 2030.   Projections show an increase in
the share of renewables, including traditional biomass, in energy consumption to
around 23% by 2030. Africa has the highest share of renewables at 57.1%, with
only 8.4% of modern renewables. Africa has the lowest improvement rate (0.6
percentage point) of renewable share in total final energy consumption since
2010. Populations without electricity and clean cooking access in the region
should be connected with clean and modern renewable energy. Based on recent
data, an energy intensity improvement rate of at least 3.4 percent per year from
now through to 2030 will be necessary to achieve SDG 7.3 With the continuous
slowdown in the rate of improvement of energy intensity, reaching SDG 7.3
becomes harder and harder. To ensure we get on track, all end-use sectors
(industry, transport and building) need to become more energy efficient. As
economic structures are quite diverse from one country to another, in-depth data
and analysis of sector specific energy intensity is critical to create sound
strategies for each country. Access to electricity Since 2010, the number of
unelectrified people reduced from 1,141 million to 675 million in 2021. As Asia
has made significant progress, Africa is becoming the sole region with the
majority (87%) of the world's unelectrified population.  80% of the unconnected
people live in just 24 countries (20 of them in Africa and the remaining 4 in
Asia).  96% of the global improvement since 2010 has been driven by gains in
Asia, particularly in India and Bangladesh (62% and 14% gains, respectively).
Africa’s gain in electricity access rate has been 14 percentage points, from 44%
to 58%, since 2010. However, with significant population growth, the
unelectrified population has resulted in only a 5-million-person reduction. With
Asia’s significant advancement, stronger focus and actions are required in
Africa Looking ahead, based on current trends, we are not on track to achieve
SDG 7.1.1 by 2030 A current trend projection and the IEA’s scenario analysis
show that we are  not on track  to achieve universal electricity access by 2030,
as 660-674 million people are expected to remain unelectrified in 2030. We need
much stronger and tailor-made actions and investments, particularly in
Africa. Regardless of improvement rates since 2010 and the size of unelectrified
populations, all countries with total access rates below 50-60% need more and
accelerated efforts.   Even countries with relatively high rates of access
(above 60-65%) still require continuous tailor-made efforts for both urban and
rural populations to reach 100% by 2030.   Differences in the rural and urban
electrification rates persist both in Asia and Africa, indicating that different
approaches are needed to close the gap in each region. Asian countries typically
have close to 100% urban electrification rates and high rural electrification
rates, except DPR Korea.  Last mile rural electrification is the key for these
countries.  Sub-Saharan Africa has a 81% urban electrification rate, but a rural
electrification rate of just over 29%, which has increased by only 1 percentage
point in a year. A combined last-mile push in urban areas and stronger rollout
of large-scale rural electrification is necessary for many countries. There were
~675 million people in the world without access to electricity as of 2021
Population without electricity access, millions, 2021 DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK /
 ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   24 countries make up 80% of the
electrification gap, and the majority is in Africa Countries with largest
populations without electricity access, millions, 2021 DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK /
 ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   Both Asia and Africa need a strong rural
push, while most African countries also need urban electrification progress,
including last-mile schemes. Rural vs Urban electrification rates (top 24
countries), 2021 NOTE: Rural access rates of Angola and Burkina Faso for 2020
and both urban and rural rates of DPR Korea were not available from the 2023
database.  The rate used for Angola was 2018 rural access rate.  The last
available Burkina Faso’s rural rate was 5% in 2014 and this rate was used in the
figure. Both urban and rural access rates used for DPR Korea were the  2020
access rates.    DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023 
Total number of unelectrified people declined from 1,141 million in 2010 to ~675
million in 2021. Asia’s significant progress contrasts Africa’s little progress
Population without electricity access, millions, 2010-2021 NOTE : The World Bank
.ESMAP historical data up to 2020 was also updated with the 2023 dataset.  This
creates inconsistencies with the analysis in the previous year DATA SOURCE:
WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   Successful efforts by
populous Asian countries could be good examples for African countries with
growing populations Reduction in unelectrified population between 2010 and 2021,
millions NOTE: These figures represent the absolute change in the number of
unelectrified people between 2010 and 2021 and does not account for changes in
the population due to birth rates, human migration etc. The World Bank .ESMAP
historical data up to 2020 was also updated with the 2023 dataset.  This creates
several inconsistencies with the analysis in the previous year DATA SOURCE:
WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023Í Access to clean cooking There
are ~2.3 billion people without access to clean fuels and technologies for
cooking Population without access to clean fuels and technologies for
cooking, millions, 2021 NOTE: Due to lack of access rate data for various
countries in the 2023 dataset as well as the possible total population data
disparity, there is 51 million difference between the population reported by the
2023 Tracking SDG7 report on total world population without clean cooking access
(2.3 billion people) in 2021 and the calculated population number by using the
2023 Tracking SDG7 dataset and the World Bank Total Population dataset updated
on May 10, 2023.  This analysis uses the total World Population without Clean
Cooking Access from the 2023 Tracking SDG7 report, while the calculated
population numbers are used for each country and each region.  This creates the
sum of the shares does not add up to 100% (it is 97.8% in total)     DATA
SOURCE: WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023 and World Bank Total
Population data 2023   There are currently 2.3 billion people without access to
clean fuels and technologies for cooking with 52% of them in Asia and 40% in
Africa.   75% of the people without access live in just 22 countries, with 10 of
them in Asia and the remaining 11 in Africa.  The Asian countries in the top 22
mostly have higher access rates than their African counterparts. However, their
large population sizes leave very significant room for improvement. Only 4 of
the 11 African countries (Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana and Comoros) that are part of
the top 75% challenge countries have access rates over 10%. Russia has decreased
access rate significantly (from 96% to 73%) since 2010 with a huge access
deficit of 73 million people. The number of people without access slightly
improved from 3.0 billion in 2010 to 2.3 billion in 2021. The global average
reduction rate of the population without clean cooking access since 2010 is just
2.4%  Asia’s progress is stronger than other regions, with an annual improvement
rate of 5.0% since 2010. The population without access has declined from 2.1
billion to 1.2 billion. Meanwhile, the number of population without clean
cooking access in Africa has increased by 150 million (from ~770 million to ~920
million) since 2010, with annual average growth rate of 1.6% Looking forward,
based on current trends, we are not on track to achieve SDG 7.1.2 by 2030 A
current trend projection and the IEA’s scenario analysis show that we are  not
on track  to achieve universal access to clean fuels and technologies for
cooking by 2030, as between 1.8 and 1.9 billion people are expected to remain
without clean cooking access. Countries with still large populations without
access, such as India, China, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Ethiopia, should
be a priority for stronger actions. Countries with very low access rates,
regardless of population size, and countries with low improvement rates should
be also a focus to create strong momentum to accelerate the rate of improvement.
Much larger public finance is necessary along with strategic planning, financial
/ fiscal incentives, and strong political will to remove barriers and create a
good enabling environment for faster and larger-scale clean cooking roll-outs.
Countries with large populations without electricity and clean cooking access
overlap. Electric cooking could be an option for solving both access challenges.
22 countries make up 75% of the access to clean cooking challenge Countries with
largest populations without access to clean cooking, millions, 2021 DATA SOURCE:
WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023 and World Bank Total Population
data 2023 The number of people without access to clean fuels and technologies
for cooking has declined slightly from 3.0 billion in 2010 to 2.2 billion in
2021 Reduction in population without access to clean cooking between 2010 and
2021, millions NOTE: The World Bank .ESMAP historical data up to 2020 was and
the total population historical data were both updated with the 2023 dataset.
 This creates inconsistencies with the analysis in the previous year Some
country data unavailable between 2011 and 2020 was interpolated DATA SOURCE:
WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023 and World Bank Total Population
data 2023   About 80% of African countries saw increases in the number of people
without clean cooking access between 2010 and 2021, while more than 60% of Asian
countries reduced the number of people without clean cooking Reduction in
population without access to clean cooking between 2010 and 2021, millions NOTE:
These figures represent the absolute change in the number of people without
access to clean cooking solutions between 2010 and 2021 and does not account for
changes in the population due to birth rates, human migration etc. DATA SOURCE:
WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023 and World Bank Total Population
data 2023   12  countries make up both the  top 80% of the electricity access
challenge and 75% of the clean cooking access challenge Country Overlap between
Electricity and Clean Cooking Access Challenges SOURCE: ESMAP Tracking SDG7
Database, 2022; IEA World Energy Outlook 2021   While significant overlaps exist
between a lack of electrification and clean cooking, the large difference of
population numbers without access between the two show that electricity does not
automatically contribute to clean cooking access as a fuel. There is a
correlation between electrification and access to clean cooking, but the
difference in population without access in the two areas is large. Clean cooking
technologies (such as solar cookers) can be used as an entry product to
unelectrified households, and e-cooking solutions may create synergy between
electrification and clean cooking access. In reality, however, e-cooking
affordability, cooking traditions, and level of electricity access are some of
the factors that contribute to the difference between the 2.3 billion people
without access to clean cooking and 675 million without access to electricity.
For example, Tier 1 or 2 electricity access does not provide enough power for
electric cooking, and efficiency plays an important role. In many parts of the
world, electricity is not an affordable clean cooking fuel compared to
traditional fuels. Electric cooking stoves could also be expensive and difficult
to obtain due to weak local market demand and/or lack of local industry/supply.
In addition, many people have strong fuel preferences on their cultural cooking
practices. To create synergy between electricity and clean cooking access
through e-cooking, well-coordinated planning, policy and regulations based on
the nature of market failures and more funding to multi-benefit projects may be
needed. Share of renewables The share of renewables, including the use of
traditional biomass, in total energy consumption was 19.1% in 2020, while the
share of  modern  renewables in total energy consumption was only 12.5%. The
global share of renewables in total final energy consumption (TFEC) increased
only 3.1 percentage point in 2020 from 16.0% in 2010, while the share of modern
renewables also had a very modest increase of 3.8 percentage points from 8.7% in
2010. Africa has the highest share of renewables at 57.1%, but this only
includes 8.4% of modern renewables. Africa has the lowest improvement rate (0.6
percentage points) of renewable share in TFEC since 2010.    Latin America and
the Caribbean follow Africa with a high renewable share in energy consumption
with 34.2%. However, the share of modern renewables of the region is 29%. Asia
and Oceania have a lower share of renewable energy, but the modern renewable
share is higher than in Africa. North America and Europe have the least share of
renewables in TFEC at 14.3%, but all are from modern renewables. After peaking
in 2017, international public investment in renewables has been declining
Although international public financial flows in support of renewable and clean
energy peaked in 2017 (around USD 26 billion), totalling USD 79 billion in 5
years, annual investment has declined every year. The 2021 investment total was
41% of the 2017 amount. Solar PV is the only technology that shows a significant
increase since 2010. Regional distribution of the total investment in renewables
has been very uneven as advanced economies and China received more than 80% of
the total investment.  Looking forward, based on current trends, we are not on
track to achieve SDG 7.1.2 by 2030 A current trend projection and the IEA’s
scenario analysis show that the share of renewables in TFEC will be increasing
to around 23% by 2030, which represents weak progress compared to that in 2010
(16.0%), and below the 33-38% needed by 2030 to keep global temperature rise
below 1.5 C.  Modern renewable expansion needs to be accelerated further to
reduce the negative impacts of traditional biomass, particularly in Africa, and
achieve much stronger progress in SDG7.2.  Increasing renewable electrification
and direct renewable usage – alongside energy efficiency - in transport,
industry and building sectors is necessary to accelerate SGD7.2 progress, while
populations without energy access in both electricity and clean cooking should
be connected with clean and modern renewable energy. Today, the share of
renewables in energy consumption is 19.1%, 12.5% of which is modern renewables
Share of renewables in total energy consumption, %, 2020 DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK
/  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   The share of renewables and share of
modern renewables in total energy consumption increased 3.8pp and 3.1pp
respectively in 2010-20, with the largest annual push in 2019-20 Share of
renewables in total energy consumption, % NOTE: The historical data up to 2019
was also updated with the 2023 dataset.  This creates inconsistencies with the
analysis in the previous year DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK / ESMAP Tracking SDG7
Database, 2023   While North America & Europe and Latin America & the Caribbean
show advancement, progress in Asia, Oceania and Africa remains VERY slow. Share
of renewables in energy consumption, %, 2010, 2020 NOTE: The historical data up
to 2019 was also updated with the 2023 dataset.  This creates inconsistencies
with the analysis in the previous year DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK / ESMAP Tracking
SDG7 Database, 2023   Only 18% of energy consumption of the top 20 energy-
consuming countries is from renewables Energy Consumption and Share of Renewable
Energy of Top 20 Energy Consuming Countries, 2020 DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK
/  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   Significant increases in shares of
renewables require strong actions in Heat and Transport Share of renewables in
world final energy consumption by sector, 2020 % DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK / ESMAP
Tracking SDG7 Database, 2022 and ; IEA World Energy Outlook, 2022 Energy
Efficiency Today, it takes 4.6 MJ of energy to generate USD 1 of economic
activity.  Regional Energy Intensities have not largely improved since 2019,
except for slight improvement in Africa Energy intensity, MJ/USD 2017 ppp, 2020
DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   Globally it took
4.6 MJ (megajoules) of energy to generate USD 1 of economic activity in 2020
Africa is the least-efficient region with 5.4 MJ/USD GDP, followed by Asia with
5.0 MJ/USD GDP. Both regions have higher energy intensity than the world average
and their progress is slow. Latin America & the Caribbean is the least energy
intensive region with 3.3 MJ/USD GDP, followed by North America and Europe (4.1
MJ/USD GDP) and Oceania (4.3 MJ/USD GDP). The three regions’ energy intensities
have not been improved since 2019.  Of the top 20 most energy-consuming
countries:  Two-thirds have lower energy intensity than the top 20 peer average.
12 are more efficient than the world average, with the United Kingdom, Italy and
Turkey leading the way. 17 countries have improved their energy intensity since
2015.  Focusing on countries in these top 20 energy consuming countries with
higher energy intensity and/or low improvement rate will be effective. Looking
back, we see that the global energy intensity has decreased from 5.5 MJ/USD GDP
in 2010 to 4.6 MJ/USD GDP in 2020, corresponding to an average rate of
improvement of 1.8% This is a higher pace of improvement compared to the 1.2% in
1990-2010. However, the rates of improvement have significantly slowed down in
recent years, with the lowest 0.4% annual improvement rate since 2010 occuring
from 2019 to 2020, well below SDG 7.3 targets. Initial estimates suggest a
return to faster progress (2%) in 2022. Looking forward, we will need an energy
intensity improvement rate of at least 3.4 percent per year through 2030 to
achieve SDG 7.3, and even higher (4%) to achieve Net-Zero by 2050  Due to the
slowdown in the rate of improvement of energy intensity since 2015, reaching SDG
7.3 will require a much higher improvement rate than the original expected rate
of 2.6 percent. The IEA’s scenario analysis shows that we are not on track and a
3.4% of annual improvement rate is necessary between 2021 and 2030 to achieve
SDG7.3  To ensure we get on track, all end-use sectors (industry, transport and
building) need to be incentivized to be more energy efficient.  As economic
structures are quite diverse from one country to another, in-depth analysis of
sector specific energy intensity data is warranted to create sound strategies
for each country Two thirds of the top 20 energy consumption countries have
energy intensity lower than the world average Energy Consumption and Energy
Intensity of Top 20 Energy Consuming Countries, 2020 DATA SOURCE: WORLD BANK /
 ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   17 highest energy consumption countries
have decreased energy intensity while Iran, Nigeria, and Russia increased their
energy intensity since 2015 Growth of Energy Intensity and GDP of Top 20 Energy
Consuming Countries, 2015-2020 Notes: Energy intensity is defined as total
energy supply divided by gross domestic product (GDP).  The 2020 data shows
Thailand, instead of Pakistan, is in top 20 energy supply countries.  However,
the comparison here was made for top 20 energy consumption countries. DATA
SOURCE: WORLD BANK /  ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023   An energy intensity
improvement rate of at least 3.4 percent per year through 2030 will be needed to
achieve SDG 7.3 Energy Intensity Annual Reduction Rate (%), Historical and
Forecasted NOTE: The World Bank/ESMAP historical data up to 2019 were also
updated with the 2023 dataset. This creates inconsistencies with the analysis
from the previous year. SOURCE: World Bank/ESMAP Tracking SDG7 Database, 2023
and Tracking SDG7 Progress Report 2023 Snapshot: SDG7 tracking report data 2010
– the latest available data (2020 / 2021)   Related content News 07 Jun 2021
Five takeaways from Tracking SDG7: The Energy Progress Report 2021 Goal 7 target
SDG 7.1 - Access to energy Goal 7 target SDG 7.2 - Renewable energy Goal 7
target SDG 7.3 - Energy efficiency Download here
Goal 7 target                            SDG 7.1 - Access to energy SDG 7.2 -
Renewable energy SDG 7.3 - Energy efficiency Sign up to our newsletter Keep up-
to-speed with what's happening at SEforALL and across the sustainable energy
movement. We'll send you our monthly update, plus special news and event
invites. Sign up Footer menu Media centre Contact us Careers Stay in touch
Sustainable Energy for All is funded by                Austrian Development
Agency                Bloomberg Philanthropies                Charles Stewart
Mott Foundation                Clean Cooling Collaborative
ClimateWorks Foundation                German Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development (BMZ)                Global Energy Alliance for
People and Planet                Google                IBM                IKEA
Foundation                Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iceland
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark                Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation Italy                OPEC Fund
Power Africa                Rockefeller Foundation                Shell
Foundation                Swedish Postcode Foundation                Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)                Transforming Energy
Access                UK Aid                USAID        Terms and conditions
Privacy policy