Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022 – Analysis - IEA IEA Close Search Search
About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip navigation Search Energy
system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel, technology or sector
Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels Transport Industry
Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage
Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore all Topics   Chevron
down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's 50th Anniversary Climate
Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical Minerals Russia's War on
Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero
Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Energy
Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable Integration Energy Access
Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries  Chevron down Explore the energy
system by country or region Member countries Australia Austria Belgium Canada
Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy
Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal
Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands Türkiye United Kingdom
United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa Rica Israel Latvia
Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India Indonesia Kenya Morocco
Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All Countries and Regions Data
Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data Data explorers Understand
and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and trackers Data explorers Data
sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy system available for
download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or planned government
policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access every chart
published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports  Chevron
down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February 2024
Fuel report — February 2024                  Electricity 2024 Analysis and
forecast to 2026                     Fuel report — January 2024
World Energy Outlook 2023                     Flagship report — October 2023
Net Zero Roadmap: A Global Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022 Southeast
Asia Energy Outlook 2022 Download pdf This report is part of  World Energy
Outlook 2022                             Overview
Previous editions                                                              4
About this report The  Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2022  is the fifth edition
of this World Energy Outlook Special Report. Building on its important
partnership with Southeast Asia, the International Energy Agency (IEA) has
published these studies on a regular basis since 2013. The studies offer
insightful prospects for the ten member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) – Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam. Since the last edition of this report, the
energy prospects for Southeast Asia have been affected by the Covid-19 pandemic,
new energy and climate policy commitments and, most recently, high and volatile
prices exacerbated by the Russian Federation’s (hereafter, “Russia”) invasion of
Ukraine. Covid-19 led to a major economic shock for countries in Southeast Asia
and the economic recovery now risks being slowed by higher energy prices. In the
run up to the UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in November 2021, several
governments in Southeast Asia announced ambitious targets for reaching
neutrality and curbing reliance on coal-fired power. Against this backdrop of
new uncertainties and ambitions, this IEA report explores possible trajectories
for Southeast Asia’s energy sector, differentiated primarily by the policies
pursued by governments across the region. It relies on  the scenarios included
in the latest edition of World Energy Outlook , namely: The  Stated Policies
Scenario (STEPS),  which reflects the countries’ current policy settings based
on a sector-by-sector assessment of the specific policies that are in place or
have been announced. The  Sustainable Development Scenario (SDS),  which
delivers on the Paris Agreement goal to limit the temperature to “well below
2°C, alongside the goals on energy access and air pollution. This scenario is
consistent with Southeast Asia’s current announced climate aspirations. The  Net
Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario (NZE Scenario),  which sets out a pathway for
the energy sector to achieve net zero CO 2  emissions in 2050. It also achieves
universal access to modern energy by 2030 and reduces energy-related air
pollution significantly. The NZE Scenario provides a global benchmark against
which changes at the regional level can be assessed. The NZE Scenario would
limit the rise in global average temperatures to 1.5°C (with a 50% probability).
After a scene-setting discussion in the first chapter, the second chapter
describes scenario projections across all fuels and technologies. The third
chapter analyses four key areas in depth: investment for the clean energy
transition, power sector decarbonisation focusing on system flexibility, low-
carbon fuels, and the supply and demand of critical minerals. Published May 2022
License CC BY 4.0 Press release Share Cite Online table of contents 1.0  Key
findings read Read online         Previous editions
Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2019                              arrow-right
Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2017                              arrow-right
Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2015                              arrow-right
Southeast Asia Energy Outlook 2013                              arrow-right The
Energy Mix Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events
delivered twice monthly. Error Subscribe View sample Explore our other
newsletters Browse Topics Countries & regions Energy system Programmes Explore
Reports Data & statistics Learn About News and commentaries Events Connect
Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x
(formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms
Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA (2022),  Southeast Asia Energy
Outlook 2022 , IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/southeast-asia-energy-
outlook-2022, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this report Close
dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook Share on LinkedIn
LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print Subscription successful
Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can unsubscribe at any time by
clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA newsletter.