The energy transition: a catalyst to address the global triple crisis |
Sustainable Energy for All   Skip to main content Main navigation Who we are
Governance & accountability Our funders & partners Our team Work with us Support
us Our work Initiatives & projects Global advocacy & diplomacy Research &
analysis Country engagement About SDG7 Impact areas Ending energy poverty
Fighting climate change Creating jobs Empowering women & youth Improving health
News and events Global Forum 2024 News & stories Events & webinars Media centre
Campaigns Open social media links dialog Stay in touch Search
Sign up to our newsletter                    Our work / Research & analysis The
energy transition: a catalyst to address the global triple crisis  Knowledge
brief    20 Jul 2023 Share this page     Download Knowledge Brief This Knowledge
Brief was developed by SEforALL for the G20 Energy Transition Working Group and
G20 Energy Ministerial meetings in Goa, India in July 2023.  This short analysis
highlights how the world is currently facing a triple crisis—severe cost of
living, energy security, and food security challenges are impacting most of the
world, but their effects are disproportionately felt by developing countries and
vulnerable communities. These crises, coupled with the ongoing climate crisis,
hamper progress on development priorities, including action on climate change.
Although these crises are distinct, they are deeply interlinked, primarily
through the rising energy prices affecting both the overall cost of living as
well as the availability of fuel and fertilizers, which in turn directly impact
agricultural productivity.  The global energy transition towards cleaner and
more sustainable energy sources for all sectors presents a significant
opportunity to address these crises through its cost benefits, job creation
potential, local market creation, and climate benefits.  As described in the
Knowledge Brief, specific actions are needed to help deliver systemic catalytic
financial solutions to support the energy transition and the scale-up of
renewables. These include:  Identifying market potential and pipelines 
Developing innovative financing mechanisms  Accurately pricing climate risk and
scaling local currency investing              Related content        Research 01
Feb 2024 State of the Market Report for Healthcare Facility Electrification Case
study 03 Dec 2023 Climate Finance for Powering Healthcare Research 06 Nov 2023
Examining the Experience of Using Electric Pressure Cookers in Urban Households
in Kigali, Rwanda  Research 18 Oct 2023 Health Facility Electrification Capital
Landscape Sign up to our newsletter Keep up-to-speed with what's happening at
SEforALL and across the sustainable energy movement. We'll send you our monthly
update, plus special news and event invites. Sign up Footer menu Media centre
Contact us Careers Stay in touch         Sustainable Energy for All is funded by
Austrian Development Agency                Bloomberg Philanthropies
Charles Stewart Mott Foundation                Clean Cooling Collaborative
ClimateWorks Foundation                German Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development (BMZ)                Global Energy Alliance for
People and Planet                Google                IBM                IKEA
Foundation                Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iceland
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark                Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation Italy                OPEC Fund
Power Africa                Rockefeller Foundation                Shell
Foundation                Swedish Postcode Foundation                Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)                Transforming Energy
Access                UK Aid                USAID        Terms and conditions
Privacy policy