The changing role of hydropower: Challenges and opportunities   ENERGY
TRANSITION                           ENERGY TRANSITION
Outlook   Partnerships   Policy   Technology   Socio-economic impact   Country
engagement   Project Facilitation   Planning   Innovation   Finance & Investment
HOW WE WORK                           HOW WE WORK                       Country
focus Regional focus Africa   Asia & Pacific   Europe   Latin America and the
Caribbean   Middle East & North Africa   North America   Collaborative
frameworks   News   PUBLICATIONS   Education   Data   Events   ABOUT
ABOUT                       About IRENA   Membership   Director-General
Procurement   Vision & Mission   Official documents   Senior Management
Working at IRENA   First time visitor?               Explore our handy tools
Skip Next Search                       Look for information across IRENA.org
Skip Next REmember                       Log in to the Member section
Skip Next Up to date with IRENA                       Get informed about news
and updates relevant to your area of interests                       Skip Next
Clipboard                       Here you can find interests items you have saved
by exploring IRENA.org                       Close Download full report Select
format PDF IRENA (2023), The changing role of hydropower: Challenges and
opportunities, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. Copy citation
 Copied https://mc-cd8320d4-36a1-40ac-83cc-3389-cdn-endpoint.azureedge.net/-/med
ia/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2023/Feb/IRENA_Changing_role_of_hydropower_202
3.pdf?rev=85b54f8dd8794f8fbc6270b5a1e0b92a Copy url  Copied   The changing role
of hydropower: Challenges and opportunities      This report is aimed at policy
makers and hydropower practitioners to raise awareness among IRENA stakeholders
regarding hydropower’s perceived challenges and needs, and to serve as a
catalyst for debate in the context of IRENA’s Collaborative Framework on
Hydropower.                         ISBN: 978-92-9260-522-3 February 2023 Home >
Publications > 2023 > Feb > The changing role of hydropower: Challenges and
opportunities   Newsletter    Go                   Full report translations:
Chinese (中文) Hydropower is an important component of power systems worldwide. It
is the largest source of renewable electricity and can enables a higher
penetration of variable renewables such as solar and wind by providing balancing
and flexibility services. Beyond electricity, hydropower also provides other
services including storage for drinking and irrigation water, increased
resilience to flooding and droughts, and recreational opportunities. Despite
being the most mature renewable technology, hydropower faces a number of
challenges. These include the need to ensure sustainability and climate
resilience; ageing fleets and related investment requirements; the need to adapt
operation and maintenance (O&M) to modern power system requirements; and
outdated market structures and business models that do not recognise the full
range of services provided by hydropower. As challenging as the present
situation is, it also presents opportunities to modernise hydropower plants and
equip them with the means to continue providing critical services to power
systems globally. This report is aimed at policy makers and hydropower
practitioners within the Member States of the International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA). Its objective is to raise awareness among IRENA stakeholders
regarding hydropower’s perceived challenges and needs, and to serve as a
catalyst for debate in the context of IRENA’s Collaborative Framework on
Hydropower. The report also provides a snapshot of the current status of
hydropower and presents a vision for how its full potential may be realised.
Additional analyses                                Geopolitics of the Energy
Transformation: The Hydrogen Factor                           15 January 2022
Related content                                  Removing Barriers for Green
Hydrogen Deployment                           1 November 2023 Articles
Second Collaborative Framework on Critical Materials Meeting Calls for Stronger
Collaboration and Knowledge Exchange                           29 October 2023
Articles                                 Renewables Jobs Nearly Doubled in Past
Decade, Soared to 13.7 Million in 2022                           28 September
2023 Press Releases                                 G7 Communiqué Echoes IRENA's
Call for Rapid Deployment of Renewables                           18 April 2023
Press Releases                                 Under IRENA's ETAF, Masdar and
AIIB Reach Financial Close on 3 Uzbek Solar Projects                           7
April 2023 Press Releases                               IRENA essentials
About IRENA   Employment   Procurement   Contact   Membership   Collaborative
Frameworks   Partnerships   Country engagement   News   Events   Publications
Education                                 Newsletter
Go                             © 2011-2022 IRENA - International Renewable
Energy Agency. All Rights Reserved.  * The designations employed and the
presentation of materials herein do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the International Renewable Energy Agency concerning
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.