Tracking Clean Energy Innovation in the Business Sector: An Overview – Analysis
- IEA IEA Close Search Search About News Events Programmes Help centre IEA Skip
navigation Search Energy system  Chevron down Explore the energy system by fuel,
technology or sector Fossil Fuels Renewables Electricity Low-Emission Fuels
Transport Industry Buildings Energy Efficiency and Demand Carbon Capture,
Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Buildings Energy Efficiency and
Demand Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage Decarbonisation Enablers Explore
all Topics   Chevron down Understand the biggest energy challenges The IEA's
50th Anniversary Climate Change Global Energy Transitions Stocktake Critical
Minerals Russia's War on Ukraine Global Energy Crisis Investment Saving Energy
Energy Security Net Zero Emissions Investment Saving Energy Energy Security Net
Zero Emissions Energy Efficiency Energy and Water Energy Subsidies Renewable
Integration Energy Access Energy and Gender Covid-19 All topics Countries
Chevron down Explore the energy system by country or region Member countries
Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany
Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico New Zealand
Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain Sweden Switzerland The Netherlands
Türkiye United Kingdom United States Accession countries Chile Colombia Costa
Rica Israel Latvia Association countries Argentina Brazil China Egypt India
Indonesia Kenya Morocco Senegal Singapore South Africa Thailand Ukraine All
Countries and Regions Data Chevron down Use, download and buy global energy data
Data explorers Understand and manipulate data with easy to use explorers and
trackers Data explorers Data sets Free and paid data sets from across the energy
system available for download Data sets Policies database Past, existing or
planned government policies and measures Policies database Chart Library Access
every chart published across all IEA reports and analysis Chart All data Reports
Chevron down Read the latest analysis from the IEA Oil Market Report - February
2024                     Fuel report — February 2024
Electricity 2024 Analysis and forecast to 2026                     Fuel report —
January 2024                  World Energy Outlook 2023
Flagship report — October 2023                  Net Zero Roadmap: A Global
Pathway to Keep the 1.5 °C Goal in Reach 2023 Update
Flagship report — September 2023                  All reports Search Bag 1 User
Profile Search Sign In Flyout close   Email                    * Error Password
* Forgot password? Error Checkbox Remember me Sign in Sign in Create an account
Create a free IEA account to download our reports or subcribe to a paid service.
Join for free Join for free Reports Tracking Clean Energy Innovation in the
Business Sector: An Overview Tracking Clean Energy Innovation in the Business
Sector: An Overview Download pdf                             Overview
About this report Acceleration of clean energy innovation, supported by
effective innovation policies, is critical for achieving net-zero emissions by
2050, and the technology development in the business sector will be to success.
As their ambitions for technological change rise, governments are increasingly
asking how they can measure the performance of their energy innovation systems,
prioritise technologies and benchmark progress internationally. However, in most
countries, information about private energy innovation is much less readily
available and less reliable than that for the public sector. In addition, the
available approaches to filling this gap have never before been compiled in a
single place. By presenting a wide variety of different approaches to tracking
clean energy innovation in the business sector, this Overview demonstrates that
governments and other analysts already have a range of practical options open to
them. For example, the wealth of existing experience with surveys of business
sector innovation, including R&D, has been applied to questions of energy by
several countries. The different approaches that have been followed provide
invaluable insights into their advantages, as well as the main challenges of
gathering reliable energy-related innovation data from the private sector. These
challenges can include the need for upfront investment, institutional capacity
building and consistent classification of technologies. However, the advantages
in terms of policy-relevant insights can outweigh the drawbacks, especially when
data is complemented by other sources of quantitative and qualitative
information. This Overview reviews a range of such sources including financial
fillings, venture capital deals, patents, scientific publications, marketed
products and firm-level perceptions. It recommends that governments seek to
develop and share effective practices in this area and adopt a portfolio of
indicators suited to their own context. Six insights are presented for
governments wishing to strengthen their energy innovation tracking efforts. The
insights highlight the value of increased international cooperation on
methodologies, which echoes the importance of cross-border collaboration to
accelerate clean energy innovation more generally. Published September 2022
License CC BY 4.0 Supported by European Union Share Cite Online table of
contents 1.0  Executive summary read Read online The Energy Mix Get updates on
the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly. Error
Subscribe View sample Explore our other newsletters Browse Topics Countries &
regions Energy system Programmes Explore Reports Data & statistics Learn About
News and commentaries Events Connect Contact Press Jobs arrow-north-east
Delegates arrow-north-east Follow x (formally twitter) facebook linkedin youtube
instagram IEA ©IEA 2024 Terms Privacy Back to top Cite report Close dialog IEA
(2022),  Tracking Clean Energy Innovation in the Business Sector: An Overview ,
IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/reports/tracking-clean-energy-innovation-in-the-
business-sector-an-overview, Licence: CC BY 4.0 Copy to clipboard Share this
report Close dialog Share on Twitter   Twitter Share on Facebook   Facebook
Share on LinkedIn   LinkedIn Share on Email   Email Share on Print   Print
Subscription successful Close dialog Thank you for subscribing. You can
unsubscribe at any time by clicking the link at the bottom of any IEA
newsletter.