Ulaanbaatar City and UNDP Mongolia Sign Memorandum of Understanding | United
Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Mongolia
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
English
Монгол   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our Impact
Get Involved
English Монгол Locations                 Home Mongolia         Ulaanbaatar City
and UNDP Mongolia Sign Memorandum of Understanding
Ulaanbaatar City and UNDP Mongolia Sign Memorandum of Understanding   November
28, 2023         Ms. Matilda Dimovska, UNDP Resident Representative in Mongolia
and Ms. Nominchimeg Odsuren, Deputy Governor of Ulaanbaatar City overseeing the
Social Sector, Green Development, Air and Environmental Pollution   UNDP
Mongolia         Ulaanbaatar, 29 November 2023  – Today marks a crucial occasion
as the Ulaanbaatar City and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in
Mongolia formalize their collaboration.  Ms. Nominchimeg Odsuren, Deputy
Governor of Ulaanbaatar City overseeing the Social Sector, Green Development,
Air and Environmental Pollution, and Ms. Matilda Dimovska, UNDP Resident
Representative in Mongolia, joined forces by signing a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU).  The MoU outlines the framework for a strategic partnership
between Ulaanbaatar City and UNDP, with a focus on implementing joint project
across various domains including efforts to mitigate air pollution, promote
renewable energy consumption, enhance gender equality, and build climate change
adaptation capacity.  Specifically, the partnership aims to address air
pollution in Ulaanbaatar by supporting the installation of renewable energy-
based heating systems for households, with a particular emphasis on supporting
single-woman-headed households, and integration of clean technology solutions
through innovative climate financing by developing National carbon market
framework and regulations. Ms. Nominchimeg Odsuren, Deputy Governor of
Ulaanbaatar City, expressed her thoughts on the collaboration, stating,
"Challenges of air pollution in Ulaanbaatar can be addressed by increasing the
use of clean energy. Within the framework of this cooperation, the transition to
renewable energy will be initiated at the policy and implementation levels." Ms.
Matilda Dimovska, UNDP Resident Representative in Mongolia, emphasized the
organization's commitment to supporting Mongolia's transition to renewable
energy while ensuring an inclusive and equitable development. She stated, "UNDP
is eager to assist Mongolia in its transition to renewable energy, but we are
dedicated to ensuring that this transition is just, benefiting everyone. This is
why we are specifically focusing on supporting single-woman-led households in
Ulaanbaatar through this partnership."  About UNDP  UNDP is the leading United
Nations organization fighting to end the injustice of poverty, inequality, and
climate change. Working with our broad network of experts and partners in 170
countries, we help nations to build integrated, lasting solutions for people and
planet.  For further inquiries:  Erdenesukh Otgonbayar | Communications Analyst
| UNDP in Mongolia | erdenesukh.otgonbayar@undp.org  Ms. Ochmaa Buyankhishig,
Officer of Partnership and Foreign relations | Ulaanbaatar City |
ochmaa.b@ulaanbaatar.mn     UNDP in Mongolia team and Ulaanbaatar City Team
during the MoU Signing   UNDP Mongolia       Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Our
leadership                                                            Funding
and delivery                                                            Legal
framework                                                             Our
partners                                                            United
Nations Volunteers                                                      What we
do                                                      Our focus
Sustainable Development Goals
Our Impact                                                      Blogs
News centre
Publications                                                             Stories
Projects                                                      Get Involved
Careers                                                            Procurement
Contact us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms Of Use facebook twitter
instagram youtube linkedin © 2024 United Nations Development Programme