UNDP report shows women’s rising role in the Kazakhstan renewable energy sector
| United Nations Development Programme     Skip to main content
Kazakhstan
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English
Қазақша Русский   Global
Nav toggle                                                          Search
Who we are
What we do
Our impact
Get involved
English Қазақша Русский Locations                 Home Kazakhstan News center
UNDP report shows women’s rising role in the Kazakhstan renewable energy sector
UNDP report shows women’s rising role in the Kazakhstan renewable energy sector
October 17, 2023         Photo: UNDP Kazakhstan/Batyr Aubakirov         The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in Kazakhstan has  published an in-
depth analysis of the gender balance in the renewable energy sector  (RES) in
Kazakhstan.  The report showed that the proportion of women in Kazakhstan's
energy sector remains lower than that of men. Specifically, the average
representation of women in the coal industry was 22 percent, while in the oil
and gas sector it was 18 percent. In contrast, the percentage of women employed
in the renewable energy sector reached 30 percent, which is a positive indicator
of the comparatively high attractiveness of the renewable energy sector for
women compared to traditional energy sectors.  Despite the positive trend, the
energy sector continues to struggle with gender inequalities, especially at
decision-making levels. The report revealed that in Kazakhstan, women in the
energy sector are concentrated in low-skilled roles, with high percentages of
unskilled women workers, especially in electricity (53 percent). Fewer women
hold managerial (16 percent) or technical (19 percent) positions. In 2022, less
than 10 percent of students, majoring in energy, in Kazakhstan were women.
Photo: UNDP Kazakhstan/Batyr Aubakirov          " Gender equality and the
empowerment of women is also not just a goal itself, is also pre-condition and
it’s part of the solution of the world’s most significant challenges. When women
are empowered and participate in all aspects of life, we unlock a powerful force
of change. Gender equality is integrated seamlessly into UNDP's comprehensive
support to national partners. Supporting a gender-responsive green transition
that reduces inequalities through climate action plans, climate finance and
natural resource management while enhancing women’s resilience and adaptation to
climate change - are priorities outlined in the UNDP's Gender Equality Strategy
2022-2025,”     said Raquel Lagunas, UNDP Global Director of Gender Equality.
Globally, the renewable energy industry employed  8 million people in 2016,
which increased to 11.5 million in 2019 .  By 2050, renewable energy is expected
to create 24.3 million jobs in 139 countries, while 27.7 million jobs will be
lost in fossil fuels, biofuels, and nuclear-related industries . This shift
demonstrates the growth of the renewable energy workforce. The report was
presented at the workshop on women's empowerment in RES in Kazakhstan, which
also served as a platform to discuss key trends and policy-level solutions to
overcome gender inequalities.       Photo: UNDP Kazakhstan/Batyr Aubakirov
“Through our programmes in Kazakhstan, we place great emphasis on gender
equality and work hand in hand with all stakeholders to have women at the
decision-making level. We are investing in new evidence and advocating for
policies that tackle deep-seated negative norms and harmful gender stereotypes
and practices, working towards fully realizing women’s potential. In the energy
sector, UNDP Kazakhstan has offered diversified access to energy sources for
over 60,000 women and supported them with energy-efficient retrofits. Our next
step is to create an enabling environment for this newly established “Women for
Just Transition” network, that will amplify gender advocates' voices across the
country and beyond,”     said Sukhrob Khojimatov, UNDP Deputy Resident
Representative in Kazakhstan.        The event was also used to establish a
robust network of women in the renewable energy sector, empowering them to
champion gender-specific targets within the clean energy industry.     Photo:
UNDP Kazakhstan/Batyr Aubakirov          “The objective of the “Women for Just
Transition” Network is to bring women to the centre of decision-making,
bolstering their political, economic participation, and access to clean energy.
Our strategy encompasses advocacy, collaboration with academia, and fostering a
conducive environment for women across both private and public sectors. To
realize this ambitious vision, the unified commitment of all stakeholders is
crucial”,     said Ainur Sospanova, Chairperson of the Board of Directors of RES
Association “Qazaq Green”.                                 Photo: UNDP
Kazakhstan/Batyr Aubakirov     Gender balance in the renewable energy sector in
Kazakhstan: current status, challenges and solutions PDF (28,194kb)
Download            Explore more Press Releases SDG 7 and the 2030 Agenda: an
EU-funded Regional SDG Platform for Central Asia launched   Today, the prospects
of Kazakhstan's transition to a green economy were discussed at the
Parliamentary Commission meeting on monitoring the implementation of nati...
Read more  Speeches Speech at the meeting of the Parliamentary Commission on
monitoring of the SDGs: clean energy During the 7th SDG Coordination Council
meeting in January, a crucial decision was made to review the current national
SDG indicators.   We analyzed draft Nationa... Read more  Stories Afghan women
in science: I am Shahnaz  Shahnaz is one of the Afghan students studying at
Satbayev University in Almaty, Kazakhstan. She won her scholarship as part of an
EU-funded cross-border initiati... Read more  Speeches Speech of UNDP Deputy
Regional Bureau Director and Deputy Assistant Administrator Nick Rene Hartmann
As we gather today to discuss the pivotal role of women in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM), I extend my heartfelt greetings to you.
So... Read more  News The Small Grants Programme of the Global Environmental
Facility The Small Grants Programme of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF
SGP) invites non-profit organizations in Kazakhstan to participate in a
competition for the d... Read more    Search           Found  0  results.
Did you mean   ?             Sort by            Relevancy Date This site All
UNDP United Nations Development Programme                         Who we are
About us                                                            Our
leadership                                                            Legal
framework                                                            Funding and
delivery
Accountability                                                             Our
partners                                                      What we do
Our focus                                                            All
projects                                                            Accelerator
Lab                                                            Sustainable
Development Goals                                                      Our
impact                                                      News centre
Speeches                                                            Stories
Blogs                                                            Publications
Get involved                                                      Announcements
Jobs                                                            Procurement
Contact us                              Report Fraud, Abuse, Misconduct Submit
social or environmental complaint Scam Alert Terms of Use x-twitter facebook
instagram youtube exposure © 2024 United Nations Development Programme