Table of Contents:  Programme rationale  : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships   : Page:  III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV
Monitoring and evaluation : Page:  DP/DCP/BHR/ “Bahrain aspires to shift from an
economy built on, and driven by, oil wealth to  productive, globally competitive
economy shaped by the government and driven by  pioneering private sector—an
economy that raises  broad middle class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living
standards” Bahrain Vision 2030  Programme rationale  The Kingdom of Bahrain is
an island state with  population of  million (630,744 Bahrainis and 683,818 non-
Bahrainis) With  strong oil sector and public sector investment, growth in
Bahrain has averaged  percent annually between 2009 and Gross domestic product
(GDP) per capita increased from $22,445 million dollars in 2003 to $22,864
million dollars in 2014 (constant price), while the gross national income per
capita was $21,843 dollars Real GDP expansion for 2014 was  percent and the non-
oil economy grew by  percent  Bahrain continues to perform well on the World
Economic Forum scale, ranking 39th in the  Global Competitiveness Report As
result of the government’ economic diversification and private sector led-growth
policies, non-hydrocarbon sectors have shown higher growth rates, marking
gradual shift away from the energy-intensive and natural gas- dependant
industries  By successfully exploiting its resource wealth Bahrain has acquired
high-income status and an improved standard of living for its citizens This is
reflected in the country’ Human Development Index ranking of 824 (very high
human development category), which places it 45th globally In 2015, Bahrain
launched the last MDG report with the support of UNDP and the United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) The report shows that
Bahrain achieved seven of the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)— MDG
was partially achieved due to the country’ geographic characteristics  Bahrain
played an important role in the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda process,
commitment that is safeguarded by aligning national plans, strategic frameworks
and policies to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The Government of
Bahrain will harmonise SDG reporting with existing national indicators This is
an area where it can benefit from UNDP expertise, particularly in terms of
alignment, improved measurement and the monitoring of development indicators
Strong economic growth, investment, and high standards of living have created
foundation that can be used to transform achievements into long-term sustainable
development gains The period of high oil prices, which lasted until 2014,
enabled the Government of Bahrain to boost public spending in the housing,
energy, health and education sectors, thereby satisfying the demand for free
healthcare and education in the face of rapid population growth Almost 32
billion dollars worth of projects have been planned to cover vital
infrastructure the upcoming years, but because fossil fuels comprise 80 percent
of total government revenue8 the  This CPD focuses on Bahraini citizens, with
particular emphasis on less privileged citizens  Information and -Government
Authority  Bahrain Economic Development Board Quarterly Report, March Accessed
online from TradingEconomicscom:  -rank  UNDP HDR, Bahrain National MDG Report,
Ibid  Information and -Government Authority portal, DP/DCP/BHR/ reduction in oil
prices has made the government’ fiscal position volatile Increased borrowing and
utilization of other financial mechanisms has sustained public investment  The
total population of Bahrain grew annually by 38 percent between 2001 and The
country has  large youth population (48 percent under the age of 29 and percent
between the ages of 15 and 29 in 2014) and there is high demand for affordable
housing, unemployment benefits and social services, especially for less
privileged9 citizens There is  housing backlog of over 61,414 units, and the
government has committed to investing $ billion dollars in order to build 25,000
housing units by 2018 for Bahraini citizens Considering the size of the current
waiting list it is imperative that stakeholders review targeting mechanisms and
provide sustainable housing solutions  The government continues to address
challenges related to public administration efficiency; public sector
management; accountability and transparency; undiversified revenues, and the
implementation of sustainable social and environmental policies By recalibrating
the subsidy system, and management of social services, the government can
conserve fiscal resources while improving the quality of social services to
citizens, particularly the less privileged  Data from the Supreme Council of
Women10 shows that out of 40 elected members of parliament there are three
women, and one female minister in the Cabinet Women comprised sixty nine percent
of graduates from public higher education institutions, and 54 percent from
private institutions in 2013 and 11 According to the two latest censuses, women
accounted for 26 percent of the national workforce in 2001 and this number
peaked at 34 percent in 2010 before dropping to 31 percent in 12  His Majesty
The King appointed the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry to publish
report in November 2011 that made recommendations to legal procedures and their
methods of implementation, in an effort to reform the justice, human rights, law
enforcement, security services, and media sectors and bring them in line with
international practices  national commission was created in March 2012 to
follow-up on the implementation of the recommendations  series of constitutional
amendments were endorsed in 2012 (as  result of the National Consensus Dialogue
in 2011), which led to  larger role for the national parliament, and following
elections in 2014 the Government Programme of Action  and biennial budget were
approved by Parliament In accordance with recommendations, the National
Institute for Human Rights was assigned greater responsibilities and brought in
line with the Paris Principles through Law No 26 of 2014, which secured the
institute’ financial and administrative independence Reforms spearheaded by the
government have led to  consolidation of the country’ human rights
infrastructure Efforts are underway to enforce environmental policies and raise
public awareness for environmental conservation With domestic and industrial
demand for natural gas rising, and low energy efficiency levels in the main
sectors, meeting the needs of  growing population poses major challenges Energy
intensity13 is high, making renewable energy, as well as the efficient use of
existing energy resources,  top priority Situated in one of the most water-
stressed regions in the world, Bahrain has limited water resources The country
mainly relies on desalination processes, which is powered by electricity that is
generated through the use of natural gas  ‘Less privileged citizens’, as
outlined in Bahrain’ Decree Law No 18 of 2006-Social Welfare, covers families
and individuals who have no income or  minimum monthly income of $180 dollars
per individual, $390 dollars for  family of less than five individuals, or $400
dollars for  family with more than five members 10 Established by Amiri Order
No44, 11 High Council of Education 12 Information and -Government Authority 13
186 tons of oil/$,000 dollars  DP/DCP/BHR/ After parliament endorsed the
Government Programme of Action , UNDP engaged in intensive consultations with
the government to refocus UNDP programmes UNDP was instrumental in assisting the
government in supporting less privileged households through the formulation and
implementation of social strategies14 for the elderly, disabled and children—the
latter in close collaboration with the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF)15
Furthermore, UNDP played  role in guiding the work of the region’ first
Sustainable Energy Unit, which drives national efforts to diversify Bahrain’
energy sources by enhancing energy efficiency and increasing the use of
renewable energy Together with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, UNDP supported the country’ adoption of two Free Trade Agreements
In addition, the Bahrain Institute for Public Administration (BIPA) is the most
important provider of training, research, and guidance to public administration
UNDP and BIPA launched the Middle East and North Africa Public Administration
Research programme (MENAPAR) in the country to spearhead networking in public
administration-related issues and research throughout the region Although UNDP
gained the trust of several counterparts for long-term development gains, more
can be done to improve the organization’ visibility in, and substantive
contribution to, Bahrain16 Gaps in programme funding were often caused by
coordination challenges and to close to strengthen communication, coordination,
and decision-making for the current country programme The Coordination Committee
agreed on the establishment of  government-funded envelope so projects can be
replenished annually UNDP office costs will be covered through two annual
allocations directly from Ministry of Finance To ensure further alignment with
national processes, the CPD cycle will be aligned with the national plan and
budget these gaps the government formed  Coordination Committee UNDP has
comparative advantage in Bahrain because it is  trusted partner that supports
policy development and institutional capacity building in the areas of economic
diversification, sustainable energy, government efficiency and effectiveness,
and the advancement of women, youth, the elderly, and disabled people As the new
programme rolls out UNDP will continue to work in these areas, in close
coordination with the Bahrain Economic Development Board, the World Bank, the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO), ESCWA, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the Office
of the High Commission for Human Rights, the International Labor Organization,
the Office of Drugs and Crime, UNFPA and the United Nations Information Center
to focus on pertinent issues such as debt reduction, fiscal policy, financial
subsidies, climate change adaptation, environmental degradation, direct
entrepreneurial development, supporting small and medium enterprises (SMEs), and
investment promotion Bahrain Vision 2030, the Government Programme of Action,
and Government Framework are three national strategic documents that feed into
the UNDP framework These documents outline ways to reduce public dependency on
government revenue and the sale of fossil fuels by restructuring the economic
model towards  diversified economy that focuses on tourism, - commerce,
knowledge based economy, innovation, and growth generated by the private sector
Strategies have been devised to reduce government expenditure through enhanced
government efficiency, effectiveness and accountability towards citizens, and
improving social investment and services for less privileged citizens UNDP, in
cooperation with its partners, will support the Government of Bahrain in
implementing the sustainable development agenda The UNDP country programme will
focus on fostering sustainable development in Bahrain by supporting the
transition from  state- 14 UNDP Childhood and Disabilities Project Final
Evaluation Report, May 15 The National Child Strategy was developed in
coordination with UNICEF (the organization is  non -resident agency) 16
Evaluation of the UNDP Bahrain Country Programme 2012-DP/DCP/BHR/ driven, oil-
dependent economy to  diversified, private sector-led economy that emphasizes
new and alternative energies, generates long-term employment for the country’
growing population, and safeguards revenues for less privileged citizens Doing
so will involve developing policies and strategies that incentivize private
sector development and sharpen the country’ competitive advantage globally,
while the introduction of alternative energies will require technical sector
plans and policies that deliver energy efficient resources and economic gains On
the institutional front, UNDP will support Bahrain as it shifts its service
provider model towards being an ‘enabler of services’ This will improve
government efficiency and policy formulation abilities, as well as oversight
capacity It will also ensure stronger government accountability and transparency
UNDP will boost the capacities of the parliament and organisations like the
Bahrain Institute for Political Development (BIPD), and support government
efforts in delivering improved targeting of social benefits and affordable
housing UNDP will focus on upstream policy support, state of the art thinking
and capacity development Deliverables will be channelled through the two
pathways the Government of Bahrain has agreed upon II Programme priorities and
partnerships The first pathway in the new CPD focuses on socio-economic results
linked to the economy and safeguarding less privileged citizens The second
focuses on institutional changes proposed in several governance areas Pathways
and associated activities are highlighted below UNDP will assist the government
by supporting policy formulation and implementation in specific sectors17
Support to economic diversification and efficient social service delivery in
Bahrain UNDP and the Government of Bahrain will develop evidence-based planning
and policy approaches to make investments in priority sectors and achieve the
SDGs UNDP will assist government institutions in developing their capacities to
harness the benefits of preferential market access and  knowledge-based
competitive economy18 In partnership with specialised United Nations
organizations and programmes, UNDP will develop and coordinate the economic
diversification policy and innovation framework in Bahrain Competitiveness
assessments will be used to identify new economic areas that require support,
and compliment trade and export Bahrain has two bilateral free trade agreements
and support will be provided to maximize the utilisation of those agreements
UNDP will complement work carried out by UNIDO on SME development by introducing
policy level interventions that focus on enhancing the legal, regulatory and
institutional SME frameworks In coordination with the Ministry of Works,
Municipality Affairs and Urban Planning, and the Supreme Council of Environment,
UNDP will support the formulation and implementation of the sustainable
development plan for Hawar Island, which covers eco-tourism, employment
generation, and environmental protection If successful, this process will be
scaled-up and replicated at other sites in Bahrain UNDP will work through the
Sustainable Energy Unit to provide policy support on ways to increase reliance
on alternative fuels, and in setting national targets for energy efficiency and
renewable energy The latter will be done through the development and
implementation of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan and National
Renewable Energy Action Plan UNDP will collaborate with UNEP and the Supreme
Council of the Environment to implement the Intended Nationally Determined
Contributions (INDCs) and National Environment Strategy, focusing on
environmental protection, waste management and climate change Emphasis will be
on the integration of energy and environmental considerations, specifically in
the areas of 17 Sectors include health, housing, social development, youth,
industries, education, labour and energy 18 In partnership with Tamkeen and
UNIDO, UNDP will look into launching entrepreneurship programmes for youth and
women  DP/DCP/BHR/ housing, urban planning, the promotion of SMEs and the
implementation of the innovation policy UNDP may assist the Supreme Council for
Water in developing  national water policy using the Integrated Water Resources
Management framework One of the goals of the economic diversification strategy
is to boost social cohesion by safeguarding government revenue and social
protection/safety nets for the less privileged in the country Social initiatives
for children, elderly, and persons with disabilities will be implemented in
participatory manner and UNDP will provide policy advice on international
practice for establishing sustainable social nets UNDP will look into supporting
the establishment of  national committee secretariat to ensure support is
delivered to those who need it Additionally, the organization will work with the
Ministry of Labour and Social Development on ways to restructure and realign
subsidies UNDP and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme will work
together to support the Ministry of Housing as it brings its policies and
strategies on rationalising subsidies, promoting new energy practices, and
renewable technologies in social housing in line with international standards
UNDP assisted the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs in developing the
National Youth Strategy for 2005 to It will now explore possibilities to assist
in the implementation of the new strategy for , which will include youth
engagement and an action plan to implement the strategy UNDP will look for ways
to mobilize resources from the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs and the
private sector, possibly by organizing mobile conferences (via the ‘SDG Bus’) in
order to raise awareness among youth and local communities about SDG goals and
targets19 Bahrain has created Equal Opportunity Units in most ministries and
UNDP will build on this by encouraging public institutions to achieve higher
levels of gender equality and women’ empowerment UNDP will collaborate with the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women) assist the Supreme Council of Women in the implementation of the National
Plan for the Advancement of Bahraini Women () Other efforts involve promoting
the advancement of women by supporting female political candidates and
implementing  national strategy that protects women from domestic violence
Furthermore, support will be provided to stakeholders on the integration of
gender considerations into government and non-government plans In collaboration
with the University of Bahrain (UoB), courses on policy, awareness raising, and
advisory services will take place to promote policies that support women in the
labour market Support to make Bahraini institutions and programmes effective,
responsive and accountable in line with international standards and practices
Because the government strives to modernize its services, internal operations,
and technology (for greater effectiveness and citizen involvement) UNDP will
continue to support BIPA by providing expertise and advice on evidence-based
policy-making and the reengineering of government processes In addition, UNDP
will support MENAPAR in employing new research practices and in policy-making
and partnership building Through MENAPAR, good South-South practices and
knowledge on public administration, - government, and labour arbitration will be
shared UNDP will support the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to position Bahrain as
global partner through the facilitation of regional and international
conferences (including  regional conference on Youth and SDGs) and the
production of  partnership report increase the effectiveness of To
communications between the government and general public, UNDP will assist
Parliamentary Committees in their evidence-based, decision-making efforts This
will help the Parliamentary transparency and accountability, and improve 19 The
‘SDG Bus’ is  mobile, high-tech conference facility that helps raise awareness
and engage youth on SDG implementation  DP/DCP/BHR/ Secretariat better
understand its modified role and new functions, and Members of Parliament will
receive additional support in drafting legislative documents, budgetary
analysis, and adopting relevant international conventions UNDP will assist the
Special Investigations Unit in formulating and implementing  communication
strategy that will improve the handling of witness protection cases and forensic
evidence, and the operationalization of the case management system UNDP will
work with BIPD on an interactive website for awareness- raising and civic
engagement, and provide capacity development training to primary stakeholders on
ways to enhance their roles on anti-corruption, and economic and electronic
security UNDP will advise relevant stakeholders on methods for integrating SDG
targets, setting up appropriate monitoring mechanisms, and ensuring SDG targets
are mainstreamed into existing and future national strategies (thereby allowing
ministries to simultaneously report against relevant SDGs targets) In line with
the 2030 Agenda, special attention will be given to coordinating outreach
efforts for civil society, youth organizations, and local communities when it
comes to increasing their involvement in the implementation of the SDGs III
Programme and risk management This document serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the UNDP programme at the country level Accountability of managers
at the country, regional, and headquarters levels—with respect to country
programmes—is prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures
and the Internal Control Framework At the national level, MoFA will take the
lead in implementing the country programme for Bahrain UNDP will only revert to
direct execution of the programme as  response to force majeure The country
programme will be further detailed in the joint government-UNDP country
programme action plan The board for the country programme is comprised of
members from the Coordination Committee (MoFA, Ministry of Finance, Office of
the First Deputy Prime Minister, the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs, and UNDP)
Board members will make strategic decisions on the country programme, oversee
alignment with national priorities, and ensure it is effectively implemented
according to disaggregated data Meetings will be held at least four times  year
to monitor projects and offer adaptive measures and/or avenues of recourse The
Committee will agree on corrective action should results be delayed or off
target If necessary, towards the end of 2018 the country programme will be
reviewed (prior to the Government Programme of Action ) to ensure full alignment
with bi-annual national and  budget cycles Bahrain is  net contributing country
and the government has committed20 to funding the four-year country programme
with  minimum allocation of $12 million dollars21 According to the bi-annual
national budget cycle, country programme planning takes place every four years
so the mid-term review coincides with the formulation of the new Government
Programme of Action MoFA’ leadership of the Coordination Committee is needed to
ensure  steady flow of funding for the successful implementation of the country
programme and to mitigate the risk of diminished resources National partners
will be responsible for implementing the country programme UNDP will orient
partners on their roles and responsibilities using social screening and
stakeholder response mechanisms The social screening mechanism is applied to the
design and formulation of all programmes and enforced through implementation For
highly technical areas where other 20 The commitment was approved in  cabinet
financial committee on 26 May 21 This amount excludes UNDP office costs
DP/DCP/BHR/ United Nations organizations have  clear comparative advantage, UNDP
will opt for joint- implementation The Coordination Committee will decide
whether to use direct implementation for UNDP support on strategic initiatives
and specific issues such as programme and project monitoring, conferences,
events, outreach activities, development research ( National Human Development
Report), innovation facilities, policy advice, and partnership reports22 One
challenge for UNDP is delivering  high enough level of expertise and cutting-
edge programming to meet the expectations of the Government of Bahrain To
overcome this hurdle UNDP will utilize its expertise in innovation and in the
development of new perspectives, ideas, and approaches UNDP will support the
government in the adoption of new techniques such as proxy indicators that
measure the SDGs, or crowdsourcing that helps stakeholders find solutions for
youth unemployment and climate change The UNDP country office provides efficient
and effective programme delivery by delegating staff to work specifically on the
monitoring and communication of development results IV Monitoring and evaluation
UNDP will provide capacity development to the Information and -Government
Authority to support the national statistics system and ensure adequate
collection and analysis of statistics in the context of the Government Programme
of Action, Government Priority Framework, and the SDGs The UNDP ‘Gender Marker’
will be used to track gender-focused resource allocation as per UNDP policy, and
to improve the integration of gender considerations as the country programme is
implemented UNDP Bahrain, through its enterprise resource planning system Atlas,
will allocate an amount under each project budget to cover the cost of data
collection, monitoring by programme assurance staff, independent monitoring,
evaluation, communications, and audits Projects will utilize data gathered for
evidence, analysis and communication purposes UNDP will rely on institutional
tools for planning, management, monitoring and reporting ( the integrated work
plan and the UNDP results and resources framework) This will enable stakeholders
to establish stronger correlations between national, regional and global results
The Evaluation Plan includes  balanced selection of outcomes and projects, along
with  results-based approach that can be used to identify lessons learned along
with initiatives that can be replicated UNDP will contribute to Bahrain’
knowledge management agenda by supporting MENAPAR’ research capacity;  series of
competitiveness analyses based on the World Economic Forum methodology; the
Sustainable Energy Unit’ studies on Bahrain’ energy mix, and the establishment
of curricula, policy courses, and advisory services on gender-aware economics
for the region 22 UNDP will support MoFA to produce partnership report() that
position Bahrain as  global partner  DP/DCP/BHR/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Bahrain () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Bahrain aspires to shift
from an economy built on oil wealth to  productive, globally competitive
economy, shaped by the Government and driven by  pioneering private sector – an
economy that raises  broad middle-class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living
standards through increased productivity and high-wage jobs OUTCOME : Economic
diversification and efficient social services are sustainable and leave no one
behind RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Growth and development are inclusive
and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and
livelihoods for the poor and excluded Data source and frequency of data
collection, and responsibilities Major partners/partnerships Frameworks
Resources by outcome ($) Outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Indicative
country programme outputs Outcome indicator  % contribution of the hydrocarbon
sectors to GDP  Data source Economic Development Board (EDB) database, annually
Responsibility: EDB Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Tourism (MoIC); Ministry
of Works, Municipality Affairs and Urban Planning (MoWMAUP); National Tourism
Authority; Bahrain Chamber of Commerce; Bahrain Development Bank; Tamkeen;
Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs (MOYSA); Supreme Council for Women (SCW);
UNCTAD; UNIDO, and the EDB Output  Capacity of key institutions developed to
conduct research, coordinate and implement policies that strengthen Bahrain’
competitiveness, innovation, and harness the preferential market access benefits
Other: ,400,000 Baseline: 21% (2013) Target: % Reduction Data source: UNDP
project report Frequency: annually Indicator  No of competitiveness studies
conducted Baseline (2015):  Target:  Data source: Study of utilisation of the
toolkit Frequency: end of cycle Indicator  Toolkit is available for Bahraini
businesses to utilize the preferential market access Baseline: No Target: Yes
Data source: Independent project evaluation; MOWMAUP Frequency: end of cycle
Indicator  Integrated Plan for Hawar Islands developed Baseline (2015): Not
developed Target: Fully developed Ministry of Labour and Social Development
(MoLSD); Ministry of Housing (MoHo); Ministry of Health; MOYSA; Sustainable
Energy Unit (SEU); UN-Habitat; UNEP, and WHO Output  Capacity of relevant
ministries developed to identify, formulate and implement policies, and deliver
efficient and innovative social services that target Bahrain’ less privileged
citizens Other: ,800,000 Outcome indicator  Renewable energy % of total
installed capacity  Data source: Ministry of Energy, EDB database and reports,
annually Responsibility: MoE Baseline (2015): % Target: % Indicator
secretariat to coordinate the social strategies (childhood, elderly, disability)
is functional Baseline: Not functional Target: Fully functional Data source:
Meeting minutes Frequency: quarterly  DP/DCP/BHR/ Data source: MoLSD annual
Report; Independent decentralised project evaluation Frequency: end of cycle
Indicator  % of targeted beneficiaries reached by MoLSD programmes and
initiatives Baseline (Beneficiaries %, 2014): Children (19%), Elderly (10%),
People with disabilities (90%) Target:23 Children (25%), Elderly (30%), People
with disabilities (100%) Data source: MoLSD Annual Report Frequency: end of
cycle Indicator   comprehensive study on social targeting options developed to
inform social entitlements Baseline: Not developed Target: Partially developed
Data Source: MoYSA reports Frequency: end of cycle Indicator  Youth strategy and
action plan updated with reference to SDGs Baseline: Not updated Target:
Partially updated Data source: Housing policy available on MoHo website
Frequency: end of cycle Indicator  Housing policy updated and implemented
Baseline: 2002 Housing Policy not updated Target: fully updated Data source:
MoHo database Frequency: quarterly Indicator  Waiting period for  housing
service by eligible applicants Baseline:  years Target:  years Data source:
Assessment of the Health Improvement Strategy Frequency: end of cycle Indicator
Extent to which the Health Improvement Strategy integrates and references the
SDGs Baseline: Not integrated Target: Fully integrated SCW; Information and
-Government Authority (IGA); Bahrain Institute of Public Administration (BIPA);
UoB; UN Women; United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
(ESCWA); related national and international NGOs, civil society organizations
(CSOs), academic institutions, official bodies and entities Output  Capacity of
institutions developed to integrate and implement gender considerations in
number of policies and strategies Other: ,000,000  Data source: SEU reports,
annually Responsibility: SEU Outcome indicator  National energy efficiency (EE)
targets are set and achieved Baseline: No EE target in place Target: EE target
of % established and achieved Indicator  Extent to which BIPA integrates gender
considerations in public service capacity development programmes Baseline: Not
integrated Target: Partially integrated Data source: Assessment of BIPA
programmes Frequency: end of cycle 23 Disaggregated by sex 10 DP/DCP/BHR/ Data
source: National policies and strategies, UNDP study Frequency: end of cycle
Indicator  No of national policies and strategies reviewed that reference gender
considerations Baseline:  Target:  Data source: UNDP project Frequency: end of
2018 Indicator  No of female candidates running in national or local elections
that are provided with capacity development support Baseline:  Target: 50
Indicator  No of women benefitting from private and/or public measures to
support women’ preparedness for leadership and decision-making roles24 Baseline:
BIPA 2016 end of year records will provide  baseline Target: 50 above baseline
Data source: UNDP project, BIPA and SCW reports Frequency: annually Data source:
UoB records Frequency: end of 2017 Indicator  No of Women economic advancement
modules designed and developed Baseline:  Target: 12 Data source: UoB Frequency:
ongoing Indicator  No of participants in women economic advancement policy
makers course Baseline (2015):  Target: 40 (at least 20% female) SEU; Minister
of Oil and Gas office); National Oil and Gas Authority; Electricity and Water
Authority; Supreme Council of the Environment (SCE), and UNEP Output  Ministries
have the capacity to integrate and implement renewable energy and energy
efficiency policies, environmental standards, climate change considerations and
natural resource management into national strategies and policies Other:
,200,000  Data source: MoLSD Reports, annually Responsibility: MOLSD Outcome
indicator  Social targeting options adopted and implemented Baseline: Not
developed Target: Targeting options partially adopted Data source: MoE
Frequency: annually Indicator  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan developed
Baseline:  Target:  Data source: MoE report Frequency: annually Indicator
National Renewable Energy Action Plan developed Baseline:  Target:  Data source:
SEU Frequency: annually Indicator  No of Energy Efficiency sectoral initiatives
implemented Baseline (2015):  Target:  24 Corresponds to Strategic Plan
indicator  11 DP/DCP/BHR/ Indicator  Extent to which comprehensive measures
implemented to achieve low- emission and climate-resilient development
objectives improved25 Baseline (2015): Not improved Target: Partially improved
Data Source: SCE Frequency: annually  Data source: Parliament homepage, SCW
Frequency: continuous Responsibility: SCW and Parliament Outcome indicator  SP
Indicator : Proportion of women in Parliament (%) Baseline (2014): % Target: 15%
Data source: MoLSD report Frequency: end of cycle Responsibility: MoLSD Outcome
indicator  Special Law for disability entitlement is issued Baseline: No Target:
Yes NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Bahrain aspires to shift from an economy built on
oil wealth to  productive, globally competitive economy, shaped by the
Government and driven by  pioneering private sector – an economy that raises
broad middle-class of Bahrainis who enjoy good living standards through
increased productivity and high-wage jobs OUTCOME : Bahraini institutions and
programmes are effective, responsive and accountable in line with international
standards and practices RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Countries have
strengthened institutions to progressively deliver universal access to basic
services  Data source: IGA database Frequency: annually Responsibility: IGA
BIPA; Civil Service Bureau; EDB; MoYSA; SCW; MoLSD; IGA, and MoFA Outcome
indicator  GoB national statistics information adapted to encompass SDGs Output
Capacity of public administration developed on policy making, government
performance, managing change, innovation and using international practice Other:
,000,000 Baseline: Not adapted Target: Fully adapted Data source: BIPA report
Frequency: annually Indicator  No of participants in relevant BIPA public sector
training courses Baseline (2015): 3000 Target per year: 5000 (at least 20%
female) Data source: MoFA reports Frequency: end of cycle Indicator  No of
communication initiatives supported to position Bahrain’ partnerships, diplomacy
and negotiations Baseline:  Target:  25 Corresponds to Strategic Plan Indicator
12 DP/DCP/BHR/ Data source: BIPA report Frequency: annually Indicator  No of
Regional South-South and triangular cooperation partnerships that deliver
measurable and sustainable development benefits for participants26 Baseline:
partnership Target:  partnerships Indicator  MENAPAR legally registered, and its
by-laws and operational guidelines formulated Baseline: Not formulated Target:
Fully formulated Data source: BIPA report Frequency: annually Data source: BIPA
Annual Report Frequency: annually Indicator  No of research papers and case
studies adopted in MENAPAR through south-south cooperation Baseline (2015):
Target: 20 MOYSA, Tamkeen, SCW, and the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs (MoCA)
Output  Capacity of selected partners from youth organizations strengthened to
support and advocate for national development Other: 500,000  Data source:
Reports from MENAPAR Frequency: annual Responsibility: BIPA Outcome indicator
No of SDG indicators monitored by national information systems Baseline:
Target: At least 50% of relevant indicators Indicator  No of SDG awareness
campaigns co-organized with youth partners Baseline:  Target: 20 Data source:
MoYSA reports Frequency: annually Indicator : No of SDG Youth conferences
conducted with youth partners Baseline:  Target:  Data source: MoYSA reports
Frequency: annually MoCA; Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister; IEA;
National Committee for Information, and MoFA Output  Selected ministries and
stakeholders have the capacity to develop evidence- based plans and policies,
which integrate the SDGs and national statistics, and align them to the
Government Programme of Action Other: 400,000  Data source: Reports from the
(BIPD) and media reports Frequency: regularly Responsibility: Parliament Media &
Outreach Department Outcome indicator  Public sector and other institutions put
in practice knowledge products and effective practices through MENAPAR Indicator
Extent to which the Government Programme of Action 2019 – 2022 is SDG- aligned
Baseline: Assessment of SDGs target mainstreaming into the GPA  to be conducted
in 2017 Target: Fully aligned Data source: UNDP Regional Hub assessment
Baseline:  (No products or practices) Target:  Data source: Government Reports,
relevant Ministries Reports Frequency: annually Indicator  Relevant SDGs are
incorporated in national policies Baseline:  policy Target:  policies 26
Corresponds to Strategic Plan Indicator  13 DP/DCP/BHR/ Data source:  Regional
Statistic Office (GCCSTAT) Indicator  National information system indicators are
linked to the relevant SDGs indicators Baseline: To be defined once SDGs
indicators are defined Target: 90% Data Source: MoCA and IGA Frequency: end of
cycle Indicator  Extent to which updated and disaggregated data is being used to
monitor progress on national development goals aligned with post-2015 agenda27
Baseline: Not started Target: Partially used Public Prosecutor’ Office—Special
Investigation Unit, Judiciary Training Institute, and the National Institution
for Human Rights Other: 450,000 Output  Capacity of relevant institutions that
promote rule of law and accountability developed in line with international
practices Data source: Independent evaluation and project reports Frequency: end
of cycle Indicator  Degree to which SIU adapts international norms and practices
Baseline:  Target:  (on  scale of =to =excellent) Outcome indicator  Parliament
outreach programmes with society strengthened Data source: Judicial and Legal
Studies Institute (JLSI) Frequency: annually Indicator  -library operational for
legal professionals Baseline: No Target: Yes Baseline: No of outreach activities
in 2017 Target: No of outreach activities in 2020 Data source: JLSI database
Frequency: annually Indicator  No of training events for the judicial sector on
international conventions and practices in implementation of international legal
frameworks Baseline:  Target:  Data source: NIHR National Strategy , to be
reported at the end of cycle Indicator  No of training courses for the staff and
partners of NIHR conducted to ensure foundational knowledge of human rights and
outreach mechanisms in line with international standards Baseline:  Target:
Data source: BIPD website tracker software Frequency: continuous Parliament and
the BIPD Output  Key institutions have improved capacity to represent Bahraini
citizens Indicator  No of hits (and downloads) on BIPD website Baseline (2015):
300 (70) Target: 2000 (500) Other: ,270,000 Data source: Survey among members of
parliament 27 Corresponds to Strategic Plan Indicator  14 DP/DCP/BHR/ Frequency:
beginning and end of cycle Indicator  No of standard operating procedures
updated by the Parliament Secretariat Baseline:  Target:  Data source: UNDP
Project report Frequency: annually Indicator  No of capacity development and
awareness sessions conducted with the Parliamentary Committees discussing
international agreements Baseline:  Target: 10 Data source: UNDP project report
Frequency: annually Indicator  No of members of parliament receiving training on
law-making, representation, oversight, and budget Baseline:  Target: 30
_______________ 15