 Disclaimer: The SEU team has made efforts to use the latest data available and
to ensure the accuracy of the content Nevertheless, the Government of Bahrain,
the UNDP, and SEU accept no liability nor give any guarantee for the validity,
accuracy, and completeness of the information provided They assume no legal
liabilities for damages, material or immaterial in kind, caused by the use or
non-use of provided information or the use of erroneous or incomplete
information This Plan is  living document that looks out to long-term needs and
will be modified to reflect new information and changing conditions
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs would like to
thank the First Deputy Prime Minister’ Office, the Electricity and Water
Authority, the National Oil and Gas Authority, the Ministry of Housing, the
Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities, the Ministry of Industry
Commerce and Tourism, the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications, the
Bahrain Defense Force, the Economic Development Board, the Supreme Council for
Environment, large industry groups, academia, and all others who provided
support in the preparation of this Plan with their valuable inputs, time,
guidance, and expertise  “Bahraini nationals and residents enjoy  sustainable
and attractive living environment Protecting our natural environment will
include directing investments to technologies that reduce carbon emissions,
minimize pollution and promote the sourcing of more sustainable energy” -
Bahrain Economic Vision 2030  His Royal Highness Prince Salman Bin Hamad Al
Khalifa The Crown Prince and Deputy Supreme Commander and First Deputy Prime
Minister His Royal Highness Prince Khalifa Bin Salman Al Khalifa The Prime
Minister His Majesty King Hamad Bin Isa Al Khalifa The King of Bahrain
Foreword The Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs: His Excellency, Dr Abdul
Hussain bin Ali Mirza The government of the Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to
the sustainability of the country’ natural resources for future generations, as
well as the protection of the environment There is considerable potential for
undertaking energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives in Bahrain, which
will extend the lifetime of oil and gas reserves, and enable long-term
sustainable development Bahrain’ Economic Vision 2030 puts special emphasis on
providing incentives for reducing and managing electricity demand, and investing
in clean energy technologies; promoting energy efficiency standards to ensure
sustainability; and ensuring better energy and water demand management Progress
has already been achieved, indeed Bahrain has been  pioneer on the way to  more
sustainable future The Kingdom was one of the first countries to install
utility- scale wind turbines on  new commercial development, the iconic World
Trade Center in 2008; and Bahrain was the first country in the GCC to have
district cooling system There are already several private sector renewable
energy systems in operation; and  number of initiatives are underway to
facilitate more efficient energy use In order to unify and consolidate efforts
on energy efficiency and renewable energy, the Sustainable Energy Unit was
established in November The Sustainable Energy Unit is mandated to develop
strategies and policies for the integrated planning of energy sources in the
Kingdom, as well as the rationalization of energy use, and to raise efficiency
in all sectors through coordination with all concerned parties To this end, the
Sustainable Energy Unit, in consultation with key stakeholders, has formulated
the National Renewable Energy Action Plan and the National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan, which were endorsed by the Cabinet (resolution no ) These plans are
an important milestone in setting out Bahrain’ national targets for renewable
energy deployment and the adoption of energy efficiency initiatives As such,
they represent the Kingdom’ efforts to deliver the sustainable energy transition
envisioned in the Economic Vision 2030 and the Government Action Plan 2015-The
plans also represent the implementation of the Kingdom’ regional and
international commitments under the Paris Agreement, the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals, and the League of Arab States Renewable Energy
Framework and Guidelines on Energy Efficiency The initiatives within the plans,
with the support of leadership across all ministries, and from key stakeholders
and members of society, will enable the Kingdom’ sustainable future By working
together, Bahrain can achieve its sustainable energy objectives, which will
benefit the Kingdom economically and environmentally   Foreword United Nations
Resident Coordinator and United Nations Development Programme Resident
Representative: Mr Amin Al Sharkawi In recognition of both the need and
potential to diversify Bahrain’ energy sector to include renewable sources, and
to develop innovative ways to ensure the most efficient use of energy, the UNDP
has been working with the Government of Bahrain for  number of years to respond
to the important issue of sustainable energy The UNDP is delighted to support
the Office of the Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs in establishing the
Sustainable Energy Unit, for the benefit of the people of Bahrain, and to
further the sustainable development of the country The publication of the
National Renewable Energy Action Plan and the National Energy Efficiency Plan is
an important milestone in Bahrain’ national development The leadership of the
Kingdom of Bahrain is to be applauded for taking active steps towards
sustainable future The plans align closely with the framework of the UN
Secretary General’ Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) Initiative that supports
universal access to modern energy services, acceleration in energy efficiency
improvements, and the increased use of renewable energy in the energy mix It
also supports the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development which includes the
United Nation’ 17 Sustainable Development Goals for social progress, economic
growth and environmental protection By focusing on renewable energy and energy
efficiency, the Kingdom of Bahrain is supporting the realization of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goal No : Ensuring acess to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all The Bahraini National Renewable
Energy Action Plan and the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan are on par
with similar initiatives in other Arab countries, and will help to promote the
exchange of successful international experiences for the benefit of Bahrain’
ambitious development agenda To achieve these objectives, the UNDP will
facilitate access to expertise from within the UN system and the international
energy community Most importantly, the plans will become  building block to
achieve Bahrain’ Economic Vision 2030 and has energy efficiency and renewable
energy as top priorities This vision marks  new era of development and
modernization for the Kingdom of Bahrain and the UNDP will continue to support
Bahrain’ leadership in implementing these important sustainable energy
initiatives  Table of Contents Acknowledgements  AcronymsandAbbreviations12
ExecutiveSummary 13 Bahrain’SustainableEnergyAgenda 19
InternationalCommitments 19  NationalCommitments21   TheSustainableEnergyUnit 22
Bahrain’EnergyOutlook23   OilandGas23   ElectricityandWater25
ProjectedEnergyDemand 32  RenewableEnergyOpportunities34   Solar 34   Wind 40
WastetoEnergy44   OtherRenewableSources 47
SummaryofRenewableEnergyOpportunities 48  RenewableEnergyActionPlan 51
Targets51   DeploymentStrategy52   BenefitsandImpact 53
FacilitatingRenewableEnergyDeployment54   PoliciestoAttractPrivateInvestment 56
ProjectstoAchieveTargets 60   SolarSystemsforGovernmentBuildings 60
SolarSystemsforPublicWorks60   SolarSystemsforNewHousingUnits61
RenewableEnergySystemsinUrbanDevelopments 62   Large-
scaleSolarFarmonAvailableLand63   SludgetoEnergy64
RenewableEnergyPlantsbyLargeIndustryGroups64   NearShoreandOffshoreWindFarms 65
EWARenewableEnergyInitiative 65  GoingForward 66  Governance66
IntegratingRenewablesinMinistries’ActionPlans 68  ToolsEnablingRenewableEnergy
68   Funding69   SettingPlanintoMotion70   72 References 10 List of Figures
Figure:Bahrain’NationalandInternationalCommitments 19
Figure:EnergySupplyandDemandTrends 24 Figure:BahrainPowerSupply, 25
Figure:ElectricityMonthlyConsumption, 26
Figure:ElectricityMonthlyConsumptionbySector, 27
Figure:SummerDayElectricityDemand 28 Figure:WinterDayElectricityDemand 28
Figure:EstimatedFutureElectricityCost 29
Figure:ElectricityandWaterTariffIncreases 30
Figure10:ProjectedElectricityConsumptionDemand 32
Figure11:GasConsumptionForecastforElectricityProduction 33
Figure12:SolarRadiationinBahrain 34 Figure13:EstimatedLCOEforSolarPVaboveMW 37
Figure14:EstimatedLCOEforSolarPVlessthanMW 37
Figure15:WindAtlasDevelopedbytheUniversityofBahrain 40
Figure16:WindSpeedMeasurementsAcquiredfromTallMastatHeight 41
Figure17:CostBreakdownofTypicalWindFarminEuropeanWaters, 43 List of Tables:
Table:ElectricityPeakdemand 27 Table:BaselineDefinitionforand 31
Table:RenewableEnergyInstalledCapacitiesinSelectedArabCountries, 31
Table:LCOEOnshoreWindbyRegion,2014- 42 Table:BiogasProductionPotential 45
Table:ProsandConsofSelectedRenewableEnergyTechnologies 48
Table:RenewableEnergyTargets 51 Table:BahrainNetMeteringScheme 56
Table:BahrainFeed-inTariffScheme 58 Table10:BahrainRenewableEnergyMandateScheme
59 11 ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS Alba  BAPCO  BD BIPV   CIO CO2   CSP DEWA  EDB
EU EWA  GCC  GCCIA GWh  INDC  IPP  IWPP  kW  kWh  kWh/m2 kWp  MMbtu Mmcf Mtoe
MW  NOGA NREAP PV  SDGs   SEU UNDP Wp  WPCC AluminumBahrain
BahrainPetroleumCompany Bahrainidinar building-integratedphotovoltaic
CentralInformationOrganization carbondioxide concentratingsolarpower
DubaiElectricityandWaterAuthority EconomicDevelopmentBoard EuropeanUnion
ElectricityandWaterAuthority GulfCooperationCouncil GCCInterconnectionAuthority
gigawatthours IntendedNationallyDeterminedContribution independentpowerproducer
independentpowerandwaterproducer kilowatt kilowatthours
kilowatthourspersquaremeter kilowattpeak millionBritishthermalunits
millioncubicfeet milliontonnesofoilequivalent megawatts
NationalOilandGasAuthority NationalRenewableEnergyActionPlan photovoltaic
SustainableDevelopmentGoals SustainableEnergyUnit
UnitedNationsDevelopmentProgramme peakWatt WaterPollutionControlCenter 12
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY BACKGROUND The Kingdom of Bahrain, despite being  small island
country, possesses abundant renewable energy resources, including solar and wind
that have been largely untapped Renewable energy is  clean, non-exhaustible, and
local source of energy, an important component for building  reliable,
resilient, and sustainable energy system Today the Kingdom’ power generation
system relies exclusively on natural gas, which is  scarce and diminishing
resource Current projections on the availability of gas reserves suggest that
Bahrain will no longer be able to meet its domestic consumption, and will have
to rely on imported gas as early as By introducing renewable energy into the
energy mix and adopting energy efficiency policies, Bahrain can reduce its
reliance on imported energy, prolong the lifetime of the indigenous gas
resource, and optimize its economic value In clear recognition of the benefits
of renewable energy, the Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to the development of
renewable energy initiatives by harnessing the country’ renewable energy
resources The National Renewable Energy Action Plan (NREAP) represents the
Kingdom’ efforts to deliver the sustainable energy transition envisioned in the
Economic Vision 2030 and the Government Action Plan 2015-This Plan also
represents the implementation of the Kingdom’ regional and international
commitments under the Paris Agreement, the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals, and the League of Arab States Renewable Energy Framework The
Plan identifies feasible renewable energy options for Bahrain, sets the targets,
and proposes policies and actions to harness the identified renewable energy
opportunities The NREAP has been prepared by the Sustainable Energy Unit (SEU)
through broad consultations with key stakeholder groups, including the
Electricity and Water Authority, the National Oil and Gas Authority, the
Ministry of Housing, the Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities,
the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Tourism, the Supreme Council for
Environment, the Economic Development Board, the Bahrain Defense Force, large
industry groups, academia, and others 13 TARGETS Based on  broad survey of
Bahrain’ resource potential, economic viability of various renewable energy
technologies, the current energy situation, and the country’ unique geographical
conditions, the Plan sets  national renewable energy target of: - % by 2025 -
10% by 2035 The targets are based on the projected peak load electricity
capacities, excluding industry’ own generation, and equate to 255 MW of
installed capacity by 2025, and to 710 MW by The targets will be met by
proposed renewable energy mix consisting of solar, wind, and waste to energy
technologies BENEFITS AND IMPACT Integrating renewable energy in the energy mix
can help Bahrain optimize the use of indigenous gas resources, reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, make the economy more competitive, decrease electricity peak
demand, and improve energy security in the long- term Achieving the % renewable
energy target will result in: - Clean energy generation of approximately 480 GWh
per year - Annual savings of ,700,000 MMbtu of natural gas - Annual financial
savings of BD  million - Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 392,000 tonnes
of CO2 per year - Attraction of more than BD 140 million of investment 14
POLICIES TO ACHIEVE TARGETS To achieve the stated targets and attract private
sector investment in renewable energy technologies, the following complementary
policies are proposed: Policy  Policy  Policy  Renewable Energy Mandate for New
Buildings Tender-based Feed-in Tariffs Net Metering Attract private investors to
develop renewable energy projects through  competitive procurement process
Require new buildings and real estate developers to integrate renewable energy
technologies in the building design Enable consumers to generate on-site, grid-
connected, renewable energy power Objective Residential, commercial and
industrial electricity customers Renewable energy developers and large
electricity customers New building and real estate developers Target group
Reduced electricity bill through on-site power generation and the ability to
credit the excess electricity fed back to the grid Reducing energy demand of the
building from the grid (reduced electricity bill) Long-term power purchase
agreement Incentive for target group The details of each policy will be outlined
in relevant documents and regulations 15 RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT STRATEGY
AND PROJECTS In Bahrain, land is  scarce resource, as such the deployment
strategy of renewable energy focuses on decentralized urban generation, large-
scale generation on available land, and offshore generation  DECENTRALIZED URBAN
GENERATION ( MW) Decentralized renewable energy applications, such as rooftop
solar photovoltaic (PV), building integrated PV, solar lighting, biogas plants,
and micro wind turbines, can be successfully integrated in the urban environment
This allows not only transitioning to  more sustainable energy system, but also
engages all members of the society, including households, businesses, academia,
and governmental authorities in building smart, modern, and resilient cities and
communities Viable opportunities for decentralized urban generation include: -
Solar systems for new housing units - Solar systems for government buildings -
Decentralized solar in urban developments (solar lighting, solar parking) -
Decentralized rooftop solar on existing residential and commercial buildings -
Other decentralized renewable energy systems (biogas, micro wind) II LARGE-SCALE
GENERATION ON AVAILABLE LAND ( MW) Economies of scale favor the development of
large-scale renewable energy power plants Therefore, it is prudent to consider
the deployment of large-scale renewable energy where land is available Viable
opportunities for large-scale generation on land include: - Solar farm on Askar
landfill site - EWA renewable energy initiative ( MW hybrid solar and wind
project) - Utility-scale renewable energy plants by large industry groups -
Solar farms in new town developments - Waste to energy plant at the Tubli
wastewater treatment plant - Renewable energy plants on other available land 16
III OFFSHORE GENERATION (50 MW) Offshore renewable energy development presents
an opportunity to pursue large-scale generation and achieve higher renewable
energy targets Bahrain has  good wind regime and shallow waters, therefore
pursuing offshore wind power could be  cost-competitive option Other offshore
renewable energy options include integrating renewable energy in offshore large
infrastructure projects connecting Bahrain and its GCC neighbors This will not
only generate clean energy, but also strengthen the regional partnerships in
building  more sustainable future Identified offshore generation opportunities
include: - Near shore or offshore wind farms - Integrating renewable energy
technologies in large infrastructure projects (causeways and railway systems)
GOVERNANCE  SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UNIT The Sustainable Energy Unit (SEU) was
established in November 2014 and is the designated agency for promoting
sustainable energy policies and practices in the Kingdom of Bahrain As such, the
SEU will lead the coordination efforts in implementing the NREAP, and will
provide technical assistance in the deployment of renewable energy projects The
SEU’ responsibilities are to: - Coordinate implementation activities among all
stakeholders through developing partnerships and organizing regular coordination
meetings; - Inform stakeholders on the progress of implementation of the NREAP;
- Draft renewable energy policy regulations and support the establishment of
standard operating procedures for their implementation; - Carry out feasibility
studies, resource potential assessment, cost-benefit analysis of various
technology options and business models, as well as oversee the implementation of
pilot projects; - Provide technical assistance in developing tendering
documents, drafting requests for proposals, evaluating bids, and assessing
outcomes of pilot projects; - Carry out information dissemination and awareness
raising campaigns through launching  dedicated website, organizing press
conferences, promoting renewable energy at various public events; - Organize and
support capacity building and training activities for government and non-
government stakeholders 17 II NREAP IMPLEMENTATION FOLLOW-UP COMMITTEE The
Committee will be composed of high-level representatives of key government and
non- government institutions who would play the role of change agents to provide
guidance, support and oversight of the implementation process of NREAP The
Committee will be chaired by the Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs, and
may include representatives from the Electricity and Water Authority, the
Ministry of Finance, the Office of the First Deputy Prime Minister, the Ministry
of Industry and Commerce, the Ministry of Housing, the Ministry of Works, Urban
Planning and Municipalities, the Ministry of Oil, and the Supreme Council for
Environment The Committee will meet on  quarterly basis The Committee’
responsibilities are to: - Oversee the implementation of the NREAP and
facilitate its execution; - Identify action items to overcome implementation
issues and challenges; - Put recommendations and suggest actions to relevant
ministries; - Decide on making changes in the NREAP if required; - Discuss the
progress in the implementation process 18  BAHRAIN’ SUSTAINABLE ENERGY AGENDA
The Kingdom of Bahrain is committed to the development of sustainable energy
envisioned in the Economic Vision 2030, the Government Action Plan , and as
party to regional and international agreements Figure : Bahrain’ National and
International Commitments International League of Arab States, Arab Ministerial
Council for Electricity Paris Agreement Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Bahrain committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through submission of its
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) “Each Arab State shall adopt
national renewable energy action plan (NREAP) Each of the member states shall
develop  National Energy Efﬁciency Action Plan (NEEAP)” Goal No : “Ensure access
to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all” Government
Action Plan () National Renewable Energy Action Plan (2017) Economic Vision 2030
“Protecting our natural environment will include directing investments to
technologies that reduce carbon emissions, minimize pollution and promote the
sourcing of more sustainable energy” “Improve the efﬁciency of electricity and
water consumption and reduce waste” “Find new sources of renewable energy to
meet the growing demand in Bahrain” Renewable Energy Targets: % by 2025 and 10
by 2035 National  INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS THE PARIS AGREEMENT In December
2015, the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change took place in Paris As  result, 195 nations adopted
the Paris Agreement on taking action toward holding the increase of global
average temperature to well below ° above pre-industrial levels The Paris
Agreement is  historic international treaty to combat climate change, and
accelerate actions and investments needed for  sustainable low carbon future On
22 April 2016 Bahrain signed the Paris Agreement, and expressed its support
through publication of its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) in
November 2015 [] The INDC is an official pledge by the Kingdom to support the
global efforts in combating climate change, by taking specific actions to reduce
its own greenhouse gas emissions Renewable energy and energy efficiency
represent key initiatives in Bahrain’ INDC, as both hold great potential to
reducing greenhouse gas emissions as well as promoting sustainable national
development 19 THE UNITED NATIONS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS In September
2015, at the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit, world leaders
officially adopted  new agenda entitled “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development” The new global agenda includes 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets The SDGs represent  consensus of the
193 member states of the United Nations to end poverty, protect the planet, and
ensure the prosperity for all SDG  calls the countries to “Ensure access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all” [] This goal is
supported by five targets to be achieved by 2030: ;; Ensure universal access to
affordable, reliable and modern energy services ;; Increase substantially the
share of renewable energy in the global energy mix ;; Double the global rate of
improvement in energy efficiency ;; Enhance international cooperation to
facilitate access to clean energy research and technology, including renewable
energy, energy efficiency and advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technology, and
promote investment in energy infrastructure and clean energy technology ;;
Expand infrastructure and upgrade technology for supplying modern and
sustainable energy services for all in developing countries, in particular least
developed countries, small island developing States, and land-locked developing
countries, in accordance with their respective programmes of support The
government of the Kingdom of Bahrain embraced the challenge of meeting the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015, and expressed its commitment to the
Post-2015 development agenda process at the press conference in the UN
Sustainable Development Summit, held on 20 September LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES –
ARAB RENEWABLE ENERGY FRAMEWORK In April 2013, the Arab Ministerial Council for
Electricity of the League of Arab States adopted the “Arab Renewable Energy
Framework,” which seeks to promote renewable energy development in the Arab
region (Arab Guidelines) Article  of these Guidelines states that “Each Arab
State shall adopt  national renewable energy action plan (NREAP), setting out
Arab States’ national targets for the share of energy from renewable sources
consumed in electricity generation,” [] The NREAP is drafted in accordance with
the template suggested by the Arab Guidelines 20  NATIONAL COMMITMENTS Pursuing
renewable energy is not only an international commitment of Bahrain, but also of
national interest Today the Kingdom’ power generation system exclusively relies
on natural gas, which is  scarce and diminishing resource Current projections on
the availability of gas reserves suggest that Bahrain will no longer be able to
meet its domestic consumption, and will have to rely on imported gas as early as
An increased reliance on imported energy is highly likely to increase energy
prices for consumers Renewable energy is  clean, non-exhaustible, and local
source of energy, an important component for building  reliable, resilient, and
sustainable energy system Integrating renewable energy in the energy mix can
help Bahrain optimize its use of indigenous gas resources, make the economy more
competitive, and improve energy security in the long-term The development of
sustainable energy is in line with the Kingdom’ Economic Vision The Economic
Vision 2030 recognizes economic, social and environmental sustainability as one
of its key principles It indicates explicitly that the economic growth must
never come at the expense of the environment and the long-term well-being of the
people Furthermore, it encourages investment in technologies that reduce carbon
emissions, minimize pollution, and promote sustainable energy [] In clear
recognition of the benefits of renewable energy, the Kingdom of Bahrain is
committed to the development of low-carbon energy initiatives by harnessing the
country’ renewable energy resource base In 2015, the Government adopted the
Government Action Plan 2015- 2018 to deliver sustainable change in line with the
Economic Vision The Government Action Plan reflects the Government of Bahrain’
strategic priorities over the next four years, and seeks to capitalize on the
Kingdom’ resources and capabilities to meet the needs of all Bahrainis Under the
“Environment and Urban Development” pillar, the Government made commitments to
finding suitable sources of renewable energy to meet the growing energy demand
in Bahrain To achieve this, the Government will seek to explore the optimal
renewable energy options such as wind and solar energy, and will take necessary
steps to implement pilot projects to pave the way for larger-scale deployment []
21  THE SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UNIT In November 2014, under Cabinet Resolution
/2238, the government established the Sustainable Energy Unit (SEU) to lead and
promote sustainable energy policies and practices in the Kingdom of Bahrain SEU
was established under the office of Minister of Energy, with the support of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) [] Due to the broad central
government restructuring in summer 2016, SEU became one of the initiatives
governed by the Office of the Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs The key
objectives of SEU are to develop  cohesive sustainable energy policy framework
to promote renewable energy, energy efficiency, and conservation in the country
SEU will also work towards bridging the legal, institutional, and capacity gaps
in order for Bahrain’ energy sector to meet future challenges The mandate of SEU
includes: - Synergizing and consolidating existing efforts of public, private
and international institutions in achieving goals as stated in the Bahrain
Economic Vision 2030; - Supporting the creation of an enabling environment for
energy efficiency and renewable energy technology transfer, and private sector
investments; - Supporting the development of necessary policies, regulations and
standards across various sectors; - Promoting replication and up-scaling of
successful pilot project and initiatives across the Kingdom; - Strengthening
national capacity on deployment of renewable energy and energy efficiency
technologies; - Coordinating the implementation of national, regional and
international obligations related to energy efficiency and renewable energy; and
- Raising public awareness on the benefits of energy efficiency and renewable
energy The NREAP represents one of the key components of the Kingdom’ efforts to
implement its national, regional and international commitments in the field of
sustainable energy development and climate change It identifies the viable
renewable energy options, sets the targets, and proposes policies and actions to
harness the identified renewable energy opportunities SEU under the guidance of
the Minister of Electricity and Water Affairs will lead the coordination of the
implementation of the Plan 22  BAHRAIN ENERGY OUTOUTLOOK  OIL AND GAS In 2014,
Bahrain’ total energy consumption came from two sources: oil (17%) and natural
gas (83%) To meet its domestic energy demand Bahrain relies on its indigenous
hydrocarbon resources Bahrain was the first country in the GCC region to
discover oil reserves in Crude oil production reached its peak in 1970, and
since then it has been gradually declining In 2014, crude oil production
amounted to 202,000 barrels  day Bahrain’ crude oil production came from two
fields: the Bahrain field with  production of around 49,000 barrels  day and the
Abu Saafa joint offshore field with Saudi Arabia, with  production of around
154,000 barrels  day [] At current production levels, the oil reserves have
projected lifetime of about 11 years Natural gas is the backbone of the energy
system and economy of Bahrain Today Bahrain entirely relies on natural gas for
its power and water generation Natural gas is also economically critical for
operation of the Kingdom’ industrial sector In 2014, Bahrain produced 728
billion cubic feet of natural gas [] All natural gas has been used for domestic
consumption in the following sectors: 41% by the manufacturing sector; 33% for
power and water generation; and 25% was re-injected for enhanced oil recovery []
The projected lifetime of natural gas reserves is about 15 years In 2014, the
manufacturing sector was the third most important sector in the economy,
accounting for 15% of the Kingdom’ GDP, after oil and gas (23%) and financial
services (%) [] It also provided for 18% of all private sector employment [] The
Economic Development Board reinforces the fact that it is economically more
advantageous to save the natural gas for consumption by the more productive
sectors of the economy, such as manufacturing, and find alternative cost-
competitive energy sources for power and water generation [] Figure  depicts
historical energy supply and demand trends in Bahrain It shows that the overall
levels of energy production and consumption have increased year on year As the
population continues to grow, and the limited amount of fossil fuels begins to
diminish, it may not be possible for Bahrain to meet its growing energy demand
without relying on imported energy Bahrain is already planning to import natural
gas as early as 2018, and the steps are underway to complete the construction of
an LNG import facility by 23 Figure : Energy Supply and Demand Trends
ELECTRICITY AND WATER  ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AND DEMAND (Mtoe) (millions) With the
adoption of the Electricity Law in 1996, the private sector has been allowed 16
14 12 10      -           to participate in the power generation market [10]
Today Bahrain has one of the most privatized power generation markets in the
region Independent power producers (IPPs) generate 80% of grid-supplied
electricity In 2014, the Kingdom had ,204 MW of installed capacity Of this ,274
MW were captive power plants, owned and operated by large industry groups such
as Alba, BAPCO and GPIC Independent power and water producers (IWPPs) own and
operat  ,100 MW, and 825 MW are owned and operated by Electricity and Water
Authority (EWA) In addition, Bahrain can import and export electricity through
its 600 MW capacity GCC Energy Production Energy Consumption Export Population
interconnection with the GCCIA (the GCC Interconnection Authority) Power
produced by captive power plants is consumed on site by large industry groups
Power produced by IWPPs and EWA is distributed and sold to customers by EWA EWA
is the sole body responsible for An increased reliance on imported energy is
highly likely to result in an increase of energy electricity transmission,
distribution, and grid operation prices for consumers In anticipation of the
diminishing gas supply, the government adopted  new gas pricing policy in Under
this policy, the price of natural gas sold to domestic companies will increase
by USD 25 per MMbtu1 each year on  April The pricing policy will be reviewed
when the price reaches USD  per MMbtu2 by  April 2021 [] The first price
increase took place on  April 2015, from USD 25 to 50 per MMbtu Figure : Bahrain
Power Supply, 2014 Introducing renewable energy into the energy mix and adopting
energy efficiency policies, can help Bahrain reduce its reliance on imported
energy, prolong the lifetime of the indigenous natural gas resource, and
optimize its economic value This approach will improve energy security in the
long-term and will have an overall positive impact on competitiveness of the
IPP, 80% Power Supplied by Industrial Own manufacturing industry and
environmental performance of the energy sector EWA to Other Generation, 34%
Customers 66% EWA, 20%  Equivalent to BD 0942 per MMbtu  Equivalent to BD 508per
MMbtu 24  ELECTRICITY AND WATER  ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AND DEMAND With the adoption
of the Electricity Law in 1996, the private sector has been allowed to
participate in the power generation market [10] Today Bahrain has one of the
most privatized power generation markets in the region Independent power
producers (IPPs) generate 80% of grid-supplied electricity In 2014, the Kingdom
had ,204 MW of installed capacity Of this ,274 MW were captive power plants,
owned and operated by large industry groups such as Alba, BAPCO and GPIC
Independent power and water producers (IWPPs) own and operat  ,100 MW, and 825
MW are owned and operated by Electricity and Water Authority (EWA) In addition,
Bahrain can import and export electricity through its 600 MW capacity GCC
interconnection with the GCCIA (the GCC Interconnection Authority) Power
produced by captive power plants is consumed on site by large industry groups
Power produced by IWPPs and EWA is distributed and sold to customers by EWA EWA
is the sole body responsible for electricity transmission, distribution, and
grid operation Figure : Bahrain Power Supply, 2014 IPP, 80% Power Supplied by
EWA to Other Customers 66% Industrial Own Generation, 34% EWA, 20% 25 In 2014,
the Kingdom consumed 24,705 GWh Grid electricity supplied by EWA accounted for
15,186 GWh, or 66% of total electricity consumption The remaining 34% was
generated and consumed by large industrial users All the electricity was
produced from natural gas The residential sector used most of the grid
electricity, at 46% of total grid consumption Grid electricity consumption grew
from ,516 GWh in 2000 to 15,186 GWh in 2014, with an annual average growth rate
of % The commercial sector was the second-largest user, accounting for %,
followed by the industrial sector, at % The agricultural sector was  marginal
user at % [11] Similar to other GCC countries, Bahrain has  large seasonal
variation in electricity consumption Due to very hot summers, electricity
consumption during the months from May to October increases significantly This
is mainly due to the heavy use of air-conditioning units, which account for
60%-65% of electricity usage in buildings In 2014, the highest peak electricity
consumption occurred in August (,720 GWh) and the lowest electricity consumption
occurred in January (701 GWh) Total electricity consumption in August was two
and  half times higher than electricity consumption in January Figure :
Electricity Monthly Consumption, 2014 1900 1700 1500    1300 1100 900 700 500
Total 26 Figure : Electricity Monthly Consumption by Sector, 2014 1000 900 800
700 600    500 400 300 200 100  Residential Commercial Industry Agriculture
Aside from seasonal peaks, Bahrain also has daily electricity consumption peaks
Bahrain has two daily peaks: the first peak occurring between 11:00 and 16:00,
and the second occurring between 18:00 and 19:Table  shows peak consumption on
typical summer day (31 August 2015), compared with electricity consumption
during  typical winter day (31 January 2015) Table : Electricity Peak demand Day
Peak Night Peak Time MW Time MW 13:39 ,441 18:36 ,189 31 August 2015 12:03 ,137
18:09 ,208 31 January 2015 Source:EWA To meet peak demand the government needs
to have extra generation capacity units, which is costly According to the World
Bank analysis of the demand curve recorded in 2014, the network required an
additional 500 MW, which operates for less than 50 hours  year The estimated
cost for the government to maintain 500 MW over  20-year period is over USD 600
million3 This amount excludes the fuel costs of producing electricity, and
variable operation and maintenance costs [11] The inclusion of solar PV power in
the energy supply mix can provide  valuable benefit by reducing the daytime
peak, as the solar radiation hours correlate with day peaking hours  Equivalent
to BD 226 million 27 Figure : Summer Day Electricity Demand Source:EWA Figure :
Winter Day Electricity Demand Source:EWA 28  COST OF POWER GENERATION As the
power in Bahrain is entirely produced from natural gas, the cost of power
generation largely depends on the fuel price The current cost of power
generation is 22 fils/kWh The electricity transmission cost is  fils/kWh, and
the distribution cost is  fils/kWh In total, it costs 29 fils/kWh for EWA to
supply power to end customers This cost is based on  natural gas price of USD
per MMbtu As the cost of natural gas will increase by USD 254 per year, the cost
of electricity supply will also increase According to unofficial expert
estimations, the cost of electricity supply (including transmission and
distribution costs) from natural gas could increase to 36 fils/kWh by 2020,
based on the planned gas price increases (see Figure ) Figure : Estimated Future
Electricity Cost 39 37 35    /     33 31 29 27 25 Historically natural gas has
been the most cost effective way to provide the country with electricity
However, from an economic and financial perspective, planned gas price increases
make renewable energy, such as solar and wind power,  cost-competitive
alternative source of energy, in the electricity generation mix Up until
recently electricity and water tariffs were subsidized Effective from  March
2016, new electricity and water tariffs have been applied to electricity and
water consumers in accordance with the new tariff schedule announced by the
Electricity and Water Authority The electricity tariffs will be gradually
increased to meet the cost of power generation of 29 fils/kWh by The new tariffs
are applicable to all residential, commercial, and industrial consumers Bahraini
citizens holding  single EWA account are exempt from tariff increases [12]
Equivalent to BD 0942 per MMbtu 29 Figure : Electricity and Water Tariff
Increases Electricity Tariffs (Fils/ kWh) Domestic Residential Tariff
(kWh/month)   16 Water Tariffs (Fils/ m3) Domestic Residential Tariff (m3/month)
2016 2019 2018 80 200 450 750 25 80 200 300 500 750 200 300 400 600 750 2016  13
19 2017 13 18 22 2018 21 23 25 2019 29 29 29 2017 From  - 3000 From 3001 - 5000
More than 5000 From  - 60 From 61 - 100 More than 100 Non- Domestic Tariff
(kWh/month) Non- Domestic Tariff (m3/month) From  - 5000 From 5001 -250000 From
250001 -500000 More than 500000 16 16 16 16 16 19 21 29 16 22 23 29 16 25 26 29
16 29 29 29 From  - 450 More than 450 300 400 550 650 750 400 500 600 700 750 *
Electricity and water tariff increases do not apply to Bahraini nationals
holding  single EWA account  SHARE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY According to the League
of Arab States Arab Renewable Energy Framework, countries need to present
unified energy baseline based on 2010 in terms of energy generation from all
sources, both renewable and non-renewable The energy baseline for 2010 and 2014
are presented in Table  below Currently the share of renewable energy in the
electricity generation mix is negligible In 2014, two pilot renewable energy
projects were in place:   MW building-integrated wind project at the Bahrain
World Trade Center; and   MW solar PV system installed by BAPCO The BAPCO  MW PV
plant is  distributed smart solar PV system deployed in three locations: () 501
kW at the campus of Bahrain University; ()  MW on the BAPCO refinery car parking
lot; and ()  MW at Awali town The BAPCO PV plant was installed as  pilot project
to test and demonstrate the technical viability of the project [13] 30 Table :
Baseline Definition for 2010 and 2014 2010 2014 Installed Capcity Generated
Electricity Installed Capcity Generated Electricity MW GWh MW GWh ,157 ,157
,274 ,274  ,431 12,142 12,142  14,000 14,000  26,142 ,925 ,925  ,279 ,274  ,204
15,186 15,186  14,008 14,000  29,194 EWA supplied electricity Natural gas
Renewable sources Industry' own generation Natural gas Renewable sources TOTAL
Source: EWA Electricity Statistics (2014) The utilization of renewable energy in
the rest of the Arab world is comparatively higher Table  presents an overview
of non-hydro renewable energy installed capacities, and renewable energy
projects under construction in other Arab countries in In the past two years,
these countries have progressed and more renewable energy projects have been
installed The deployment of wind power was leading in earlier years in countries
with favorable wind regimes However, the trend is moving towards more solar PV
installations as the prices have decreased, as evidenced by the number of
projects under construction in each country [14] Table : Renewable Energy
Installed Capacities in Selected Arab Countries, 2014 Solar (MW) Wind (MW) Under
Construction Under Construction Installed Installed TOTAL TOTAL 32 343 375 10
10 Algeria 35 38 73 610 600 1210 Egypt 249 263 45 183 184 Jordan  60 62  10 10
Kuwait 35 160 195 750 370 1120 Morocco 19 65 84   Saudi Arabia  20 10 30 245
245 Tunisia 133 200 333    UAE Source: Arab Future Energy Index, 2015 31
PROJECTED ENERGY DEMAND Currently Bahrain has  million people, of which 48% are
Bahraini nationals [15] According to projections from the Central Information
Organization, the population of Bahrain is expected to reach ,850,000 by 2020
and ,130,000 by In addition to population growth, Bahrain’ industrial sector is
projected to expand One of the largest industrial expansion projects includes
‘Line  Expansion Project’ of Alba, one of the world’ largest aluminum smelting
companies With the construction of the Line  Expansion Project, Alba’ gas
consumption is projected to increase Other major industrial expansion projects
include BAPCO’ Modernization Program, the Bahrain Gas Plant Project, and others
The development of mega infrastructure projects such as the regional GCC high-
speed rail link and  new causeway between Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, will have
significant impact on improving transportation logistics These projects are
expected to further increase the operations of industrial sector With the
current projections of population growth, economic development, and expansion of
industries, the demand for energy will increase EWA has projected electricity
demand for 2020 and 2030 under three growth scenarios starting from 2013: low,
medium, and high, depicted in Figure According to these projections under the
low growth scenario power demand in 2030 of grid-supplied electricity will reach
21,700 GWh, under the medium growth scenario power demand in 2030 will nearly
double reaching 28,180 GWh, and under the high scenario power demand will reach
34,550 GWh Figure 10: Projected Electricity Consumption Demand 40000 35000
30000                 25000  20000 15000 10000 5000  High Medium (Base) Low
Source: EWA 32 Figure 11 provides  forecast of natural gas consumption for the
power generation process Gas demand for power generation is expected to increase
from  daily consumption of 654 million cubic feet (Mmcf) of natural gas in 2014,
to 800 Mmcf in 2025 and to 909 Mmcf in Figure 11: Gas Consumption Forecast for
Electricity Production 950        900 850 800          750 700 650       600 550
500 Medium (Base) Source: EWA 33  RENEWABLE ENERGY OPPORTUNITIES In the last two
decades  variety of clean energy technologies have been deployed Solar and wind
technologies have witnessed major advancements, becoming financially competitive
alternatives to energy generated from fossil fuel As Bahrain is blessed with
renewable energy resources, an overview of opportunities has been conducted in
consultations with key stakeholders The overview focused on resource potential,
high-level economic viability5, and technology specific benefits and challenges
The main technologies considered include solar, wind, and waste to energy  SOLAR
RESOURCE POTENTIAL Similar to its GCC neighbors, Bahrain enjoys relatively
strong solar resource potential Global horizontal irradiance is around ,120
kWh/m2 and the estimated annual PV generation is around ,600-,700 kWh/kWp/year,
as shown in Figure According to measurements taken at the PV plant installed at
the Bahrain University campus, the average solar radiation was around 18
kWh/m2/day, with an average sunshine duration of  hours [13] Figure 12: Solar
Radiation in Bahrain GHI = 2120 KWh/m2 PV= 1745 KWh/Kw KWh/m2 Source: PVOUT map
© 2017 Solargis  The levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) is used in
establishing the economic viability of renewable energy tech- nology options
LCOE takes into account all costs during the lifetime of the project including
upfront capital costs, operation and maintenance and other costs 34  SOLAR
TECHNOLOGIES There are three primary technologies that convert solar energy into
useful energy: photovoltaic (PV), which directly converts solar light into
electricity; concentrating solar power (CSP) which uses concentrated sunlight
and converts it to heat to drive conventional power generation turbines; and
solar heating and cooling systems which collect solar thermal energy to provide
hot water and air conditioning This section presents an overview of these
technologies, including specific advantages and disadvantages SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
(PV) Photovoltaic (PV) cells convert sunlight directly into electricity  solar
panel is comprised of many PV cells  wide range of PV cell technologies are
available on the market today The most commonly used PV cells in the market are
crystalline silicon (-Si) and thin films PV cells According to the Fraunhofer
Institute for Solar Energy global PV production in 2015 was dominated by multi-
crystalline silicon (69%), followed by mono-crystalline silicon (24%), and thin
film (%) [16] There is  lot of literature describing differences, advantages and
disadvantages of each PV technology In general, crystalline silicon cells are
more efficient (%), more space efficient, but more expensive to produce They are
also rigid and must be mounted in  rigid frame to protect them Thin films are
less efficient (-13%), have lower space-efficiency, and are less expensive to
manufacture They can be made flexible, which allows them to be used in multiple
applications [17, 18, 19]  solar PV system comprises of different components
including solar panels, inverters, metering system, and interface protection
There are two main types of PV systems: grid- connected and stand-alone off-grid
systems  grid-connected PV system can be used to feed on-site consumption and
the surplus can be delivered to the electricity grid Off-grid PV systems require
batteries and are thus more expensive Off-grid solutions are usually better for
remote areas, or loads, which are not connected to the electricity network Solar
PV presents two advantages that are important in the context of Bahrain First,
the modular nature of solar PV makes it well suited for small-scale
decentralized applications Decentralized renewable energy generation refers to
power production close to the point of consumption, such as rooftop PV Unlike
any other electricity technology, solar PV can be deployed economically at
virtually any scale  residential solar PV system depending on the efficiency of
the panels on average requires -10 m2/kWp, which can be deployed on roofs,
parking lots and other spaces Having limited land resources to accommodate
large- scale renewable energy projects, distributed solar PV generation at the
level of households, commercial and government buildings can play an important
role in Bahrain’ energy mix 35 Second, solar PV has experienced the most rapid
technology advances and cost reductions of any renewable technology in use today
Solar PV prices have declined by % since 2006, making solar PV an attractive and
cost-competitive source of power generation In Germany, the cost of power from
utility-scale PV plants fell from over 40 EUR cent/kWh6 in 2005, to  EUR
cent/kWh7 in 2014 [20] In early 2015, the Dubai Electricity and Water Authority
(DEWA) awarded  200 MW utility-scale PV plant contract at the price of 84 US
cents/kWh8 One year later, DEWA received an even lower bid of 99 US cents/kWh9
for the development of 800 MW PV project, which made major news headlines as the
world’ cheapest solar PV price [21] Solar PV has an average lifespan of  years
and its efficiency degrades at the rate of  to % per year Recent data indicates
that the upfront capital investment requirement is around USD ,100/kWp10 for PV
projects above  MW and about USD ,400/kWp11 for small- scale PV12 Impressive
progress has also been achieved in lowering the cost of inverters Prices for
inverters declined from  EUR/Wp13 in 1990, to almost 10 EUR/Wp14 in 2014, while
efficiency and power density have increased significantly The following chart
illustrates current and future projected levelized cost of electricity for
utility-scale PV projects (larger than  MW) in Bahrain with three different
discount rates The estimations were calculated using the model prepared by the
leading German think tank institution Agora Energiewende [22] In 2015, the LCOE
for utility-scale PV ranged from  to  USD cents/kWh15 (based on  discount rate
of %) This is comparable to PV prices tendered in neighboring Arab countries16
The LCOE is expected to continue to decrease due to the decline in the cost of
PV panels, inverters, installation, and financing  Equivalent to 171 fils/kWh
Equivalent to 39 fils/kWh  Equivalent to 22 fils/kWh  Equivalent to 11 fils/kWh
10 Equivalent to BD 415/kW 11 Equivalent to BD 528/kW 12 Based on information
received from solar PV installers in Jordan and Bahrain 13 Equivalent to 429
fils/Wp 14 Equivalent to 43 fils/Wp 15 Equivalent to 25 – 30 fils/kWh 16 In
2015, the four lowest prices received for the 50 MW scale solar PV projects
during the second round of the direct proposal submission process in Jordan were
, ,  and  US cents/kWh In 2015, DEWA concluded  power purchase agreement with
private developer for  200 MW solar PV plant at  price of 85 US cents/ kWh 36
Figure 13: Estimated LCOE for Solar PV above  MW 12 Full load hours: 1600 - 1700
kWh/kWp/ year Cost of Capital (WACC): between % and 10% 10    /             2035
2015 2025  2015 % 2025 % 2035 % Year WACC % 10% % 10% % 10% Min Max Min Max Min
Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max                   The trend
of declining PV prices has also been experienced for small-scale residential PV
systems In Germany, the end customer price paid for  kWp PV systems fell from
,000 EUR/kWp17 in 2006, to ,300 EUR/kWp18 in 2015 [20] The following chart
presents LCOE calculations for small-scale PV projects in Bahrain Figure 14:
Estimated LCOE for Solar PV less than  MW 12 Full load hours: 1600 - 1700
kWh/kWp/ year Cost of Capital (WACC): between % and 10% 10    /             2035
2015 2025  2015 % 2025 % 2035 % Year WACC % 10% % 10% % 10% Min Max Min Max Min
Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max                 17
Equivalent to ,140 BD/kWp 18 Equivalent to 557 BD/kWp 37 Utility-scale PV plants
can be 25% more cost-competitive compared to decentralized small-scale PV plants
However, utility-scale PV plants require large land areas,19 which is
challenging requirement in the Bahraini context, as the country is limited in
its land availability Taking into account the above factors, Bahrain will focus
on promoting decentralized small- scale PV applications, unless available land
is identified for the deployment of utility-scale PV plants BUILDING INTEGRATED
PHOTOVOLTAIC Building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) can be  particularly
interesting option for Bahrain as it requires little or no land space BIPV
refers to the solar photovoltaic materials that become part of the building
elements such as roofs, skylights, windows, shading systems or façade In other
words, BIPV serves both as  building element and as  means of electricity
production In addition, BIPV can add to the architectural appeal of  building By
substituting BIPV for standard materials during the initial construction,
building developers can reduce the incremental costs of PV systems and eliminate
costs and design issues for separate mounted systems  recent survey of BIPV
projects in Europe, by the University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern
Switzerland, found key essential facts about BIPV [23]: - The European market is
supported by approximately 200 commercially available BIPV products - When
integrating PV in the roof of the building the cost of the roof increased on
average by EUR20 200/m2 - When integrating PV in the façade of the building, the
cost was very similar to the costs of the conventional façade material (stone or
glass) - The BIPV market is expected to experience significant growth in the
near future due to the adoption of European Directive 2010/EU, which requires
all new buildings from 2020 and onwards to be made ‘nearly zero-energy’
buildings Zero- energy building refers to the building with zero net energy
consumption In other words, the total annual energy consumption of the building
should be roughly equal to the energy produced on-site usually from renewable
sources BIPV products will play an essential role in meeting this requirement 19
Depending on the efficiency of PV panels, land requirements for   MW crystalline
ground mounted PV plant are around 16,000 m2 20 Equivalent to BD 86 m2 38 Based
on these findings, it is more economic to promote BIPV in new buildings and new
real estate development projects in Bahrain, as PV can be integrated into the
overall building design, minimizing the impact on the overall cost of
construction CONCENTRATING SOLAR POWER Concentrating solar power (CSP) systems
generate electricity by using mirrors or lenses to concentrate  large area of
sunlight onto  small area Electricity is generated when the concentrated light
is converted to heat, which drives  heat engine (usually  steam turbine)
connected to an electrical power generator One advantage of CSP over solar PV,
is that CSP plants can integrate low-cost thermal energy storage, which allows
them to meet power needs several hours after sunset However, CSP plants have
three major disadvantages, which makes this technology  less suitable option for
Bahrain: - CSP plants have high upfront capital requirements compared to solar
PV Unlike PV, CSP has not experienced  sharp decline in technology costs
Investment costs for CSP plants (without storage) range between USD ,600 and
,000/kW21 in OECD countries, and in non-OECD countries range between USD ,500
and ,300/ kW22 [24] These prices are reported for parabolic trough collectors,
which is the dominant technology used in CSP plants today (85% of all CSP
projects installed globally are parabolic trough collectors) The operation and
maintenance costs are estimated to be in the range of USD 02 to USD 04/kWh23
[24] - Similar to utility-scale PV plants, CSP plants require large land areas
According to the US Solar Energy Industries Association,  typical CSP plant
requires  to  hectares of land per MW of installed capacity Although CSP plants
can be built in smaller sizes,  CSP plant operates most efficiently, and most
cost-effectively, when built in capacities of 100 MW and higher [25] - CSP
plants require water for cooling CSP plants are often designed to use cooling
water at the back-end of the thermal cycle  typical 50 MW parabolic trough plant
uses - million m3 of water per year for cooling [26] Water is also used for
cleaning the mirrors to maintain their high reflectivity Meeting these
requirements for water might be challenging in Bahrain, given that most of the
fresh water in Bahrain comes through an energy intensive process of desalination
Taking into account the above factors, Bahrain is unlikely to consider pursuing
the deployment of CSP technologies at this stage 21 Equivalent to BD ,735 –
,018/kW 22 Equivalent to BD ,320 – ,753/kW 23 Equivalent to  – 15 fils/kWh 39
WIND  RESOURCE POTENTIAL  possible option for deployment of large-scale
renewable energy plants in Bahrain is to pursue onshore and offshore wind power
generation Wind turbines harness the energy of moving air to generate
electricity Preliminary assessment of existing wind data suggests that there is
good wind power potential in Bahrain Analysis conducted by the University of
Bahrain of the 10-year wind data set from the meteorological weather station24
shows that Bahrain enjoys an annual mean wind speed of  / at 60 meters height
(extrapolated), resulting in an average annual power density of 440 /m2 The
strongest wind regime was found in the central and southern parts of the main
island of Bahrain [27] According to the one-year measurements of wind speed from
tall mast at 50 meters height, the most prevailing wind speed occurred at around
/ The highest wind speed reached almost  / Figure 15z: Wind Atlas Developed by
the University of Bahrain 24 The data was analyzed using industry-standard
software package for siting the wind turbines and wind farms – WAsP 40
Preliminary assessment of these findings suggests that Bahrain enjoys  wind
resource suitable for power generation However,  more detailed and conclusive
analysis of wind speeds is required to establish the economic viability of wind
power Figure 16: Wind Speed Measurements Acquired from Tall Mast at 50  Height
/                 Ground Level Measurements NASA  WIND TECHNOLOGIES ONSHORE WIND
The current economics of wind power favors onshore wind The capital requirements
for onshore wind power plant is about USD ,700/kW25 Wind turbines have an
average lifetime of about 25 years The main cost component in  wind project, is
the cost of  wind turbine, which accounts for about 70% of the total cost [28]
typical horizontal-axis wind turbine comprises of several components, including
the blades, the hub, the nacelle, the gearbox, the tower, and associated
electrical equipment Other costs in such projects include civil works, grid
connection costs, project planning and development costs  survey of over ,000
turbines installed in Denmark since 2006, shows that operation and maintenance
costs of onshore wind declined from % to less than % per year of invested
capital Other sources indicate that operation and maintenance costs of onshore
wind range between 20%-25% of LCOE [28] 25 Equivalent to BD 640/kW 41 The LCOE
largely depends on the wind resource – how fast it blows, how often, and when In
very windy regions, the LCOE can be as low as  USD/kWh26, per the recent bids in
Morocco and Egypt [29] The following table illustrates the weighted average LCOE
in different parts of the world Table : LCOE Onshore Wind by Region,  Weighted
average LCOE (USD/kWh) Weighted average LCOE (fils/kWh) Country China 053 20
Other Asia 12 45 North America 06 23 Europe 07 26 India 08 30 Central and South
America 08 - 10 30 - 38 Oceania and Africa 08 – 10 30 - 38 Source: IRENA (2016),
Power to Change,  59 Similar to solar PV technology, wind technology has
experienced improvements and cost reductions Since 2009, wind turbine prices
decreased by 30% to 40% and are expected to decline further [28] According to
projections made by IRENA, the future global weighted average installed costs of
onshore wind could fall by 12% by 2025, resulting in  34% reduction of total
LCOE [28]  wind turbine takes up little ground space, as almost all the
components are up to  meters in the air However,  wind farm (several wind
turbines) requires available land without structures that might impede wind
speeds, which is  limiting factor in Bahrain OFFSHORE WIND Offshore wind power
is where turbines are sited in water areas, such as coastal shallow water Whilst
offshore wind farms typically enjoy higher wind speeds, the marine environment
exposes the units to high humidity, salt water, and salt-water spray making
installation and operation and maintenance more challenging Most of the offshore
wind is currently concentrated in Europe The capital cost for offshore wind
ranges from USD ,500 to ,600 per kW27 The capital cost largely depends on water
depth, distance from shore, turbine size and other factors According to IRENA’
projections, the future installed costs for  reference wind farm could be
reduced by 15% from 2015 costs, given technological innovations, economy of
scales, and learning by doing 26 Equivalent to 11 – 15 fils/kWh 27 Equivalent to
BD 943 – ,112 /kW 42 Offshore wind farms are characterized by  larger size of
the wind turbines The typical size of offshore wind turbine is in the range of
to  MW The average size of an offshore wind farm in 2015 was around 300 MW
Figure 19 represents an example of  cost breakdown of  typical offshore wind
farm in European waters in Figure 17: Cost Breakdown of  Typical Wind Farm in
European Waters, 2015 Transmission System 13% Construction and Installation 19%
Development % Electrical Array % Turbine Rotor and Nacelle 38% Support Structure
Foundation 18% Turbine Tower % Source: IRENA (2016), Power to Change,  74 Whilst
onshore wind has favorable economics, as an island country, Bahrain clearly has
technical potential for offshore wind power In general, sea winds are stronger
and steadier than on land While the landscape, trees and buildings distort the
flow of onshore wind, offshore wind flow can blow without obstacles with higher
wind speeds and  more even flow close to the surface which allows lower tower
heights [30] The fact that the depth of water in Bahrain in general is shallow
(less than 10 meters) at the coastal areas would in principal favor the
deployment of cost-effective offshore wind However,  number of parameters (
nature of seabed, offshore wind conditions, grid connection, etc) are not well
known yet, and therefore the technical and economic feasibility for offshore
wind power in Bahrain’ coastal waters requires further analysis 43  WASTE TO
ENERGY Many technologies have been developed and deployed to use waste as  fuel
input for energy This section presents an overview of some of the key waste to
energy technologies that can be potentially deployed in Bahrain  BIOGAS
According to data from the Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities
Bahrain produces more than  million tons of solid waste per year, which instead
of being landfilled can be used to produce electricity and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions Organic material, which is mostly food waste, makes up 60% of total
municipal solid waste Today all municipal solid waste in Bahrain is landfilled
According to unofficial expert estimations from the Ministry of Works, Urban
Planning and Municipalities, Bahrain has only four to five years of landfill
capacity left Organic waste presents an excellent opportunity to turn waste into
useful energy by extracting biogas through anaerobic digestion process Anaerobic
digestion is  bacterial decomposition process that stabilizes organic wastes and
produces biogas, which is  mixture of methane and carbon dioxide Agricultural
and marine byproducts, crops, sewage sludge, municipal solid waste or any other
biodegradable feedstock, under anaerobic conditions, can produce biogas Biogas
can be used for  number of applications including electricity generation,
injection into the national gas grid, and as  vehicle fuel It is estimated that
Bahrain has  potential to generate 190 million m3 of biogas per year from its
organic waste In the European Union, anaerobic digestion is recognized as an
essential step in  sustainable waste management process and as an efficient
waste recycling method [31] Today there are more than 13,800 biogas plants in
operation in Europe In Sweden, out of 230 biogas plants, 135 plants are at
wastewater treatment facilities [32] Adding an anaerobic digestion step to the
wastewater treatment plant brings  number of benefits, including reducing the
volume of sludge, reducing the greenhouse gas emissions from landfilling the
sludge and generating renewable energy in the form of biogas The investment
requirements of  biogas plant depend on  number of factors including the type of
technology, the type of waste, the size of the plant, and the automation
involved The average cost of  biogas-fueled power plant of  MW capacity, or
larger, ranges between EUR ,000 – ,500 per kW28 Table  provides information on
biogas production potential from different substrates 28 Equivalent to BD ,286 –
,930/kW 44 Table : Biogas Production Potential Methane Concentra- tion Total
Solids (TS) Biogas Production Substrate m3/ton wet weight m3/ton TS % % Sewage
sludge  300 15 65 Fish waste 42 ,279 537 71 Sorted food waste 33 618 204 63 An
important precondition for implementing  biogas project is to have food and
other organic waste to be separated out and collected from the rest of the
municipal solid waste This requires implementing  waste management strategy, an
important component of which is education and raising awareness of households
and businesses about separating out the waste Unlike other organic waste
streams, sewage sludge is already collected and concentrated in one place, which
presents an opportunity for Bahrain to immediately pursue the energy recovery
process from sewage sludge  LANDFILL GAS RECOVERY Another waste to energy
opportunity for potential consideration in Bahrain is landfill gas recovery
Landfill gas recovery has strong environmental benefits, as it is  means to
collect the already available methane gas in the landfill, and prevent it from
being released into the atmosphere Landfill gas is  natural byproduct of
decomposition of organic material in the solid municipal waste and it is
typically composed of 50% methane Methane has  global warming potential 21 times
greater than carbon dioxide, which makes it important to capture for both
environmental and energy reasons The recovered landfill gas can be used to
produce medium-Btu gas (sometimes called ‘direct use’), or pipeline quality gas
(sometimes called ‘high-Btu gas’), thereby reducing consumption of the
indigenous gas resource [33] 45 Electricity can be produced from either medium
or high-Btu gas through reciprocating engines, combustion turbines, steam cycle
power plants, and co-firing landfill gas with fossil fuels in conventional power
plants When landfill gas is used as  medium-Btu gas, it is directly used as
substitute for fossil fuel with little treatment The typical application of
medium-Btu gas is co-firing in existing conventional power plants High-Btu gas
production involves an extensive cleanup of the landfill gas to  level of
quality so that it can be introduced into existing pipelines as  direct
substitute for natural gas  OTHER WASTE TO ENERGY OPPORTUNITIES There are other
waste to energy options available, including waste incineration, pyrolysis,
biodiesel, and others However, these options should be pursued after
establishing  waste management strategy The waste management strategy will lay
down the rules and conditions for identifying, sorting and collecting waste
streams that could be re-used or recycled such as plastic, paper or construction
material Depending on the composition of non-recyclable waste, the appropriate
waste to energy options can be further considered The international best
practice on waste management suggests the following waste management hierarchy:
Reduction  Re-use  Recycling ( using aluminum cans as raw material in aluminum
production)  Resource recovery ( recovering biogas from food waste)  Disposal (
landfilling, waste incineration without energy recovery) Waste disposal is the
management option used for the remaining fraction of waste when all forms of
diversion, reuse, and resource recovery are exhausted Waste to energy options
such as waste incineration or pyrolysis should be considered after reducing, re-
using, and recycling of waste 46  OTHER RENEWABLE SOURCES Biomass, geothermal
and hydropower have been cost-competitive sources of power generation for many
years in regions with high resource supply potential Hydropower and biomass were
excluded from the evaluation in this Plan since Bahrain has no or very limited
resource supply potential Geothermal energy uses the heat from beneath the
earth’ surface to generate electricity High temperature geothermal resources (
oC) can be used to generate electricity Lower temperature geothermal resources
can be used for direct heating applications The constant temperature that exists
at shallow depths can be used as an energy-efficient method of heating and
cooling using heat pumps Geothermal power is  mature, cost- competitive,
commercially available renewable energy technology that can be used to provide
base load capacity in areas with excellent high-temperatures resources that are
close to the surface [24] Geothermal co-production can potentially be an
attractive option for Bahrain, where geothermal power is generated from the hot
wastewater coming from the oil and gas extraction process According to the US
Department of Energy, co-produced geothermal energy can deliver near-term energy
savings, extend the economic life of oil and gas fields, and profitably utilize
abandoned oil and gas field infrastructure There are already several pilot
projects in the US testing the production of geothermal power at oil and gas
fields [34] An assessment of geothermal resource potential for Bahrain is yet to
be undertaken To draw conclusions on economic viability of geothermal power for
Bahrain, further research and investigation is required 47  SUMMARY OF RENEWABLE
ENERGY OPPORTUNITIES Different factors affect the selection of renewable energy
technologies, some of these relate to the technology itself while others relate
to geography and valued socio-economic components Resource potential, capital
investments, knowhow, land requirements, grid stability, weather and climate
conditions are amongst the most influential factors The following table presents
summary of advantages and disadvantages of selected renewable energy
technologies Table : Pros and Cons of Selected Renewable Energy Technologies
Advantages Disadvantages - Generates power only during the - Strong resource
potential day hours - Cost-competitive technology - Overcoming dust challenge
might - Can be deployed on various surfaces entail additional costs - Does not
require much land space - Difficult to achieve  high share of      -
renewables - Can partially shave the day peak - On-site consumption can avoid
power losses during transmission and distribution    - Raise public awareness
about renewable energy - Requires large land areas - Strong resource potential
-      - Overcoming dust challenge might - Cost-competitive technology entail
additional costs - Can shave the day peak - Generates power only during the -
Can be deployed in modules day hours   - Requires large land areas - Strong
resource potential - Requires water for cooling and for - Ability to store heat
that can be used cleaning mirrors to generate power after sunset    -
Significant upfront investment costs 48 Advantages Disadvantages - Power
generation is less - Estimated good resource potential predictable           -
Cost-competitive technology  - Requires unobstructed land parcels - Resource
potential is not clearly identified, need to compile  detailed wind atlas -
Power generation is less - Estimated good resource potential predictable
- Can be deployed in large-scale with minimum land requirements  - Resource
potential is not clearly identified, need to compile  detailed wind atlas - In
shallow waters might be  cost competitive option - Seabed and other conditions
are not well known, need to launch  feasibility study - Energy recovery is
limited to the quantity of organic waste produced - Avoid greenhouse gas
emissions from landfilling the waste - Reduce the volume of waste to be
landfilled, saving landfill capacity - Food and other organic waste need to be
collected and sorted out first - Stabilization, sanitation and odor reduction
- Generate useful energy that can be  used for multiple applications - Biogas
can be used to generate electricity that is able to be dispatched, predictable
and available at night - Energy recovery is limited to the quantity of landfill
gas available - Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from landfill - Risk of
methane leakage - Reduction in odor emissions - Reduction in emissions of
hazardous    organic air pollutants to the atmosphere   fi     - Recovery of
low-cost, useful energy that can be used to generate electricity that is able to
be dispatched, predictable and available at night 49 50  RENEWABLE ENERGY ACTION
PLAN  TARGETS The goal of the Plan is to create  renewable energy market in
order to increase the share of renewable energy in the energy mix of Bahrain
This includes creating  business environment favorable to renewable energy
investments, building expertise within industries and government agencies in
developing renewable energy projects, strengthening institutional capacity to
support the deployment of renewables, integrating renewable energy in the
government strategies, policies and plans and raising overall awareness about
the benefits and importance of sustainable energy development To achieve this it
is necessary to formulate ambitious, yet realistic renewable energy targets
supported by an enabling policy framework, streamlined administrative
procedures, and  general commitment by all government authorities to pursue
renewable energy The renewable energy deployment strategy is based on  broad
assessment of Bahrain’ resource potential, economic viability of various
renewable energy technologies, current energy situation, and its unique
geographical and socio-economic conditions Based on the findings, and through
consultations with key stakeholders,  renewable energy target of % is proposed
for 2025, and 10% for The targets are calculated as  share of the future
projected peak load demand, excluding industry’ own generation Values for
electricity generation in GWh are derived based on these targets and the local
resource potential as set out in Table  Table : Renewable Energy Targets 2025
2035 Peak Load Ca- pacity Generated Electricity Peak Load Capacity Generated
Electricity Projected Energy Demand MW GWh MW GWh ,085 23,640 ,867 31,786 2025
2035 Renewable Energy Targets MW GWh MW GWh Wind 50 125 300 750 Solar 200 340
400 680 Biogas  13 10 26 TOTAL: 255 478 710 ,456 Peak Load Capacity Generated
Electricity Peak Load Capacity Generated Electricity TARGET as  share of
projected % % % % Note: Electricity figures include only grid-supplied
electricity by EWA They do not include industry’ own generation 51  DEPLOYMENT
STRATEGY The deployment strategy is driven by  number of factors including
scarcity of land, resource potential, cost-effectiveness of renewable energy
systems, socio-economic and geo-political considerations:  DECENTRALIZED URBAN
GENERATION ( MW) Decentralized renewable energy applications such as rooftop PV,
BIPV, solar lighting, biogas plants, and micro wind turbines can be successfully
integrated in the urban environment and can help in creating  more sustainable
future With continuous technological improvements, the opportunities for
integrating renewable energy in the urban design are tremendous Decentralized
urban generation is also an excellent way to engage all members of society
including households, businesses, academia, and government authorities in
building smart, modern and more resilient cities and communities Viable
opportunities for decentralized urban generation include: - Solar systems for
new housing units - Solar systems for government buildings - Decentralized solar
in urban developments (solar lighting, solar parking) - Decentralized rooftop
solar on existing residential and commercial buildings - Other decentralized
renewable energy systems (biogas, micro wind) II LARGE-SCALE GENERATION ON
AVAILABLE LAND ( MW) Economies of scale favor the development of large-scale
renewable energy power plants Therefore, it is prudent to consider deployment of
large-scale renewable energy where land is available  good example is the
deployment of  solar farm on  land that is otherwise not useful, such as  closed
landfill site Another option to pursue large-scale renewable energy development
is through joint GCC efforts (using land in neighboring countries and bringing
electricity through existing interconnection network) Viable opportunities for
large- scale generation on land include: - Solar farm on Askar landfill site -
EWA renewable energy initiative ( MW hybrid solar and wind project) - Utility-
scale renewable energy plants by large industry groups - Solar farms in new town
developments - Waste to energy plant at the Tubli wastewater treatment plant -
Renewable energy plants on other available land 52 III OFFSHORE GENERATION (50
MW) Offshore renewable energy development presents an opportunity to pursue
large-scale renewable energy generation and achieve higher renewable energy
targets As Bahrain has  good wind regime and shallow waters, pursuing offshore
wind power could be  cost-competitive option Other offshore renewable energy
options can include integrating renewable energy in offshore large
infrastructure projects such as causeways connecting Bahrain and its GCC
neighbors This will not only generate clean energy, but also strengthen
partnerships in building  more sustainable future in the region Identified
offshore generation opportunities include: - Near shore or offshore wind farms -
Integrating renewable energy technologies in large infrastructure projects
(causeways and railway systems)  BENEFITS AND IMPACT Integrating renewable
energy in the energy mix can help Bahrain optimize the use of indigenous gas
resources, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, make the economy more competitive,
and improve energy security in the long-term Other benefits include improving
local air quality, shaving day peak through solar PV, creating  new industry,
and meeting international obligations Achieving % targets by 2025 will result
in: - Clean energy generation of approximately 480 GWh per year - Annual savings
of ,700,000 MMbtu of natural gas - Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by
392,000 tonnes of CO2 per year - Attracting more than BD 140 million of
investment 53  FACILITATING RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT An important aspect of
creating  renewable energy market is removing structural and non-structural
barriers According to the IEA 2015 Renewable Energy Market Analysis report, high
levels of incentives are no longer necessary for solar PV and onshore wind, but
their economic attractiveness still strongly depends on the regulatory framework
and market design To facilitate renewable energy deployment in Bahrain, policies
will be implemented to enable power to be produced from renewable energy
sources, to stimulate investment and the take up of renewable energy
technologies These policies will aim to address the following regulatory and
power market structure related barriers:  ADDRESSING REGULATORY BARRIERS The
power sector by default is  heavily regulated sector Typically, private
production of electricity requires authorization from government authorities,
either through legislation or concessions In Bahrain, the current Electricity
Law (1996) allows for the private generation of power However, each IPP scheme
requires  written authorization from the Minister and an approval from the
Cabinet This scheme is not suitable to stimulate private investments in
renewable energy as it is geared towards large-scale conventional power plants,
where fuel input is an important consideration It was drafted in times when
renewable energy was not considered  viable alternative source of energy Today
the situation is different Renewable energy technologies have substantively
matured, the costs have declined, and the options have improved To stimulate
investment in renewable energy, the current legislation needs to allow private
deployment of renewable energy plants, without an extensive prior authorization
process from the government However, renewable energy systems would still be
subject to all necessary building code requirements, grid connection rules, and
other administrative safety regulations  ADDRESSING MARKET STRUCTURE RELATED
BARRIERS The Electricity Law allows on-site electricity generation for self-
consumption purposes (captive generation), and has mainly been used to allow
large industry groups to install their own power generation capacities However
the Law does not authorize exporting on- site generated energy to the main grid
To stimulate investments in renewable energy, especially by households and
commercial users, it is important to allow renewable energy plants to export the
excess power to the grid Thus, it is critical to develop  grid code for
renewable energy systems together with other safety regulations to ensure safe
connection to the grid 54 Under the current legal framework and market
structure, EWA is the sole buyer and distributor of electricity in the Kingdom
To motivate private developers to invest in renewable energy, there needs to be
mechanism whereby private investors are able to sell the power produced from
renewable sources and generate income The key components of such mechanism are
price and guarantee of purchase of electricity from renewable sources Thus, it
is important to set  policy that will define  purchase price for electricity
from renewable sources and guarantee the purchase of such electricity Such
policies can be either feed-in tariff policy, or auctions or public competitive
tenders  DRIVING INVESTMENT IN RENEWABLE ENERGY In 2015, the government
announced  scheme to gradually increase electricity tariffs to meet the cost of
power generation of 29 fils/kWh The new tariffs became effective starting March
2016 for residential, commercial, and industrial consumers Bahraini nationals
holding an EWA single account are exempt from the tariff increases and continue
to pay electricity tariffs of  fils/kWh Bahraini nationals make up 50% of the
population and account for around 20% of electricity consumption, and are likely
to have roof space for small-scale PV systems To motivate this segment of
customers to install renewable energy systems on their roofs,  special incentive
scheme needs to be proposed, combined with targeted information dissemination
and awareness raising campaign Bahrain has  fast growing real-estate industry
There are many real estate development projects underway under private and
public domains New buildings and real estate development projects present an
excellent opportunity for integrating cost-effective renewable energy solutions
Integrating renewables in the building design is more efficient and cost-
effective than retrofitting renewable energy sources at  later stage In
addition, buildings are the biggest consumers of electricity in Bahrain More
than 80% of grid electricity is consumed by buildings Currently there is no
scheme in place to encourage building and town developers to integrate renewable
energy in the building and urban design, such as  renewable energy mandate 55
POLICIES TO ATTRACT PRIVATE INVESTMENT To achieve the stated targets and attract
private sector investment in renewable energy technologies, three complementary
policies are proposed: ()  net metering scheme; () tender-based feed-in tariffs;
and ()  renewable energy mandate for new buildings The following subsections
present brief information on each policy The details of each policy will be
outlined in relevant documents and regulations  NET METERING SCHEME To support
the deployment of decentralized small-scale solar systems, the Government of
Bahrain will adopt  Net Metering scheme Net Metering will enable residential,
commercial, and industrial customers to generate and consume electricity on-site
by installing renewable energy systems on their premises, and exporting the
excess electricity to the EWA network Customers will be billed only for the
‘net’ energy used, according to the latest electricity retail tariffs approved
by the Government The excess electricity produced will be credited in the next
billing period The smart meter roll-out programme has commenced and will
facilitate the net metering scheme Net metering is  strong incentive mechanism
when electricity retail prices are sufficiently high With the recent increases
of electricity tariffs, the net metering scheme will likely be most attractive
to the unsubsidized large energy consumers, such as malls, hotels, and other
commercial and industrial customers Table : Bahrain Net Metering Scheme Net
Metering Scheme Enable consumers to generate on-site, grid-connected electricity
from renewable energy sources Objective: Residential, commercial, and industrial
electricity customers Target Group: Reduced electricity bill through on-site
power generation - Incentive for Target Group: Ability to credit the excess
electricity fed back to the grid against future consumption - 56 Implementation
Timeline 2017 2018 2019 2020 Responsible Entity Net Metering Scheme
Develop net metering regulations to be presented for government approval SEU
Minister of Electricity & Water Obtain government approval of net metering
regulations Develop and approve  grid code for small-scale solar PV systems EWA
Develop necessary standard operating procedures to implement net metering scheme
EWA with technical assistance from SEU Develop all necessary technical documents
to ensure safe installation of solar systems Establish  quality assurance scheme
for solar PV equipment and system installers Develop information and awareness
raising plan to promote net metering scheme SEU & EWA Apply net metering scheme
EWA Implement information and awareness raising plan SEU & EWA Implement quality
assurance scheme for solar PV equipment and system installers EWA  TENDER BASED
FEED-IN TARIFF To encourage the deployment of renewable energy projects by
private developers, the Government of Bahrain will adopt  tender-based feed-in
tariff scheme The feed-in tariff scheme will provide  long-term purchase
guarantee of electricity from renewable sources at  pre-determined price The
appropriate feed-in tariff will be set based on the bids received from private
developers  feed-in tariff is important in attracting professional renewable
energy developers who have expertise, know-how, and access to finance, in
developing renewable energy projects Because land is  major limiting factor in
Bahrain, the government will aid the private sector by identifying and/or
designating sites for the development of renewable energy projects Such sites
may include government buildings such as schools, hospitals, and other public
facilities This, however, will not limit the private sector to find their own
sites for the development of renewable energy projects, under the tender-based
feed-in tariffs scheme Tenders will be announced on  regular basis 57 The
tender-based feed-in tariff scheme will enable the government to take advantage
of the best available market prices for the development of renewable energy
projects This is particularly important with regards to renewable energy systems
that are experiencing fast- paced technological improvements and cost
reductions, such as solar PV The scheme will also allow the government to
control the quantity of renewable energy procured Table : Bahrain Feed-in Tariff
Scheme Tender based Feed-in Tariff Scheme Attract private investors to develop
renewable energy projects through  competitive procurement process Objective:
Renewable energy developers and large electricity customers Target Group: Long-
term power purchase agreement at  pre-defined price Incentive: Implementation
Timeline 2017 2018 2019 2020 Responsible Entity Tender-based Feed-in Tariff
Scheme                                                 Designate  (1st batch)
government buildings for private development Ministry of Works Estimate the size
of available space for solar PV and divide into several lots SEU Prepare
tendering documents for solar PV systems EWA & SEU Invite private developers to
submit their offers for the development of the ﬁrst 50 MW solar PV projects
Selection of the successful bidders and concluding power purchase agreement EWA
with technical assistance from SEU Construction, conection to the grid and
commissioning of solar PV plants Private Developer/EWA Extend the best price
offers received for gov buildings as  FiT to private buildings SEU & EWA
Conclude power purchase agreements for development of solar PV on private
buildings EWA Develop tools and guidelines to assist the private sector in
deployment of RE projects SEU Designate 2nd batch of gov buldings for private
development Ministry of Works 58  RENEWABLE ENERGY MANDATE To take advantage of
cost-effective renewable energy solutions and reduce the energy demand from
buildings, the Government of Bahrain will adopt  Renewable Energy Mandate for
new buildings The Renewable Energy Mandate will require all new buildings and
new real estate developments, to source  minimum certain percentage of energy
from renewable sources such as roof-top PV, building integrated PV, solar water
heaters, and urban wind systems The generated renewable energy will be consumed
on-site; and the excess electricity will be fed to the grid according to the Net
Metering regulations To recognize the outstanding performance of buildings and
real estate developers in integrating renewable energy, where the minimum
percentage has been exceeded, SEU will issue  certificate of award Table 10:
Bahrain Renewable Energy Mandate Scheme Renewable Energy Mandate Require new
buildings and real estate developers to inte- grate renewable energy
technologies in the building design Objective: New building and real estate
developments Target Group: Reducing energy demand of the building from the grid
(reduced electricity bill) Incentive: Implementation Timeline 2017 2018 2019
2020 Responsible Entity Renewable Energy Mandate
Develop RE Mandate regulations to be presented for government approval SEU
Obtain government approval of RE Mandate regulations Minister of Electricity &
Water Develop necessary standard operating procedures to implement RE Mandate
scheme SEU in coordination with EWA, Min of Works Develop all necessary
technical documents to ensure safe installation of solar systems Develop
information and awareness raising plan to promote net metering scheme SEU
Conduct trainings to the relevant stakeholders on the implementation of RE
Mandate SEU EWA & Min of Works Implement/enforce RE Mandate scheme SEU, EWA &
Min of Works Implement information and awareness raising plan Issue certiﬁcate
of award to recognize the most outstanding performance SEU Propose incentive
scheme to encourage buildings to go beoynd the min requirement SEU 59  PROJECTS
TO ACHIEVE 2025 TARGETS This section presents key renewable energy projects
identified through  broad consultative process with different stakeholders to
achieve the 2025 targets The list is not exhaustive and may be updated as time
progresses and more opportunities are identified  SOLAR SYSTEMS FOR GOVERNMENT
BUILDINGS The Assistant Undersecretary of Construction Projects and Maintenance
at the Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities is responsible for
the construction of new government buildings and for refurbishment of existing
government buildings for the Kingdom of Bahrain This Ministry is one of the
champions in the government sector in promoting green building and sustainable
energy practices In 2011 the Assistant Undersecretary of Construction Projects
and Maintenance developed  strategy to implement green building practices in new
and existing government projects To implement the Strategy particular building
specifications have been developed containing 14 green building practices Since
2013 the Ministry has been actively implementing these practices, achieving
great energy savings and exceeding the requirements of the Bahrain thermal
insulation regulations Although the focus has been primarily on improving
building energy efficiency, the Ministry has also started implementing
experimental solar projects such as solar water heater systems on school
buildings and solar PV panels on car parking lots To make government buildings
more efficient and sustainable and to continue to demonstrate leadership in
sustainability actions, the Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities
is committed to incorporate further renewable energy solutions in government
projects (roof-top PV, building integrated PV, solar parking lots)  SOLAR
SYSTEMS FOR PUBLIC WORKS In addition to the construction and maintenance of
government buildings, the Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities
is responsible for public works, infrastructure and engineering covering: -
Roads: Planning, design, supervision of construction and maintenance of roads,
bridges, and traffic facilities 60 - Sanitary and Drainage: Planning, design,
supervision of construction and operations and maintenance of networks,
treatment plants, pumping stations and treated sewage effluent systems Energy
consumption makes up  large share of the Ministry’ expenditures, especially for
the operation of water pumping stations To make public works more efficient and
sustainable, and to reduce the energy bill, the Ministry of Works, Urban
Planning and Municipalities is committed to incorporate renewable energy sources
in the design and engineering of public works and infrastructure Preliminary
identified initiatives include: - Implementing solar PV systems for water
pumping stations; and - Installation of solar powered street lighting systems
SOLAR SYSTEMS FOR NEW HOUSING UNITS The Ministry of Housing is responsible for
building affordable social housing units for the low- income Bahraini households
The Ministry of Housing plans to develop 40,000 housing units in Bahrain’ four
Governorates The projects are planned to be funded under the government budget
and GCC development program The first 25,000 housing units will be built in the
next four years The Ministry of Housing is committed to delivering cost-
effective, efficient and quality housing It is already implementing energy
efficiency measures in housing units to comply with Bahrain building thermal
insulation regulations It has also started implementing experimental solar
projects (solar water heaters) To make houses more efficient and sustainable,
the Ministry of Housing is committed to incorporate further renewable energy
sources in the housing units (roof-top PV, building integrated PV, solar parking
lots) This will help minimize the impact on the environment, improve air
quality, reduce reliance on fossil fuel, and shave the energy peak demand during
hot summer seasons, when the bulk of electricity demand is used for air-
conditioning purposes The work will start with the initiation of demonstration
projects in one of the new town developments Upon delivery of the demonstration
projects, capacity-building workshops will be organized for housing developers,
architects, contractors, and installers, on lessons learned and on successful
integration of renewables in the building design This will be an opportunity to:
- Increase confidence of building owners and the general public about solar PV
as  viable energy technology; 61 - Improve knowledge and the skills of PV
installation and construction companies, as well as architects through learning-
by doing; - For Electricity and Water Authority, to test the integration of
intermittent renewable resources into the electricity grid These lessons will be
vital for the continued deployment of PV (and other renewable resources) in
Bahrain  RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS IN URBAN DEVELOPMENTS Many of the new social
housing units will be built in new town developments such as Northern City,
Bahir, and Southern New Town This presents an opportunity for the Ministry of
Housing to incorporate renewable energy sources not only in the housing units,
but also in the urban design The Ministry of Housing has already started the
process of integrating principles of sustainability in new town developments One
of such examples includes Southern New Town development in collaboration with
the Prince Charles Foundation The Southern New Town development will have around
,000 homes and will be built around principles of environmental and social
sustainability This includes minimizing the environmental impact of the urban
environment; creating healthier living spaces for people; and promoting social
dialogues through integrating creative solutions in the urban design and
management The sustainability strategy of the town plans seeks to incorporate
renewable energy sources in the town development as  means to reduce reliance on
fossil fuel, and minimize the impact on the environment Two types of renewable
energy initiatives are proposed: () community scale PV array to provide clean
power to the future residents of the town; and () various decentralized
renewable energy solutions integrated in the urban environment (solar roof tops,
building integrated PV, solar street lighting, solar parking lots)To create more
sustainable urban spaces, the Ministry of Housing in coordination with other
Ministries, is committed to incorporating renewable energy initiatives in other
new town developments 62  LARGE-SCALE SOLAR FARM ON AVAILABLE LAND Economies of
scale favor the development of large-scale renewable energy plants; therefore,
it is prudent to consider deployment of such projects where land is available
good example is the deployment of  solar farm on land that is otherwise not
productive such as  closed landfill site Askar landfill is the largest landfill
site in Bahrain Spread over an area of more than 300 hectares, the landfill is
expected to reach its capacity in the next few years The Askar landfill site
mostly caters to solid municipal waste, agricultural waste, and industrial non-
hazardous waste Currently around  hectares of Askar landfill is full and closed
This parcel of land in general is not suitable for construction, or development
of residential or commercial projects due to the risks associated with landfill
sites (high concentration of toxic and hazardous materials posing serious health
threats to people and pollutions risks to environment) One of the more
successful ways of rehabilitating closed landfill sites is to turn them into
solar fields to generate clean power for the residents of nearby towns and
villages Generation of solar power can be coupled with  landfill gas recovery
project to enhance the utilization of the land and provide for more safety This
will not only minimize the environmental impact of the overall power generation
system (by reducing greenhouse gas emissions), but also will make more economic
use of the otherwise unproductive land parcel, and promote more sustainable
development Today there are many examples worldwide where landfill sites have
been successfully turned into solar fields29 The Ministry of Works, Municipality
and Urban Planning is committed to promoting sustainable development in Bahrain,
and strongly supports the rehabilitation of the closed landfill site in Askar,
into  solar field to provide clean power to the residents of nearby towns,
reduce reliance on fossil fuels for power generation, and contribute to shaving
the energy peak demand during hot summer seasons 29 For some examples of solar
landfill sites please see the report of the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL) “Best Practices on Sitting Solar Photovoltaic on Municipal Solid Waste
Landfills” (2012), Appendix  63  SLUDGE TO ENERGY The Tubli Water Pollution
Control Center (WPCC) is the largest municipal wastewater treatment plant in
Bahrain serving most of the residential communities in the country With the
recently completed upgrade to the Tubli WPCC the plant treats approximately
304,000 m3 of wastewater per day compared to the previous figure of 200,000 m3
per day The treated effluent is partially used for irrigation and the surplus is
discharged into the nearby Tubli bay, which is  protected natural reserve under
both national and international legislation On average more than 50 ton of dry
solids (sludge) is produced at Tubli WPCC on  daily basis Currently, there is no
further process to treat the generated activated sludge from the Tubli WPCC;
most sludge is sent to the landfill site for sanitary disposal This amount of
sludge presents an excellent opportunity to extract useful energy either through
anaerobic digestion process (biogas) or other waste to energy solution such as
pyrolysis The extracted energy can be used to generate electricity to power the
Tubli WPCC, thereby reducing electricity bill of the Tubli plant Recovering
energy from sludge at the wastewater treatment plants will have  number of
environmental benefits: - Avoid emission of greenhouse gas emissions by 89,000
tonnes of CO2 per year from landfilling the sludge - Reduce volume of sludge to
be landfilled, saving the landfill capacity - Stabilization, sanitation and odor
reduction - Generating renewable energy that can be used to power the Tubli WPCC
RENEWABLE ENERGY PLANTS BY LARGE INDUSTRY GROUPS Large industry groups are
taking  lead in launching renewable energy projects to show their commitment in
preserving the Kingdom’ natural resources and protecting the environment One
prominent example includes the recently commissioned Tatweer Petroleum’  MW
solar PV project The new solar plant was commissioned in February 2016 with
total capital cost of USD  million30 It is connected to Tatweer’ own grid and
delivers enough power to provide autonomy to its headquarters After successful
implementation of the first solar project Tatweer is looking into further
deployment of solar PV plants with  more optimized cost structure It is planning
to install an additional - MW of solar PV capacity 30 Equivalent to BD 680,000
64 The energy intensive aluminum smelting company, Alba is also looking to
develop solar projects to take advantage of its available large industrial roof
areas It has already approached the Sustainable Energy Unit for technical advice
and assistance Gulf Petrochemical Industries Company (GPIC) has been  pioneer of
sustainability actions in Bahrain As part of its sustainability program GPIC
plans to expand the use of renewable energy projects at its premises in four
phases, starting in 2014 and completing by It has already built  10 kWp solar
water heating system, and is in the process of installing   MW solar PV project
NEAR SHORE AND OFFSHORE WIND FARMS The assessment of preliminary wind data
suggests the viability of taking formal steps to build  medium scale wind farm
The first wind farm can be used to demonstrate the technical and financial
viability of such projects In order to maintain  relatively reasonable LCOE and
attract private developers, the government is considering  prefeasibility study
for  wind farm with  capacity of around 50 MW (around 16 to 20 turbines) This
process will be initiated after the publication of the comprehensive wind
resource assessment map for the Kingdom of Bahrain  EWA RENEWABLE ENERGY
INITIATIVE To demonstrate commitment in renewable energy, EWA is developing
Bahrain’ first  MW hybrid renewable energy system in Al Dur district The project
consists of   MW solar PV system and   MW wind turbine EWA has already completed
detailed technical studies and selected the successful contractor to perform
engineering, design and installation of the power plant The construction of the
project is expected to start in 65  GOING FORWARD  number of factors must come
together to ensure that the National Renewable Energy Action Plan effectively
transitions from  desk document, to actions that capitalize on the potential
benefits described: -  governance structure that provides guidance and executive
sponsorship; - Incorporation of renewable energy initiatives in ministries’
action plans and work programs; - Developing tools enabling deployment of
renewable energy initiatives; - Identifying funding opportunities for projects
and activities An effective energy governance structure is critical to
implementation of the National Renewable Energy Plan Current roles within
government structures can be utilized and built upon to support good governance
GOVERNANCE An effective energy governance structure is critical to
implementation of the National Renewable Energy Plan Current roles within
government structures can be utilized and built upon to support good governance
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UNIT SEU is the designated agency for promoting sustainable
energy policies and practices in the Kingdom of Bahrain As such SEU will lead
the coordination efforts in implementing the NREAP, and will provide technical
assistance in the deployment of renewable energy projects Responsibilities: -
Coordinate implementation activities among all stakeholders through developing
partnerships and organizing regular coordination meetings - Inform stakeholders
on the progress of implementation of the NREAP - Draft renewable energy policy
regulations and support the establishment of standard operating procedures for
their implementation - Carry out feasibility studies, resource potential
assessment, cost-benefit analysis of various technology options and business
models, as well as overseeing the implementation of pilot projects 66 - Provide
technical assistance in developing tendering documents, drafting requests for
proposals, evaluating bids, and assessing outcomes of pilot projects - Carry out
information dissemination and awareness raising campaigns through launching
dedicated website, organizing press conferences, promoting renewable energy at
various public events - Organize and support capacity building and training
activities for government and non-government stakeholders NREAP IMPLEMENTATION
FOLLOW-UP COMMITTEE The Committee will be composed of high-level representatives
of key government and non- government institutions who would play the role of
change agents to provide guidance, support and oversight of the implementation
process of NREAP The Committee will be chaired by the Minister of Electricity
and Water Affairs and may include representatives from the Electricity and Water
Authority, the Ministry of Finance, the Office of the First Deputy Prime
Minister, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the Ministry of Housing, the
Ministry of Works, Urban Planning and Municipalities, the Ministry of Oil, and
the Supreme Council for Environment The Committee will meet on  quarterly basis
Responsibilities: - Oversee implementation of the NREAP and facilitate its
execution; - Identify action items to overcome implementation issues and
challenges; - Put recommendations and suggest actions to relevant ministries; -
Decide on making changes in the NREAP if required; - Discuss the progress in the
implementation process SEU will assist in preparing the agenda of the meeting,
the minutes, including the action list; the progress report on the status of the
implementation process since the last meeting; and any other documents to be
discussed or considered during the meeting 67  INTEGRATING RENEWABLES IN
MINISTRIES’ ACTION PLANS To demonstrate leadership and ensure successful
development of renewable energy it is important that individual Ministries and
government institutions incorporate renewable energy initiatives in their action
plans and work programs This will reinforce the role of the government as the
leader in sustainability actions and make renewable energy technologies more
visible to people and businesses It will also allow government staff to build
expertise and training with technologies (purchasing, installation, suppliers,
options, operation, maintenance, economics), and aid in further development and
improvement of renewable energy policies  TOOLS ENABLING RENEWABLE ENERGY To
further aid the successful development of renewable energy systems, SEU in
collaboration with other research and think-tank institutions will provide and
develop on continuous basis, information, evidence based research, and tools to
support the deployment of renewable energies Such activities include: -
Developing proof of concept tasks to demonstrate feasibility and economic
viability of various renewable energy initiatives through cost-benefit analysis
and pilot projects; - Providing guidance on various technologies and building
stronger case for adoption of renewables; - Conducting resource potential
assessment of new renewable energy sources and identifying potential technical,
economic, regulatory and institutional barriers; - Streamlining regulatory and
administrative procedures; - Providing benchmarking, reporting, education, and
capacity building activities 68  FUNDING  key factor in advancing renewable
energy systems is the capability to fund renewable energy initiatives There are
two types of activities that require funding: () Funding for deployment of
renewable energy systems; and () Funding to carry out other activities enabling
deployment of renewable energy systems Deployment of renewable energy systems
requires significant capital funding These can come from private sector and
public sector The current Plan proposes three policies that are aimed at
attracting private investment in renewable energy projects: () Net Metering; ()
Tender-based Feed-in Tariff; and () Renewable Energy Mandate for New Buildings
Funding requirements for activities enabling the deployment of renewable energy
projects such as capacity building, resource potential assessment, or
feasibility studies are less capital intensive, but more difficult to source
from private sector Many countries have established clean energy funds to
support research, development and demonstration of renewable energy technologies
These funds are often financed either through direct allocation of funds from
government budget, private and public donations, or tax proceeds SEU will
investigate best practices on setting up such fund and will develop  proposal
for the establishment of the Bahrain clean energy fund, to support the research,
development, and demonstration of renewable energy and energy efficiency
initiatives In additional, funding from global clean energy financing mechanisms
and global financial institutions will also be explored 69  SETTING PLAN INTO
MOTION This section presents the top ten actions to set the Plan into motion
Some of these are fundamental activities that should be implemented quickly to
enable further progress, others have already begun and are in the process of
implementation  few actions are large impact, multi-stakeholder projects that
require attention, or additional research in order to deliver longer term
results The top ten actions are set out below: - Develop and approve net
metering regulations; - Develop and approve the grid code, and necessary
technical guidelines for small- scale solar PV systems; - Designate  government
buildings with large roof/parking lot areas for the private development of solar
PV systems through the tender-based feed-in tariff scheme; - Based on available
wind speed data compile  detailed wind atlas for Bahrain; - Launch  feasibility
study on integrating renewable energy sources in large infrastructure projects
such as causeways; - Designate  batch of new housing units to implement solar PV
systems as demonstration projects; - Designate Askar landfill site for the
development of the large-scale solar PV farm; - Explore the possibility of
extracting energy from sludge at the wastewater treatment plants; - Launch
prefeasibility study for offshore wind power generation; - Launch  pilot waste
to energy project 70 71 REFERENCES [] Bahrain Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC), November 2015 [] The United Nations General Assembly
Resolution /RES/ Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, September 2015 [] Arab Renewable Energy Framework, Arab Ministerial
Council for Electricity, League of Arab States, 2013 [] Bahrain Economic Vision
2030 [] Government Action Plan  [] Cabinet Resolution No /2238 on the
Establishment of the Sustainable Energy Unit [] Bahrain Oil and Gas Statistics
(Jan – Dec 2014), NOGA [] Bahrain Economic Development Board (2015), Maximizing
the Economic Value of Bahrain’ Natural Gas Resources [] Information &
-Government Authority 2015 Annual Report [10] Bahrain Electricity Law (1996)
[11] World Bank (2016), Kingdom of Bahrain Energy Efficiency Program (KEEP) [12]
EWA Electricity and Water Tariffs, 2016 [13] Waheeb  Alnaser, Naser  Alnaser
,Issa Batarseh, Bahrain’ BAPCO 5MWp PV Grid– Connected Solar Project,
International Journal of Power and Renewable Energy Systems Volume , 2014 [14]
RCREEE (2015), Arab Renewable Energy Index (AFEX) Renewable Energy, Regional
Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency [15] Bahrain Central
Information Organization, Mid-Year Population Projections for the Kingdom of
Bahrain () [16] Fraunhofer ISE (June 2016), Photovoltaics Report [17] Solar-
Facts,  [18] Energy Informative,  [19] CivicSolar,  [20] Fraunhofer ISE (2015),
Recent facts about Photovoltaics in Germany [21] Dubai Electricity and Water
Authority,  news-and-media/press-and-news/latest-news/dewa-signs-power-purchase-
agreement-and-shareholder-agreement-for-second-phase-200mw-pv-plant-at-moh [22]
Fraunhofer ISE (2015): Current and Future Cost of Photovoltaics Long-term
Scenarios for Market Development, System Prices and LCOE of Utility-Scale PV
Systems Study on behalf of Agora Energiewende [23] Francesco Frontini, Pierluigi
Bonomo, Anatoli Chatzipanagi, BIPV Product Overview for Solar Facades and Roofs,
BIPV Status Report [24] IRENA (2015), Renewable Power Generation Costs in [25]
Solar Energy Industry Association (2014), Concentrating Solar Power [26] Fabrizi
(2012), CSP Technologies 72 [27] Hanan Al Buflasa, Murray Thomson, David
Infield, Simon Watson, Feasibility Study of Wind Power in the Kingdom of
Bahrain, Centre for Renewable Energy Systems Technology (CREST), Loughborough
University [28] IRENA (2016), The Power to Change: Solar and Wind Cost Reduction
Potential to [29] RenewablesNow,  goes-as-low-as-usd-30-mwh-509642/ [30] EON
(2012), Offshore Wind Energy Fact book [31] Position paper of the European
Biogas Association on the revision of the Waste Framework Directive from  April
2016 [32] SGC (2012), Basic Data on Biogas [33] California Energy Commission
(2012), Economic and Financial Aspects of Landfill Gas to Energy Project
Development [34] National Renewable Energy Laboratory of the US Department of
Energy (2010), Geothermal Energy Production with Co-produced and Geopressured
Resources 73 74 75 inquiry@seugovbh +973 17319429  Box 26814 Kingdom of Bahrain
76