Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/IRQ/  Programme rationale  Iraq is an upper middle-income country that
ranks 120 out of 189 countries on the 2018 human development index Its human
development progress has been impeded by wars and conflict, compounded by poor
governance, corruption, lack of investment in basic social services, poor
economic management, and major internal divisions and societal fractures Women
and youth are disadvantaged and generally score lower in human development
indicators The gender inequality ratio was 506 in 2017; labour force
participation rates of women and youth are at 19 and 26 per cent, respectively,
versus 74 per cent for men The youth unemployment rate is 18 per cent, compared
to the overall formal unemployment rate of  per cent, with young women faring
significantly worse than young men, at 43 per cent and 76 per cent, respectively
Iraq is the most oil dependent country globally; in 2015, hydrocarbon resources
contributed to 58 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP), 99 per cent of
its exports, and more than 90 per cent of central government revenues However,
the oil sector generated only  per cent of total employment and contributed
mainly to public sector expansion  Iraq is striving to transition from conflict
and stabilization to sustainable development While the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) has been territorially defeated in Iraq, the consequences of
the war continue to define the country’ ability to move forward as  stable,
resilient, cohesive state Conflict and violence, and to  much lesser extent, the
spill- over of violence from the neighbouring Syrian Arab Republic, resulted in
thousands of lost lives; increased marginalization and vulnerability – including
up to  million internally displaced persons (IDPs) and 255,000 refugees hosted
by Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI); the destruction of physical infrastructure
that requires $88 billion for recovery and reconstruction; the collapse of
social and economic services; heightened social divisions and tensions along
ethnic, sectarian, religious and regional lines; and the further erosion of
citizens’ trust in the state Conflict and violence have impacted the economic
welfare of the affected population due to the destruction of the economic
infrastructure, their livelihoods and jobs The incidence of poverty among IDPs
is 42 per cent, nearly double the national poverty rate of per cent, which is
already considerably high for an upper middle-income country The conflict and
its consequences have more adversely impacted women and youth Youth are
disenfranchised and have no voice in decisions that affect their lives They are
faced with  dearth of livelihood and employment opportunities, which increases
frustration and marginalization –  vicious cycle and potential root cause of
future conflicts  The Government recognizes the need to address structural
challenges and adopt  holistic approach to ensure the success of sustainable
reconstruction and rehabilitation It envisages  renewed social contract, based
on strengthening citizen-state trust, social cohesion, private- sector-led
growth and focus on sustainable development Iraq is committed to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development The Iraq Vision 2030, the National Development Plan
(NDP), , the Reconstruction and Development Framework (RDF), , and the Poverty
Reduction Strategy (PRS), , are mostly anchored in the Sustainable Development
Goals  The preliminary findings of the UNDP-supported 2018 rapid integrated
assessment (RIA) of the country’ strategic planning frameworks suggest
significant degree of alignment  World Bank Group, Iraq Economic Monitor: Toward
Reconstruction, Economic Recovery and Fostering Social Cohesion The World Bank
Retrieved from: documentsworldbankorg [Accessed November 2018]  World Bank Data,
Iraq The World Bank Available at: dataworldbankorg/country/iraq [Accessed
January 2019]  Iraq Systematic Country Diagnostic 2017, The World Bank  Ibid
Multi-sector Needs Assessment (MSNA) IV of Refugees Living out of Formal Camps
in the KR-, May 2019, UNHCR  Kuwait International Conference on Iraq, The World
Bank, Iraq MEU April 2019, The World Bank  Iraq Reconstruction and Development
Framework, “Alignment of Development Plans with Sustainable Development Goals
2030 and Identify Priorities”, workshop report, October 2018, UNDP country
office Iraq  DP/DCP/IRQ/ between the strategic priorities of Iraq and KRI – as
reflected in existing visions and plans – with the Goals There is significant
focus on people and prosperity issues, and effective and accountable
institutions (Goal 16) The RIA shows that 71 per cent of relevant Goals targets
have corresponding targets in the NDP, , and the Kurdistan Regional Government
(KRG) Vision Some gaps, including on inclusion and environmental sustainability,
deserve attention  preliminary assessment of the NDP shows that, despite the
priority given at policy levels, major gaps remain in linking Goals targets with
corresponding national targets The National Committee on Sustainable Development
(NCSD) is mandated to monitor the progress on the Goals and to submit reports on
the country’ progress to  “high-level follow‐up group”  The governing
institutions of Iraq have  key role in fostering and creating an enabling
environment for peace Healing societal divisions and tensions – caused by
inequitable economic and social opportunities, and exclusion and marginalization
of groups based on ethnicity, sect and region – will require  comprehensive
social cohesion strategy by national institutions that responds to the needs and
priorities of the vulnerable and marginalized sectors of the population,
particularly women and youth  Corruption, lack of transparency, accountability
and inefficiency in public institutions are manifest in the poor quality of
basic social services and infrastructure10 The national PRS acknowledges the
governance, corruption and accountability challenges and their impact on state
effectiveness and efficiency in delivering quality public services Several
country diagnostics identify the absence of good governance, the spread of
administrative and financial corruption, and weak accountability/transparency as
responsible for low government efficiency and effectiveness and the poor quality
and responsiveness of public services11 Inadequate performance management
systems, limited implementation of the decentralization framework, and limited
capacities of public officials contribute to poor service delivery
infrastructure planning, management and maintenance Structural factors such as
discriminatory practices and centralization further aggravate these system
deficiencies The low priority accorded to improving socioeconomic services,
compounded by poor and deteriorating infrastructure, has worsened the quality
and access to amenities, particularly to vulnerable populations Centralized
decision-making does not provide the opportunity for citizens to have  voice in
decisions that affect their lives These challenges need to be addressed through
legal frameworks and mechanisms for corruption prevention, strengthened
oversight and accountability, and enhanced inclusive institutions that are
responsive to the needs and priorities of vulnerable populations  Despite strong
efforts by the Government and development partners,  million IDPs remain
displaced This requires durable solutions to overcome challenges to voluntary
return and integration of IDPs – due to poor security, destroyed public
infrastructure and housing, lack of livelihood opportunities and poor law
enforcement in the areas liberated from ISIL  Iraq is highly prone to natural
disasters and vulnerability caused by environmental degradation and neglect,
weak legal and regulatory frameworks for environmental management, and weak
institutional arrangements and capacities Furthermore, climate change and
natural disasters pose multiple challenges in the post-conflict context, as
result of their impact on poverty and livelihoods and conflict over natural
resources Climate- induced migration from rural to urban areas can potentially
trigger conflict and violence as it generates competition for (already strained)
urban services and resources Environmental challenges also contribute to
increased incidence of poverty through loss of livelihoods and productivity
caused by land degradation, deforestation and desertification  The previous
country programme document (CPD), , focused on institutional reform of key
national institutions; devolution of administrative and fiscal powers to 10 Iraq
is ranked 168 countries in the Transparency International corruption perception
index 11 Iraq systematic country diagnostic 2017, The World Bank  DP/DCP/IRQ/
governorates; and contribution to safe, voluntary IDP returns through
stabilization, peace- building and early recovery Following the ISIL conflict,
the programme direction and priorities were realigned to meet the humanitarian
and stabilization needs Stabilization became the major thrust at  scale and pace
not foreseen at the time of CPD formulation The independent country programme
evaluation (ICPE) 2019 acknowledged the UNDP contribution to support IDP return
under its stabilization programming, the largest stabilization programme to-date
Starting in 2015, the programme now operates in eight governorates in Iraq and
KRI It has contributed to the return of  million IDPs and to implementation of
more than ,000 infrastructure projects (,149 completed) and more than 18,000
housing units And it has generated more than 35,000 livelihood opportunities in
target areas In total,  million women and girls have benefitted from
stabilization assistance The ICPE identified  number of valuable lessons learned
that will be considered when designing and implementing activities under this
new CPD, namely: aligning UNDP contributions to the country’ changing
priorities, including  focus on conflict prevention through economic
diversification, governance, social cohesion, and energy and environment On the
management side, the ICPE highlighted the need to strengthen results-based
management (RBM) The UNDP comparative advantage in Iraq, as highlighted by the
stabilization programme, rests on its ability to support key nationally-led
initiatives at the policy and operational levels, and in marshalling donor
resources Successful integrity and accountability measures, and efficient
delivery mechanisms introduced have built strong donor, Government, KRG and
community confidence and trust that make UNDP  partner of choice to design and
implement complex programmes in  high-risk environment UNDP is well-positioned
as  strategic partner to support achievement of national Goals targets through
programme priorities elaborated in the following section UNDP will draw on the
global and regional knowledge networks to provide policy advice and
institutional strengthening II Programme priorities and partnerships The country
programme is aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, , (UNSDCF) and national strategic priorities reflected in the NDP, ,
Iraq Vision 2030, Kurdistan Vision 2020,12 and the KRG Roadmap to Economic
Reforms, which are within the framework of the Goals UNDP will support the
Government vision for  sustainable peaceful Iraq through an approach that
strengthens societal resilience to better deal with social, economic,
environmental and political shocks and stresses, while addressing risk drivers
UNDP will support four interlinked, inclusive, holistic development pathways,
underpinned by  resilience-based strategy that addresses the needs of vulnerable
segments to contribute to sustaining peace and stability The four pathways in
the CPD are: () strengthened stabilization; () diversified pro-poor economic
growth for sustainable livelihoods; () improved governance with accountable
institutions that protect the rights of vulnerable groups and pave the way for
citizen-state trust; and () decreased fragility to climate change These pathways
are all underpinned by  strategy for achieving social cohesion, protection and
inclusion, as critical to ensuring the humanitarian-peace-development nexus and
forging  new social contract in Iraq key strategic thrust for UNDP will be to
undertake these activities in  manner that builds the capacity of Central,
Governorate and local level institutions to manage initiatives key to
peacebuilding and reconstruction in the near future UNDP will also strengthen
its donor coordination mechanisms, especially on stabilization, social cohesion,
and security sector reform, with donors and other United Nations organizations
12 KRG Vision 2020 is expected to be extended to 2030 with the same policy
priorities (based on discussions with KRG officials)  DP/DCP/IRQ/ UNDP will
mainstream conflict-sensitive approaches to all programming in order to address
the underlying challenges of exclusion, marginalization and societal divisions
through each pillar and to contribute to addressing key drivers of conflict,
particularly with regard to strengthening the peace-dividends associated with
service delivery in order to increase state legitimacy, and reduce local
tensions in areas of hardest return and identified volatility, most of these
being the regions covered by UNDP stabilization initiative UNDP will also adopt
and introduce innovative approaches to use social media and social local
networks to engage youth and women to address social and development challenges
through accelerator labs and use of digital technology In addition, UNDP will
support the Government to develop and implement  social cohesion agenda that
promotes conflict resolution mechanisms, dialogue and trust-building measures;
enable peaceful coexistence; and prevent future radicalization and recruitment
by violent extremist groups Gender and youth will be mainstreamed in all
programming through dedicated strategies and monitoring based on gender and age-
disaggregated data UNDP will leverage its close relationship with, and the
political mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to
develop and implement innovative and sensitive conflict approaches, especially
with regard to identified priority regions, social cohesion, returns, prevention
of violent extremism and overall governance reform UNDP will explore
partnerships with United Nations organizations – International Organization for
Migration (IOM), United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and World Food Programme
(WFP) – to offer an integrated approach to social cohesion, especially in
conflict flash point areas UNDP will strengthen partnerships with national and
local non-governmental organizations (NGOs), academic institutions and research
organizations on awareness creation, peace and conflict studies and design of
pilot innovative, social-cohesion mainstreaming initiatives Informed by the
common country assessment (CCA), and ICPE findings and recommendations, UNDP
will contribute to achieving UNSDCF outcomes , ,  and , which reflect Goals  and
to 17 and are aligned with UNDP Strategic Plan, , Outcomes  to  The country
programme will focus on the following priority areas Stabilization (UNSDCF
Outcome ; Goals , 16 and ,  and ) The current UNDP stabilization initiative has
been the main stabilization effort in support of the Government’ post-ISIL
efforts; there is still major demand for its activities to support the
transition Based on its success and lessons learned, the next phase of the
stabilization pillar () will address challenges related to access to basic
infrastructure and services in disadvantaged areas most affected by the cycle of
conflict and at risk for future conflict The pillar will address restoration of
public services, rehabilitation of housing and public infrastructure, and
implementation of interventions to address service sustainability in critical
infrastructure sectors, while giving greater emphasis to issues of exclusion,
discrimination and rights and stronger focus on ‘building back better’ In
conflict sensitive way, this pillar will develop stronger synergies with other
programme areas, particularly livelihoods, social cohesion, environment and
governance, while improving strategies for the empowerment of women and youth
and mainstreaming innovation UNDP will ensure that the required technical
expertise of municipalities and local line directorates is built and allocated
to sustain service delivery efforts in liberated areas and underserved
governorates, especially those still hosting IDPs, and host communities UNDP
will leverage its strong partnership with the Government, KRG, governorates and
local authorities, to strengthen sustainability, national ownership and
coordination In implementing its stabilization pillar, UNDP will seek technical
collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to strengthen
environmental safeguards; with the United Nations Human Settlement Programme
(UN-HABITAT) around housing, land and  DP/DCP/IRQ/ property rights; and with
UNICEF and the World Health Organization (WHO) on education and health
programming; and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) on mine action
Growing the economy for all (UNSDCF Outcome ; Goals , , , 10, 12, 17) To promote
an enabling environment that facilitates inclusive and diversified economic
growth benefitting citizens at all levels, UNDP will support the strengthening
of business ecosystems, especially in high-impact, labour-intensive productive
sectors UNDP will support the Government to implement its private sector
development strategy (PSDS); improve access to markets and finance through
innovative financing options; establish small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and
start-ups; promote skills development and job placement; and set up  system for
asset grant replacement UNDP assistance will aim to strengthen local government
capacities for inclusive local-green economic development; support innovative
solutions through public-private partnerships that stimulate inclusive local
economic development; provide income and employment opportunities for vulnerable
groups,; and promote social cohesion and environment-friendly business
practices, especially in growth- promising economic sectors that have high
impact on employment creation UNDP will support both the central level (for
PSDS) and in underserved regions, especially those liberated from ISIL, southern
governorates and the Baghdad belt UNDP will elaborate  sustainable livelihoods
strategy that includes  mapping of ongoing and future initiatives to identify
possible partnerships in this pillar It will build on its strong partnership
with municipalities and governorate councils to pioneer public-private
partnership initiatives, while further exploring partnerships with the private
sector and the International Labour Organization (ILO) for skills advancement
and SME and private sector development Women and youth will be key target groups
in all these activities Strengthen institutions and services (UNSDCF Outcome ;
Goals , 10, 16) In order to restore citizens’ confidence in governance
institutions and State legitimacy, UNDP will support accountable, transparent,
efficient institutions able to deliver basic services, through support to
policies and actions for inclusive, participatory and responsive planning,
budgeting and decision-making processes that reflect the needs and priorities of
vulnerable groups UNDP will pilot innovative technology-based solutions that
contribute to increased efficiency, effectiveness and transparency of governance
institutions, systems and services at national and subnational levels, including
strengthening national anti-corruption capacities, sector-specific approaches,
and capacity development of relevant national institutions and NGOs UNDP will
improve access to justice and strengthen citizen security, particularly for
women and other marginalized groups, by promoting effective dispute resolution
mechanisms, and by strengthening security sector reform, the rule of law and
national human rights institutions Interventions proposed under this pillar are
also intended to provide an enabling environment for the achievement of social
cohesion and sustainable development UNDP will partner with government
institutions to implement its interventions in this pillar at the central and
local levels, including the Ministry of Interior and its community security
machinery; the Integrity Committee and the Parliament for strengthened
oversight; and governorate councils and municipalities for decentralization
efforts Promoting natural resource and disaster risk management, and climate
change resilience (UNSDCF Outcome ; Goals , , 10, 12 to 15, 17) UNDP will
support resilient, low-emission, development pathways to cope with climate,
change and environmental risks and exposure Key elements include promoting
sustainable water governance, and sustainable practices of wastewater and solid
waste management; improving access to clean renewable energy; and strengthening
biodiversity UNDP will offer  DP/DCP/IRQ/ policy advice and technical assistance
to enable national partners to integrate environment, disaster and climate risks
in resilience-building and recovery planning UNDP will build national and
subnational capacities to design and implement strategies to achieve
environment, disaster and climate-related Goals UNDP will promote resilience, by
supporting implementation of the national environment strategy, and
accessibility to global climate finance instruments The programme will focus on
ecologically-degraded, climate change, disaster-vulnerable the south
Mesopotamian marshlands; designated national protected areas, and the mountain
ecosystem in the north It will target disaster and climate-vulnerable
communities, IDPs and host communities, with priority on women, children, the
elderly and disabled UNDP will provide policy advice and technical assistance to
assist the Government in meeting its international commitments, obligations and
conventions and comply with related reporting requirements regions; salinity-
affected, water-stressed regions in UNDP will draw on its regional and global
environment and climate change expertise to support evidence-based policy and
analysis to inform national policies and action plans It will work with national
partners to identify and access climate financing opportunities, including
vertical funds such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Green Climate
Fund (GCF), the Adaptation Fund and vertical funds which Iraq has yet to fully
utilize UNDP will promote South-South and regional collaboration to address
cross-boundary environmental, energy and water-related threats and challenges,
and will partner with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), UNEP, UNICEF, WHO, the Arab Water Council, and the Regional
Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (RCREEE) on policy advocacy,
research, community outreach and programme implementation III Programme and risk
management This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels
with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme
and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework The
programme will be directly implemented by UNDP If necessary, direct
implementation may be replaced by national implementation for parts of this in
case of force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be
used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage
financial risks As per Executive Board decision 2013/, cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects In accordance with Board decision 2013/, all direct costs
associated with project implementation, including data, information and
monitoring, will be charged to concerned projects UNDP is likely to face
significant operational and programming risks primarily related to the operating
environment in the country, characterized by  fragile peace and continued
security challenges Sustaining national political commitment throughout the CPD
period – regarding the required security, governance, justice and sectoral
reforms and actions contained in this programme – will be  challenge, given the
situation in Iraq, and may pose  risk to achieving programme impact and
delivering results UNDP will maintain close consultations with Federal and local
Government, KRG, UNAMI and development partners to mitigate risks and take
corrective measures where possible UNDP plans to regularly update critical risk
analysis to ensure timely preventive measures are taken to avoid programme
disruption and delays  DP/DCP/IRQ/ IV Monitoring and evaluation Data
availability, reliability and access, particularly sex disaggregated and
subnational levels, remains  major challenge in the RBM of the programme and the
Goals Data availability assessments conducted under UNDP support for the
Voluntary National Review indicate  data gap of about 70 per cent for the 230
indicators of 17 Goals13 Once the process of validation of the RIA is completed,
and national priority targets are identified, UNDP will support the undertaking
of  data gap analysis for the Goals UNDP, with in-house expertise at regional
and global levels, jointly with other United Nations organizations, especially
UNFPA, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) and
IOM, will intensify efforts to support national institutions to introduce modern
information management techniques and technology to improve data availability,
reliability and access to enhance the quality of monitoring and reporting on the
Goals Key national partners include the Central Statistical Organization and
Kurdistan Regional Statistical Office, which are mandated to manage national and
regional statistics14 In partnership with United Nations organizations and
international partners, UNDP will advocate that the “leave no one behind”
approach be embedded in the national census UNDP will, to the extent possible,
align the country programme and project-level indicators with the UNSDCF, the
UNDP Strategic Plan, , and the national Goals and national/regional development
plan indicators to ensure that data generated through United Nations and
national sources is consistent and available to meet UNDP monitoring and
reporting requirements UNDP has established  programme management and support
unit (PMSU) to strengthen its monitoring and evaluation capacity, programme
quality assurance and management oversight The PMSU provides  dedicated capacity
for management to use project and outcome evaluations in managing/adjusting
initiatives, documenting lessons learned and knowledge-sharing Each pillar will
work in cooperation with PMSU to identify data limitations/ availability of
reliable data, evidence and analysis to improve results-based and adaptive
management UNDP will conduct risk analysis and analytical research and baseline
studies to enhance its internal knowledge base for better targeting and to
inform programme interventions It will strengthen national staff capacities for
effective RBM to ensure compliance with UNDP and donor reporting requirements
UNDP will conduct regular monitoring visits to review implementation progress
and take timely remedial actions In line with UNDP corporate guidance and
practice, data and information and project monitoring costs will be included as
direct costs to project budgets UNDP will also consider  midterm review of the
country programme to assess progress and relevance and to inform (re)alignment
with emerging priorities and needs, if required The UNDP gender marker and
environmental screening guidelines will be used to monitor country programme
expenditures and improve planning and decision-making 13 Iraq Voluntary National
Report 14 Iraq systematic country diagnostic, The World Bank, 2017 (based on
assessment of the Iraq statistical system)  DP/DCP/IRQ/ Annex Results and
resources framework for Iraq () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National development
priority:  Lay the foundations for good governance UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP:  People in Iraq, civil society and communities, particularly women, have
improved capacity to lead, participate in and contribute to the design and
delivery of equitable and responsive services, especially for the most
vulnerable populations RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Indicative resources by
outcome (in United States dollars) Data source and frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities UNSDCF outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets) Major
partners / partnerships frameworks Indicator  Number of governorates with direct
participation mechanisms for civil society engagement in all facets of
development plans for the delivery of equitable and responsive services that
operate regularly and transparently Baseline (2019): TBC Target (2024): 10
Source: TBC Output  Infrastructure for basic service delivery improved in
locations affected by crisis and vulnerable to conflict Council of Minister’
Secretariat (COMSEC) Ministry of Planning (MoP) Ministry of Finance (MoF)
Relevant technical ministries for service delivery Ministry of Higher Education
and Scientific Research (MHESR) Governorates Local authorities Universities
Civil society UNAMI UNMAS UN-HABITAT UNESCO UNICEF WHO UNEP Regular $350,000
Frequency: TBC Indicator 15 Number of people from locations affected by crisis
accessing basic services, gender disaggregated Baseline (2019): ,039,253
(,968,280 women) Target (2024): 12,000,000 Source: IOM displacement tracking
matrix (DTM); UNDP project reports Other $664,000,000 Indicator  Number of
infrastructure projects completed in priority sectors in conflict affected
communities Baseline (2019): ,249 projects Target (2024): ,800 projects Source:
UNDP project records Indicator  Number of families benefitting from improved
housing Baseline (2019): 20,960 (234, Welthungerhilfe) Target (2024): 25,000
Source: UNDP project records 15 Contributes to Strategic Plan, , indicator
DP/DCP/IRQ/ Output : Civil society and academic institutions strengthened to
promote social cohesion, prevention of violent extremism and sustainable
development Indicator  Number of civil society organizations (CSOs) supported to
engage in sustainable development, conflict prevention and mitigation processes
Baseline (2019): 25 Target (2024): 50 Source: UNDP project records, NGO
Directorate Indicator  Number of academic institutions with increased capacity
to promote social cohesion within the higher education system in Iraq Baseline
(2019):  Target (2024): 15 Source: MHESR; UNDP project records Indicator  Number
of community-level mechanisms for conflict resolution and consensus-building
that are operational with the engagement of youth and women Baseline (2019): 30
( women focused) Target (2024): 80 Source: UNDP project records Indicator
Number of people engaged in the innovative use of social media and local
networks to address development challenges and social cohesion (gender
disaggregated) Baseline (2019): 12,278 (,472 women) Target (2024): 30,000
Source: Social media tracking tools; project records NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
National development priority:  Provide the conditions for an enabling
environment for all forms of investment and strengthen the role of the private
sector;  Reduce unemployment and underemployment rates UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP:  Improved people-centred economic policies and legislation contribute to
inclusive, gender sensitive and diversified economic growth, with focus on
increasing income security and decent work for women, youth and vulnerable
populations 10 DP/DCP/IRQ/ RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Advance
poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions Indicator  Number of jobs
created in productive non-oil sectors out of total jobs by sex and age and
persons with disabilities Baseline (2019): 15,985 Target (2024): 76,213 Source:
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs (MoLSA) Output  Priority policies and
partnerships approved and implemented for inclusive green economic growth and
employment creation Regular MoF Ministry of Trade Ministry of Industry and
Minerals Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs Ministry of Agriculture Ministry
of Water Resources Prime Minister’ Office COMSEC National Investment Commission
Governorate offices State-own enterprises Private sector and banking
institutions Union of Iraqi Chambers of Commerce Iraqi Federation of Industries
Iraqi Contractors Union World Bank International Monetary Fund (IMF) UNEP ILO
CSOs Universities and research institutions $550,000 Other: Frequency: TBC
Indicator  Number of policy or strategy actions implemented to enable private
sector development Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: High-level Steering
Committee on PSDS; Ministry of Finance $160,000,000 Indicator 16 Number of
public-private partnerships formalized for economic diversification and
employment creation Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: COMSEC, Ministry
of Finance; Ministry of Trade Output  Access to livelihood and employment
creation opportunities increased in locations affected by and vulnerable to
conflict Indicator 17 Number of people benefitting from emergency livelihood
support, disaggregated by gender Baseline (2019): 58,872 (10,862 women;13,095
youth) Target (2024) 68,000 Source: UNDP project records Indicator  Number of
people supported to access sustainable livelihoods and employment opportunities,
disaggregated by gender Baseline (2019): 14,114 (7520 women) Target (2024):
20,000 16 Adapted from Strategic Plan, , indicator  17 Contributes to Strategic
Plan, , indicator  11 DP/DCP/IRQ/ Source: UNDP project records; Ministry of
Labour and Social Services; governorate offices Indicator 18 Number of men and
women accessing financial services Baseline (2019):  Target (2024): ,000 Source:
UNDP project records NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National development priority:
Lay the foundations for good governance; Lay the foundations for
decentralization to strengthen spatial development UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP:  Strengthened institutions and systems deliver people-centred, evidence
and needs-based equitable and inclusive gender and age-responsive services,
especially for the most vulnerable populations, with particular focus on
advocating for women’ leadership in decision-making processes RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development Source: Satisfaction surveys conducted by CSOs Indicator  Proportion
of the population satisfied with the delivery of improved public services,
disaggregated by sex, age, disability, type of service and governorates Baseline
(2019): % Target (2024): % increase every two years Regular $490,000 Output
Innovative, digital and data-driven solutions for developing evidence-based
policies and systems for planning, budgeting and monitoring public services
designed and implemented COMSEC Council of Representatives of Iraq Parliament of
the Kurdistan Regional Government MoP MoF Ministry of Justice Ministry of
Interior Governorate offices Local authorities Supreme/Higher Judicial Council
Supreme Anti-Corruption Council Independent High Electoral Commission Judiciary
Oversight Commission Commission of Integrity Other $106,000,000 Frequency: Every
two years Indicator 19 Number of systems in place that use digital technologies
and data for improved public services Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source:
UNDP project records; Government partner records Indicator  Number of analytical
reports produced on progress towards achieving the Goals, disaggregated by
national and subnational levels Baseline (2019):  (national);  (subnational)
Target (2024):  (national); 16 (subnational) Source: Ministry of Planning;
governorate offices 18Links with Strategic Plan, , indicator  19 Links to
Strategic Plan, , indicator:  12 DP/DCP/IRQ/ Indicator  Number of solutions to
address priority social and development challenges tested by the accelerator lab
Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: Accelerator lab records Board of
Supreme Audit UNAMI UNHCR IOM CSOs Output  National institutions and mechanisms
dedicated to promoting social cohesion and prevention of violent extremism
strengthened Indicator  Number of policies or plans of action for social
cohesion and prevention of violent extremism, ensuring the engagement of women
and youth, approved Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: Parliament of
Iraq; COMSEC, Coexistence Committee Indicator 20 Number of national institutions
to lead inclusive processes and initiatives that promote social cohesion
strengthened Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: UNDP project records
Indicator 21 Number of conflict and development analysis conducted with
stakeholders to inform decision- making and risk management strategies,
disaggregated by national and subnational levels Baseline (2019):  subnational
level Target (2024): 10 Source: UNDP project records Output  Capacities and
systems for transparency and accountability improved in key policymaking and
oversight structures to mitigate the risk of corruption 20Aligns to Strategic
Plan, , indicator  21 Aligns to Strategic Plan, , indicator  13 DP/DCP/IRQ/
Indicator 22 Level of progress made in operationalizing the Parliamentarian
Development Institute (PDI) Baseline (2019): No PDI in place Target (2024): PDI
operational, providing capacity- building support to officials in the Parliament
of Iraq Source: Parliament of Iraq Indicator  Number of measures adopted to
mitigate corruption risks, disaggregated by national, subnational and/or sector
level Baseline (2019):  Target (2024): 20 Source: UNDP project records; Supreme
Anti-Corruption Council Output 23 People’ access to justice increased through
improved capacities and systems of rule of law, security sector and human rights
institutions Indicator  Number of mid-ranking local police officers and criminal
investigators trained against prioritized and specialized training requirements
for improved service provision in target locations, gender disaggregated
Baseline (2019): 829 Target (2024): 3000 Source: Ministry of Interior; UNDP
records Indicator  Number of people in locations affected by and vulnerable to
conflict who have access to legal services, disaggregated by sex Baseline
(2019): 18,069 (14,622 women) Target (2024): 25,000 Source: Directorate for
Combatting Violence Against Women (DCWAV); Responsible party reports NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: 22 Aligns to Strategic Plan, , indicator:  23 Contributes to
Strategic Plan, , output  14 DP/DCP/IRQ/ National development priority or goal:
Lay the foundations for decentralization to strengthen spatial development
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP:  Strengthened and resourced policies and
frameworks are implemented for managing natural resources (including
transboundary issues), developing renewable resources, and increasing resilience
to climate change, environmental stress and natural hazards, and human-induced
and natural disasters RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome : Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Indicator  Adopted and
implemented national disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies in line with
Sendai Framework for DRR, 2015- Baseline (2019): No Target (2024): Yes Source:
Office of the National Security Advisor (ONSA), National Disaster Policies
Regular Prime Minister’ National Operations Centre (PMNOC) Prime Minister’
Advisory Council (PMAC) Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) Ministry of Health
and Environment (MoHEn) Joint Coordination and Monitoring Centre Joint Crisis
Coordination Centre, KRG WHO UNICEF UNEP FAO Arab Water Council Regional Centre
for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (RECREE) Output  National capacities
improved for climate change adaptation and mitigation $,000,000 Indicator 24
Number of gender-responsive policies or frameworks developed or updated for
conservation, sustainable use, and equitable access to and benefit-sharing of
natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystems Baseline:  Target (2024):
Source: MoHEn Other $63,000,000 Frequency: TBC Indicator  Number of initiatives
on renewable energy supported Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: UNDP
project records; MoHEn Indicator  Number of reports on Iraq’ international
commitments submitted Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  Source: UNDP project
records; MoHEn Civil society Indicator  Number of ecologically vulnerable
locations in which the 3X6 approach is piloted for ecosystem conservation and
restoration Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):  24 Aligns to Strategic Plan, ,
indicator  15 DP/DCP/IRQ/ Source: UNDP project records; MoHEn Indicator  Extent
to which the mechanism for water governance in drought prone areas, which are
vulnerable to conflict, are strengthened25 Baseline (2019):  Target (2024):
Source: MoWR; governorate offices Output  Disaster risk management and
resilience strengthened with multi-stakeholder engagement, in geographic
locations at high risk of human-induced or natural disasters Indicator  Number
of gender-responsive disaster preparedness plans designed and approved for
priority governorates, disaggregated by type of disaster Baseline (2019):
Target (2024):  Source: PMNOC; UNDP project records Indicator  Level of
implementation of mechanisms for critical infrastructure protection from
disasters Baseline (2019): Mechanisms not in place Target (2024): Mechanisms in
place for five critical infrastructure Source: ONSA 25 Rating scale:  = very
weak;  = weak;  = moderate;  = strong;  = very strong 16