Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/COM/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Since 2010, Comoros has
experienced accelerated economic growth, reaching  per cent in The country
joined the lower-middle-income category in 2018 and the medium human development
category in 2019 (Human Development Index 554, 156th of 189 countries)
Nevertheless, in multidimensional poverty and per cent were below the national
poverty line Progress remains fragile due to: () the volatility of growth and
its undiversified base; () low exploitation of regional integration
opportunities and the potential of green and blue economies; () ecological
fragility and high vulnerability to climate change and shocks; () the country'
limited adaptation and mitigation capacity; and () lack of preparedness,
response and recovery from disasters, as the passage of Cyclone Kenneth and the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have recently demonstrated In addition,
global governance indicators suggest that this is an area requiring additional
attention Comoros is ranked 38th of 54 countries in the Ibrahim Index of African
Governance, having lost  points between 2010 and in 2019, per cent of Comorians
were living  There are important gender disparities in Comorian society; for
example, women have  Human Development Index and gross national income of 519
and $,300, compared to 583 and $,885 respectively for men More than 82 per cent
of actively employed women work in the informal sector5 and women are
underrepresented in political bodies (only per cent of seats in Parliament,  per
cent of the Government’ Cabinet Ministers and 28 per cent of local authorities’
cabinet members) Young people face high unemployment (38 per cent in the  age
group are unemployed), are insufficiently trained in sectors with growth
potential and there is little support for young entrepreneurs Persons with
disabilities are largely ignored and their needs neglected (more than 60 per
cent have never attended school and per cent are economically inactive)  The
country’ 2019 development strategy, the Plan for an Emerging Comoros (Plan
Comores Emergent (PCE)), acknowledges these challenges while capitalizing on the
country’ economic and ecological potential and young labour force, aiming to
make it an emerging country by The plan targets five areas driving sustainable
growth: () tourism and handicrafts; () blue economy; () financial and logistic
services; () modernized agriculture; and () industrial niches to diversify the
economy Infrastructure, human capital and digital technology are identified as
catalytic priorities Moreover, the PCE integrates the interrelated challenges of
climate change, disaster risk reduction and biodiversity conservation, thereby
placing ecological transition at the heart of the sustainable development of
Comoros  The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNSDCF) articulates the contribution of the United Nations system to the
Government’ vision for development and advancement of the Sustainable
Development Goals in Comoros The UNDP contribution is based on its comparative
advantages and integrator role UNDP will be lead agency for the UNSDCF “planet"
pillar and play  major role in the “prosperity” and “peace/governance” pillars
UNDP will also make an important strategic contribution to aid coordination It
will be at the forefront of analysis on emerging challenges including post-
UNDP Human Development Report,  Common Country Analysis,  The Global Climate
Risk Index 2021 lists Comoros as 16th most at risk out of 180 countries and 59th
for lack of capacity to adapt to climate change  Human Development Report,
National Institute of Statistics and Economic and Demographic Studies (Institut
Nationale de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques et Démographiques
(INSEED)), Comorian Market Study (2016)  INSEED,    Study, Phase  (2014)  UNDP,
Case Study: Disability-inclusive COVID-19 response and recovery (2021) /14
DP/DCP/COM/ COVID-19 recovery, the blue economy, integrated digital
transformation and climate finance  UNDP will build on its reputation as an
effective and reliable partner of State and non- State actors and on its new
development approaches ("Next Generation UNDP") It will support sustainable
development in Comoros and the implementation of the UNSDCF by: () Promoting
integrated multidimensional and multisectoral development approaches including
around resilience and economic transformation; () Capitalizing on the UNDP
global network of expertise, competencies and knowledge to build local
capacities and draw on lessons learned from similar contexts; () Mobilizing
priority partnerships integrating civil society and the private sector around
innovative financing and new business models; () Supporting digital
transformation and launching high-potential pilots, including through
mainstreaming technological innovation for climate-resilient agriculture,
disaster resilience, energy transition, resilient water supply, integrated waste
management and entrepreneurship, in collaboration with regional accelerator labs
and through the establishment of  local accelerator lab; () Promoting the
empowerment of women, creation of new opportunities for youth and socioeconomic
integration of persons with disabilities and the consideration of their rights
and needs; () Capitalizing on its presence on all islands; () Expanding efforts
for regional integration, supporting the establishment of South-South and
triangular cooperation through the Comorian International Cooperation Agency and
promoting technology and knowledge transfer in strategic sectors For example, in
terms of South-South and triangular cooperation, Benin, India, Morocco, United
Republic of Tanzania, Tunisia and South Africa will be involved in climate-smart
and digital agriculture; Morocco in water management; France, Japan, Madagascar,
Turkey and the United States of America in disaster resilience; Maldives,
Mauritius and Seychelles in circular economy; Iceland, Kenya and New Zealand, in
geothermal energy; and France, Morocco, Senegal and Tunisia in development
finance () Promoting the humanitarian-development-peace nexus  The proposed
programme reflects the lessons learned from the independent evaluation of the
preceding country programme, which recognized the progress made and the value
added by UNDP The evaluation recommended that UNDP: () strengthen its governance
portfolio; () consolidate support to energy transition, promoting sectoral
partnerships; () increase national ownership and continue efforts to strengthen
the capacities of national counterparts and partners; () replicate successful
pilot experiences and significantly involve communities; () review development
financing and support increased aid effectiveness whilst capturing new funding
including remittances; and () develop  realistic theory of change The proposed
programme, and the UNSDCF to which it is aligned, also build on lessons learned
from the evaluation of the previous United Nations Development Assistance
Framework II Programme priorities and partnerships  The proposed programme is
the result of  national consultation process involving government, civil society
and other development partners, building on inclusive dialogue around the UNSDCF
The process helped to identify how the United Nations system could complement
the work of other partners It is based on the principles of integrated United
Nations programming and the comparative advantages of UNDP At the request of the
United Nations country team, UNDP took  lead role in the elaboration of the
Common Country /14  DP/DCP/COM/ Analysis and the facilitation of related
consultations In line with the UNSDCF, the programme is fully aligned with the
African Union and Southern African Development Community Agenda 2063, the
ecological and economic agenda of the Indian Ocean Commission, the UNDP
Strategic Plan, the strategic offer of the UNDP Regional Bureau for Africa, the
SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (Samoa) Pathway and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction () It also contributes to the priorities set in the
PCE and the Government’ 2020–2024 Interim Development Plan which constitute the
national frameworks for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
The programme is fully aligned with the three development settings of the
Strategic Plan: eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions; accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development; and build resilience to
shocks and crises The six UNDP signature solutions are also integrated in
cross-cutting manner to achieve the programme’ results  The theory of change
underpinning the programme is as follows: () If ecological resilience and
resilience to climate change and natural disasters are enhanced through the
conservation of biodiversity, the sustainable provision of ecosystem goods and
services, capacity-building and management, through the adoption of adequate
mitigation and adaptation measures, , integrated coastal zone management and the
promotion of sustainable habitats with  small environmental footprint; () If the
Comorian economy is more competitive, inclusive and creates sustainable jobs and
added value as part of the emergence of an entrepreneurial ecosystem that
further develops the potential of the green, blue and circular economies and
agroecological value chains in an environment conducive to public and private
investment; () If State and non-State institutions, including the private sector
and civil society organizations, are fully involved and more efficient,
accountable and transparent in  context of improved access to information, and
if social cohesion and citizen participation are at the heart of public action;
() Then, by 2026, the Comorian population, particularly the most vulnerable,
will be more resilient and will enjoy shared prosperity in  dynamic of
accelerated ecological transition, digital innovation and improved governance;
() Because the country will have reduced its vulnerability to climate change and
disasters, slowed the loss of biodiversity, valued ecosystem services and put
its economy on  path of sustainable forward-looking growth upheld by more
competent public and private institutions that are gender-sensitive and support
the rights of all Comorians and maintain social cohesion; () Provided that the
population and the authorities take ownership of the objectives of this
programme, that political leadership is transformational and adheres to the
principles of sustainable development, that the country realizes the relevant
structural investments planned in the PCE, and that the effects of climate
change and crises do not exceed the resilience of the population, the State and
its infrastructure and environment This programme is built on three interrelated
Sustainable Development Goal pillars (planet, prosperity and peace) and will
contribute to the UNSDCF outcomes described below UNSDCF outcome : By 2026,
State and non-State actors and the Comorian population, especially the most
vulnerable, are more resilient to climate change, natural disasters and crises
and ensure sustainable and integrated management of land and marine ecosystems
and associated ecosystem goods and services, in  context of promoting
sustainable habitats with  small environmental footprint The UNDP contribution
will focus on: () the protection and development of marine and terrestrial
ecosystems, knowledge and capacities to conserve biodiversity; () the creation
of  biodiversity trust fund; () the sustainable management of ecosystem goods
and services, including in particular  resilient water supply and sustainable
access to clean and affordable /14  DP/DCP/COM/ energy; and () strengthening the
technical, technological and financial capacities required for disaster
preparedness and response at all levels, including strengthening institutional
and regulatory frameworks for coordination and integrated disaster management as
well as knowledge and understanding of the interrelationships between disasters,
climate hazards and biodiversity conservation UNDP will work the following
United Nations agencies on the issues of access to water, waste management,
environment and sustainable habitats: Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the World Health Organization
(WHO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) UNSDCF outcome : By
2026, the Comorian population, especially the most vulnerable, enjoys shared
prosperity, built on  more competitive and inclusive economy, on renewed public-
private partnerships and in  perspective of sustainable growth oriented towards
the sectors of the future (green, blue and digital economy) The UNDP
contribution will focus on: () the establishment of an inclusive entrepreneurial
ecosystem in growth sectors (green, blue, circular and digital economies)
supported by strengthened public-private partnerships; () promotion of socially,
economically and environmentally engaged youth; () women’ social, political and
economic empowerment; () scaling-up of successful experiences in climate-smart
agriculture and agricultural diversification, including innovative solutions
focused on adaptative techniques and technologies; () social coverage of rural
communities in areas of concentration; and () creation of an enabling
environment to drive economic transformation post-COVID-Partners include FAO,
the International Labour Organization (ILO), International Trade Centre, UNICEF,
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and UN- Women,
working on the blue and green economies and social protection UNSDCF outcome :
By 2026, public institutions are more inclusive, efficient, accountable and
resilient and strengthen citizen participation in public life, social cohesion,
human rights, gender equality and democracy The UNDP contribution is based on:
() the establishment of platforms and innovative tools (including digital) that
promote active citizen engagement in decision-making, inclusive dialogue with
elected officials and social cohesion; () strengthened capacities of civil
society for advocacy based on accessible, disaggregated and reliable data; ()
strengthened operational, technological and technical capacities to improve
development planning and management in  context of institutional efficiency and
accountability; and () the use of "big data" including around platforms for aid
coordination, foreign direct investment and trade integration Partners will
include the United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and UN-Women around citizen participation
and social cohesion The achievement of the results for this programme cycle is
based on seven factors for success: ()  multisectoral approach to maximize
impact and promote the adoption of socially and economically innovative, gender-
sensitive and ecologically responsible solutions, coupled with “top to bottom”
and “bottom-up” approaches to ensure ownership at all levels; () promotion of
the fourth industrial revolution and digital transformation, including using
innovation and digital technology as vectors of opportunity, efficiency and
inclusion in all aspects of the economy, governance and society, building on the
legislative and regulatory frameworks developed with UNDP support; () promotion
of  human rights- based approach, leaving no one behind and the promotion of
differentiated approaches by /14  DP/DCP/COM/ targeting vulnerable groups
(women, youth, persons with disabilities, people vulnerable to climate change);
() lessons learned from previous evaluations and scaling-up of successful
experiences; () use of regional integration as  platform for new opportunities,
particularly for youth and women; () the effective appropriation of the small
island developing States offer as  reference programmatic framework and the
underlying opportunities including access to blue finance; and () taking into
account the challenges, opportunities and lessons learned from the management
and socioeconomic impacts of COVID-In synergy with the interventions of other
partners, the programme will build on and strengthen partnerships with technical
and financial partners, including the European Union, World Bank, African
Development Bank and the French Development Agency This programme will also
serve as  platform for partnerships with the catalytic funds of the United
Nations, bilateral and multilateral partners, financial institutions, vertical
funds and South-South cooperation, as well as partnerships with the private
sector and diaspora UNDP will collaborate with the national Chambers of Commerce
and Industry, the Chamber of Agriculture, national agencies, public utility
services, private companies, women' organizations and networks, civil society,
microfinance and research institutions and incubation structures Because the
evaluation of the previous country programme indicated that national State and
non-State partners wish to be more involved in the formulation and
implementation of projects, the participatory dynamic initiated during the
formulation of the proposed programme will be maintained and strengthened in the
development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of projects and
programmes The evaluation also suggested that UNDP continue national execution
for most of its projects to strengthen national capacities for results-based
management and foster national ownership UNDP will build on the recommendations
from the result of the micro-assessment of implementing partners of United
Nations projects and programmes conducted in 2020 through the harmonized
approach to cash transfers, and relevant recommendations from the latest
national implementation audits to accelerate the gradual ownership of the
programme by national implementing entities III Programme and risk management
This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board
for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels
with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework The
programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response
to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in
coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks
Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness
will be charged to the concerned projects The country office will use the UNDP
quality assurance standards and social and environmental risk management and
strict accountability mechanisms The enterprise risk management framework will
guide the design and implementation of the portfolio The significant level of
risk of most of the programme' implementing partners requires UNDP to provide
appropriate expertise, while strengthening their capacities and paying
particular attention to the sharing of responsibilities within the national
execution modality The establishment and coordination of an inclusive national
dialogue framework and conflict prevention mechanisms will help to mitigate the
risks of political instability and conflict /14  DP/DCP/COM/ Risks related to
resource availability are managed through  realistic approach to programming
based on secure resources and building on the resource mobilization momentum of
the country office during the current cycle The principles of flexibility in
planning and resource allocation will be based on  systematic analysis and
assessment of the overall context and risks In order to limit the socioeconomic
impact of COVID-19 and other shocks on the allocation of human and financial
resources, UNDP will strengthen its support for the prevention and coordination
of the response It will also directly address the socioeconomic impact of
COVID-19 across the programme including through the targeting of those worst
impacted by the crisis To optimize the efficiency of interventions and manage
fiduciary risks, the financial supervision of programme/projects and the
evaluation of implementing partners will be strengthened The principles of the
United Nations Global Compact will be carefully applied Given the
intensification and increase in the frequency of extreme weather events and the
high vulnerability of Comoros to disaster risks, the country office has put in
place  business continuity plan which outlines the full range of responses to
assessed risks, including relocation UNDP will also use, when appropriate,
mechanisms for coordinating national and subnational multisectoral responses as
means of risk mitigation IV Monitoring and evaluation The UNDP performance
monitoring system will be harmonized with that of the UNSDCF and with the United
Nations Evaluation Group norms and standards (2019) UNDP will actively
participate in the UNSDCF thematic and results groups Programmatic achievements
will be reviewed annually and outputs reviewed semi-annually through  budgeted
and integrated evaluation plan The programme will be subject to  final
evaluation in Project steering committees will be fully inclusive of vulnerable
groups identified during the design phase They will monitor their progress and
risks annually or more often Results of participatory evaluation will be
systematically shared to improve the implementation of current and future
projects Joint monitoring missions will be organized with national counterparts
and donors To address the shortcomings identified by the independent country
programme evaluation, the monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be built on
strengthened data collection and statistics system The results-based management
will be improved through an inter-agency project supporting the development of
disaggregated data (age, gender, type of disability, island) Furthermore, the
office has established  monitoring and evaluation system, including the creation
of  specialist position  budgeted results-based communication plan will be
implemented to ensure visibility of the results of UNDP and partners Evaluations
will be conducted in accordance with the approved evaluation plan UNDP will
ensure that  system for classifying activities by their contribution to the
promotion of gender equality is included in projects and programmes The country
office is engaged in the Gender Equality Seal certification The country office
will maximize recent investments in new technologies to make its monitoring and
evaluation system more efficient and proactive /14  DP/DCP/COM/ Annex Results
and resources framework for the Comoros () NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS: Interim
Development Plan (2020–2024):  Sustainable management of the environment by
strengthening the protection of the natural resources and biodiversity, the
fight against climate change and the improvement of waste management Plan
Comores Emergent (PCE) Catalyst : Upgraded infrastructure for an efficient
economy COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF outcome : By
2026, State and non-State actors and the Comorian population, especially the
most vulnerable groups, strengthen their resilience to climate change, natural
disasters and crises, and ensure sustainable and integrated management of
terrestrial and marine ecosystems as well as ecosystem goods and services while
promoting sustainable habitats with  small environmental footprint RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES  - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development and - Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises Signature solutions
(Enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for resilient societies),
(Promote nature-based solutions for  sustainable planet),  (Close the energy
gap) and  (Strengthen gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() Indicator : Proportion of the
Comorian population with sustainable access to drinking water and productive
sector usage and sanitation due to resilient supply infrastructures,
disaggregated by gender and geographic Baseline: 15% Target: 75% MAJOR
PARTNERS/PARTNERSHIP FRAMEWORKS INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUT (Including
indicators, baselines targets) ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) Source: Ministries
of Environment and Economy reports OUTPUT : Capacities of State and non-State
actors, particularly decision makers and communities living in protected areas,
are improved to understand the fundamental importance of ecosystems, ecosystem
goods and services, and to support their conservation, management and
sustainable use National Sectoral Directorates (Environment, Civil Security,
Energy, Meteorology) Regular resources: ,000,000 domestic for Other resources:
74,000,000 Frequency: Annual Commissariat for Solidarity and the Promotion of
Gender Indicator : Net loss in area of ecosystems of primary and secondary
forests, mangroves, coral reefs and seagrass beds Baseline: Primary (14,ha) and
secondary (ha) forest cover = total 17,ha; mangroves: 25 ha; seagrass beds: ,030
ha; Reef cover (30,000 ha of which 18,000 ha healthy) (2020) Target: No net loss
Data source: National Agency for Protected Areas, annual Comoros Environmental
Fund University and research institutes (volcanology, agriculture, fisheries and
the environment) Indicator : Proportion of the to population with electricity
Baseline: 46% (2017) Target: 76% Source: National Electricity Company of Comoros
/ Ministries of Environment and Economy reports access Geological Bureau of
Comoros National company in charge of the exploitation and distribution of water
Frequency: Annual Indicator : Average abundance and biomass per unit surface
area of fish and invertebrates within marine protected areas Baseline: Abundance
80 individuals / 100 m²; Biomass 256  / m² (2020) Target: Abundance 120
individuals / 100 m²; Biomass 350  / m² Data source: National Agency for
Protected Areas, annual Source: General Directorate of Water and Forests reports
Indicator : Area of forest ecosystems, mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds
Baseline: Primary (14,ha) (,ha) and secondary forest cover = Total 17,ha;
Mangroves: 25 ha; seagrass reef cover beds: ,030 ha; National Electricity
Company of Comoros Frequency: Annual Centre for Emergency and Protection
Operations Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water /14  DP/DCP/COM/ (30,000 ha
including 18,000 ha in good health) Target: No net loss Source: General
Directorate of Civil Security reports Indicator : Volume of funds mobilized for
the conservation of biodiversity Baseline: $ (2020) Target: $,000,000 Data
source: Comoros Environmental Fund, annual Banda Bitsi Association Frequency:
Annual NGO Development of Forest Environment Management Indicator : Proportion
of the population covered by natural hazard early warning systems, disaggregated
by sex Baseline: 18% (2020) Target: 40%, of whom 20% women Source: Land Use
Planning Department reports International: African Union SADC Climate Investment
Platform Climate Technology Centre Network Global Fund for Coral Reef Stockholm
International Water Institute Geothermal Development Company Kenya Electricity
Generating Company (KenGen) OUTPUT : The Comorian population, especially the
most vulnerable groups, have access to sustainable water supply services for
domestic and production purposes Frequency: Annual Indicator : Proportion of the
population benefiting from safely managed sustainable drinking water supply
services, disaggregated by sex Baseline: 15% (2017) Target: 60%, of whom 50%
women Data source: National company in charge of the exploitation and
distribution of water, annual Indicator : Number of local authorities that have
adopted integrated zone management plans that include less vulnerable urban
areas and the promotion of sustainable habitats small environmental footprint
Baseline:  Target: 12 of which  are led by women coastal with  UN-Habitat UNEP
UNICEF WHO FAO UN-Women Indicator : Number of gender-responsive mechanisms for
the coordination and integrated management of water resources, Baseline:  (2020)
UNDP target:  Data source: National company in charge of the exploitation and
distribution of water, annual SIDS Dock International Renewable Energy Agency
Africa Renewable Energy Initiative Indicator : Proportion of farmers benefiting
from resilient irrigation infrastructures in concentration areas, disaggregated
by sex and age Baseline: 22% (2020) Target: 70%, of whom 50% women and 30% youth
Data source: National Strategic Directorate of Agriculture and Livestock, annual
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development Bilateral cooperation (Governments of
France, Italy, New Zealand, United Kingdom) OUTPUT : Solutions enabled for
sustainable access to clean and affordable energy by rural and urban population
African Development Bank World Bank Indicator : Share of renewable energy in
final electricity consumption Baseline: % (2017) Target: 30%  /14 DP/DCP/COM/
Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, annual Indicator : Number
of innovative and gender- responsive solutions for the production and management
of green energy Baseline:  (2020) UNDP target: 15, of which  are specific to the
needs of women Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, annual
Indicator : Existence of  comprehensive legal and regulatory framework for
renewable energy, favorable to public and private investments Baseline: No
(2020) Target: Yes Data source: Directorate of Energy, Mines and Water, annual
OUTPUT : State and non-State actors, as well as the general population, have the
technical, technological, financial and operational capacities to strengthen
their resilience to climate change and disasters Indicator : Number of local
governments that have adopted disaster risk reduction strategies aligned with
the national strategy Baseline:  (2020) Target: 12 Data source: General
Directorate of Civil Security, annual Indicator : Proportion of the population
covered by multi-hazard early warning systems disaggregated by islands Baseline:
18% (2020) Target: 40% proportionally distributed by island Data source: General
Directorate of Civil Security, annual Indicator : Number of local governments
that have adopted integrated coastal zone management plans that include
sustainable habitats with  small environmental footprint 10  DP/DCP/COM/
Baseline:  (2020) Target: 10 Data source: Equipment and Territorial Planning,
annual NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS: Interim Development Plan (2020–2024):
Relaunch the economy for % growth;   Promote growth and improve the conditions
and the lifestyle of the populations; Promote the rapid recovery of the economy
and improve the flow of information within the population towards strong social
cohesion; Ensure that the sub-sectors are drivers of socio- economic development
PCE Catalyst : Human capital that prepares for the future, PCE pillars // PCE
Catalyst : Structural reforms for an enabling competitive environment
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, the Comorian
population, and in particular the most vulnerable, will enjoy shared prosperity,
built on  more competitive and inclusive economy, on renewed public-private
partnerships, and sustainable growth building on the sectors of the future
(green, blue and digital economy) RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES - Advance
poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions and - Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development Signature solutions  (Keeping people
out of poverty),  (Promote nature-based solutions for  sustainable planet),
(Strengthen gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls) Indicator :
Proportion of in agricultural value actors chains adopted having sustainable and
safe practices, and disaggregated by geographic area Baseline: % (2014) Target:
30% OUTPUT  National and subnational government enabled to develop and implement
plans and strategies for forward-looking entrepreneurial ecosystem with  small
ecological footprint Source: Ministries of Agriculture and Environment reports
FAO reports Regular resources: ,500,000 National: Ministry of Youth, Employment
and Labour emergence the of  Other resources: 21,600,000 Frequency: annual sex
Ministry of Health, Solidarity, Social Cohesion and Gender Indicators : Number
of regulatory frameworks for promoting entrepreneurship in the green and blue
economy responsible to promote efficient, socially created companies with  small
ecological footprint Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Data source: Annual report of
the Ministry of Economy Sectoral Directorates (Agriculture, Economics) Source:
Ministry of Employment / House of Employment Reports / ILO reports Indicator :
Share of workers covered by  social protection system, disaggregated by sector,
type of job, sex and vulnerability status Baseline: 20% (2020) Target: 35% Rural
centres of economic development Frequency: annual National Research Institute
for Agriculture, Fisheries and the Environment facilities innovative incubation
and Indicator : Number of specializing in entrepreneurship Baseline:  (2020)
Target: 14 Data source: UNDP report youth female, Source: Ministry of
Environment Reports / National Agency for Integrated Waste Management reports
National agencies (international cooperation, promotion of investment,
digitalization and waste management) Indicator : Existence of an operational
integrated waste management system Baseline: No Target: Yes Frequency: Annual
Indicator : Volume of financing mobilized with the support of UNDP for the
structuring projects of the PCE General Commissariats (solidarity, planning,
social protection and the promotion of gender) Baseline: $ (2020) Target:
$150,000,000 Data source: Development assistance database, annual  11
DP/DCP/COM/ National Tourism Office of Comoros OUTPUT : Vulnerable populations,
in particular, youth, women, and people living with disability are enabled to
access and benefit from the positive impacts of the development of the green
blue and circular and digital economies Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry
and Agriculture Platforms for Youth and Women Entrepreneurs Indicator : Number
of micro-, small and medium- sized enterprises and cooperatives led by youth,
women and people living with disability created Baseline: 836 (2019) Target:
300, of which 150 led by women, 200 by youth, 20 by persons with disabilities
Data source: Comoros Investment Promotion Agency, annual International: The
Canada Fund for Local Initiatives / Canadian International Development Agency
Indicator : Number of people benefiting economically from the collection and
recycling of waste, disaggregated by sex, age, and disability situation
Baseline: 200 (2020) Target: 850 of whom 425 women, 600 youth and 85 persons
with disabilities Data source: National Integrated Waste Management Agency,
annual International Trade Centre ILO FAO UNICEF UNIDO UN-Women India, Brazil
and South Africa Facility OUTPUT : Technical capacities of key actors in the
agro-ecological value chains, in particular women, living with disabilities, are
youth and people strengthened to access digital technologies and develop
resilient, innovative agricultural solutions French Development Agency Indicator
: Number of farmers across all agricultural value chains using resilient
techniques and technologies for increased productivity, disaggregated by sex,
age, sector of activity Baseline: ,202 (2020), of whom ,986 women Target: ,824,
of whom ,500 women and ,000 youth Data source: National Strategic Directorate of
Agriculture and Livestock, annual Indicator : Proportion of rural households in
key focus areas covered by  basic social protection scheme Baseline: % (2020)
Target: 50% 12  DP/DCP/COM/ Data source: National Strategic Directorate of
Agriculture and Livestock, Rural centres of economic development, annual
Indicator : Number of people using digital tools and workspaces to support
agricultural value chains, disaggregated by sex and age Baseline:  Target:
40,000 of whom 20,000 women, 30,000 youth Data source: Rural centres of economic
development, Union of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture, annual
Indicator : Proportion of farmers in key focused areas with property rights or
guaranteed rights to agricultural land, by type of right, disaggregated by sex
Baseline: % (2020) Target: 25%, half of whom women Data source: National
Directorate of Agricultural and Livestock Strategies, annual NATIONAL PRIORITIES
OR GOALS Interim Development Plan 2020–2024:  Guarantee the peace, security and
stability of the country and consolidate democracy;  Reform and modernize
administrations for greater visibility, efficiency and quality, and for better
career management;  Promote equitable justice serving the country’ emergence PCE
Catalyst   reformed and more stable institutional framework COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2026, public institutions are more
inclusive, effective, accountable and resilient, and strengthen citizen
participation in public life, social cohesion, human rights, gender equality and
democracy RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES : Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development Signature solutions  (Strengthen
effective, inclusive and accountable governance),  (Strengthen gender equality
and the empowerment of women and girls) Indicator : Overall quality of national
institutions (Africa Country Policy and Institutional Assessment) Baseline:
(2020) Target:  OUTPUT : The parliament and CSOs have adequate technical and
technological capacities for innovative interaction and inclusive dialogue for
effective participation of Comorian citizens in public life Regular resources:
,463,000 Source: World Bank Reports National: Frequency: Annual Ministry of the
Interior Other resources: ,000,000 Assembly of the Union of the Comoros
Indicator : Number of mechanisms and platforms for citizen engagement and
participation of civil society, including women, in decision-making and
legislative processes and promotion of social cohesion Baseline:  (2020) Target:
Data source: Assembly of the Union of the Comoros, Comorian Platform for Citizen
Watch, annual General Planning Commission Indicator : Resource absorption rate
Baseline: 48% (2019) Target: 80% Source: World Bank, IMF, UNCTAD, AfDB reports
Commissariat for Solidarity and the Promotion of Gender Frequency: Annual
National Agency for Digital Development  13 DP/DCP/COM/ Source: Ministry of
Finance Reports Frequency: annual Indicator : Existence of operational medium-
term sectoral expenditure frameworks Baseline:  Target:  Indicator : Number of
users of an integrated information system on democratic governance, social
cohesion and the protection of rights and freedoms, disaggregated by sex, age
Baseline:  (2020) Target: 20,000, of whom ,000 women and 14,000 youth Data
source: Comorian Platform for Citizen Watch, annual National Human Rights and
Freedoms Commission Comorian Agency for International Cooperation Indicator :
Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index ranking Baseline: 160th
Target: 130th Non-State: Comorian Platform for Citizen Watch Source:
Transparency International reports Indicator : Number of CSOs using digital
technologies and big data for public engagement Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Data
source: National Agency for Digital Development, annual Frequency: Annual
International: Indicator : Ibrahim Index of African Governance Baseline: 38th
place (2019) Target: 30th UNFPA Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs OHCHR UN-Women World Bank European Union Source: Mo Ibrahim Foundation
reports OUTPUT : Operational, technological and technical capacities of public
institutions at the national and local levels enabled to improve the
effectiveness, efficiency, transparency and accountability of the development
planning and management systems Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of public
institutions and non- state organizations with publicly available tools and
information systems Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Data source: INSEED, annual
Indicator : Number of sector planning units set up and operational to improve
development planning and coordination Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Data source:
General Secretariat of the Government, annual Indicator : Existence of an
operational gender- sensitive integrated national financing framework Baseline:
No (2020) Target: Yes Data source: Central Bank, annual 14