Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/KEN/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The gross domestic product (GDP)
of Kenya grew at an average annual rate of  per cent between 2013 and 2019,
below its Vision 2030 target of 10 per cent GDP per capita has steadily
increased, reaching $,50 in The attainment of middle-income status saw monetary
poverty rates decline to per cent in , but absolute numbers of poor have
increased, driven mainly by population growth While government spending has
stimulated growth, sustainability is not secured; debt levels increased to over
70 per cent of GDP in  Kenya has made progress in implementing1 the Sustainable
Development Goals, ranking 118th out of 165 globally and in the top 10 best-
performing countries in sub-Saharan Africa Out of the 14 Sustainable Development
Goals whose data was collectable, six2 are moderately improving and one, Goal
13, on track, while the remaining seven are either stagnating or decreasing
Kenya is recognized as an innovation hub, ranking 7th in Africa on the Global
Innovation Index, 2021, and 82nd globally, with an increasing number of
innovation technical hubs across the country, increased broadband connectivity,
and increased investment in decentralization and local development of technical
capacity Over the past decade, Kenya has seen more start-ups and businesses
registered, due to strong demand for innovative products and services In 2021,
despite the ongoing pandemic, an increase of per cent was recorded  Micro, small
and medium-sized enterprises play  critical role in economic development and
employment creation Over  million of them employ approximately million Kenyans,
contributing approximately 40 per cent of GDP and providing an engine for
inclusive economic growth However, they remain largely informal and vulnerable
to economic and climate shocks, lacking access to the economic and financial
opportunities associated with formalization  The 2020 Human Development Index
was 601, putting Kenya in the medium human development category, ranking 143rd
out of 189 countries While Kenya has been more successful in boosting shared
prosperity than its regional peers, it continues to suffer from inequality of
opportunity, with rural populations in the poorest counties lagging behind in
development Its Gini index improved from 45 in  to 39 in 2015-Multidimensional
poverty diminishes with age; youth and children are the most affected,
accounting for 73 per cent of the poor  Implementation of  fully democratic
political system under  transformative constitution is well under way, but
challenges of peace and security remain, with implications for sustainable
development Regional instability, violent extremism, conflicts over natural
resources, ethnic polarization, corruption and social discrimination are
outlined as key drivers that tend to be aggravated during election years
Although Kenya was recently classified as  hybrid democracy (irregularities in
elections prevent them from being free and fair), the 2020 Mo Ibrahim Index on
African Governance ranked Kenya 14th out of 54 countries, with an overall score
of /100 and  -point improvement over the  period Human mobility represents
challenge for peace and security, but also opportunities for economic growth and
connecting societies10 Kenya  Africa SDG Index and Dashboards Report 2020
Sustainable Development Goals ,  ,  ,  ,  and   Groupe Spéciale Mobile
Association, 2019 report  Business Daily, September 2021  World Bank, Systematic
Country Diagnostic Kenya 6Ibid  Comprehensive Poverty Report 2020, Kenya
National Bureau of Statistics  Building Bridges to  United Kenya: from  nation
of blood ties to  nation of ideals, 2019, Presidential Task Force on Building
Bridges to Unity Advisory and Kenya @ 10;  Decade After: The State Of Human
Rights Post the 2010 Promulgation of the Constitution:  Human Rights Scorecard,
2020, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights 9Economist Intelligence Unit
Democracy Index 2020 10 Global report on internal displacement, 2020  /14
DP/DCP/KEN/ hosts 05 million international migrants, almost half of them
refugees and asylum seekers Kenyan emigrants were estimated at 535,348 in 2020,
contributing remittances worth  per cent of GDP  The Kenya Constitution provides
framework for democratic governance considered  progressive ‘People’
Constitution’, based on the premise that sovereign power belongs to the people,
who have  critical role to play in the delegated exercise of power with women’
political leadership Kenya devolved substantial powers from the Government to 47
county governments, including  minimum allocation of 15 per cent of the national
budget, in addition to conditional grants that supplemented local taxes In 2020,
Kenya was ranked 124th out of 180 countries on the Corruption Perceptions Index
Kenyans have nevertheless embraced the devolved system, including county
governments as centres of service delivery11  Kenya has rich biodiversity, made
up of undulating landscapes, coastal seascapes, marine life, beaches, mangrove
forests, and water resources Challenges associated with climate change,
population growth and rapid urbanization led to the decline of its megafauna,
biodiversity and forest cover12 Efforts are under way to reverse deforestation
and improve tree cover to the constitutional 10 per cent target, with an outcome
document13 for county-level climate action to accelerate mitigation and
adaptation measures  Climate change remains  major threat, with growing economic
costs estimated at  per cent of GDP14 Kenya committed to climate actions through
an updated nationally determined contribution aimed at reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by 32 per cent by 2030, from the present 143 metric tons of carbon
dioxide equivalent The total cost of implementing mitigation and adaptation
actions is estimated at $62 billion, of which Kenya has committed 13 per cent
Kenya has achieved 93 per cent of the renewable energy contribution to the
electricity grid, and is expected to reach  clean grid by 2030 and  79 per cent
reduction in total energy intensity annually by 2030 from the baseline year, 15
The impact of COVID-19 has seen increased poverty among up to  million people
and increased gender inequality through loss of income and gender-based violence
During 2020,  million jobs were lost in the formal sector and  million in the
informal sector16 The pandemic increased poverty by  per cent through income
loss and other socioeconomic impacts The poverty incidence among women tends to
be higher due to minimal employment opportunities in the formal sector, among
other factors17 UNDP led the development of the United Nations system-wide
socio-economic recovery plan and COVID-19 socioeconomic reengineering and
recovery strategies for national and county-level governments The Kenya
Constitution promotes  youth-centric approach, gender equality and women’
empowerment This acknowledges 75 per cent of the population below the age of 35
years and 51 per cent females among million people18 While progress has been
made in empowering women and youth, as well as people with disabilities, these
groups remain largely marginalized The unemployment rate for youth aged  years
is five times the national unemployment rate of  per cent, with an estimated
future increase due to more than 800,000 youth entering the job market annually
The exclusion of women and youth in leadership, economic empowerment and
decision-making spaces has continued, resulting in 41 per cent of women being
vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence and 29 per cent of children in
rural areas being affected by child marriages19 11 What do Kenyans Know About
Devolution? Survey evidence on political knowledge and public opinion, Ken
Ochieng’ Opalo, Georgetown University, June 2020 12 Kenya State of Environment
Report,  13 The Seventh and Final Annual Devolution Conference, November 2021 14
Diwakar and Shepherd, (2018); Overseas Development Institute, (2020) 15
Sustainable Energy for All, 2016 16 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics and
Federation of Kenyan Employers, 2020 17 Kenya integrated household budgetary
survey, 2018 18 Kenya population and housing census, 2019 19 Kenya demographic
and health survey, 2014  /14 DP/DCP/KEN/ Vision 2030 aims to transform Kenya
into  newly industrializing, middle-income country providing  high quality of
life and  clean and secure environment for all citizens Central to the vision is
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, considered to have  transformative
impact for the people of Kenya and being implemented through five-year medium-
term plans The current plan, ‘MTP-III’ (), is under review with support from
UNDP in preparation for ‘MTP-IV’ () formulation Kenya has adopted  whole-of-
government and whole-of- society approach towards implementing Sustainable
Development Goals, where its planning frameworks, including the medium-term
plans, county integrated development plans and other key strategic plans, are
consistent with the 2030 Agenda The United Nations Sustainable Cooperation
Framework, , articulates the United Nations contribution to the achievement of
Sustainable Development Goals The UNDP contribution is supported by the
recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation20 and based on
its comparative advantage and integrator role: First, UNDP brings its global
mandate as  lead development entity through signature and integrated development
solutions, and its repositioned offer for Africa Second, UNDP builds on lessons
learned and development results achieved during the previous country programme
Third, UNDP leverages its global policy network to provide specialized advice,
taking into account the unique context of Kenya as the only country in the
global South hosting United Nations headquarters offices and where UNDP boasts
global, regional, country and United Nations Volunteers21 presence Fourth, UNDP
will continue to be the platform for mainstreaming, acceleration and policy
support on the Sustainable Development Goals Its development effectiveness
cooperation and recovery programme will serve as an ‘integrator programme’,
supporting Goals policy coherence and planning, financing, capacity
strengthening for data, and multi-stakeholder coordination The accelerator lab
would be utilized to drive entrepreneurship and innovation to address the
complex youth unemployment challenge, thereby reinforcing the integrator role of
UNDP II Programme priorities and partnerships The country programme is aligned
with national development and recovery priorities and follows extensive
consultations with key partners 22 It is guided by the Cooperation Framework,
the UNDP Strategic Plan, ,23 the UNDP gender strategy, , the UNDP energy
compact, the UNDP ‘people 2030’ strategy, and commitment to focus on youth, the
principles of gender equality, and leaving no one behind, as identified in the
common country analysis, The vision of the country programme is to leverage
partnerships to safeguard development gains by building resilience and
accelerating recovery for the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
through Vision 2030, to address root causes hampering sustainable development
This will be realized through  youth- and gender-centric lens, including people
with disabilities, those living with HIV, and borderlands24 communities This
approach is focused on three interrelated development areas: to leave no one
behind through () governance, peace and social cohesion; () sustainable,
inclusive green growth; and () nature-based solutions and resilience Programme
efficiency will be enhanced by implementing an updated partnership and
communication action plan that diversifies the funding mix25 as recommended by
the independent country programme evaluation and various project evaluation
findings which articulate the comparative advantage of UNDP over other partners
The theory of change is based on the 20 Independent country programme
evaluation, 2021U 21 United Nations Volunteers are supporting devolution, peace
and security, the COVID-19 response, and coordination of United Nations
programming 22 Consultations held with Government, civil society, private
sector, academia and the UNDP Youth Sounding Board 23 The three development
settings are: () structural transformation accelerated – green, inclusive and
digital transitions; () no one left behind, centred on equitable access to
opportunities and  rights-based approach; and () resilience built to respond to
systemic uncertainty and risk, integrating the six ‘signature solutions’ 24
Borderlands are the territorial margins of nation-states – regions where border
contact is  central feature of economic, social and political life, creating
opportunities for acceleration of implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals 25 Elaborated in the country programme document resource mobilization
table  /14 DP/DCP/KEN/ expectation that if economic growth becomes sustainable
and green and society is inclusive and peaceful innovation and multi-stakeholder
partnerships with access to quality services, then people will be resilient and
fulfilled, and achieve their full human potential through an enabling
environment takes advantage of that UNDP is strategically positioned to offer
high-level policy advice, institutional strengthening, programme support and
strategic partnerships to implement, report on and monitor the Sustainable
Development Goals and enhance institutional coordination mechanisms Building on
its technical leadership role in the integrated national financing framework,
UNDP will support the discourse on Goals financing and the formulation process
of ‘MTP-IV’ UNDP will continue working with partners and, most notably, its
pioneering Youth Sounding Board, to design interventions that integrate
volunteerism and innovation to tackle the challenges of governance, resilience
and service delivery Governance, peace and social cohesion Governance, peace and
social cohesion are foundations for sustainable development COVID-19 has
reinforced the notion that revitalizing the social contract by rethinking the
process by which state and citizens interact to design and implement policies
for the management of public affairs, is not only  pathway to achieving and
sustaining peace, but also the resilience of nations, societies and communities
The attention to governance, peace and social cohesion under this country
programme is based on the independent country programme evaluation
recommendations and is aligned with the transformative vision of the Kenya
Constitution As the United Nations entity with principal responsibility for
governance and peacebuilding, UNDP strategic interventions will embrace  whole-
of-government and whole-of-society approach, working with legislative,
executive, and judicial institutions at national and county levels while
leveraging the skills, capacities, networks, and resources of civil society, the
private sector, media, academia, local community associations –particularly
youth and women’ groups – to monitor, conduct oversight, and raise awareness of
the work To achieve transformative results in the areas of accountability and
transparency, special attention will be paid to promoting open government and
rule of law; upholding human rights; strengthening public participation;
enhancing planning and budgeting; and strengthening partnerships with key
oversight institutions26 at national and county levels UNDP will continue
supporting non-state actors and rights-holders, contributing to transparency,
accountability, access to justice, and the promotion and protection of human
rights, particularly for people with disabilities, people living with HIV27 and
other key populations To support transformational leadership and change,
sustaining  revitalized social contract, UNDP will continue to develop
leadership capacities enabling state and non-state actors to scale up successful
initiatives, innovate, and collaborate effectively to promote gender-equitable
social norms free of stigma and discrimination To address vulnerability to
violent conflict, driven by competition over natural resources, climate change,
marginalization, violent extremism, ethno-political competition, poverty and
inequality, UNDP, through its regional programmes and partners in the peace,
conflict prevention and security sector, will intervene through gender-
sensitized legal and policy dialogue and advocacy, institutional development and
capacity development, peace innovation platforms and early warning response
systems, including leveraging the UNDP African Borderlands Centre UNDP will
continue to support the strengthening of local democracy, local governance and
peace capacities, in line with the national policy on devolved functions and
public service reforms to increase effectiveness accountability, inclusion,
resilience, core government functions, and 26 Kenya National Commission on Human
Rights; Ethics and Anticorruption Commission; National Gender and Equality
Commission; Office of the Auditor General; Commission on Administrative Justice;
Commission on Revenue Allocation; Office of the Controller of Budget 27 Global
AIDS Strategy, , and UNDP HIV and health strategy   /14 DP/DCP/KEN/ delivery of
basic public services to meet citizen expectations UNDP will harness
digitalization to support development interventions that are inclusive,
effective, and transformative Sustainable, inclusive, green growth Inclusive
green growth is  pathway to attaining sustainable development Kenya has made
great strides on poverty, but these have damaged the environment and increased
social inequality The real costs of resource depletion have yet to be
established for commensurate reinvestment The development gains made thus far
are under threat, and long-term economic growth will not be sustainable One of
the major priorities of the National Youth Development Policy, 2019, is to
promote mechanisms that support youth engagement in developing, protecting, and
conserving natural resources and the environment while fostering eco-
entrepreneurship and green jobs UNDP will support inclusive green growth
policies to maximize benefits to youth, women, people with disabilities and the
most vulnerable by mobilizing and building capacities to establish and
strengthen viable business and entrepreneurship models in key productive value
chains28 to create employment and sustainable livelihoods The enablers for
inclusive green growth are: political will; innovations and smart solutions; and
alternative finance Strategies adopted will strengthen national policy
frameworks and data systems, integrate development financing frameworks, and
develop youth, women and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises to take
advantage of the available tools for green growth strategies UNDP will support
activities that encourage green investments and those that incentivize smart
decision-making and innovative financing to tackle the increasing needs in light
of dwindling domestic resources and limited fiscal space In partnership with
Government, businesses and investors, UNDP will promote the Sustainable
Development Goals investor maps to provide potential investors with market
intelligence and enhance opportunities for South-South and triangular exchange29
This will enable the dissemination and utilization of scalable and bankable
business models in productive sectors, targeting youth, women and entrepreneurs
with disabilities UNDP will collaborate with the Regional Service Centre and the
African Continental Free Trade Area secretariat to open up additional
opportunities, especially for women and youth Nature-based solutions and
resilience Kenya faces pressing environmental challenges, including climate
change, natural resource depletion, loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services,
and climate security risks While climate change does not itself cause conflict,
there is  need to address climate change and environmental degradation as risk
multipliers, and to promote and safeguard the state of the environment for
sustainable economic growth The focus on nature-based solutions and resilience
seeks to actualize the constitutional recognition of sustainable development and
the right to  clean and healthy environment for all citizens, leaving no one
behind, particularly the most vulnerable – youth, women and people with
disabilities This is anchored in  robust set of international environmental
governance and multilateral environmental instruments ratified by Kenya UNDP
will continue to work with partners to support national and county governments
to accelerate implementation of legal, policy and institutional frameworks for
sustainable management of the environment and natural resources To mitigate
environmental degradation and loss of biodiversity, and build community
resilience, UNDP will scale up the sustainable use and management of natural
resources to reduce deforestation; enhance catchment and land restoration; scale
up sound waste management; advance sustainable blue economy initiatives; promote
tourism; and scale up climate mitigation and adaptation measures to leverage
innovation, digitization and development financing Emphasis will be placed on
youth-centric and gendered, conflict-sensitive use of natural resources for
accountable, social, and economic development UNDP will support the development
of robust policy and institutional frameworks to guide implementation of the
nationally determined contribution, 2020; the land degradation neutrality 28
Tourism, forestry, agroforestry, manufacturing, information and communication
technologies 29 UNDP, in consultation with Government departments, will
strengthen networks and knowledge exchanges, peer learning on middle-income
countries, and coordination through South-South cooperation  /14 DP/DCP/KEN/
targets; and the climate change action plans and strategies anticipating the
adoption of an inspiring long-term strategy towards net zero carbon emissions To
address the widening energy gap, UNDP will support initiatives to improve access
to renewable energy technologies for productive use These will be supported by
the development of mini-grids and associated productive uses of electricity in
areas where energy poverty and scarcity of economic opportunities are salient
The country demonstrates substantial scope for decentralized renewable energy
generation to provide universal energy access among rural populations30 On
disaster risk-informed development, UNDP will support the overall government
strategy for reducing and managing climate and disaster risks and impacts UNDP
will focus on strengthening disaster risk governance/policy, legal and
institutional frameworks; establishing mechanisms to assess and monitor disaster
risks and impacts; improving access to and use of risk information;
strengthening preparedness and early warning systems; exploring risk insurance
options; and mainstreaming disaster risk reduction into development plans and
budgets UNDP will strengthen post-disaster recovery through  ‘build forward
better’ approach to enhance community resilience to future shocks and crises In
supporting disaster risk management, UNDP will partner with national and
subnational institutions31 III Programme and risk management This country
programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to
country programmes are prescribed in the programme and operations policies and
procedures and the internal control framework The programme will be nationally
executed To mitigate risks in project management, UNDP will strengthen
capacities internally and prioritize related accountability and training for
implementing partners If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will
be charged to the concerned projects To mitigate any social or environmental
risks, UNDP will apply its standards, accountability mechanisms and agility in
its programme management UNDP will seek to better anticipate shocks and promote
resilience through early-warning systems, collaboration with key stakeholders,
and targeted risk and gender-sensitive analysis These will be integrated into
the formulation and implementation of all projects, including leveraging tools
such as the gender marker to track gender and women’ empowerment; the crisis
risk dashboard to monitor and mitigate risk; and the ongoing process of Gender
Seal certification Kenya will hold general elections in August 2022, which could
delay programme implementation and threaten development gains UNDP will continue
investing to better equip national stakeholders with inclusive, innovative and
gender-sensitive tools to inform and support early-warning systems and
prevention responses before, during and after the electoral period UNDP will
continue to support democracy and human rights by leveraging past engagement
with non-state actors and the diverse media and social media landscape, which is
key channel for public debate on issues of governance, transparency and
accountability In line with recommendations from the 2021 Management Audit32 and
the independent country programme evaluation, risks related to resource
mobilization will be managed through  30 Magda Moner-Girona, Katalin Bódis,
James Morrissey, Ioannis Kougias, Mark Hankins, Thomas Huld, Sándor Szabó,
Decentralized rural electrification in Kenya: Speeding up universal energy
access, Energy for Sustainable Development, Volume 52, 2019, pp  31 National
Treasury and Planning, National Drought Management Authority, and National
Disaster Operation Centre 32 Office of Audit and Investigations, 2021  /14
DP/DCP/KEN/ realistic programming approach based on resource availability and
robust partnership and resource mobilization strategy UNDP will make use of
regional and global assets and collaborate with the Government on joint resource
mobilization efforts, including government cost-sharing and working with the
private sector to maximize benefits for targeted groups The award winning ‘CO-
RESET’33 framework of the country office will guide integrated programming and
operational efforts IV Monitoring and evaluation UNDP has been working with the
Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate under the National Treasury and Planning
to enhance availability and utility of data for evidence-based policy
formulation, implementation and reporting at the national and county levels
Kenya has been consistent in voluntary national reporting on Sustainable
Development Goals, which has cascaded to counties and continues to be  valuable
source of data for tracking the Goals UNDP will continue to support initiatives
to augment data verification and validation, including annual performance
reviews at project, programme and United Nations levels UNDP will place greater
emphasis on results monitoring and reporting At least  per cent of programme
resources will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation UNDP will support
capacity enhancement for staff, government, civil society organizations and
national partners on results- based management To strengthen outcome-level
monitoring, evaluation and reporting, project outputs and outcomes will be
appropriately linked to country programme outcomes UNDP will strengthen
monitoring and evaluation coordination structures internally and externally to
support better data collection, data verification, results monitoring and
reporting The resources will be utilized to strengthen national and county-level
monitoring and evaluation activities, including strengthening national data
sources, establishing baseline data, joint programmatic visits, and capacity
development Documentation and dissemination of lessons learned and success
stories will be undertaken regularly to inform programming and capacity support
to national and subnational institutions UNDP will monitor the implementation of
costed and approved evaluation plan for this country programme, which will be
reviewed periodically to reinforce accountability, learning, and agility in
decision-making Joint programming with other United Nations organizations will
be prioritized through enhanced standard operating procedures To strengthen data
collection and verification, UNDP will conduct annual outcome-level performance
reviews with government and national partners and use the data to inform policy
advice, advocacy and strategic decisions to strengthen accountability and
transparency in the public domain 33 The CO-RESET (CPD roll-out; Organizational
excellence; Resource mobilization; Efficiency in business processes; Staff well-
being; Engagement; and Talent management) is  home-grown performance and
accountability mechanism for more effective systems and structures  /14
DP/DCP/KEN/ Annex Results and resources framework for Kenya (2022–2026) NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL:  democratic political system that is issues-based , people-
centred, results-oriented and accountable to the public  COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
(OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No  By 2026, people in Kenya at risk of
being left behind – particularly in the arid and semi-arid lands (ASAL)
counties, informal urban settlements, all women and girls, all children and
youth – inhabit an inclusive, enabling, socially cohesive, and peaceful society
where human rights are upheld, benefit from accountable institutions,
participate in transformative governance systems that are gender-responsive, and
uphold the rule of law Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) , 10, 11, 16 and 17
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME  No one left behind centring on equitable access
to opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human
development INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines, targets) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES,
TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES
MAJOR PARTNERS/ PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) Proportion
of the population who have experienced  dispute in the past two years and
accessed  formal or informal dispute resolution mechanism, by type of mechanism
Baseline 2022: To be confirmed (TBC) Target 2026: TBC Frequency: Annual Data
source: National Steering Committee on Peacebuilding and Conflict Management
(NSC), National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC) Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of Interior, National Coordination (MOINC) Output
Democratic systems and space for inclusive participation and social cohesion
towards peace and security are enhanced Regular: $ million Ministry of
Devolution (MOD) Ministry of Gender and Public Affairs Parliament Judiciary
Office of the Attorney General Council of Governors County Assemblies Forum
(CAF) Kenya National Commission on Human Rights Independent Electoral and
Boundaries Commission National AIDS Control Council Kenya School of Government
County governments Civil society UN-Women United Nations Children’ Fund Office
of the High Commissioner on Human Rights United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization United
Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) Intergovernmental Authority on
Development European Union Sweden Germany Other: $million Indicator  Number of
peace, social cohesion, preventing and countering violent extremism, and human
security plans, policies and legal frameworks enacted and implemented Baseline :
(2021) Target :10 (2026) Data source: NSC, NCIC, Kenya National Action Plan,
NCTC, Uwiano Platform for Peace Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of
mechanisms supported for dialogue, consensus-building, reconciliation and
preventing violent extremism, with equal participation of women and men Baseline
: 10 (2021) Target : 20 (2026) Data source: MOINC, NCIC, NCTC Frequency: Annual
Data source: NSC, National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC), National
Counterterrorism Centre (NCTC) Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOINC
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOINC Output  Capacity of rights-holders and
governance institutions to ensure transparency, accountability and human rights
principles towards the attainment of SDGs enhanced Data source: NSC, NCIC and
NCTC Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOINC  /14 DP/DCP/KEN/ Italy United
Kingdom Norway Finland Peacebuilding Fund Indicator  Proportion of persons, by
gender, accessing justice through formal and alternative justice systems
Baseline: 29% (2018) Target: 45% (2026 ) Data source: Justice Needs Satisfaction
survey, 2018, and Alternative Justice Systems baseline policy, Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Proportion of persons subjected to HIV-related stigma and
discrimination Baseline: 35% (2020) Target: 25% (2026) Data Source: HIV Stigma
Index and Kenya AIDS Framework II,  Frequency: Annual Data source:
Judiciary/National Legal Aid Service (NLAS) Frequency: Annual Output  Enhanced
capacity and governance of duty-bearers to support public delivery of basic
services at national and devolved levels Indicator  Number of counties with
improved monitoring and evaluation (&), planning and budgeting capacities
Baseline:  (2021) Target: 14 (2026) Data source: State Department of Planning -
Monitoring and Evaluation Department and Council of Governors Frequency: Annual
Data source: Judiciary/NLAS; civil society organizations Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Proportion of counties that have enacted policies and laws to support
gender-sensitive service delivery Baseline: 57% (2022) Target : 70% by 2026 Data
source: MOD, Council of Governors (COG), County Assemblies Forum Frequency:
Annual Indicator  Percentage of counties with mechanisms for inclusive public
participation of women, youth and PWDs  10 DP/DCP/KEN/ Baseline: 70% (2022)
Target (year): 85% 2026 Data source: COG, CAF and MOD Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Proportion of county governments reporting improved public finance
management processes and systems for equitable, efficient and accountable
service delivery Baseline: 50% (2021) Target: 75% (2026) Data source: COG,
Office of Auditor General, Office of Controller of Budget, National Treasury
Frequency: Annual Indicator: Proportion of positions, by sex, age, people with
disabilities (PWDs) in public institutions (national and local legislatures)
compared to national distributions National legislature % women Baseline 23%
(2021) Target: 33% (2026) Local legislature % women Baseline % (2022) Target 40%
(2026) Output  Electoral, legislative and oversight institutions strengthened to
promote inclusive, transparent and accountable governance and service delivery
Indicator   Number of institutions with strengthened capacities for transparent
and accountable governance through UNDP support Baseline:  (national) (2020)
Target: 16 (2026) Data source: Perception surveys/KNBS/COG Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  globally competitive and prosperous country with
high quality of life by 2030  COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP No  By 2026, people in Kenya at risk of being left behind –
particularly in the ASAL counties, informal urban settlements, all women and
girls, all children and youth – derive benefit from inclusive, sustainable,
diversified and environmentally/climate-sensitive quality livelihoods with
decent work in the sector economies, and realize growth that is resilient,
green, and equitable SDGs , , , , , 11, 12, 13, 14 RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME  Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive,
and digital transitions Proportion of men, women and children of all ages living
in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definition Baseline: 53%
(2020) Data source: KNBS Frequency: Annual Responsibility: State Department of
Planning (SDP) Output  Inclusive and resilient green growth policies, financing
and practices across key growth sectors enhanced MOD Ministry of
Industrialization, Trade and Enterprise Development (MOITED Regular – $ million
Other – $million  11 DP/DCP/KEN/ % male; % female; 48% children; 52% adults
Target: 28% National Treasury, Kenya Industrial Training Institute Kenya
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry Kenya Private Sector Alliance Kenya
Investment Authority Kenya Association of Manufacturers (KAM) International
Labour Organization United Nations Industrial Development Organization FAO UNCDF
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development European Union Sweden Russia
Japan Indicator  Number of risk- informed development strategies and plans in
place Baseline:  (2017) Target:10 (2026) Data source: KNBS; National Treasury;
Kenya Investment Authority Frequency: Annual Employment in formal and informal
sectors Baseline: 17% formal (KNBS 2020) 83% informal Target: Formal 25%
Informal 75% Output  National policy frameworks, planning, budgeting and data
systems for SDG indicator tracking and reporting and & systems strengthened Data
source: MOITED Frequency: Annual Responsibility: SDP Kenya ranking in Green
Growth Index for Africa Baseline: 14th in Africa (2019) Green Growth Index
Target: 11th in Index Indicator  Percentage of SDG indicators captured in the
National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation system achieved Baseline: 131 (%)
2021 Target ): 166 (%) 2026 Data source: KNBS Frequency: Biennial Output
Capacities to promote innovation in existing and emerging markets enhanced
across productive sectors for youth, women and micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises (MSMEs) Data source: MOITED Frequency: Annual Responsibility: SDP
Indicator  Proportion of formal to informal jobs in productive sectors, by
gender Baseline: Formal 17%, informal, 83% (2020) Target ): Formal 25%,
informal75% (2026) Data source: KNBS, Ministry of Labour Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Number of innovative products and services certified for existing and
emerging markets by women- and youth-led MSMEs in productive sectors,
disaggregated by sector Baseline: 290 (2021)  12 DP/DCP/KEN/ Target: 500 (2026)
Data source: Kenya ICT Authority; Kenya Institute of Administration; Kenya
Intellectual Property Institute Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
nation living in  clean, secure and sustainable environment  COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No  By 2026, people in Kenya at
risk of being left behind – particularly in the ASAL counties, informal urban
settlements, all women and girls, all children and youth – have access to and
derive benefit from sustainably managed ecosystems for nature-based solutions in
green transition SDGs , , , , , 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME  Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk Indicator
Tree cover as  proportion of total land area (%) Baseline: 28% (2022) Target:
12% (2026) Data source: Kenya Forest Service (KFS) Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MOEF) Output  Sustainable
management of natural resources at national, subnational and grassroots levels,
using people-centred approaches, enhanced Regular: $ million MOEF Ministry of
Energy National Environment Management Authority Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Action National Environment Trust Fund NDMA NDOC United Nations
Environment Programme World Food Programme Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) KAM Global Environment Facility Japan Russia Other: $million Indicator
Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to
disasters, per 100,000 population Baseline: Target: Data source: National
Disaster Operation Centre (NDOC) Frequency: Annual Responsibility: NDOC
Indicator  Areas of landscape – forests and rangelands – under improved
management practices Baseline: 4MHa (2021) Target: 600,000Ha (2026) Data source:
KFS; Department of Resource Surveys and Remote Sensing Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Percentage of households using renewable energy and green
technologies Baseline: 70% (2022) Target: 90% (2026) Data source: KNBS
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOEF Indicator  Number of people (by gender
and rural/urban) benefiting from initiatives to protect and promote sustainable
use and management of natural resources Baseline: 10,000 (2021) Target: 60,000
(2026) Data source: KFS; Frequency: Annual  Output  Capacities and resilience to
disaster risks and climate impact across national and county levels enhanced
Indicator  No of counties with gender-responsive policies and legal framework
for disaster risk reduction Baseline: County 14, national  (2021) Target: County
23, national  (2026)  13 DP/DCP/KEN/ Data source: National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA) Frequency: Annual Indicator  No of people (by gender)
benefiting from climate-smart initiatives Baseline: ,876 female, ,930 male
(2021) Target: 90,000 (2026) Data source: NDMA Frequency: Annual Output  Access
to cost-effective clean energy enhanced Indicator  No of technologies
transferred to improved access to clean and affordable energy Baseline: 12
(2021); Target: 15 (2026) Data source: Ministry of Energy Frequency: Annual
Indicator  No of people (by gender) benefiting from clean cooking solutions
(clean energy) Baseline: (16m women and 12m men) (2021);Target:   (2026) Data
source: NDMA Frequency: Annual Output  Capacities to deliver on nationally
determined contributions enhanced – national/county level Indicator  No of Mt
CO2e reduced from climate mitigation initiatives implemented Baseline: 143Mt
CO2e (2021) Target: 142Mt CO2e (2026) Data source: Ministry of Energy Frequency:
Annual Indicator  No of counties with gender-responsive policies and legal
framework for climate change Baseline: 35 (2021) Target: 47 (2026) Data source:
Ministry of Energy Frequency: Annual  14