 REPUBLIC OF KENYA Ministry of Energy NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY October, 2018 TABLE
OF CONTENTS FOREWORD BY THE CABINET SECRETARY  PREFACE BY THE PRINCIPAL
SECRETARY  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 10  – INTRODUCTION 16  THE ROLE OF ENERGY IN
NATIONAL ECONOMY  16  ENERGY POLICY OBJECTIVES  17  LEGAL AND REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK  18  The Constitution of Kenya  18  Current Policy and Legislation  18
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  20  – COAL RESOURCES 23  Overview  23  Demand for
Coal  23  Midstream and Downstream Coal Development  23  Challenges in Midstream
and Downstream Coal  23  Policies and Strategies  24  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 25
BACKGROUND  25  GEOTHERMAL ENERGY  25  Background  25  Challenges  26  Policies
and Strategies  26  HYDROPOWER  27  Large Hydros  27  Small Hydros  29
Background  29  Challenges  30  Policies and Strategies  30  BIOMASS  31
Background  31  Challenges  31  Policies and Strategies  32  BIOFUELS  32
Background  32  Challenges  33 ii NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Table of
Contents:  Policies and Strategies: Page: 42  The ,000+MW Project  48
Generation from Renewable Energy Resources  49  Thermal Power Generation  49
Challenges  49  Policies and Strategies  50  Nuclear Energy - Electricity
Generation  50  Policies and Strategies  52  ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION  53
Background  53  Extension of the National Transmission Network  54  Regional
Interconnection  56  Challenges  57  Policies and Strategies  57  ELECTRIC POWER
DISTRIBUTION  58  Background  58  Distribution System  59  Rural Electrification
59  Cross Border Electrification  59  Reliability and Quality of Supply  60
Connection to Electricity Supply  60  Challenges in Distribution  61  Policies
and Strategies – Distribution  61  RETAIL OF ELECTRICAL ENERGY  63  Background
63  Challenges in Retail of Electrical Energy  64  Policies and Strategies –
Retail of Electrical Energy  64  CROSS CUTTING ISSUES  64  Challenges  64
Policies and Strategies – Electricity Cross Cutting Issues  65  – ENERGY
EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION 66  BACKGROUND  66  CHALLENGES  67  POLICIES AND
STRATEGIES  67  – LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 69  BACKGROUND  69
SUPPLY SIDE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS  70  Coal Midstream  70  Renewable Energy  70
iv NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Electricity  71  Nuclear Energy  71
DEMAND SIDE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS  71  CLIMATE CHANGE ISSUES  72  DISASTER
PREPAREDNESS AND MITIGATION  74  LAND AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACTS  75  CHALLENGES
IN LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY  75  POLICIES AND STRATEGIES FOR LAND,
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 76  Land and Socio-Economic Issues  76
Environment, Health and Safety  76  Climate Change Mitigation  77  Disaster
Preparedness, Prevention and Management  78  – DEVOLUTION AND PROVISION OF
ENERGY SERVICES 79  BACKGROUND  79  DISTRIBUTION OF FUNCTIONS BETWEEN THE
NATIONAL AND COUNTY GOVERNMENTS  80  Functions of the National Government  81
Functions of the County Governments  82  – ENERGY FINANCING, PRICING AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC ISSUES 83  BACKGROUND  83  CHALLENGES  83  POLICIES AND STRATEGIES  83
CONSOLIDATED ENERGY FUND  84  ENERGY PRICING AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES  85
Energy Pricing  85  Household Energy Consumption Patterns  86  Policies and
Strategies  87  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 88  LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  88
Background  88  Challenges  88  Policies and Strategies  88  INTEGRATED ENERGY
PLANNING  89  Background  89  Challenges  90  Policies and Strategies  90
RESEARCH AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  91  Background  91  TABLE OF CONTENTS
Challenges  91  Policies and Strategies  91  GENDER, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH
SPECIAL NEEDS  91  Background  91  Challenges  92  Policies and Strategies  92
POLICY IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING AND EVALUATION 92  Background  92  Challenges
92  Policies and Strategies  92  DATA COLLECTION, MANAGEMENT AND DISSEMINATION
93  Background  93  Challenge  93  Policies and Strategies  93  SHARING OF
BENEFITS FROM ENERGY RESOURCES  93  Background  93  Challenges  93  Policies and
Strategies  94  LOCAL CONTENT  94  Background  94  Challenges  94  Policies and
Strategies  94  COMMUNITY ENGANGEMENTS, EXPECTATIONS AND CONFLICTS 95
Background  95  Challenges  95 Table Energy Generation Potential in Floriculture
Industry  97 Table 2Biogas Potential from Sisal Production  97 Table Nuclear
electricity generation figures around the world  98 Figure - Nuclear Power
Programme Milestones  99 ACRONYMS AND GLOSSARY OF TERMS 100 ACRONYMS  100
GLOSSARY OF TERMS  102 vi NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 VISION Affordable
Quality Energy for All Kenyans MISSION To Facilitate Provision of Clean,
Sustainable, Affordable, Competitive, Reliable and Secure Energy Services at
Least Cost while Protecting the Environment vii TABLE OF CONTENTS FOREWORD BY
THE CABINET SECRETARY The enactment of the Constitution of Kenya, 2010
substantially transformed the governance structure of the country and enhanced
citizen‘ participation in administrative decision making processes This Policy
document is  result of extensive consultations within the sector and the wider
government, insightful benchmarking on best practises from different
jurisdictions around the globe and most importantly stakeholder engagement and
public participation through workshops held in all the 47 counties The document
sets out the national policies and strategies for the energy sector The overall
national development objectives of the Government of Kenya as set out in the
development blue print, Kenya Vision 2030 include accelerated economic growth;
increasing productivity of all sectors; equitable distribution of national
income; poverty alleviation through improved access to basic needs; enhanced
agricultural production; industrialisation; accelerated employment creation and
improved rural- urban balance The realisation of these objectives will be
feasible if quality energy services are availed in  sustainable, competitive,
cost effective and affordable manner to all sectors of the economy ranging from
manufacturing, services, mining, and agriculture to households With the
discovery of oil and coal there is need to put in place an appropriate policy,
legal regulatory and institutional framework to ensure that the country benefits
from these resources and is able to deal with opportunities associated with
exploiting these resources towards addressing the country‘ energy needs Several
initiatives are being pursued to enhance the country‘ power generation capacity
and to diversify the energy mix The intention is to ensure competitive power to
drive the socio-economic transformation that this country desires We submit
these Policy recommendations with optimism Even though the tasks ahead are
challenging, they remain achievable To address our energy challenges, we must
put to good use the resources and the talents around and within us  call upon
all stakeholders in the energy sector to work together to ensure that the
proposals contained in this policy are implemented Hon Charles Keter, EGH
Cabinet Secretary Ministry of Energy  NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018
PREFACE BY THE PRINCIPAL SECRETARY In the last ten years the Policy direction of
the energy sector has been governed by Sessional Paper No  of 2004 on Energy
However,  number of changes have taken place presenting new challenges and
opportunities The unveiling of the national development blueprint, Kenya Vision
2030, in 2008 and promulgation of the Constitution of Kenya on 27th August, 2010
and the Government‘ Big Four Agenda made it necessary to review the sector
policy The energy sector plays  critical role in the socio-economic development
of the country Indeed, petroleum and electricity as sources of energy are the
main drivers of the economy Discoveries of oil and coal present opportunities
for the country to develop the sector and the economy The Ministry has made
concerted efforts in the development of an appropriate legal, regulatory and
institutional framework for utilization of these resources for the country‘
energy needs Local content development in the sector remains  pivotal agenda for
the Ministry At the same time, interventions have been made at ensuring
increased access to electricity supply by industries and households The ―last
mile project‖ is one such intervention, specifically targeting households, with
the aim of achieving universal access by The major challenges facing the energy
sector include; improving the competitiveness, quantity, reliability and quality
of supply; high initial capital outlay and the long lead times from feasibility
studies to development of infrastructure; mobilizing adequate financial
resources to undertake massive investment in the power sector, high cost of
energy, low per capita incomes and low levels of industrialization The policy
recommendations contained herein seek to address these challenges Successful
implementation of this Policy will require all stakeholders to play their role
effectively so as to make the vision of affordable quality energy to all Kenyans
reality The Ministry will provide overall leadership, oversight, guidance and
direction to ensure full implementation of this Policy Dr Eng Joseph  Njoroge,
CBS Principal Secretary Ministry of Energy PREFACE BY THE PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Preamble  The process of formulating this Policy entailed
comprehensive reference of the Constitution, Sessional Paper No  of 2004 on
Energy, Energy Act 2006, legislation and regulations applying in the energy
sector, other policies, administrative procedures, government guidelines and
circulars relating to energy All the energy sector organizations carried
situational analysis and prepared  Position Paper that formed the basis for the
initial draft of the policy which was then shared and discussed with
stakeholders at  National Workshop in Nairobi County followed by similar
workshops in the other 46 counties Desktop analysis and benchmarking with
several selected countries were also undertaken Further consultations with key
government ministries, departments and agencies as well as key energy sector
stakeholders were held  National Validation Workshop was subsequently held where
several suggestions and comments were received, including request by several
stakeholders for additional time to allow for further input This document has
been enriched from the foregoing consultative process which has been
participatory and transparent as required by the Constitution  This Policy
document is organised into nine substantive chapters, starting with the
Introduction under Chapter  Chapter  deals with Coal while Chapter  provides for
Renewable Energy including electricity generation from geothermal and hydro
resources Chapter  covers Electricity while Chapter  provides for Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Chapter  covers Land, Environment, Health and Safety
Chapters ,  and  deal with Devolution and Provision of Energy Services; Energy
Financing, Pricing and Socio-Economic Issues; and Cross Cutting Issues
respectively The Acronyms and Glossary of Terms used herein are provided after
Chapter  Introduction  The overall objective of this Energy Policy is to ensure
affordable, competitive, sustainable and reliable supply of energy at the least
cost in order to achieve the national and county development needs, while
protecting and conserving the environment for inter-generational benefits  The
energy sector has been guided by the Sessional Paper No  of 2004 on Energy and
governed by several legislation, principally the Energy Act, No 12 of 2006 and
the Geothermal Resources Act No 12, of The Feed in Tariff Policy 2008 which was
last revised in 2012 has been instrumental in accelerating investment in the
renewable energy sub sector Adoption of the Kenya Vision 2030 and the
promulgation of the Constitution, 2010, made it necessary to review both the
Policy and the applicable legislation and regulations so as to align them with
the Vision and the Constitution 10 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Coal
Coal is an affordable, competitive, reliable and easily accessible source of
energy, especially for electricity generation Extensive coal exploration has
taken place in the Mui Basin of Kitui County where  total of 76 wells have been
drilled with 42 wells intercepting coal seams of various thicknesses at
different depths More wells are being drilled to appraise the coal reserves in
the basin of which Block  has been appraised to have 400 million tonnes More
coal exploration is going on in other parts of the country These resources are
expected to provide about ,000MW of electricity generation by  The Government
shall promote efficient utilisation of coal resources while minimising the
environmental impacts associated with its use  conducive investment environment
targeting power generation from coal will be created by providing fiscal
incentives to attract investment in this sector Renewable Energy  Renewable
energy, derived from the naturally occurring resources including geothermal,
hydro, solar, wind, ocean energy, biomass, biofuels, biogas and municipal waste
can supply our energy needs and those of future generations in  sustainable way
if effectively harnessed through careful planning and advanced technology In
addition, renewable energy has potential to enhance energy security, mitigate
climate change, generate income, create employment and generate foreign exchange
savings  To enhance exploitation of the vast geothermal resources that Kenya is
endowed with, the Government will continue to fund the Geothermal Development
Company (GDC) so as to manage the geothermal exploration risk and attract
investors As at 2017, Geothermal‘ contribution to the total grid installed
capacity of ,07MW was at 652MW (28%) Further, the Government will encourage
investment in the geothermal subsector so as to achieve at least ,093MW of
geothermal electric power generation by 2020 and ,056MW by 2024, and enhance
direct use of the resource  Kenya has an estimated hydropower potential of about
,000MW comprising of large hydros (sites with capacity of more than 10MW) and
small hydros Of the large hydros, 8MW has been exploited and accounts for % of
installed generation capacity as at Potential for small hydros is over ,000MW,
of which, less than 25MW has been developed In view of the vulnerability of
hydropower to variations in hydrology and climate, it will be necessary to put
in place  mechanism to cushion generators, transmitters, distributors and
consumers against the effects of adverse hydrology EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 11 The
National Government shall establish an inter-ministerial Renewable Energy
Resources Advisory Committee (RERAC) to, inter alia, advise the Cabinet
Secretary on: () Criteria for allocation of energy resource areas to investors
() Licensing of Renewable Energy resource areas () Management of water towers
and catchment areas () Development of multi-purpose projects such as dams and
reservoirs for power generation, portable water, flood control and irrigation
with  view to ensuring proper coordination at policy, regulatory and operational
levels on matters relating to the various uses of water resources () Management
and development of other energy resources such as agricultural and municipal
waste, forests, and areas with good wind regimes, tidal and wave energy The
National Government shall transform the Rural Electrification Authority into the
Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation (RERC) to be the lead
agency for development of renewable energy resources other than geothermal and
large hydros Electricity Electricity is  secondary source of energy generated
through the consumption of primary energy sources namely petroleum, coal,
renewable energy and nuclear energy Due to its versatility in utilization,
electricity is crucial to the socio-economic development of the country Access
to electricity is associated with rising or high quality of life Reform and
restructuring of the Kenyan electricity supply industry (ESI) has been going on
since the mid-90s with the aims of, inter alia: () Creating appropriate legal,
regulatory and institutional framework for the industry () Ensuring provision of
affordable, competitive, reliable, efficient and sustainable electric power
supplies Increasing the population‘ access to electricity as  means of
stimulating economic growth () () Improving the efficiency of power distribution
and supply through reductions in system losses and enhanced collection of
revenues () Creating  more competitive market structures with clear delineation
of roles for public and private sector players in generation, transmission,
distribution and retail functions In order to provide affordable and competitive
electrical energy to transform Kenya‘ economy,  roadmap to raise the generation
capacity by at least ,000MW from ,664MW as at October, 2013 to slightly over
,700 MW by 2024 is proposed Through this plan the Government will in the medium
to long term commit itself to development of technologies that result to least
cost based on 12 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 technology of screening
curves The screening curves take into account the elements of capacity factor,
capital and discount rates As at December, 2017, the installed capacity had
reached ,336 MW The National Government shall:- () Establish the Energy
Institute to, inter alia, promote and implement  nuclear electricity generation
programme () Develop and monitor implementation of electricity master plans for
the country and the Eastern African Region () Support the development by KETRACO
of new transmission lines, comprising of about ,000 km in the short term and
16,000 km by 2031 to enhance security, reliability and affordability of
electricity supply () Facilitate open access to the transmission and
distribution networks, designate  System Operator and encourage regional
interconnections to enhance regional electricity trade () Provide incentives for
development of robust distribution networks to ensure efficient and safe
provision of distribution services by duly licensed network service providers,
so as to reduce power supply interruptions and improve the quality of supply and
service () Formulate and implement  National Electrification Strategy to
accelerate connection with  view to achieving universal access to electricity by
() Continue funding the development of distribution networks through RERC Energy
Efficiency and Conservation The importance of energy efficiency and conservation
in the Kenyan economy cannot be overemphasized Challenges impacting on the
implementation of energy efficiency and conservation measures include lack of
awareness of the benefits and methods of conservation, apathy, limited technical
capacity and inadequate data The Government shall: () Develop and implement
sustainable, awareness and sensitization programmes on energy efficiency and
conservation; () Implement energy efficiency and conservation initiatives in all
sectors; () Undertake research and development in energy efficiency and
conservation; and () Collaborate with the private sector in energy efficiency
and conservation EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 13 Land, Environment, Health and Safety Land
is  critical resource in the development of energy infrastructure However, due
to competing interest in land utilization, the sector faces challenges in
developing its infrastructure Prudent environmental management is key to
ensuring sustainable development of the sector In carrying out its planning and
development mandate pursuant to the Fourth Schedule, Part , paragraph  ()
regarding electricity and gas reticulation and energy regulation, every county
government shall set aside suitable land for energy infrastructure development
purposes, including but not limited to projects recommended in the indicative
national energy plans The Government shall facilitate: () Development of
National Resettlement Action Plan Framework for energy related projects;
including livelihood restoration in the event of physical displacement of
communities () Access to land where exploration blocks fall on private land,
community land and cultural heritage areas including game parks/reserves ()
Establish strategies and mechanisms to eliminate wood fuel, charcoal and
kerosene as  household energy source by () Creation of disaster response units
in each county and in relevant energy sector entities Devolution and Provision
of Energy Services Under the Constitution, the functions of energy policy
including electricity and energy regulation have been assigned to the National
Government while electricity and gas reticulation are assigned to the County
Governments To avoid uncertainty and/or overlap of responsibilities,  framework
on the functional devolution of roles between the two levels of government has
been developed in consultation with all stakeholders Energy Financing, Pricing
and Socio-Economic Issues The Government shall: () Explore and adopt all viable
financing options from local and international sources for cost effective
utilization of all its energy resources, and in so doing shall endeavour to
maintain  competitive fiscal investment climate in the country () Support Public
Private Partnerships in the development, operation and maintenance of energy
infrastructure and delivery systems The Government shall set up  Consolidated
Energy Fund to fund infrastructure development; energy sector environmental
disaster mitigation, response and recovery; hydro risk mitigation; water towers
14 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 conservation programmes; energy
efficiency and conservation programmes as well as promotion of renewable energy
initiatives Cross Cutting Issues Research, development and dissemination as well
as human resource development are key in achieving the objectives of this Policy
It is therefore necessary to provide for the Energy Institute to undertake
training, research, development, dissemination, nurture talent, innovation and
to enhance capacity building in the sector The Government shall: () Promote
conducive environment to attract investments in the energy sector, taking into
account the needs and ability of the people of Kenya () Develop and implement
local content policy and regulations to facilitate participation of Kenyans in
the energy sector, including utilization of locally available goods, services
and human resources () Put in place framework for pro-active and sustained
engagement between the two levels of government, investors and communities in
energy resource areas Full and timely implementation of this Policy will go
long in facilitating transformation of Kenya into  globally competitive, newly
industrialized, middle income and prosperous country with  high quality of life
to all its citizens in  clean and secure environment by Electricity will be
affordable, competitive and reliable with  balanced energy mix The oil and gas
as well as coal sub-sectors will have well developed infrastructure and supply
since the preliminary findings show high potential Local content in the sector
will also be well developed for enhanced national productivity EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
15  – INTRODUCTION  THE ROLE OF ENERGY IN NATIONAL ECONOMY  Energy is  critical
component in the economy, standard of living and national security of  country
The level and the intensity of energy use in  country is  key indicator of
economic growth and development The Kenya Vision 2030 identified energy as one
of the infrastructure enablers of its socio-economic pillar Sustainable,
competitive, affordable and reliable energy for all citizens is  key factor in
realization of the Vision  Over the next five years, the Government aims to
focus on manufacturing, universal healthcare, food security and affordable (the
―Big Four‖) to further strengthen the economy, progress industrialization and
create jobs, thereby contributing towards the realization of the Vision 2030
Kenya‘ implementation of appropriate broad-based policies has led to  stable
macroeconomic environment resulting in positive economic growth of %, %, % in
the year 2015, 2016 and 2017 respectively The setting up of County Governments
after the general elections held in 2013 have also impacted positively on
economic growth as public expenditure rose in line with the devolved system of
government Despite this outcome, low productivity in agriculture, weak
manufacturing sector and weak transport system in the face of rising imports and
stagnating exports are major concerns  The country has continued to experience
relatively low and stable inflation, moderate interest rates and  relatively
stable shilling against the major trading currencies Key macroeconomic
indicators have remained fairly stable with overall inflation rate decreasing
significantly from % in 2015 and to % in This was attributed to lower energy and
transport prices In 2017, interest rates declined due to the impact of their
capping that became effective in September In the money market, the Kenyan
Shilling strengthened against most of the major trading currencies but weakened
against the Euro and the US Dollar in The current account deficit widened on
account of significant growth of imports against  slower growth of exports Thus,
there was  moderate build up in inflationary pressure from % in 2016 to % in
2017 mainly due to significant increase in oil and food prices  Real GDP is
expected to continue to improve, largely because of expansion in tourism, ICT,
transport, construction, industrialization, investments in the energy sector and
recovery in agriculture  The principal taxation policy pursued by the Government
of Kenya (GoK) in the energy sector is based on the need to create  sustainable
balance between fiscal revenue generation and to ensure access to modern energy
services by the low income segments of the population at reasonable prices GoK
also uses taxation as an instrument to discourage wasteful consumption of
energy, and by extension, to encourage its efficient utilization in  cost
effective manner  Given this policy regime, the energy sector has continued to
play its role as  significant contributor to fiscal revenues through taxes,
levies and duties imposed on various petroleum products, electrical energy and
materials sourced by service providers for operations, maintenance and
infrastructure expansion  Energy shortages and supply disruptions coupled with
high cost remain serious obstacles to economic activity Tax and other
concessions are planned to encourage investment in development 16 NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 of energy infrastructure particularly by private
investors involved in power generation from geothermal as well as other forms of
renewable energy such as wind, solar and biomass  The cost of energy has
significant impact on economic activities particularly those that are energy
intensive such as cement, steel, pulp and paper production In  liberalized
market such as Kenya, energy prices are significant determinants of
competitiveness of locally manufactured goods relative to imports In this
regard, high energy prices impact negatively on domestic wealth creation,
balance of payments and employment creation since consumers opt for cheaper
imports  ENERGY POLICY OBJECTIVES  The overall objective of the Energy Policy is
to ensure sustainable, adequate, affordable, competitive, secure and reliable
supply of energy at the least cost geared to meet national and county needs
while protecting and conserving the environment  Specifically these objectives
are: () Utilize energy as  tool to accelerate economic empowerment for the
National and County Governments as well as urban and rural development ()
Improve access to affordable, competitive, and reliable energy services ()
Provide an environment conducive for the development and provision of energy
services () Prioritise and promote development of indigenous primary and
secondary energy resources () Prioritise and promote the development of local
technologies in energy development and delivery () Promote energy efficiency and
conservation () Ensure that prudent environmental, social, health and safety
considerations, as well as issues of climate change are factored in energy and
petroleum sector developments () Ensure that  comprehensive, integrated and well
informed energy sector plan is put in place for effective development () Foster
international co-operation in energy trade, investments and development ()
Promote capacity building in the sector through research, development and
training Also promote local manufacture of plant, equipment, appliances and
materials () Promote appropriate standards, codes of practice and specifications
for equipment, systems and processes in the sector () Promote diversification of
energy supply sources to ensure security of supply () Promote cost effective and
equitable pricing of energy products () Protect investor, producer, supplier,
consumer and other stakeholder interests () Provide incentives for local and
international investments in the energy sector () Ensure that investors and
operators in energy sector comply with local content requirements () Promote and
develop government owned agencies in the development of energy resources  –
INTRODUCTION 17 () Promote an elaborate response strategy in the management of
energy related disasters () Encourage generation of electricity from renewable
resources, build and maintain the necessary distribution and transmission
infrastructure () Provide for the efficient and optimal distribution of
functions between the National and County Governments in the sector while
fostering cooperation with relevant public institutions  LEGAL AND REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK  The Constitution of Kenya  The Constitution has enhanced protection
and enforcement of fundamental rights amongst other gains It provides for  two
tier structure of government,  the National and the County Governments It
distributes the functions and powers between the two levels as detailed in
Chapter Eleven and the Fourth Schedule  Specifically in relation to the energy
sector, Part  of the Fourth Schedule provides that the National Government shall
be responsible for:- () Protection of the environment and natural resources with
view to establishing  durable and sustainable system of development including
water protection, securing sufficient residual water, hydraulic engineering and
the safety of dams () Energy policy including electricity and gas reticulation
and energy regulation; and () Public investment  In relation to the County
Governments, Part  of the Fourth Schedule provides that they shall be
responsible for county planning and development including electricity and gas
reticulation and energy regulation  It is necessary to review and align the
energy sector policy, legal and regulatory framework with the provisions, spirit
and aspirations of the Constitution  Current Policy and Legislation  The energy
and petroleum sector is guided by Sessional Paper No  of 2004 on Energy and
several other legislations and policies, the principal ones being: () The Energy
Act, No 12 which was enacted in It sought to amend and consolidate the
legislation relating to energy, provide for the establishment, powers and
functions of the Energy Regulatory Commission, the Energy Tribunal and the Rural
Electrification Authority () The Geothermal Resources Act No 12, enacted in 1982
to control the exploitation and use of geothermal resources and vests the
resources in the Government () The Feed in Tariff Policy 2012 which was issued
in 2008 and revised in the year 2010 and This Policy was formulated to promote
investment in electricity generation from renewable energy sources 18 NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Alongside the foregoing principal Acts, there are
several other Acts that impact the energy sector, including:- () The Standards
Act, Chapter 496 of the Laws of Kenya that provides for establishment of minimum
quality specifications, mode, materials and apparatus used in the country () The
Environmental Management and Co-ordination Act, 1999, which regulates the
environmental issues including those relating to the energy sector () The
Physical Planning Act, Chapter 286 of the Laws of Kenya that provides for zoning
of areas for storage, distribution and retailing of petroleum products and
construction of electric power sub-stations and other infrastructure () The
Weights and Measures Act, Chapter 513 of the Laws of Kenya under which storage
tanks and dispensing equipment for sale of petroleum products are calibrated and
regulated for accuracy () The Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act No 33 of
2015 that establishes procedures for efficient public procurement and for the
disposal of unserviceable, obsolete or surplus, stores, assets and equipment by
public entities () The Anti-Corruption and Economic Crimes Act No  of 2003 which
provides for prevention, investigation and punishment of corruption, economic
crime and related offences () The Public Officer Ethics Act No  of 2003 which
provides for code of conduct and ethics for public officers () The Ethics and
Anti-Corruption Commission Act No 22 of 2011 which establishes the Ethics and
Anti-Corruption Commission () The Land Act 2012 No  of 2012 which provide for
matters relating to public, private and community land () The Land Registration
Act, No  of 2012 which provides for registration of titles to land and the
objects of devolved government in land registration () The National Land
Commission Act  of 2012 that provides for the establishment of the National Land
Commission () The Environment and Land Court Act No 19 of 2011 that provide for
the establishment of the Environment and Land Court () The Urban Areas and
Cities Act No 13 of 2011 that provide for the, classification, governance and
management of urban areas and cities () The National Government Loans Guarantee
Act No 18 of 2011 that provides for the transparent, prudent and equitable
management of the authority to guarantee loans conferred on the National
Government  – INTRODUCTION 19 () The Consumer Protection Act No 46 of 2012 that
provides for consumer protection and prevention of unfair trade practices in
consumer transactions () The County Government Act, 2012 that provides for the
regulation required to implement the provisions relating to devolved government
and to give effect to chapter 11 of the Constitution, to provide for county
government powers, functions and responsibilities to deliver services and for
connected purposes  INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS Sessional Paper No  of 2004 and
the Energy Act No12 of 2006 restructured the sector in  bid to facilitate high
level performance The Policy has enabled increased private sector participation
in the development of the sector whilst focusing on improved management and
delivery of energy services This was intended to enable the sector achieve its
mission of providing clean, sustainable, affordable, reliable and secure energy
services at least cost while protecting the environment The following are the
key actors in the sector:-  Ministry of Energy and Petroleum (MoE) It is
responsible for formulation and articulation of energy policies through which it
provides an enabling environment for all stakeholders Its tasks include national
energy planning, training of manpower and mobilisation of financial resources
Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) It was established as an energy sector
regulator under the Energy Act, 2006, with responsibility for economic and
technical regulation of electric power, renewable energy, and downstream
petroleum sub-sectors Its functions also include tariff setting, review,
licensing, enforcement, dispute settlement and approval of power purchase and
network service contracts  Energy Tribunal This quasi-judicial body was
established under section 108 of the Energy Act, The Tribunal adjudicates
appeals originating from the decisions of ERC It also has jurisdiction to hear
and determine all matters referred to it relating to the energy sector  Kenya
Power and Lighting Company Limited (KPLC) KPLC is  State Corporation with GoK
shareholding of % and private shareholding of % as at June It purchases
electrical energy in bulk from KenGen and other power producers and undertakes
transmission, distribution, supply and retail of electric power 20 NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Kenya Electricity Generating Company Limited
(KenGen) KenGen is  State Corporation with GoK shareholding of 70% and private
shareholding of 30% as at June It is mandated to generate electric power,
currently producing the bulk of electricity consumed in the country The company
currently utilises various sources including hydro, geothermal, thermal and wind
to generate electricity  Rural Electrification Authority (REA) REA was
established under section 66 of the Energy Act of 2006 as  body corporate with
the principal mandate of extending electricity supply to rural areas, managing
the rural electrification fund, mobilizing resources for rural electrification
and promoting the development and use of renewable energy  Geothermal
Development Company Limited (GDC) This is  state-owned company established by
the Government of Kenya as  Special Purpose Vehicle for the development of
geothermal resources in Kenya  Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited
(KETRACO) This is  GoK wholly owned company established to be responsible for
the development, maintenance and operation of the national transmission grid
network It is also responsible for facilitating regional power trade through its
transmission network  Kenya Nuclear Electricity Board (KNEB) KNEB is charged
with the mandate of spearheading and fast tracking development of nuclear
electricity generation in order to enhance the production of affordable and
reliable electricity Independent Power Producers (IPPs) IPPs are private
companies which generate power and sell electricity in bulk to KPLC Currently
there are fourteen (14) IPPs in operation as listed below which account for
about 24% of the country‘ installed capacity: - () Iberafrica Power () Company
Limited (thermal power plant) () Tsavo Power Company Limited (thermal power
plant) () Mumias Sugar Company Limited (co-generation) () Orpower  Inc
(geothermal power plant) () Rabai Power Company Limited (thermal power plant) ()
Imenti Tea Factory Company Limited (mini-hydro) () Gikira Hydro (mini-hydro) ()
Thika Power Limited (thermal power plant) () Gulf Power Limited (thermal power
plant) () KTDA(various plants) (hydro power plants) () Lake Turkana Wind Power
(LTWP) (wind power plant) () Strathmore Solar (solar power plant)  –
INTRODUCTION 21 () Regen-Terem (hydro power plant) () Biojoule Kenya Ltd (biogas
power plant) Centre for Energy Efficiency and Conservation (CEEC) The Centre was
established jointly by GoK and the Kenya Association of Manufacturers to
champion energy efficiency and conservation efforts in Kenya 22 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018  – COAL RESOURCES  Overview  Coal is  readily combustible
rock containing more than 50% by weight and more than 70% by volume of
carbonaceous material formed from compaction of variously altered plant remains
It is used as  source of energy, mainly for electricity generation It is the
most affordable fuel worldwide and has potential to become the most reliable and
easily accessible energy source  Coal has been identified as one of the
indigenous sources of energy that will drive the development of strategic
initiatives for Kenya Vision It was recognized that the key to increased
development lay in early identification of indigenous energy sources, exploiting
them and establishing an appropriate institutional framework for their delivery
to consumers  The country has coal deposits for commercial exploitation and the
Government is fast tracking exploration and development of the resource for
power generation and other industrial uses  The introduction of Clean Coal
Technologies (CCTs) in coal fired power plants reduces emissions and extracts
sulphur and carbon from the atmosphere thus making coal an environmentally
viable source of energy  Demand for Coal  In Kenya, coal is mainly used by
cement manufacturers to complement heavy fuel oil for process heat As at
December 2017, consumption of coal declined from 29 thousand tonnes of oil
equivalent to thousand tonnes of oil equivalent  Coal consumption is expected to
increase with the discovery and mining of coal deposits in Mui Basin in Kitui
County mainly for electricity generation among other uses Exploration is also
ongoing in other parts of the country  As  medium term measure, the Government
intends to import coal to support electricity generation  Midstream and
Downstream Coal Development  The Government is working with  strategic investor
to build  coal fired power plant in Lamu County in the coastal region Phase  of
the plant will have  capacity of 960MW Construction of the plant is expected to
be in operation in the year 2024 running on imported coal However, there is need
to develop adequate and appropriate coal handling and storage facilities onshore
The Government has concessioned Blocks in the Mui Basin for coal resource
development with the objective of generating about ,000MW in Kitui County as
part of the coal contribution of ,000MW in the ,000+MW project  Challenges in
Midstream and Downstream Coal  Inadequate technical capacity for coal midstream
and downstream activities  Absence of large import coal handling facilities
Underdeveloped road and railway transportation system  Negative public
perceptions on use of coal to generate electricity  – COAL RESOURCES 23  Limited
funding for coal generation projects  Undeveloped capacity to store and evacuate
coal products  High initial cost of acquiring the necessary infrastructure (land
– check in cross cutting)  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long
Term  Coal Utilization  Develop local expertise and enhance local content in
coal training and collaboration with other    utilisation Government organs,
training and research institutions through  Develop and implement appropriate
legal, fiscal and regulatory    framework for utilisation  Undertake
extensive public awareness and stakeholder engagement on the use of coal as
cheap source of electricity generation     Adapt appropriate clean coal
technology and provide suitable    fiscal incentives  Enhance regional co-
operation in data and information exchange    for coal exploration   
Enhance budgetary support for utilisation of coal resources  Encourage private
sector participation in coal utilisation through PPP and JV arrangements by
providing appropriate incentives  Facilitate development of 960MW coal fired
plant within the Mui Basin (Kitui County), and development of other coal fired
plants in other feasible sites in the country           Develop an
integrated for coal storage, transportation and utilization to facilitate
development of the coal industry infrastructure    Ensure compliance with the
best coal industry practice in coal utilisation    Enforce investors‘
compliance with the regulatory framework and agreed work plans    Provide
incentives to encourage and promote the use of coal as an electricity generation
source 24 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  – RENEWABLE ENERGY  BACKGROUND
Renewable Energy (RE) is derived from natural processes that are replenished
constantly In its various forms, it derives directly or indirectly from the sun,
or from heat generated deep within the earth Included in the definition is
energy generated from solar, wind, biomass, geothermal, hydropower and ocean
resources, as well as bio-fuels and hydrogen derived from renewable resources
All these resources can supply our needs and those of future generations in
sustainable way Effectively harnessing these renewable resources requires
careful planning and advanced technology  RE has the potential to enhance energy
security and reliability; generate income and create employment; enable
substantial foreign exchange savings by reducing dependence on imported fuels
and its attendant price volatility, and mitigate climate change as it has
minimal adverse effects on the environment  According to data from MoE, biomass
provides about 69% of the country‘ overall energy requirements while petroleum
accounts for about 22% and electricity about % As at June, 2017 % of the
electricity component was generated using renewable energy sources with fossil
fuels providing the balance of % as indicated table   GEOTHERMAL ENERGY
Background  Geothermal is the energy formed due to the Earth‘ natural heat to
primordial energy generated during earth‘ from decay of is produced formation
radioactive elements like uranium, thorium and potassium The amount of heat
within 10,000 metres of the earth' surface contains 50,000 times more energy
than all the oil and natural gas resources in the world Figure  - Location of
Geothermal Resource Areas in Kenya is due The heat that  The areas with the
highest underground temperatures are in regions with active or geologically
young volcanoes These occur at plate boundaries or at places where the crust is
thin enough to let the heat through than 14 high  In Kenya, more temperature
potential sites occur along the Rift Valley with an estimated potential of more
than 10,000 MWe Other locations include Chyulu, Homa Hills in the Coast and
Nyanza, Mwananyamala at Nyambene Ridges; as shown in Figure  across  – RENEWABLE
ENERGY 25  Geothermal power plants use steam or hot water from  natural
underground reservoir to generate electrical energy Other uses of geothermal
energy include: () Dairy industry - refrigeration and pasteurization of milk
products () Grain Silos - drying of grains (wheat & maize) and other farm
products  pyrethrum () Space heating and cooling - green houses, residential
houses, hotels and other buildings () Industry - production of industrial
sulphur, treatment of hides and skins and honey processing () Water heating for
fish and crocodile farming, spas and swimming pools  Geothermal projects
typically progress through stages of reconnaissance, surface exploration,
feasibility study, exploratory drilling, appraisal drilling, production
drilling, steam field development and power plant construction stages
Challenges  Relatively long lead time of between - years from conception to
production of electricity  High upfront investment costs  High resource
exploration and development risks  Inadequate geothermal expertise  The
resources are site specific  Heavy investment in transmission and other support
infrastructure due to long distances to existing load centres  Land use conflict
Policies and Strategies Geothermal Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term   The
Government shall continue to support and fund geothermal resource assessment and
development so as to manage the geothermal exploration risk and attract
investors     Promote research, development and capacity building for   
geothermal development by providing fiscal and other incentives  Streamline
licensing and allocation of geothermal blocks with incentives and sanctions in
order to accelerate geothermal development     The government to package
incentives through attractive pricing to promote and encourage direct uses of
geothermal resources such as utilization of heat, water, gases and minerals  
  The government to enforce compliance with the regulatory requirement to
utilize the best available technologies that optimise the resource and conserve
the reservoir     Promote early geothermal generation through implementation
of    efficient modular geothermal technologies 26 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY,
October 2018  HYDROPOWER  Hydropower is electricity generated using the energy
of moving water Rain or melted snow, usually originating in hills and mountains,
create streams and rivers that eventually run to lakes, seas or oceans This
energy has been exploited for centuries In the late 19thcentury, hydropower
became  source for generating electricity   typical hydro plant is  system with
three parts: an electric plant where the electricity is produced;  dam that can
be opened or closed to control water flow; and  reservoir where water can be
stored The amount of electricity that can be generated depends on how far the
water drops and how much water moves through the system  Hydropower is also
readily available; engineers can control the flow of water through the turbines
to produce electricity on demand In addition, reservoirs may offer recreational
opportunities, such as swimming and boating But damming rivers may destroy or
disrupt wildlife and other natural resources  Hydropower is, to date, the most
successful form of renewable energy The amount of electrical energy generated
depends upon the quantity of available water Adverse hydrology can have
devastating effect on an economy that is heavily dependent on hydropower such as
Kenya at present  Kenya has  considerable hydropower potential estimated at -
,000MW as at December, 2017 comprising of large hydros (sites with capacity of
more than 10MW) and small hydros Potential for small hydros is over ,000MW, of
which about 5MW has been developed  There are five major water towers in Kenya,
namely: Mt Kenya, Aberdare Ranges, Mau Complex, the Cherangani Hills and Mt
Elgon as depicted in Figure  below These water towers give rise to five drainage
basins which are critical to the country‘ socio economic well being The major
drainage basins are those of Tana River and Lake Victoria  Large Hydros
Background  As at December 2017, the installed capacity of hydropower generation
was 8MW equivalent to % of total installed capacity It is estimated that the
undeveloped hydroelectric power potential of economic significance is ,630MW
Average energy production from these potential projects is estimated to be at
least ,605 GWh per annum This hydropower potential is located in five
geographical regions, representing Kenya‘ major drainage basins: Lake Victoria
(329MW), Rift Valley (305MW), Athi River (60MW), Tana River (790MW) and Ewaso
Ng‘iro North River (146MW)  Beyond the existing schemes, Kenya still has
substantial hydropower potential This is reflected by current plans to develop
large hydro projects in Karura and High Grand Falls (both in the Tana catchment
area), Nandi Forest (in the Lake Victoria North catchment area) and Magwagwa (in
the Lake Victoria South catchment area), and Arror (in the Rift Valley area)
This development could lead to additional hydropower capacity of over 800 MW in
the long term There is  large pipeline of small hydropower projects under the
Feed in Tariff (FiT) scheme Feasibility studies of smaller hydropower projects
are still on-going  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 27 Figure  - The  Water Towers and
Drainage Basins  Challenges  Hydropower is vulnerable to variations in hydrology
and climate change, leading to reduction of water levels in reservoirs and thus
reducing the contribution of hydro power in the energy mix  Inadequate storage
capacity in existing power generating reservoirs  The economic risk in
hydropower projects is high  Relocation and resettlement of affected persons to
create room for the construction reservoirs  Long lead time of between -10 years
Inadequate hydrological data within the region  Water levies that have  direct
effect on the cost of hydro generated electricity  Conflicting and competing
land and water uses between various sub-sectors of the economy with regard to
development and utilization of the same for electricity generation  Absence of
synergies and competing interests in the management of hydropower generating
infrastructure leading to delays in implementation of viable energy projects 28
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Policies and Strategies Hydropower Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term   The government to develop  hydro risk mitigation
mechanism to address risks such as prolonged droughts so as to cushion
generators, transmitters, distributors and consumers against effects of adverse
hydrology     The government to establish  coordinated approach for the   
management of water reservoirs  Develop  framework for coordination for use of
water resource    against various interests  The government to finance
conservation of hydro power water    catchment areas  The Government shall
implement hydro power projects as multi-    purpose projects  The government
to invest in increased storage capacity for hydro    power reservoirs  The
government to finance pre-feasibility studies for identification    of
potential hydropower sites  Small Hydros  Background  Small hydros are
hydropower schemes whose potential does not exceed 10MW The total estimated
potential of small, mini, micro and pico hydro systems is ,000MW Most of this
potential is situated within the country‘ five main drainage basins The
implementation of some of these projects are undertaken by both the Government
and private investors As at the end of 2017 Government run schemes were  total
of 7MW while those by private developers were about 81MW  The government
introduced the Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) policy in 2008 to promote the development of
renewable energy to supply villages, small businesses or farms, as well as grid
supply  The Ministry of Energy has carried out feasibility studies for small
hydros in tea growing areas covering twelve sites with an estimated combined
potential generation capacity of 33MW Feasibility studies are on-going at 14
other sites and will be expanded to cover other areas and the results used for
capital mobilization for development of the sites As at 2017, only  few schemes
had been developed as stand-alone systems or to feed to the national grid  –
RENEWABLE ENERGY 29  By the end of 2017, more than 260 small hydropower sites
had been identified but the largest number of sites are found in the Tana River
drainage basin, mainly in the counties of Kirinyaga, Muranga, Meru and Tharaka
Nithi Figure : Small Hydropower Schemes  The map in Figure  shows locations of
small hydropower sites appraised by MoE (dots in green colour) as well as
summary compilation from various studies (dots in red colour) As can be seen,
the potential for small hydropower sites is mainly located that have high
population in counties density and high energy demand  Challenges Development of
small hydros subsector has faced the following challenges:  Destruction of
catchment areas, threatening long term viability of small hydro power projects
Inadequate financial resources and technical personnel for carrying out
feasibility studies and development of sites  Inadequate hydrological data
Competing interests between developing the sites and usage of land and water
resources by the concerned communities and institutions  Inadequate technical
capacity to design, construct, operate and maintain the projects  Vandalism of
electric power infrastructure  Non-compliance with standards, legal and
regulatory regime  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term
Small Hydros  Finance conservation of hydro power water catchment areas   
Provide incentives for Public Private Partnerships in small hydros     Invest
in hydrological data collection, management and    dissemination  Promote
development of capacity and knowledge on usage of    appropriate technologies
Formulate and enforce standards, legal and regulatory regimes for    small
hydros 30 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  BIOMASS  Background  Biomass is
organic matter that can be used to provide heat, make fuel and generate
electricity Wood-fuel, the largest source of biomass has been used to provide
heat for thousands of years Many other types of biomass are also used as an
energy source such as plant residue from agriculture or forestry and the organic
component of municipal and industrial wastes Landfill gas is also considered
biomass source Biomass resources can be replenished through afforestation
programmes  There is  gap between the existing tree cover vis--vis the minimum
requirement of 10% prescribed by the Forest Conservation Management Act No 34 of
The continuous overreliance of Biomass as  primary source of energy threatens
achievement of this requirement  Biomass fuels are the largest source of primary
energy in Kenya with wood-fuel (firewood and charcoal) accounting for about 69%
of the total primary energy consumption About 55% of this is derived from
farmlands in the form of woody biomass as well as crop residue and animal waste
and the remaining 45% is derived from forests  Wood fuel supply management is
crucial to ensure sustainable supply to meet the growing demand Key issues here
include: competing land use activities, the growing imbalance between supply and
demand and the attendant adverse environmental as well as related land and tree
tenure issues, among others  The Government has promoted agro forestry and
social forestry programmes to increase the stock of woody biomass on farms to
make up for the loss of forest trees as forestland is converted into
agricultural and settlement land This is  multidisciplinary effort involving the
ministries responsible for energy, agriculture and environment and natural
resources  Challenges  Unsustainable use of biomass with attendant negative
impacts on the environment  Widening gap between supply and demand for wood-fuel
Emissions from wood fuel leading to health hazards among users  Weak enforcement
of the legal and regulatory framework for sustainable production, distribution
and marketing of biomass  Insufficient promotion of sustainable afforestation
programmes  Inadequate data on biomass production and consumption  Uncoordinated
approach in policy formulation and implementation by the relevant ministries and
organizations to reduce overreliance on biomass as  primary source of energy
Inadequate recognition of alternative clean modern energy sources to reduce
overreliance on biomass energy source  Lack of efficient technologies for
production, conversion and consumption of biomass energy Competing interests
over land use between biomass production, food production and other commercial
uses  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 31  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Biomass  The government to undertake  comprehensive base line study
on biomass energy resources and potential, and establish status of tree cover in
the country     The government to develop, update and disseminate information
   on biomass energy resources  Formulate and implement  national strategy
for coordinating    subsistence and commercial biomass production  Promote
efficient conversion and cleaner utilization of biomass    energy  Promote
the use of biomass briquettes as alternatives to    woodfuel  Provide
incentives for private sector participation in conversion of waste to energy
initiatives to reduce overreliance on Biomass energy     Undertake public
sensitization and awareness programmes to enhance participation the management,
protection and conservation of the environment as provided for in Article 69 ()
of the Constitution    in  Promote alternative sources of energy and
technologies such as    LPG, biogas and solar as substitutes for biomass
Collaborate with other relevant ministries and stakeholders to    promote
sustainable afforestation programmes Collaborate with other stakeholders to
ensure efficient use of land resource for biomass, food production and other
human needs    Undertake and promote Research, Development and   
Dissemination (RD&) of biomass energy technologies  BIOFUELS  Background  Unlike
other renewable sources, biomass can be converted directly into liquid fuels
called biofuels to meet energy needs  The use of biofuels would reduce pollution
and save on foreign exchange required for importing petroleum fuel, improve on
the balance of trade and create employment   strategy for introduction of
biofuel blends in the market was developed by the Government in Facilities for
ethanol-gasoline blending have been completed in Kisumu to be followed by
Eldoret and Nakuru However, there aren‘ sufficient quantities of bio-ethanol
feed-stocks  Land will need to be set aside for the production of energy crops
as feed-stock for bio-fuels Most bio-fuel projects being planned involve
sugarcane and sweet sorghum as the main feed-stock for 32 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018 ethanol; and jatropha, castor and other vegetable oil crops
such as, coconut, croton and cotton seed for biodiesel  Challenges  Insufficient
feed-stocks to produce biofuels for blending  Limited research data/information
for the use and sustainable production of biofuel  Insufficient legal and
institutional framework to support sustainable generation, utilisation,
production, distribution, supply and use of liquid biofuels  Threat of
competition over land use that could lead to food insecurity  Reliance on rain
fed, slow maturing feed-stock for biofuels  Inadequate RD& on alternative
biofuel feed-stocks and technologies  Lack of knowledge among the stakeholders
on the importance of biofuels for complementing energy needs in the country
Competing uses of the ethanol  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Biofuels  Undertake RD& on biofuel feed-stock     Review the
existing legal, fiscal, regulatory and institutional    framework  Provide
incentives for biofuel production projects and    consumption  Collaborate
with other stakeholders to ensure efficient use of land resource for biofuel
feed-stock, food production and other human needs     Create stakeholder
awareness and sensitization on the importance    and viability of biofuel
production and consumption  Implement the bioethanol pilot program   
Initiate and implement biodiesel blend pilot program     BIOGAS  Background
Biogas typically refers to  mixture of gases produced by anaerobic digestion of
biodegradable materials such as manure, sewage, municipal waste, green waste,
plant material, and crops  number of pilot and small commercial biogas
facilities for heat and electricity generation have been rolled out These biogas
projects have been used to substitute fuel oil in running medium size boilers In
2011 the Ministry of Energy initiated pilot projects for electricity generation
from cut flower wastes in Kiambu and Kajiado counties with  view to scaling up
the generation of electricity from  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 33 other biogas sources
Tables and indicates the energy generation potential in the Kenyan floriculture
and sisal industry (Source REA Master-plan 2009)  In an effort to minimize
overreliance on biomass the government has put in place incentives to promote
the use of Biogas  feasibility study carried out under this initiative
established that it is possible to construct ,500 biogas digesters in Kenya
every  years  Several biogas projects are being undertaken by MoE and REA in
public institutions The private sector is also implementing  number of similar
initiatives all over the country  Challenges  Lack of awareness on the potential
and benefits of biogas technology  Inadequate RD& on biogas technologies  High
upfront costs of domestic and commercial biogas plant and equipment  Inadequate
capacity and skilled biogas contractors in the country  Insufficient legal and
regulatory framework for biogas contracts  Policies and Strategies Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Biogas  Develop and implement public awareness programs
on the    benefits and potential of biogas technology  Undertake and promote
RD& of biogas energy technologies     Provide appropriate fiscal incentives
for local manufacture of biogas plant and equipment, large scale production,
storage and distribution     The government to initiate capacity building
programs on biogas    technology in learning institutions  The government to
develop and enforce legal and regulatory    requirements on biogas  Support
domestic and community based biogas plants among    urban, rural population
and institutions  Promote the use of biogas as an alternative to woodfuel and 
  kerosene for domestic and commercial energy needs  Roll out biogas
initiatives the remaining public institutions including prisons, schools and
hospitals as well as biogas bottling plants across the country to supply   
SOLAR ENERGY  Background  Kenya‘ geographical location astride the equator gives
it unique opportunity for  vibrant solar energy market The country receives good
solar insolation all year round coupled with moderate to high temperatures
estimated at - kWh/m²/day The percentage of solar energy harnessed for 34
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 commercial and domestic applications is
insignificant relative to the potential Solar energy can be used for lighting,
heating, drying and generating electricity  Solar water heating systems are
mainly used in homes, hotels, hospitals and learning institutions As of December
2014,  survey to determine the number of installed solar water heating (SWH)
units was launched The demand for solar water heating (SWH) is however,
projected to grow to more than 800,000 SWH units by 2020 equivalent to 300,000
TOE This represents  growth rate of 20% per annum This demand will mainly be
from domestic, institutional and small commercial consumers spurred by the
operationalization of the Energy (Solar Water Heating) Regulations,  Kenya has
large-scale market-driven penetration of small PV systems with capacity of 12 –
50 watts power (Wp) consisting of low cost amorphous silicon modules and both
mono- and polycrystalline silicon modules As at June 2017, the installed
capacity for solar energy was at 66 MW By the year 2020, it is projected that
the installed capacity of solar photovoltaic systems will reach 100MW generating
220 GWh annually  The Government initiated  programme for electrification of
institutions far from grid using solar PV systems As at December 2017 solar PV
systems had been installed in ,685 institutions including primary and secondary
schools, dispensaries, health and administrative centres  The Government has
embarked on  programme to provide solar/wind hybrid generation capacity to off-
grid diesel power stations as detailed below: Table : Operational Solar/Wind
Hybrid Generation Capacity Off-Grid Station Name Existing Diesel Capacity (Kw)
Existing Solar Capacity (Kw) Existing Wind Capacity (Kw) No  ,000 350 Mandera
Kakuma 800 60   Merti in Isiolo 128 10   Habaswein 360 30 50  El Wak in Wajir
360 50   Mfangano 520 11   Rhamu (Mandera) 184 50   Eldas 184 30   Takaba 184 50
Laisamis 184 80  Lodwar ,000 60  Marsabit ,000   TOTALS ,904 781 550  There are
also plans to develop 26 diesel/solar hybrid at various sites of the country
with  capacity of 114kW  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 35  Challenges  Uncoordinated
approach in policy implementation and promotion of solar energy projects  High
upfront capital cost for plant and equipment  Weak enforcement of standards and
regulations  Rampant theft of solar photovoltaic panels, which discourages the
installation  Lack of awareness on the potential, opportunities and economic
benefits offered by solar technologies  Proliferation of sub-standard solar
energy technologies and equipment  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium
Term  Long Term  Solar Energy  Undertake awareness programs to promote the use
of solar    energy  Enforce regulations on standards     Regular review of
standards for solar energy technologies and    equipment  Provide incentives
to promote the local production and use of    efficient solar systems
Enforce regulations on building codes on water heating and    lightning
Provide  framework for connection of electricity generated from solar energy to
national and isolated grids, through direct sale or net metering     Enhance
penalties for theft and vandalism of solar systems     Support hybrid power
generation systems involving solar and other energy sources to manage the
effects caused by the intermittent nature and availability of solar energy   
Roll out installation of solar PV systems in all the remaining public   
facilities in the off grid areas Procure and distribute solar lanterns to light
up rural, peri-urban    and urban areas Undertake RD& on solar technologies 
   WIND ENERGY  Background  Wind energy uses naturally occurring energy of the
wind for practical purposes like generating electricity, charging batteries, or
pumping water Large, modern wind turbines operate together in wind farms to
produce electricity for utilities 36 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Kenya
has  proven wind energy potential of as high as 346 /m2 and speeds of over 6m/
in parts of Marsabit, Kajiado, Laikipia, Meru, Nyandarua, Kilifi, Lamu, Isiolo,
Turkana, Samburu, Uasin Gishu, Narok, Kiambu Counties among others The MoE
developed  Wind Atlas in 2008 with indicative data  To augment the information
contained in the Wind Atlas, MoE with the assistance of Development Partners,
has together with KenGen installed more than 60 wind masts and data loggers in
various counties across the country to collect site specific data with  view to
open up generation electricity from wind Confirmed wind energy potential for
selected areas is given in Table -  With the rising cost of oil, exploitation of
wind energy has become more attractive Substitution of thermal generation with
wind power plants will cut down on the large amounts of foreign exchange
required to import fossil fuels for the thermal power plants  Further, partial
substitution or combining wind with gen-sets (wind–diesel hybrid) and some form
of renewable energy storage such as pumped storage in hydropower could cut down
overall costs by substituting renewable energy sources for significant amounts
of diesel  Using wind energy to substitute thermal generation will also lead to
less CO2 emissions thus contributing to reduction in global warming The carbon
credits associated with the reduction of the emissions can be sold as
certificates of emission reduction Table : Average wind speed data for selected
sites No Site Average wind speed data  Narumoru 39  Maralal 67  Malindi 78
Ngong  85  Ngong III (50) 24  Ngong III (80) 17  Meru (Mugae) 71  Meru (Kiremu)
82  Meru (Mweromalia) 44 New Marsabit 67 Bubisa West 11 Bubisa East 71 Kerio
Valley 55 Kisumu 91 Masono 41 Kisii 06 Narok 49 Loitoktok 05 Kinangop 02 Source:
KenGen, 2018  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 37  The installed capacity of wind power
connected to the grid as at June 2017 was 05MW The 300MW Lake Turkana Wind power
Plant was commissioned in 2017 and delivery of power to the grid expected in
Other committed projects include 310MW at Ngong, Kipeto, Prunus, Bahari Wind, Ol
Danyat and Chania Green There are proposals for development of 820 MW of wind
power at Marsabit, Meru, Ngong, Kinangop and Limuru,  Local production and
marketing of small wind generators has started and few pilot projects are under
consideration However, only  few small and isolated wind generators are in
operation so far  Challenges  High upfront costs for wind power generation
equipments  High capital investment for transmission lines due to wind power
potential areas being far away from the grid and load centres  Inadequate wind
regime data  Inadequate skilled capacity for wind power technology  Inadequate
wind energy industry standards due to fast changing technologies  Competing
interest in land use with other activities  Inadequate RD& in wind technologies
Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Wind Energy  Develop
institutional capacity for wide spread use of wind energy     Continually
review and enforce regulations and standards for wind    energy technology
Collect and compile wind energy data and update the wind atlas     Provide
incentives for wind energy development     Support hybrid power generation
systems involving wind and other    energy sources  Provide  framework for
connection of electricity generated from wind energy to national and isolated
grids, through direct sale or net metering    Plan and invest in transmission
lines to facilitate evacuation of power from areas with high wind potential to
major load centres  Undertake Research Development and Dissemination (RD&)   
    MUNICIPAL WASTE  Background  Municipal waste consists of solid waste
including durable and nondurable goods, containers, food scraps, yard waste and
inorganic waste from homes, institutions and businesses, wastes generated by
manufacturing, agriculture, mining, construction and demolition debris, as well
as sludge and liquid 38 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 waste from water
and wastewater treatment facilities, septic tanks, sewerage systems, slaughter
houses  In order of preference, municipal waste can be managed by reduction of
its production at source; reuse and/or recycling It can also be managed through
responsible dumpling and disposal In addition, waste can be treated to destroy
or reprocessed to recover energy or other beneficial resources, if the treatment
does not threaten public health, safety, or the environment  Most of the
municipal waste in Kenya is disposed in poorly managed dump sites, such as the
Dandora dumpsite, located  km from Nairobi‘ Central Business ranked as the
largest waste disposal pit in the East African region With appropriate waste-to-
energy technologies, municipal waste can be used to provide energy while helping
to clean the environment  Challenges  Lack of legal and regulatory framework for
exploitation  Lack of management and exploitation by the responsible
institutions  Inadequate data and information on potential of municipal waste
Lack of incentives for exploitation  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium
Term  Long Term  Municipal Waste  Develop and implement legal and regulatory
framework for    exploitation of municipal waste  Develop and implement
framework for collaboration to manage    and exploit the municipal waste
Develop programs for data collection and dissemination on the    potential of
municipal waste  Provide incentives for conversion of municipal waste to energy
    Undertake pilot programmes for the generation of electricity using   
municipal and industrial solid waste  Provide integrated solid waste management
plan and roadmaps    10 CO-GENERATION Background  Co-generation refers to the
simultaneous production of heat and power from one single fuel source It is
common where plant processes require both heat and power such as sugar
processing and offers opportunity for improved energy efficiency besides
reducing energy costs and providing an additional revenue stream through export
of surplus power to the national grid   pre-feasibility study completed in 2007
by the MoE on cogeneration by sugar companies established potential for
generating up to 120MW of electricity for export to the national grid with minor
investments and about 200MW with modest investments in terms of expanding cane
fields and cane crushing capacity  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 39  Mumias Sugar Company
took advantage of its cogeneration potential from sugarcane bagasse by
installing 38MW capacity out of which 26MW is dedicated to the national grid
Other sugar companies are expected to diversify into the use of sugar processing
by-product value addition through co- generation and bioethanol production
Challenges  Inefficient plant and equipment in the cogeneration industry
Unreliable and insufficient supply of agro-waste  Limited technical, human and
financial resources for cogeneration development  Under utilization of
cogeneration potential in areas where agro-wastes are available  Inadequate data
and documented assessment of resources and potential  Lack of clear
dissemination strategy of information to investors on issues relating to
licensing, taxation and feed in tariff policy Policies and Strategies Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Co-generation  Provide incentives for investment in
efficient and emerging    cogeneration technologies  Promote community
programmes and projects in production and    supply of agro-waste  Support
co-generators in implementing capacity building    programmes in cogeneration
technologies  Carry out public awareness and sensitization programmes in   
cogeneration  Formulate and implement  national strategy for coordinating   
development of co-generation  Undertake RD& in co-generation technologies   
Support PPP arrangements to accelerate investment in    cogeneration
Formulate and implement information dissemination strategy to investors on
issues relating to licensing, taxation and feed in tariff policy     Develop
and implement regulatory framework for certification of    cogeneration
projects 11 FEED IN TARIFFS Background   Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) is an instrument
to promote the generation of electricity from renewable energy sources It
enables  utility to produce Renewable Energy Sources Generated Electricity
(RES-) and sell the output to  distributor at  pre-determined tariff for  given
period of time 40 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  The objectives of the
FiT Policy are to: () Facilitate resource mobilization by providing investment
security and market stability for investors in electricity generation from
Renewable Energy Sources () Reduce transaction and administrative costs and
delays by eliminating the conventional bidding process and lengthy negotiations
of PPA () Encourage private sector investors to operate their plants prudently
and efficiently so as to maximize returns  The FiT Policy was launched in April
2008 and applied to three technologies namely wind, small hydro power and
biomass (municipal waste and cane bagasse) for capacities not exceeding
50MW,10MW and 40MW respectively  1st and 2nd Revision were done in 2010 and 2012
respectively, revising the tariffs, including geothermal and grid connected
solar technology and Standard PPA Initial submissions from potential investors
pointed to generation tariffs higher than the FiTs due to increases in the cost
of generation equipment and financing However this trend has since changed with
some technologies attracting lower tariffs To benefit from the lower tariffs
while simultaneously attract investors  review of the FiT tariffs is proposed to
provide for the introduction of the renewable energy auctions where the industry
determines the price for the project through competitive bidding As at 2018
number of investors had expressed interest to develop projects under the FiT
policy, including: () 104 small hydropower projects with total capacity of 71MW
() 19 wind power projects with total capacity of 20MW ()  biomass/biogas energy
projects with total capacity of 09MW () Solar energy projects with  total
capacity of ,40MW () Geothermal energy projects with  total capacity of 15MW
The existing FiT structure for each technology is as shown in the Table : Table
(): Feed-in-Tariff Structure for projects up to 10MW Technology Installed
Capacity (MW) Standard FiT (US$/kWhr) Percentage escalable portion of the tariff
Min Capacity (MW) Max Capacity (MW) Wind -10 11 12  10 Hydro  105   10 10 0825
Biomass -10 10 15  10 Biogas -10 10 15  10 Solar (Grid) -10 12   10 Solar (Off-
Grid) -10 20   10  – RENEWABLE ENERGY 41 Table  (): Feed-in-Tariff Structure for
projects above 10MW Technology Installed Capacity (MW) Standard FiT (US$/kWhr)
Percentage escalable portion of the tariff Min Capacity (MW) Max Capacity (MW)
Max Cumulative Capacity (MW) Wind -50 11 12 50 500 Geothermal  088 for 20 first
12 years and 15 after 35 70 500 Hydro -20 0825  20 200 Biomass -40 10 15 40 200
Solar (Grid) -40 12 12 40 100 Challenges  Insufficient data and analytical tools
to inform the level of tariffs for different technologies  Lack of awareness on
FiT among the potential investors  No clear guidelines on PPA negotiations
Preference for certain renewable energy technologies and not others  Inadequate
technical and financial capacity  Current tariffs are not market reflective and
do not cater for hybrid renewable energy systems  Policies and Strategies Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Feed-in-Tariffs  Encourage the private sector
through Feed-in-Tariff to develop potential sites to generate electricity for
their own consumption and for export of any surplus to the national grid   
Formulate and implement promotion campaigns to attract potential    investors
Periodic review and implementation of FIT policy     Undertake periodic
studies on the capital expenditures and operating costs of the different types
of technologies and develop sufficient analytical tools to inform the level of
tariffs for different technologies     Develop and regularly review model
power purchase agreements    for the various modes of generation  Provide
capacity building programs and financial assistance to    community based
projects  Expand the scope of FiT to include emerging and hybrid   
technologies 42 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 12 OTHER RENEWABLES
Background  Other renewable energy sources and technologies have not attracted
considerable interest or commercialised These include ocean energy, biomass
gasification, bio-refinery technologies and concentrating solar power energy
storage Ocean energy possess  high potential owing to the long coastline which
Kenya is endowed with  The oceans contain huge amounts of power that can be
drawn from different sources and exploited for generating useful energy The most
developed conversion systems use tidal energy, marine currents and ocean waves
Challenges  Lack of legal and regulatory framework for utilization of emerging
renewable energies  Inadequate data and information on potential of emerging
renewable energies  Lack of incentives for exploitation Policies and Strategies
Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Other Renewables  Develop and implement
legal and regulatory framework     Carry out RD& on potential of emerging
renewable energies     Provide incentives for exploitation and utilization of
emerging    renewable energy technologies 13 CROSS CUTTING ISSUES Cross-
cutting issues in renewable energy related to land, environment, health and
safety are covered in chapter six Challenges () Inadequate criteria for
allocation of energy resource areas to investors () Lack of  framework for
management of cross-county energy resource areas () Environmental protection,
conservation and management () Lack of clear and agreeable formula for working
out national government, county government and local community benefits sharing
() Insufficient local credit schemes and financing mechanisms () Inadequate
public awareness on the economic opportunities offered by renewable energy and
renewable energy technologies () Lack of  mechanism for integrated planning for
renewable energy resources () Slow growth in load demand which is not
commensurate with gradual increment in electrical output () Inadequate capacity
for integration of intermittent power generation into the national grid  –
RENEWABLE ENERGY 43 Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term
Cross Cutting Issues in Renewable Energy  Establish inter-ministerial Renewable
Energy Resources Advisory Committee (RERAC) to advise the Cabinet Secretary on
matters relating to renewable energy resource   Transform into the Rural
Electrification Authority the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
Corporation (RERC) to become the lead agency in the development of renewable
energy resources excluding geothermal and large hydros RERC shall be the one
stop shop for information and guidance to investors on renewable energy projects
  In order to promote use of renewable energy and disseminate information on
renewable energy technologies, it is proposed to: () Assist the counties which
do not have energy centres to    establish new ones based on existing models
() Develop criteria for the phased transfer of existing energy centres to host
County Governments  Facilitate Partnership with potential financing institutions
to enable    the public to access credits schemes  Develop regulations for
net metering to facilitate and encourage sale to the grid of electrical energy
generated from renewable energy systems     Develop and implement master plan
for renewable energy     Incentivise community based power generation   
Partner with relevant certification schemes institutions to support green energy
    Develop and implement resettlement action plans (RAP)    Enhance the
capacity of the System Operator to manage power    supplies from intermittent
energy sources 44 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  – ELECTRICITY
BACKGROUND  Electricity is  secondary source of energy generated through the
consumption of primary energy sources namely fossil fuels, renewable energy and
nuclear energy By virtue of its versatility in application, it is crucial to
economic growth and is the most sought after energy service by society Access to
electricity is associated with rising or high quality of life  The electricity
supply industry (ESI) value chain consists of five elements, as shown below
First, there is generation, requiring both  fuel source (, hydro, geothermal,
petroleum or wind energy) and  power plant to convert the fuel source into
electrical energy  Second, the generated electricity is transformed (stepped up)
for transmission over high voltage power lines; and matching end user
requirements (demand) with energy availability (supply), referred to as system
operations  The third element is distribution where electricity is transformed
again (stepped down) to enable delivery or supply of electrical energy to end
users or consumers via  vast network of power lines and substations  Finally,
there is delivery or supply which entails retailing of electrical energy to
consumers through  series of commercial functions – procuring, pricing, and
selling, metering, billing and revenue collection  Generation, transmission,
system operations and distribution are physical functions, while wholesaling and
delivery/retailing are merchant or commercial functions  Competition in the
industry generally means competition in the generation of electricity, as well
as in the commercial functions The transportation (transmission and
distribution) as well as system operation functions are natural monopolies as it
does not make economic, environmental or aesthetic sense to build multiple sets
of competing systems in any one area System operations is also non-competitive,
since the system operator has to control all the plants in  control area,
otherwise the system would not function efficiently or safely  The ESI in Kenya
has been undergoing reforms and restructuring since the mid-90s with the aims
of, inter alia: () Creating appropriate legal, regulatory and institutional
framework for the industry () Ensuring provision of affordable, reliable,
efficient and sustainable power supplies () Increasing the population‘ access to
electricity so as to stimulate economic growth () Improving the efficiency of
power distribution and supply through reductions in system losses and
enhancement of collection of revenues  – ELECTRICITY 45 () Creating  more
competitive market structure with clear definition of roles for public and
private sector players in generation, transmission, distribution and retail
functions  ELECTRIC POWER EXPANSION PLANNING  The Energy Act, No 12 of 2006
assigned responsibility for development of indicative national energy plans to
the Energy Regulatory Commission In 2009, the Commission established  committee
responsible for carrying out medium to long term planning of the electric power
sub-sector through the annual 20 year rolling Least Cost Power Development Plan
(LCPDP) Up to year 2011, the LCPDP was being reviewed annually Currently, the
plan is updated every two years, the latest update having been undertaken in
The LCPDP identifies existing potential in generation, possible investments in
transmission, forecasts future power demand and how best it can be met at least
cost The process entails three key aspects: () Load forecasting – Comprises
review of load forecast assumptions, variables, historical data set and
methodology taking cognizance of the future macro-economy () Generation Planning
– Involves the review and update of the power system simulation data including
plant types, system constraints and costs () Transmission Planning - Involves
power system transmission simulation to ensure the system is well balanced
Planning of the distribution system is carried out by the national entities
responsible for distribution and rural electrification These plans form inputs
to the LCPDP, particularly with regard to the load forecast   As at 2017,
electricity provided % of overall energy requirements in Kenya, while petroleum
and renewable energy provided 22% and 69%, respectively Demand for electricity
has shown an upward trend since 2007 due to accelerated economic growth Peak
demand increased from ,044MW in FY 2007 to ,656MW in FY2016 while the number of
electricity consumers more than trebled from ,060,383 in FY 2007 to ,182,292 by
June 2017 as detailed in Table  DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY  Peak demand is projected
to grow from ,812MW as at July 2018 to ,421 MW by 2022 and to ,989, MW by 2025
and ,244MW by To meet this demand, an additional ,000 MW of new generation is to
be developed to bring total installed capacity to at least ,652MW by Annual
energy consumption is projected to increase from ,272GWh in 2016 to 14,334GWh in
2021/ Major drivers of the demand include industrial parks, LAPPSET projects,
resort cities, iron and steel smelting industry, the standard gauge railway and
the light rail  As at 30th June 2017,% of the population was connected to
electricity compared to only 15% at 30th June The national electricity
distribution network as at 2016 was1,212km of 66kV lines, 30,846km of 33kV lines
and 37,234km of 11kV The existing medium voltage (66kV,33 kV and 11 kV)
distribution lines cover areas in which about 63% of Kenya‘ population of 40
million live 46 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Table  Demand and Consumer
Statistics Financial Year Energy Generated (GWh) Energy Sold (GWh) Peak Demand
(MW) Number of Consumers 2007 ,385 ,322 ,044 ,060,383 2008 ,489 ,432 ,072
,267,198 2009 ,692 ,624 ,107 ,463,639 2010 ,303 ,123 ,194 ,753,348 2011 ,670
,341 ,236 ,038,625 2012 ,087 ,581 ,354 ,330,962 2013 ,840 ,244 ,468 ,766,441
2014 ,280 ,655 ,512 ,611,904 2015 ,817 ,912 ,586 ,890,373 2016 Source: KPLC
Annual Report and Financial Statements, 2017 10,205 ,272 ,656 ,182,282  ELECTRIC
POWER GENERATION  Background  Electricity generation in Kenya is liberalised
with several licensed electric power producers whose combined installed capacity
was ,336MW as at June These include KenGen which accounts for approximately 70%
of the installed capacity, and eight () Independent Power Producers (IPPs) which
account for the balance In the FY ended 30th June 2017, 79% of the electrical
energy was generated using renewable energy sources while 21 % was generated
using fossil fuels as detailed in Table  Table  - Electric Power Generation
Sources and Energy Generated Installed Capacity (June 2017) Annual Generation
(FY 2016) Sources of Electric Power Generation (MW) Percentage % (GWHrs)
Percentage Hydro ,74% 00 28% Geothermal ,62% 05 % Wind 62% 00 % Biomass
01% 66 02% Solar  01%  Imports - - 80% Total % ,51 ,79 79% MSD % 32 ,55 75% Gas
Turbines % 60 06%  HSD (Isolated Stations) % 24 40%     Emergency Power Plant
00%       Total % 56 ,06 21% Installed Capacity and Units Generated ,07MW 10,85
GWhrs Source: KPLC 2017 Annual Report  – ELECTRICITY 47  The ,000+MW Project  It
is anticipated that electricity demand will rise sharply as new County
Governments take shape and numerous economic activities spring up in the
counties In particular, energy intensive activities such as mining, production
of iron and steel products from local iron ore deposits, irrigation of large
tracts of land for food security and agro-based industry Other such activities
include; operation of petroleum pipelines for both crude and refined fuel oils,
petrochemicals production including urea, steel products based manufacturing,
such as motor vehicle body parts and for earth moving equipment, electrification
of designated rail lines, installation of escalators at shopping malls and
airports, and new economic zones  In order to provide affordable electricity for
these activities which are expected to transform our economy,  roadmap to
increase the installed generation capacity from 1664MW as at October 2013 by at
least 5000MW to ,652 MW by 2024 has been proposed and is being implemented
Through this plan the Government will in the medium to long term commit itself
to development of technologies that result to least cost based on technology of
screening curves The screening curves take into account the elements of capacity
factor, capital and discount rates As at December, 2017, the installed capacity
had reached ,336 MW  This capacity will mainly be developed from an energy mix
of Geothermal ,646MW, Natural Gas ,050MW, Wind 630MW and Coal ,920MW through
IPPs under the PPP framework Table  below show the new generation capacity
additions and cumulative installed capacities for the period of 2017-Table  –
New Generation Capacity Additions in MW for the period 2017 to 2024 TECHNOLOGY
CUMULATIVE INSTALLED CAPACITY (MW) 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 HYDRO
80 - - - - - 00 - THERMAL 56 - - - - - - - GEOTHERMAL 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
GASOIL 00 - WIND 05 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 SOLAR 66 25 00 00 00 00 00 00 COAL - -
00 IMPORTS - - 00 - - - - - CO-GENERATION 00 - - - - - - - TOTAL ,07 25 00 00 00
00 00 ,00 CUMULATIVE TOTAL Source: LCPDP 2017 ,07 ,32 ,32 ,32 ,32 ,32 ,32 ,32 48
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  The road map will require the construction
of various transmission lines to evacuate power to respective load centres at an
estimated cost of KShs 50 billion to be funded by GOK over the period between
so as to unlock over KShs 800 billion of new investment in power generation by
the private sector The developers of these power plants will be expected to
negotiate and execute power purchase agreements with KPLC which shall remain the
single buyer during the project period  Generation from Renewable Energy
Resources Generation of electrical energy using renewable energy resources is
dealt with in Chapter   Thermal Power Generation  Thermal power plants generate
electrical energy using fossil fuels, mainly, petroleum, natural gas and coal
Thermal generation accounts for approximately % of installed capacity and its
contribution to the actual energy mix as at June 2017 was approximately 21% The
installed thermal capacity is 56MW  All thermal generating plants are run on
imported petroleum fuels which are subject to volatile international oil market
prices which are passed through to consumers Consumption of petroleum is
projected progressively reduce and be replaced by natural gas  Thermal power
generation: () Requires  relatively shorter period of between 12 to 18 months ()
Requires smaller physical space compared to hydro and geothermal power plants ()
Lower capital cost compared to hydro power and geothermal power plants () Can be
installed in any part of the country as compared to hydro power and geothermal
plants which are site specific () Attractive to private investment due to faster
return on investment  Challenges () Inadequate infrastructure for power supply
in the locality of generation plants () Reliance on fossil fuel leading to high
electricity costs () Underdevelopment of the immerse potential of renewable
energy for power generation () Thermal power generation causes environmental
pollution which requires costly mitigation measures () High price volatility of
petroleum products affecting electricity generation cost () Thermal power plants
have  relatively short life span () Stringent emergency power plan conditions ()
Thermal power plants have relatively lower conversion efficiencies of less than
50% compared to hydropower plants which have over 90% efficiency  – ELECTRICITY
49  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Electric Power
Generation  Develop electricity infrastructure within the locality of generation
   plants  Put in place mechanisms to ensure that local communities benefit
from future developments of the electricity supply infrastructure  Formulate and
implement  renewable energy roadmap from the       renewable energy master
plan  Facilitate electricity generation using natural gas and coal through   
PPPs  Develop and enforce  regulatory framework to ensure that all equipment
procured for thermal power plants shall be designed and constructed to minimise
the environmental impact     Promote the utilisation of Combined Cycle Gas
Turbine (CCGT)    plants to enhance efficiency  Develop and enforce
regulations for compliance with standards    for reliable and stable power
Establish natural gas handling and storage facilities in the    country
Enforce compliance for pollution prevention in thermal power    plants
Nuclear Energy - Electricity Generation  Background  The uptake of nuclear power
has been growing over time across the world Various countries without existing
nuclear power plants in their energy mix have expressed interest in investing in
nuclear electricity generation, while developed countries with existing nuclear
plants have been expanding their capacities All over the world, as of June 2017,
there were 451 nuclear power plants in operation and 55 under construction and
230 are in the planning stage as detailed in Table   Vision 2030 notes the need
for reliable and affordable electricity for the ever increasing commercial,
industrial and household use The critical need for nuclear energy is premised on
the fact that, with the rising demand for power in the country due to the
accelerated investment in the economy, it is one of the forms of energy that can
produce enormous amounts of electricity at  relatively economical cost  In April
2010, the National Economic and Social Council (NESC) proposed the introduction
of nuclear electricity into the Kenyan energy mix as  national priority leading
to the formation of the 13 member Nuclear Electricity Project Committee (NEPC)
under the Ministry of Energy In November 2012, the Kenya Nuclear Electricity
Board was established vide Legal Notice 131 of 2012 effectively becoming the
successor to NEPC to fast track the development of generation of electricity
using nuclear energy 50 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Nuclear energy
across the world elicits varied reactions in relation to plant safety,
management or radioactive waste management and proliferation concerns in the
wake of heightened nuclear incidents It is important to note that the
international nuclear industry through comprehensive  & has substantially
addressed most of the concerns and challenges that traditionally undermined
nuclear energy as  form of economical and safe energy This can be evidenced by
long and safe operation of nuclear power plants In fact, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was awarded the prestigious Nobel Peace Prize in
2005 for ‘its efforts in preventing nuclear energy from being used for military
purposes and most importantly for ensuring that nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes is used in the safest possible way  Kenya has adopted the
internationally recommended IAEA Milestone Approach in development of its
nuclear power programme The Milestone Approach is  phased, guided and systematic
methodology which assesses all nuclear infrastructure issues at every single
stage of development Figure in - Annexures illustrates the activities under each
milestone  The first nuclear plant of ,000MW is expected to be commissioned in
Additional units of ,000MW each are expected to be commissioned in 2030, 2033,
and It is further noted that the introduction of nuclear plants into the grid is
justified by the demand for electricity within the Eastern Africa Power Pool
(EAPP)  Advantages  Nuclear plants are some of the most cost effective sources
of generating electricity  It is  clean non- pollutant way to generate
electricity as it does not produce any GHG emissions  Uranium which is the fuel
used in nuclear power plants is abundantly available as it‘  natural resource
Uranium deposits are not exhaustible for an estimated ,000 years worldwide
Nuclear power is  reliable source of power with an economic life of 70 years
with an option of extension of up to 20 years  Nuclear power is suitable for
base load operation  Nuclear fuel can be recycled and re-used This approach
would capture the vast amount of energy still remaining in the spent nuclear
fuel and reduce on radioactive waste  Nuclear power plants have one of the
highest conversion factors with  sustained plant efficiency of up to 98%  In
comparison with other forms of energy such as solar and wind, nuclear energy
utilizes less land  site area comparison of the various forms of energy reveals
that for  ,000MW capacity plant, nuclear energy requires 330,000m², solar
33,000,000m² and wind 165,000,000m²  Challenges  Nuclear plants require high
upfront capital cost  Nuclear reactors yield products that could be diverted and
turned into atomic weapons  Nuclear waste is highly radioactive and non
biodegradable  – ELECTRICITY 51  Globally, there is no safe and environmentally
acceptable standards for disposal of radioactive and chemical nuclear waste
Nuclear accidents are catastrophic as experienced in Chernobyl, Ukraine (1986)
and Fukushima, Japan (2011) hence no guarantee on safety  Negative public
perceptions on nuclear power plants  Mitigating factors  Some of the measures to
mitigate the challenges include: () Comprehensive nuclear laws, regulations and
treaties, in reactor designs, operator training, public awareness, emergency
preparedness, enhanced safety, additional safeguards and security standards All
these have greatly reduced probability of occurrence of nuclear accidents and
negative impact on public environment, health and safety () New reactor types
have been designed to make it physically impossible to melt down This is due to
elaborate regulations on safety and security safeguards, in design, setting up
and operating nuclear plants () Development of small and medium sized reactors
(SMRs) provides an attractive and affordable nuclear power option for many
developing countries with small electrical grids, insufficient infrastructure
and limited investment capability Multi-module power plants with SMRs may offer
energy production flexibility that energy market deregulation might call for in
future in many countries SMRs are also of particular interest for co-generation
and many advanced future process heat applications Some SMRs designs reduce
obligations of the user for spent fuel and waste management and offer greater
non-proliferation assurances international community the to () Heightened
vigilance by the IAEA and the international community has ensured recent nuclear
energy research; development and use are increasingly for peaceful purposes and
not military use  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term
Nuclear Power Generation  Transform the Kenya Nuclear Electricity Board to the
Nuclear Power and Energy Agency under statute, mandated to, inter alia, promote
and fast track the nuclear power programme   Develop  comprehensive legal and
regulatory framework for the development, regulation and utilization of nuclear
energy for electric power generation    Identify an operator for the nuclear
power plant and establish any other body required for the development and
operation of nuclear electricity programme    Carry out RD& of nuclear energy
technology and application   52 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Nuclear Power Generation  Provide funds
electricity programme for establishment and operation of nuclear     Carry
out pre-feasibility and feasibility studies to address all requisite
infrastructure issues for the development of  nuclear power programme 
Commence human capacity building programme for recruitment of highly
knowledgeable and skilled human resource in nuclear energy and ensure continuous
relevant specializations required for the support of the nuclear power programme
   training in all  Ensure to key the country accedes and domesticates
conventions, treaties and protocols to meet her international obligations
necessary for the establishment of  nuclear power programme   Undertake
extensive public awareness on the need for nuclear energy, engage stakeholders
for support of nuclear power and also draw  comprehensive communication strategy
   Identify nuclear candidate sites followed by site evaluation, to be  
feasible sites characterization and selection of communicated to IAEA Identify
vendors in nuclear energy technology, engage in bilateral   agreements and
MOUs with vendor countries Attain IAEA Milestone  (Ready to make  knowledgeable
commitment to  nuclear programme and Milestone  (Ready to invite bids for the
first nuclear power plant)  Commission the first ,000MW nuclear plant by 2027
and   ,000MW by The Government in the development of nuclear power shall IAEA
and countries with nuclear power    collaborate with generation technology
ELECTRIC POWER TRANSMISSION  Background  Kenya‘ existing transmission network
comprises of ,766 circuit km at 132 kV and above voltage levels as at June This
comprises of 585 km of 400kV lines, 59 km of 220 kV lines and 11 km of 132 kV
lines  As at 30th June 2017, Kenya has Thirty-eight (38) generation substations
with  generation capacity of 10,85GWh and transmission substations with
capacity of ,787 MVA  The existing transmission system capacity is severely
constrained particularly during peak hours The problem is partly due to
inadequate reactive power in major load centres and also transmission
constraints particularly in the Western and Nairobi regions  – ELECTRICITY 53
One of the recommendations under Sessional Paper No  of 2004 on Energy was to
unbundle transmission and distribution functions This began in 2008 with the
establishment of KETRACO as  transmission entity These two functions were being
performed exclusively by KPLC who owned, operated and maintained the national
transmission and distribution network  Extension of the National Transmission
Network  KETRACO is currently undertaking new transmission projects aimed at
developing  robust grid system to:- () Enable evacuation of electric power from
various generation plants and injecting it to the national grid () Improve
quality and reliability of electricity supply throughout the country by ensuring
adequate evacuation capacity () Develop new transmission lines comprising of
about ,000km in the short term and 16,000km by () Reduce the cost of electricity
to the consumer by absorbing the capital cost of transmission lines since they
will be fully funded by the National Government () Provide interconnection links
with the neighbouring countries in order to facilitate power exchange and
develop electricity trade in the region () Reduce system losses () Open up off-
grid areas in order to ease connectivity to electricity by constructing
transmission lines to link them up to the national grid  As earlier stated, the
numerous economic activities springing up in the counties require  corresponding
increase in generation capacity and transmission network Consequently, the
number of transmission lines projected for construction in the next  years needs
to be substantial to meet this need  The LCPDP of 2018 has identified 10,000 km
for implementation These projects include ,650km of 132kV lines, ,700km of 220kV
lines, ,000km 400kV lines and 612km of 500kV HVDC lines The projects fall into
four broad categories based on their specific objectives, namely: line as
priority projects transmission () System strengthening projects These Projects
will improve capacity to transfer electrical energy and address the challenge of
low voltages, high transmission losses, unreliability of supply and network
security () Power evacuation projects The projects target evacuation of power
from various generation plants for injection into the national grid () Regional
interconnectors The Government has entered into partnerships through which
regional power integration is being spearheaded in order to facilitate regional
trade 54 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 () Electricity access projects The
projects in this category fall under the Energy Scale - Up Programme and their
main objective is to increase electricity access and address the challenges of
access and low connectivity  It is projected that by 2031 16,000 km of
transmission lines and associated substations will have been constructed Figure
shows the development of the Kenya transmission network as at June Figure  –
Development of the Kenya Transmission Network  – ELECTRICITY 55  As the
transmission network expands through the various institutions as  result of
increased generation, it would be necessary to ensure evacuation and uptake of
that generation by consumers This is presently done through power purchase
agreements between KPLC as the off-taker and generators With liberalisation of
the energy sector careful implementation of an open access system in
transmission should be given due consideration to safeguard the existing
obligations  Regional Interconnection  Imports and Exports  The Kenyan
transmission network is interconnected with Uganda‘ system through  132 kV
double circuit transmission line The arrangement allows for electrical energy
exchange between the two systems Kenya also has cross-border agreements with
Tanzania and Ethiopia Quantities of imports and exports of electrical energy (in
kWhs) between Kenya and Uganda as well as between Kenya and Tanzania are
detailed in Table  Table  - Imports and Exports of Electrical Energy Year ended
30th June Kenya – Uganda (kWhs) Kenya – Tanzania (kWhs) Kenya – Ethiopia (kWhs)
Imports Exports Imports Exports Imports Exports / / 2008 24,665,248 46,359,936
,036,864 / / / 2009 28,570,508 26,557,446 ,220,868 / / / 2010 37,135,529
26,291,418 ,101,026 526,740 / / 2011 29,946,605 30,265,350 860,527 838,800 / /
2012 35,805,150 41,214,150 ,080,674 ,097,820 / / 2013 41,000,000 30,000,000
,200,000 ,000,000 ,100,000 / 2014 83,000,000 37,000,000 ,300,000 ,000,000
,800,000 / 2015 76,000,000 38,000,000 600,000 ,000,000 ,600,000 / 2016
65,000,000 43,000,000 / ,000,000 ,400,000 / 2017 180,000,000 20,000,000 /
,000,000 Source: KPLC Report 2016  Resulting from the ongoing regional
integration under the EAPP initiative and the need to build synergies in the
region in power development, the Government has committed to enter into mutually
beneficial regional interconnections with other African countries As  result,
the regional power market is progressively evolving into  power pool with the
anticipated interconnections with Ethiopia, Tanzania and the Southern African
Power Pool (SAPP) countries and strengthening of the interconnection with Uganda
Table  details planned regional inter-connectors Table  – Planned Regional
Inter-connectors No Transmission Line Distance (km) Voltage Capacity (MW) Status
as at Dec 2014  Lessos (Kenya) –Tororo (Uganda) 400 kV 250 In progress  Eastern
Africa Electricity Highway 686 500kV HVDC 2000 In progress  Kenya – Tanzania 97
400kV ,300 In progress Source: KETRACO, 2017 56 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October
2018  Benefits of Regional Interconnectivity  Security of supply and system
stability due to increased generation mix  Increasing national economic
efficiency by operating on lower reserve margins  Expanded power market sizes
and reduced country specific risks  Capital saving as the need to invest in new
power stations is reduced  Increases competition by providing options for
cheaper power  Electricity access to remote areas  Shared reserve margin  The
transmission infrastructure acts as  catalyst for investment in non-conventional
renewable energy sources  Challenges  Weak and inadequate transmission
infrastructure  Displacement of population and settlements  Environmental,
health and safety concerns  Vandalism on transmission network  Inadequate local
technical skills, especially in HVDC systems  Land and wayleaves acquisition
process  Encroachment of the wayleaves trace  Limited private sector
participation in development and operation of transmission infrastructure
Inadequate policy, legal and institutional framework for the operationalization
of the independent system operator Undeveloped legal, regulatory and
institutional framework for  competitive wholesale electric power market
Policies and Strategies Electric Power Transmission Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term   Facilitate open access to safeguarding the existing obligations and
commitments  Provide  mechanism for determination of wheeling charges
transmission network while the        Develop and implement the legal,
regulatory and institutional framework for competitive electricity market and
support regional integration of the power system to enhance regional power trade
National Government in collaboration with neighbouring states to provide
infrastructure and finance EAPP power market centre in the region      
Allocate sufficient funding to implement the power transmission    master
plan  – ELECTRICITY 57 Electric Power Transmission Short Term  Medium Term  Long
Term   Develop and implement the requisite legal and institutional framework to
designate one transmission licensee to be the system operator     Provide
funding for redundancies in the transmission system to    ensure reliability
of the system  Improve mechanisms for timely acquisition of way-leaves for   
power transmission  Collaborate with other land regulatory agencies to ensure
that energy infrastructure corridors are provided for in the national plan
Develop and implement legal and operational frameworks to enable limited use of
land along transmission line corridors as an alternative to outright acquisition
of the land        ELECTRIC POWER DISTRIBUTION  Background  Distribution
entails movement of electrical energy from power plants and/or from the
transmission system through distribution networks comprising electric supply
lines and distribution substations to consumers Participants in the distribution
function include: () Distribution licensees authorised to design, construct,
operate and maintain distribution systems As at 2018, KPLC is the distribution
licensee in most parts of Kenya () Rural Electrification Authority, which
carries out grid extension at medium and low voltage in areas which are
considered uneconomic for electrification by the licensee () County Governments
that have the function of county planning and development, including electricity
and gas reticulation and energy regulation Consequently, they will work in
collaboration with REA and distribution licensees to enhance connectivity in the
country  As at June 2017, just about % of the population had access to
electricity In addition to those set out in Table  and Table , other key
statistics about the electricity supply industry are summarised in Table  Table
- Power System Statistics Financial Year 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
UNITS PURCHASED (GWh) UNITS SOLD (GWh) ,692 ,303 ,670 ,087 ,840 ,280 ,870 10,205
,624 ,123 ,341 ,581 ,244 ,655 ,912 ,272 System Losses(GWh) ,068 ,180 ,329 ,507
,596 ,624 ,905 ,933 Losses as % of Energy Purchased 00 20 30 60 Average Unit
Yield Sold (cents) System Loss in Billion KShs ,,,88 ,71 ,74 ,45 ,38 ,63 62 84
22 67 10 2433 73 24 Incremental Loss Reduction (%) 30 -20 -10 -30  50 -  Source:
KPLC Annual Report 2016 58 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Distribution
System  As at 30th June 2017, the distribution system comprised of ,212 km of 66
kV lines, 30,846 km of 33 kV lines, 37,234 km of 11kV lines and low voltage
lines, primary distribution substations with transformation capacity of ,416MVA
and distribution transformers with total capacity of ,276MVA  It is projected
that by 2020, capacities of primary and distribution substations, HV lines and
MV lines are projected to be 11,888MVA, 190, 204MVA, ,925km and 118,875km
respectively In the year 2030 the estimates of the distribution substation
capacity, distribution transformer capacity, HV lines and MV lines will be
37,565MVA, 60,104MVA, 25,043 km and 187,825 km respectively  As the distribution
network expands through the various institutions as  result of increased
generation and enhanced transmission, it would be necessary to ensure efficient
distribution and supply of electric energy to consumers  The devolved structure
in the energy sector calls for careful implementation of an open access system
in distribution while safeguarding the existing obligations  Rural
Electrification  The Rural Electrification Schemes Programme (the Programme) was
initiated in 1973 with the objective of providing electricity supply to areas
considered economically unviable by the distribution licensee The Programme was
implemented by KPLC until 2007 when the Government established the Rural
Electrification Authority (REA) under section 66 of the Energy Act, No12 of 2006
to be the lead agency under the Programme The mandate of REA includes
accelerating the pace of rural electrification by managing the Rural
Electrification Programme Fund (REP Fund), developing rural electrification
master plans, mobilizing resources for rural electrification as well as
promoting the development and use of renewable energy  By June 2016, 88,581
public facilities in the country out of which 60,617 were electrified (%) under
the Programme and 27,964 were un-electrified (%) The un-electrified public
facilities will be electrified through the grid extension and renewable energy
options such as installation of solar PV systems in the off grid areas There has
been accelerated connectivity of rural customers which have increased from
133,047 in 2007 to ,269,510 in  The cumulative capital expenditure since
inception of the Programme is at Kshs 96 billion as at June The units of
electricity sold under the rural electrification schemes customers increased by
12 million kWh (an increase of %) from 537million kWh in 2015 to 549 million kWh
in 2016/ Towards the promotion of renewable energy, the Government through REA
is presently implementing  54MW solar power plant project situated in Garissa
County and plant is to be commissioned in In addition, REA is implementing 25No
Solar PV/Diesel Hybrid Mini Grid power projects at various sites country wide
The projects are expected to be commissioned in  Cross Border Electrification
Cross border electrification (CBE) is the extension of the medium and low
voltage distribution networks from one country to supply communities and load
centres in  neighbouring country in situations where those communities and load
centres are far from distribution systems within their own country Areas that
have benefitted from CBE include Lunga Lunga and Vanga in Kenya  – ELECTRICITY
59 supplied from Tanzania, Namanga in Tanzania supplied from Kenya and Moyale in
Kenya supplied from Ethiopia  CBE is implemented by electricity supply licensees
and rural electrification authorities of the member states It can enhance
electricity trade between countries and facilitate increased access to power
supply in  cost-effective manner in border regions where distribution systems
exist across borders within the Eastern Africa Region  Challenges to CBE include
different legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks, technical standards,
quality of supply and service levels, tariffs and tariff structures among the
countries in the Region  Reliability and Quality of Supply  It is acknowledged
that the reliability and quality of supply has  direct bearing on
competitiveness of the country as these directly impact on the cost of
production Electricity consumers continue to demand more reliability and better
quality of service commensurate with the tariffs they pay, though the service
they receive is below their expectations KPLC maintains data on reliability and
quality of supply that provide the following statistics: () Number of high and
low voltage interruptions () Number of transformer failures () Number of low
voltage breakdowns () Average repair time following interruption of supply ()
Cumulative number of customers () Quantity of electrical energy purchased and
sold  These statistics are not  sufficient measure of the reliability and
quality of supply While it is appreciated that efforts are being made to improve
reliability and quality of supply, it is important to track and monitor these
aspects using internationally accepted indicators such as System Average
Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI), System Average Interruption Frequency Index
(SAIFI) and Customer Average Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI)  In the
generation part of the electricity supply chain, plant availability factors are
the indicators of reliability of supply  Connection to Electricity Supply
Towards socio-economic transformation of the country, the Government has set
target of universal access to electricity by Electricity access is  critical
element that is necessary in  country‘ economic growth It is particularly
crucial to human development, as certain basic activities—such as lighting,
refrigeration, running household appliances, and operating equipment; cannot
easily be carried out by other forms of energy Sustainable provision of
electricity can free large amounts of time and labour and promote better health
and education  As at June 2017, % of the population had access to electricity
study commissioned by the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum in 2014 established
that Kenya has one of the highest connection charges leading to low access to
electricity supply Despite the successful electrification of public 60 NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 facilities in rural areas, neighbouring households
largely remain unconnected Consequently the Government is currently implementing
the Last Mile Connectivity Project funded by exchequer and Donors  Going by the
current pace at which connections are being effected, particularly by the
achievement of % access to electricity by The country is on course to achieve
universal access by This would not have been possible without  paradigm shift in
the electrification strategy  Challenges in Distribution  Vandalism of electric
power infrastructure  Lengthy process of way-leaves acquisition  Encroachment of
way-leaves trace  Weak distribution network characterized by limited redundancy
and aging  Frequent and prolonged supply interruptions  High cost of conversion
of overhead to underground distribution networks  High distribution system
losses  Illegal power line connections and theft of electricity  Physical plans
in most cases do not provide an infrastructure corridor for electricity
reticulation High arbitrary levies charged by the public institutions on
electric power infrastructure Lack of  framework and synergies in adoption of
parallel system in off-take of power (parallel systems being single and multiple
off-taker) Scattered nature of homes in rural areas High costs of rural
electrification projects Lack of adherence to technical standards High
electricity connection charges Majority of consumers cannot afford upfront
connection costs  Policies and Strategies – Distribution Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Electric Power Distribution  Continually support and fund capacity
building programs for the    realization of energy human resource pool
Government shall ensure and support reinforcement and development of the
distribution network so as to improve reliability and quality of supply   
Government to facilitate partnership programs in modernization of    the
distribution networks  Review and enforce legal provisions with respect to
energy related    offences which are classified as economic crimes  –
ELECTRICITY 61 Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Electric Power Distribution
National government to put in place  collaborative framework with the County
Governments in planning and developing distribution networks and transferring
them to duly licensed distributor() to operate and maintain them so at to have
only one distributor in  given area at any particular time for efficiency,
safety and technical effectiveness of the national grid     Facilitate open
access to the distribution network with safeguards    for the existing
obligations and commitments  Provide  mechanism for determination of use of
system charges    in  multiple off-taker model  Enforce standards to ensure
off-grid networks meet the national    power grid standards to enable future
inter-connection  Carry out regular review of the electricity market structure
to    enhance efficiency Harmonize all levies charged on electricity
infrastructure for    purposes of managing costs Regularly review and
implement of the rural electrification master    plan Mobilize funds from
development partners for specific rural    electrification programmes Support
local capacity programs for manufacture, installation, maintenance and operation
of appropriate energy technologies in rural areas    Provide incentives to
both users and producers of energy    technologies in rural areas Support
data collection, dissemination and packaging and disseminate information on
energy systems in rural areas to create investor and consumer awareness on
economic potential offered by these systems    Collaborate with other
government agencies for provision of basic necessities including energy services
to nomadic and pastoral settlements    Develop the criteria to access and
utilize funds for electrification of marginalized areas from the Equalization
Fund under Article 204 of the Constitution    Implement the East African
Community (EAC) Cross Border Electrification Policy for the cost-effective
electricity supply to communities and load centres along the borders of Kenya
and her neighbours    Continually review bilateral agreements with countries
outside the EAC to enhance cross boarder electrification 62 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018 Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Electric Power
Distribution Gather system operation and customer data through appropriate
incident management and geographical information systems to enable computation
of key performance indicators    Provide for incentives where reliability and
quality of supply targets    are met and sanctions in events of default
Formulate  national electrification strategy to fast track consumer connections
with  view to achieving universal access to electricity by The strategy shall,
inter alia, provide for: () Establishment of  national electrification fund to
finance the difference between the cost of connections and connection charges
based on affordability       () Source of funds and management of the
national electrification    fund () Appropriate technical standards for
electric supply lines    () Efficient utilisation of resources for the design
and construction    so as to ensure that connection costs are realistic ()
Determination of number and location of households in the    country and
extent of the electricity supply network () Prioritisation of areas to be
electrified, while ensuring equitable    provision of services across the
country () Use of off-grid systems, including stand alone renewable    energy
solutions where appropriate () Setting of connection charges on the basis of
affordability rather than cost, with options for payments in instalments ()
Mechanisms for refunds where persons require connections out of agreed
prioritisation and therefore pay more than affordability based charges and the
electric supply lines are used to supply other persons       () Role of
County Governments in the national electrification    strategy () Roles and
management of contractors     RETAIL OF ELECTRICAL ENERGY  Background
Retailing of electricity entails delivery or supply of electrical energy to
consumers through  series of commercial functions  procuring, pricing, selling,
metering, billing and revenue collection  Delivery and retailing of electricity
is  merchant or commercial function as opposed to generation, transmission and
distribution which are of physical nature  The retail function is currently
exclusively undertaken by KPLC Based on this, KPLC has continued to be the
single buyer of electricity signing Power Purchase Agreements with generators of
electrical  – ELECTRICITY 63 energy This energy is sold by KPLC to all customers
including those connected under the Rural Electrification Programme  As at 30th
June 2017, the total unit sales which include all connected customers (,182,282)
were ,272 million kilowatt hours as detailed in Table   Challenges in Retail of
Electrical Energy  High end user electricity tariffs  Illegal power line
connections and theft of electricity  Lack of  legal framework for opening up
retail for competition  Policies and Strategies – Retail of Electrical Energy
Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Retail of Electrical Energy  The Government
to facilitate investors in the implementation of the strategy to achieve an
optimal energy mix that will bring down the end user electricity tariffs   
The Government to develop and implement  mechanism for     national uniform
tariff  Review and enforce the legal provisions with respect to illegal power
line connections and theft of electrical energy and classify such offences as
economic crimes     Regularly review the electricity market to facilitate
competition in    retail of electricity  CROSS CUTTING ISSUES Cross cutting
issues in electricity related to land, environment, health and safety are
covered in chapter six  Challenges  Lack of updated land use master plans for
planning of energy infrastructure  High cost to acquire land and way-leaves for
power infrastructure development  Delays in decision making in public energy
sector due to complicated corporate governance structures  High cost of
financing energy infrastructure projects  Insufficient fiscal and other
incentives for private sector investment  Delayed implementation of power
generation projects from cheaper energy resources including coal and natural gas
to support power generation  The restructuring of the sector creates challenges
due to existing obligations including Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs),
financial covenants and asset ownership  Inadequate energy data to guide
decision making for energy development programs  Insufficient demand for power
in some areas due to low economic activities 64 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October
2018  Policies and Strategies – Electricity Cross Cutting Issues Electricity -
Cross Cutting Issues Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  The Government shall:
Facilitate RD& programs and feasibility to guide integrated    planning for
electricity projects  Enact or amend laws that enhance penalties for existing
offences affecting the sector and provide for additional offences while also
classifying these offences as economic crimes     Harmonize levies charged on
energy infrastructure for purposes of    managing electricity costs  Support
and ensure reinforcement and development of the    distribution network
Ensure that lifeline tariff is appropriately targeted to benefit the    poor
and marginalized consumer groups  Create awareness and promote clean development
mechanisms in energy projects so as to benefit from carbon credits under the
1997 Kyoto Protocol or any successor mechanism     In consultation with power
generators, distributors and transmission licensees, facilitate the construction
of supply lines to cater for the needs of the local community in areas where
generating plants are located     Institute appropriate and innovative ways
to enhance surveillance    and security of energy infrastructure  Undertake
to progressively interconnect the off-grid network to the    national grid
where commercially viable Provide incentives for local assembly and manufacture
of energy infrastructure equipment Classify strategic energy installations such
as power plants, primary substations, control centres as protected areas and
provide security during construction and operation    Ensure that the
sanctity of power purchase agreements and network service contracts are
respected and honoured at all times Develop and implement legal framework to
empower the regulator       to enforce provisions of the law  –
ELECTRICITY 65  – ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION  BACKGROUND  Energy
efficiency and conservation refers to measures aimed at reducing energy
consumption without sacrificing productivity or increasing costs Energy
efficiency and conservation measures have the potential to scale down capital
investments needed to provide additional supplies and reduce overall resource
use It also has the potential of reducing cost of production at the end user
level  Energy efficiency and conservation reduces energy demand, improves energy
security, improves competitiveness and helps to mitigate climate change by
lowering GHG emissions   number of factors have highlighted the importance of,
and urgency for, energy efficiency and conservation: () High energy prices – the
continuing increase in the price of energy has significantly contributed to
increased interest in energy efficiency and conservation () Insecurity of supply
– expressed in the growing discomfort about the vulnerability and uncertainty of
future energy supplies as well as the volatility of their prices () Adverse
environmental and health impacts – there is increasing concern about spiralling
degradation of the environment as exemplified by increased local air pollution
and acid precipitation from ever growing fossil fuel combustion Associated with
this are global issues such as climate change as  result of GHG emissions ()
Depletion of energy resources – there is growing unease at the rate of depletion
of major energy resources The most used energy resources such as fuel wood and
fossil fuels are becoming scarce as demand rises  From the consumer‘ point of
view, energy efficiency and conservation measures yield direct savings on the
energy bill From the national stand point, adoption of such measures would
significantly reduce the foreign exchange costs of oil imports It would also
serve to defer additional investment in power generation capacity Ultimately,
improved energy efficiency would boost the competitiveness of Kenyan products
owing to reduced input costs  The United Nations Development Programme Global
Environmental Facility-Kenya Association of Manufacturers (UNDP-GEF-KAM)
Industrial Energy Efficiency Project report of 2005 revealed that wastage of
primary energy input ranged from 10% to 30% This was attributed to  lack of
information, motivation, know-how and financial restrictions in adopting
emerging energy efficiency and conservation technologies and innovations  The
UNDP-GEF – KAM Project ended in Thereafter, the MoE and the Kenya Association of
Manufacturers signed  Memorandum of Agreement to establish  Centre for Energy
Efficiency and Conservation (CEEC) The CEEC picked-up from where the GEF-KAM
project had ended; mainly to undertake on behalf of the Ministry – energy audits
in mainstream industries, small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and public
institutions, capacity building in energy efficiency and conservation, public
education and awareness activities as well as administer the Energy Management
Awards (EMA) annual events Further to this, the Energy Management Regulations
were enacted in 2012 by 66 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 ERC The total
energy audits undertaken on behalf of the MoE under the Regulations are 975
indicating  saving potential of KShs  billion and 389,690MWh equivalent  It is
expected that with continued efforts through the CEEC and the private sector, it
is possible to avoid cumulative emissions of CO2 to the tune of  million tonnes
by the end of year 2016, equivalent to more than 20,000GWh in energy savings
CHALLENGES  Inadequate awareness and sensitization of the benefits accruing from
energy efficiency and conservation  Low uptake of energy efficiency and
conservation technologies, appliances and standards  High technical losses in
the generation, transmission and distribution systems  Limited technical
capacity, training and expertise in energy management, efficiency and
conservation  Lack of comprehensive, reliable energy consumption audit data and
information covering various sectors  Slow adoption of conservation
opportunities and measures due to socio-economic factors  High upfront cost for
energy efficiency and conservation projects  Insufficient standards of energy
efficiency and conservation equipment and appliances  Lack of tax rebates and
fiscal incentives for energy efficiency and conservation equipment and
appliances Low awareness of existing fiscal, and legal, incentives, for
generation plants, equipment and infrastructure Low awareness of the existence
of credit facilities such as green energy facility grants and loans and carbon
credit from the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)  POLICIES AND STRATEGIES Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Energy Efficiency and Conservation  Develop and
implement sustainable, awareness and sensitization    programmes on energy
efficiency and conservation  Implement energy efficiency and conservation
initiatives in all    sectors  Develop and implement guidelines for carrying
out of energy    audits and advisory services in the counties  Develop and
enforce minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) and rating labels for energy
efficiency and conservation equipment     Develop and implement  regulatory
framework to provide for incentives and penalties to reduce high losses in
generation, transmission and distribution     – ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
CONSERVATION 67 Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Energy Efficiency and
Conservation  Provide appropriate fiscal and other incentives to enhance uptake
   of energy optimisation technologies  Build capacity and empower the energy
efficiency and conservation directorate to champion and spearhead energy
efficiency and conservation activities     Enforce building codes to enhance
the concept of green design in    buildings  Develop and enforce standards
for fuel economy of motor vehicle    operations and maintenance practices
Promote safe and fuel efficient transportation for passengers and   cargo
Adopt the use of new and efficient technologies in energy    efficiency and
conservation Develop, disseminate and implement  National Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Plan in consultation with relevant stakeholders    Undertake
research and development in energy efficiency and    conservation Collaborate
in the preparation of education curricula on energy    efficiency and
conservation Implement international co-operation programmes in energy   
efficiency and conservation Collaborate with the private sector in energy
efficiency and    conservation 68 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  –
LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY  BACKGROUND  Land is  critical resource in
the development of energy and petroleum infrastructure However, due to competing
interest in land utilization, the sector faces challenges in developing its
infrastructure  Environmental Management in the energy and petroleum sector is
key to ensuring sustainability in the energy value chain Energy generation,
transmission and use pose various dangers to human life and the environment The
challenge for players in the energy sector is the provision of affordable,
competitive, reliable and sustainable energy whilst upholding people‘ rights to
land, environment, health and safety  The Environmental Management and Co-
ordination Act, No  of 1999 (EMCA, 1999) is the umbrella legal framework in
respect to environmental management in Kenya Its implementing agency is the
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) It recognises  ―Lead Agency‖
as any Government institution in which any law vests functions of control or
management of any element of the environment or natural resource Lead Agencies
therefore play an important role in enforcing compliance with environmental laws
and regulations  The Energy Regulatory Commission is  key ―Lead Agency‖ in the
energy sector, drawing its powers from the Energy Act No 12 of 2006 to ―inter
alia… formulate, enforce and review environmental, health, safety and quality
standards for the energy sector, in coordination with other statutory
authorities‖ The Act also requires that while reviewing applications for
licences in the energy sector, ERC to consider, among others, the environmental
and social impacts and compliance with EMCA 1999   Strategic Environmental
Assessment is required for public plans and programmes to identify and minimize
any negative environmental impacts Environmental Impact Assessment Regulations
require that mitigating measures be put in place to minimise the adverse impact
of energy projects Comprehensive environmental impact assessments are conducted
for all projects prior to their implementation to ascertain the level of
potential environmental damage, the required mitigation measures and associated
costs  Other authorities that have regulatory mandate in the energy sector in
terms of environment, health and safety are the Directorate of Occupational
Safety and Health Services (DOSHS) under the Occupational Safety and Health Act
of 2007, Water Resources Management Authority (WRMA) under the Water Act of 2002
and the Kenya Maritime Authority (KMA) under the Merchant Shipping Act & Kenya
Maritime Authority Act of  Vision 2030 acknowledges that land is  vital factor
of production in the economy together with its aesthetic, cultural and
traditional values Some key initiatives envisioned to address environmental
problems which relate to the energy sector are: () Sustainable management of
natural resources () Pollution and waste management () Disaster risk management
() Use of incentives for environmental compliance  – LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH
AND SAFETY 69  The Constitution provides for protection of the right to property
Energy sector players, to whom land access and utilization is critical in their
operations, must be alive to this fact In addition, Article 42 of the
Constitution provides for every person‘ right to  clean and healthy environment
The Constitution also provides that sustainable development is one of the values
and principles of governance which bind all State organs, officials and any
person implementing public policy  The trans-boundary impact of environmental
pollutants has necessitated international cooperation in order to prevent,
minimise and mitigate pollution  substantial portion of the risks arise from
operations in the energy sector, amongst them construction of generation,
transmission and distribution infrastructure, disposal of hazardous waste,
handling and management of radioactive materials Several multilateral
environmental agreements/treaties have been developed globally with Kenya
ratifying and domesticating  number of them The Constitution provides that any
treaty or convention ratified by Kenya forms part of the Laws of Kenya It is
necessary to develop guidelines to ensure the application and compliance of the
relevant conventions in the energy sector  SUPPLY SIDE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
Coal Midstream Concerns in the coal industry include emissions which contribute
to global warming, acid rain and degradation of environment, among others
However, modern technologies among them the Clean Coal Technology (CCT) can be
applied to reduce pollution significantly Clean coal energy can be harnessed
chemically without combustion with air by capturing 99% of Carbon Dioxide
Renewable Energy  Generally, renewable energy for energy is considered an
environmentally development However, some concerns exist raising the need for
mitigation measures to be incorporated in projects to ensure minimal impact and
sustainability friendly option  Geothermal  Geothermal power generation involves
drawing fluids at high temperature from deep in the earth These fluids carry
mixture of gases and liquids which may contribute to global warming, acid rain,
noxious smells and ground water pollution if released on the surface  To
mitigate these, the plants are equipped with emission control systems to reduce
the exhaust In addition, the practice of re-injecting the fluids into the earth
for disposal and stimulation of reservoir also help to reduce environmental risk
Other mitigation measures include extraction of products for industrial use
Large Hydro  The major concern for hydros is the displacement of people and
wildlife where  reservoir is located Large reservoirs result in submersion of
extensive areas upstream, destroying ecologically rich and productive land,
riverine valley forests, marshland and grass land  Dams also have an impact on
aquatic ecosystems both upstream and downstream by disrupting the reproductive
cycle of, , fish whose spawning grounds are normally upstream Submerged
vegetation decomposes anaerobically producing methane,  potent greenhouse gas
Other risks of hydros include dam failure which may be caused by sabotage, or
structural failures, and siltation 70 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018
Appropriate mitigation measures should be adopted to counter these and other
potential negative effects  Biomass   supply-demand imbalance in the use of
biomass has negative environmental impact in the form of deforestation It has
been established that charcoal production leads to the depletion of woodlands in
Kenya This is mainly because of use of inefficient charcoal kilns In addition,
the cost of the raw material ( tree replacement) is generally not considered and
the wood is regarded as  free good  Electricity  The construction and operation
of electricity infrastructure have  direct impact on the quality of the
environment either by the emission or discharge of pollutants, poor waste
handling, or by changing the ecological systems The degree of pollution and
other ecological impacts are dependent upon the nature of the technology in use
as well as the size and the general location of the plant   health and safety
concern with electricity grid systems and consumer installations is the danger
of electrocution and electric shocks As result of this, available data for 2017
from ERC indicates that there has been 134 accidents/incidents out of which 88
were fatalities and 59 were personal injuries related to electrical accidents
Nuclear Energy  The global, traditional challenge of nuclear energy remains the
management of radioactive waste However, as  result of continued research in the
area, radioactive waste management is now well within manageable levels Spent
fuel rods can either be safely stored until the radioactive levels reduce to
non-toxic levels or be reprocessed and reused in generation of nuclear energy
The waste also requires special handling and storage facilities to reduce the
risk of exposure to employees, the public and the environment   nuclear meltdown
may cause release of radioactive materials which can have  negative impact to
environment, health and safety of persons However, further research has led to
development of advanced reactors with enhanced security and safety mechanisms
that greatly diminish the possibility of nuclear accidents  DEMAND SIDE
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS  Solid fuels or biomass fuels are less efficient than
oil, natural gas or propane It takes larger quantities of wood, peat or coal to
produce the same amount of energy and they produce larger quantities of smoke
when they burn Solid fuels produce less heat for the amount of fuel consumed and
produce more pollution This is described as the energy ladder  – LAND,
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 71 Figure:  - The Energy Pyramid1 - Efficiency of
Solid Fuel compared to other fuels  The solid fuels lead to increased indoor air
pollution which leads to Upper Respiratory Tract Infections (URTI) The challenge
is to move consumers up the energy ladder recognising that biomass, which is at
the bottom of energy ladder As at 2017 Biomass contribution to Kenya‘ final
energy demand is at 69%  Kerosene is widely used in households for lighting and
cooking In 2017 about 448 thousand cubic metres were used, up from 372 thousand
cubic metres consumed in However, this causes indoor air pollution leading to
cases of URTI, in addition to the risk of explosions of lamps and stoves leading
to injuries, loss of lives and property There is need to move consumers from the
consumption of kerosene to efficient renewable energy solutions like LPG or
natural gas and electricity  CLIMATE CHANGE ISSUES  Kenya is  signatory of the
Kyoto Protocol,  treaty signed in 1997, to lower anthropogenic emissions of
Carbon Dioxide (CO2) However, Kenya is not among the Annex  countries, which
have emission reduction targets since its emissions are low as seen in Table
which compares emissions from developed (Annex ) countries and MDCs and LDCs
However, under the protocol, there are opportunities to benefit by selling
Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) through the Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) Table  - Comparative Energy Indicators - Energy Consumption and Emissions
Category Country TPES/pop (toe/capita) TPES/GDP toe 2000 US$ Elec Cons/pop
kWh/capita CO2/TPES CO2/pop CO2/GDP kgCO2 US$ tCO2/toe tCO2/capita Developed USA
80 13 12,25 28 53 30 UK 78 07 23 16 99 15 Norway 71 06 23403 24 07 08 France 71
09 7043 18 37 10   72 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 MDC China 17 33 4047
04 59 01 India 65 37 859 43 58 90 Malaysia 83 26 4656 36 47 14 Indonesia 87 23
823 96 72 45 Africa South Africa 58 34 4148 01 17 02 MDC/ LDC Egypt 87 32 1254
50 17 80 Ghana 35 21 320 45 51 30 Kenya 55 48 169 56 31 27  TPES – Total
Primary Energy Supply  Pop – Population  MDCs – Middle Developing Countries 
LDCs – Least Developed Countries Source: Key World Energy Statistics, 2011,
International Energy Agency  Kenya also ratified the Paris Agreement under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on 28th December
Climate change action in Kenya is guided by the Climate Change Act of 2016 and
the National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 2018-Kenya, in its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) submitted to the UNFCCC in 2016, undertook to
abate greenhouse gas emissions by 30% (140MtCO2e) by  The NDC Sector Analysis
Report 2018 examined the energy sector and identified the prioritized actions
and their mitigation potential as shown in Table  below Table : Energy Sector
Prioritized Mitigation Action Sector/Sub-sector Energy Sector Prioritized
Mitigation Action Emission Reduction (tCO2e) Action up to 2022 Action up to 2030
Energy Supply/ Electricity Generation Developing new 2405 MW of grid-connected
renewable and retirement of three thermal plants by   generating electricity
Energy demand side Develop and distribute  million improved biomass stoves by
Develop and distribute  million clean energy (LPG, biogas and ethanol) stoves by
2022   Total sector emission reduction potential of the prioritized actions
Although Kenya has ratified the Kyoto Protocol, it has not benefited much from
the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) since potential projects have not been
developed or fully made operational Table  shows projects developed and
submitted for consideration under CDM  – LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 73
Table  - Projects Developed and Submitted for Consideration under CDM in Kenya
Estimated Annual Emission Reductions (‘000  CO2e) Project Type Investor/Buyer
Company Bagasse Cogeneration Project SonduMiriu Hydro Power Project Olkaria II
Geothermal Expansion Project Conversion of the Kipevu Open Cycle Gas Turbine to
Combined Cycle Operation Redevelopment of Tana Hydro Power Station Optimisation
of Kiambere Hydro Bagasse Cogeneration Project Olkaria  Expansion (140MW) Mumias
Sugar Company Japan Carbon Finance 591 Danish Carbon Fund (World Bank) Community
Development Fund (World Bank) KenGen 068 KenGen 026 Development Carbon Fund
(World Bank) KenGen 808 Development Carbon Fund (World Bank) Development Carbon
Fund (World Bank) KenGen 42,258 KenGen 758 Muhoroni Sugar Company Pioneer Carbon
(UK) 758 World Bank KenGen Source: NEMA 2017, Climate Change and CDM in Kenya
With these investments, on  scale of between 100 points (highest) and  points
(lowest) Kenya is rated to have an ‗adequate‘ climate for CDM investment It
however needs to move from ‗Satisfactory‘ to ‗Good‘ categories to improve
opportunities to attract investments  DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND MITIGATION
Natural disasters may be triggered by adverse weather and climate conditions,
whereas man-made disasters may be due to sabotage, human error or technological
failure Government therefore recognises the need to establish appropriate
disaster preparedness and mitigation mechanism within the energy and petroleum
sector  The following hazards are  constant threat that must be taken into
consideration in planning and management of the sector: () Climate and weather
hazards including floods and droughts () Geological hazards including
earthquakes, faults, volcanic eruptions, subsidence, landslides, blowouts and
mud flows () Environmental hazards including soil erosion, siltation and
desertification () Industrial accidents, oil spills, human negligence, sabotage
through terrorism and other deliberate acts and infrastructural systems failure
74 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  The challenges are mainly in setting up
and making operational disaster prevention, preparedness, management and
mitigation institutions This can be addressed through proper disaster
prevention, preparedness and management mechanisms and practices  LAND AND
SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACTS  Energy development projects have various impacts on
communities where the projects are implemented Key among these is economic and
physical displacement Physical displacement of people affected by the project is
prevalent in projects such as hydro power plants requiring water reservoirs,
petroleum and coal development, acquisition of way leaves during construction of
transmission lines and pipelines Others include the concern by local communities
that they will not benefit from these projects  CHALLENGES IN LAND, ENVIRONMENT,
HEALTH AND SAFETY  Inadequate review and update of physical plans and land use
Absence of  comprehensive and fair compensation mechanism  Vandalism of energy
infrastructure continues to cause adverse impact on security of supply  High
costs due to variation from the preferred land use required for development
Potential negative impact on the social, cultural or recreational life of
communities  Inadequate operational capacity for disaster prevention,
preparedness, management and mitigation  Low compliance with health, safety and
environmental laws and regulations  Absence of  national Resettlement Action
Plan Framework  Inadequate health, safety, environmental and quality laws to
regulate energy projects Low public awareness and sensitization in the
obligatory role of each individual in their right to  clean and safe environment
Inadequate human and technical capacity to handle EHS risks associated with
emerging areas such as upstream petroleum, coal and nuclear  – LAND,
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 75  POLICIES AND STRATEGIES FOR LAND,
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY  Land and Socio-Economic Issues Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Land and Socio-Economic Issues  Provide linkages with
provisions of the National Land Policy, which provide  framework for access,
planning, utilization and administration of land in the country   
Collaborate with the relevant agencies to review and set rates payable for
compensation in respect of damage caused by the energy and petroleum sector
players     Ensure compliance with the environmental laws on restoration  
 and decommissioning of projects  Collaborate with other land regulatory
agencies to ensure that energy and petroleum infrastructure corridors are
provided for in the national plan     Ensure enforcement of legal provisions
on encroachment and    obstruction of energy infrastructure  Develop and
enforce  legal and regulatory framework on    encroachment and trespass on
energy infrastructure  Develop and implement  national Resettlement Action Plan
   Framework for energy projects  Environment, Health and Safety Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Environment, Health and Safety  Develop and implement
legal and regulatory framework for    enforcement of environmental rights
Develop and implement  compliance mechanism for safety and    environmental
pollution  Develop and implement Strategic Environmental Assessment    (SEAs)
for the energy sector  Enforce compliance with business and operating standards
    Develop mechanism and strategies to empower consumers to    convert to
modern clean energy and technologies  Empower sector regulator through adequate
financial and human resource to facilitate their leadership in environmental,
health, safety and quality enforcement in the energy sector  Mainstream
ecosystem and biodiversity management in energy       sector  Develop and
enforce air quality laws and regulations in    collaboration with the
relevant agencies  Support establishment of vehicle emission, inspection and  
 maintenance programs 76 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Environment, Health and Safety Phase out the importation
of two stroke motorcycles    Continuously update and enforce standards for
supply of clean fuels the specifications and    Enforce emission standards in
energy production plants    Carry out public education sensitization
programmes on benefit    of clean fuels and well maintained vehicles Promote
the use of public transport and non-motorized transport    Provide incentives
for acquisition and use of fuel efficient    technologies in motor vehicles
Provide incentives for use of clean modern household energy to eliminate the use
of wood-fuel, charcoal and kerosene as an energy source    Provide incentives
for the uptake of renewable energy    technologies Enforce the regulatory
framework for wood fuel and commercial    woodlots production Spearhead the
national afforestation programme aimed at    increasing the national tree
cover percentage Support and promote conversion of cook stoves to uptake   
modern and clean fuels in households and institutions Ensure compliance with
international standards for nuclear plant siting, construction, operation,
decommissioning and waste to management managing the environmental, health and
safety risks    to ensure proactive preventive approach Support initiatives
and ensure proper coordination of all relevant    statutory authorities in
conservation of catchment areas Identify and map out water catchment areas
boundaries and    gazette them as protected areas Develop capacity to deal
with EHS risks associated with emerging sectors such as coal, nuclear, upstream
and midstream petroleum and gas     Climate Change Mitigation Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Climate Change Mitigation  Support the development and
implementation of the national    policy on climate change  Facilitate
capacity building for participation in international    climate change
negotiations  – LAND, ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SAFETY 77 Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Climate Change Mitigation  Formulate  collaborative framework for the
implementation of    climate change mitigation initiatives  Disaster
Preparedness, Prevention and Management Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term
Disaster Preparedness, Prevention and Management  Establish  Disaster
Preparedness, Prevention and Management (DPPM) Unit to spearhead response to
accidents and disasters in the energy sector     Establish  collaborative
framework of the (DPPM) Unit with the    National Disaster Operations Centre
(NDOC)  Undertake  risk assessment of the energy sector and    implement the
risk mitigation programmes  Undertake capacity building programmes   
Enforcement of legal and regulatory requirements     Develop and implement
disaster preparedness, prevention and    mitigation policy  Ensure compliance
with regulatory provisions on designated    parking lots for petroleum
tankers  Provide security for all energy and petroleum installations, which  
 shall be gazetted as national protected zones  Formulate  framework for
weather and climate data collection    and dissemination with the
Metrological department Establish and implement hazard monitoring systems in for
disaster    collaboration with other statutory authorities prevention and
mitigation 78 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  – DEVOLUTION AND PROVISION
OF ENERGY SERVICES  BACKGROUND  The Constitution has introduced significant
changes in the governance structures in the country, especially in relation to
administrative, resource allocation and service delivery functions It has
introduced two levels of government  the National and County Governments and
further provided for the distribution of functions and powers between the two
levels, inter alia, under Articles 185(), 186() and 187()  Kenya has been
divided into 47 counties as shown in Figure  The status and challenges of energy
resources as well as infrastructure and services in the counties are very
diverse Figure  – Kenya and its 47 Counties  As set out under Article 174 of the
Constitution, the objects of devolution of government are to: () Promote
democratic and accountable exercise of power () Foster national unity by
recognising diversity  – DEVOLUTION AND PROVISION OF ENERGY SERVICES 79 () Give
powers of self-governance to the people and enhance the participation of the
people in the exercise of the powers of the State and in making decisions
affecting them () Recognise the right of communities to manage their own affairs
and to further their development () Protect and promote the interests and rights
of minorities and marginalised communities () Promote social and economic
development and the provision of proximate, easily accessible services
throughout Kenya () Ensure equitable sharing of national and local resources
throughout Kenya () Facilitate the decentralisation of State organs, their
functions and services, from the capital of Kenya () Enhance checks and balances
and the separation of powers  Further, under Article 175, County Governments
established under the Constitution shall reflect the following main governance
principles: () County Governments shall be based on democratic principles and
the separation of powers () County Governments shall have reliable sources of
revenue to enable them to govern and deliver services effectively () No more
than two-thirds of the members of representative bodies in each county
government shall be of the same gender  It is  further requirement under Article
176 () that every County government decentralise its functions and the provision
of its services to the extent that it is efficient and practicable to do so
Under Article 202 (), the Constitution further requires that Revenue raised
nationally be shared equitably among the national and county governments Under
Article 202 (): County governments may be given additional allocations from the
national government‘ share of the revenue, either conditionally or
unconditionally  Article 191 provides for the resolution mechanisms and co-
operation arrangements where there are conflicts between national and county
laws in respect of matters falling within the concurrent jurisdiction of both
levels of government The proposed sharing of functions between the national and
county governments is discussed in section   Each County Government will have
Legislature and an Executive It is noted under Article , that although the two
levels of government are distinct and inter-dependent, they are required to
conduct their mutual relations on the basis of consultation and co-operation
DISTRIBUTION OF FUNCTIONS BETWEEN THE NATIONAL AND COUNTY GOVERNMENTS  The
Fourth Schedule of the Constitution allocates to the National Government the
functions of energy policy, including electricity and gas reticulation and
energy regulation, and to the County Governments the functions of county
planning and development, including electricity and gas reticulation and energy
regulation 80 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, there is  possibility of operational uncertainty as to the extent of
responsibility between the two levels of governments This section provides
framework to guide the two levels of government on their respective functions
Functions of the National Government  Policy Formulation and Integrated National
Energy Planning Formulation of the National Energy Policy ) Preparation of
Integrated National Energy Plan, incorporating, coal, renewable energy and
electricity master plans ) Provision of land and rights of way for energy
infrastructure )  Energy Regulation Regulation and licensing of importation,
transportation, storage of coal for the purposes of electricity generation )
Regulation and licensing of production, conversion, distribution, supply,
marketing and use of renewable energy ) Regulation and licensing of generation,
importation, exportation, transmission, distribution, retail and use of
electrical energy ) Approval of energy purchase agreements as well as network
service and common user facility contracts ) Protection of consumer, investor
and other stakeholder interests ) Preparation and enforcement of regulations and
standards ) Formulation of national codes for energy efficiency and conservation
in buildings ) Issuance of energy saving certificates to enhance energy
efficiency and conservation ) Setting, review and adjustment of energy tariffs
and tariff structures ) Resolution of complaints and disputes between parties
over any matter in the energy sector ) Prosecution of offences created under the
Energy Act ) Certification of electrical workers and contractors, solar system
installation technicians and contractors )  Energy Operations and Development
Generation importation and exportation, of coal, geothermal and other energy
based natural resources ) Transportation and storage of coal ) Generation,
transmission, distribution (including reticulation) and retail of electrical
energy ) Collect and maintain energy data ) Implementation of electrification
programme fund the rural electrification programme and management of the rural )
– DEVOLUTION AND PROVISION OF ENERGY SERVICES 81 Undertake feasibility studies
and maintain data with  view to availing the same to developers of energy
resources and infrastructure ) Provide technical and other capacity building
support to county governments ) Administration and management of the Sovereign
Wealth Fund, the Consolidated Energy Fund and the National Energy Conservation
Fund ) Providing security for energy infrastructure including power plants,
control centres, electric supply lines and substations )  Functions of the
County Governments  County Energy Planning Preparation of county energy plans,
incorporating coal, renewable energy and electricity master plans ) Physical
planning relating to energy resource areas such as dams, solar and wind farms,
municipal waste dumpsites, agricultural and animal waste, ocean energy, woodlots
and plantations for production of bio-energy feed-stocks ) Provision of land and
rights of way for energy infrastructure ) Facilitation of energy demand by
planning for industrial parks and other energy consuming activities )
Preparation and implementation of disaster management plans )  County Energy
Regulation Regulation and licensing of retail supply of coal products )
Regulation and licensing of biomass and charcoal producers, transporters and
distributers ) Customize national codes for energy efficiency and conservation
in buildings to local conditions )  County Energy Operations and Development
Electricity and gas reticulation ) Provide and maintain adequate street lighting
) Collect and maintain energy data ) Implementation of county electrification
projects ) Undertake feasibility studies and maintain data with  view to
availing the same to developers of energy resources and infrastructure )
Establishment of energy centres for promotion of renewable energy technologies,
energy efficiency and conservation ) Security of energy infrastructure including
power plants, control centres, electric supply lines and substations ) 82
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  – ENERGY FINANCING, PRICING AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC ISSUES  BACKGROUND  The funding required for the energy sector is
substantial New investments are needed for exploration, utilization, generation,
transmission and distribution activities Long-term financing options that
involve both foreign and domestic financing resources are required However,
foreign investment capital and national foreign earnings provide the greater
proportion of needed funds  The Government shall continue to encourage private
sector investment in the energy sector  Experience has shown that Independent
Power Producers (IPPs) require incentives to mitigate the perceived political
and economic risks  CHALLENGES  Inadequate funding for the energy sector  Low
foreign investment from  highly competitive international finance market  High
initial capital outlay for energy projects  Inadequate institutional capacity to
negotiate energy contracts  Inadequate local content in energy projects  Foreign
exchange fluctuations  Unpredictable fiscal regime  POLICIES AND STRATEGIES
Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Energy Financing  Explore and adopt all
viable financing options from local and international sources to ensure cost
effective utilization of all locally available energy resources     Create
competitive and predictable investment climate in the    country to attract
investments in the energy sector  Provide adequate fiscal incentives for energy
resource and    infrastructure development () to attract investment in energy
infrastructure across the    country; () for renewable energy projects to
reduce reliance on    petroleum based energy in the long term; () to
encourage adoption of clean and efficient coal    technologies  Develop
fiscal legislation to encourage efficient technologies    and discourage
inefficient technologies  Dedicate not less than two percent of the income from
energy research, development and    to support training, sector demonstration
– ENERGY FINANCING, PRICING AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES 83 Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Energy Financing  Ensure  reasonable return on investments through
cost-    reflective pricing  Develop adequate infrastructural facilities to
enterprises    involved in the development of the energy sector  Liaise with
the National Treasury the internationalization of Kenya‘ Capital Market by
encouraging financial instruments and stocks of Kenya' energy corporate units to
be quoted in international financial markets to attract foreign portfolio
investment capital to enhance     Expand the scope of venture capital
financing to include    investments in the energy sector Review the relevant
legislations to provide fiscal incentives in    the energy sector Provide
letters of comfort to private investors and letters of    guarantee to state
corporations Continuously engage development partners to establish financial
facilities for financing energy related projects at minimal interest rates
especially for renewable energy and energy efficiency projects    Seek
financing of clean energy projects through carbon credits under clean
development mechanism and other financing associated with clean energy   
Package attractive investment instruments which will be appealing to alternative
investors such as savings and co- operative societies, pension schemes and
venture capitalists Support and encourage Public Private Partnership as provided
for in the PPP Act, 2013 to facilitate private sector participation financing,
construction, development, operation and in maintenance of energy resource or
infrastructure projects, including development of infrastructure for strategic
petroleum reserves and power generation projects       Mobilise funds for
strategic petroleum stocks through government appropriation, development
partners, international financial institutions and strategic stocks bonds   
CONSOLIDATED ENERGY FUND  The Government shall set up  Consolidated Energy Fund
to cater for the following:- () Operations of the Energy Institute () Operations
of the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Agency () Assist in energy sector
environmental disaster mitigation, response and recovery 84 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018 () Hydro risk mitigation during times of prolonged drought
() Water towers conservation programmes () Promotion of renewable energy
initiatives, including pre-feasibility studies () Decommissioning of energy
infrastructure ()  mechanism for price stabilization  Sources of money for this
fund will include: () Penalties and fines relating to offences in the energy
sector as levied by ERC and the Energy Tribunal () Contribution from energy
sector players () Contribution from sovereign wealth fund () Contribution from
Treasury other than funds provided to public institutions for the discharge of
their mandates () Funds raised through the stock market (bonds and bills) ()
Recovered assets from proceeds of corruption and economic crimes in the energy
sector () Support from development partners () Contribution from consumers
ENERGY PRICING AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES  Energy Pricing Electricity
Electricity pricing is based on the principles of Long Run Marginal Cost (LRMC)
of supply The end- user-tariff incorporates all prudent costs in the value chain
and  fair return to the investors The bulk tariffs are negotiated between
producers and the off-taker, however, the Power Purchase Agreement is subject to
approval by the Commission The retail tariffs are regulated by the Commission
and may be subject to review at least every three years  Fuel costs and exchange
rates gains/losses are pass-through costs in the current regime These account
for power cost variations in the event of fluctuation in the international crude
oil prices as well as volatility for the Kenya shilling against foreign
currencies, mainly the US dollar  Other costs that affect electricity prices
include steam charges, hydro water charges, charges imposed by the Kenya
Wildlife Service (KWS), Kenya Forest Service (KFS) for lease of land for wind
and geothermal project developments, and charges imposed by regional development
authorities  – ENERGY FINANCING, PRICING AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES 85  Household
Energy Consumption Patterns  There are two main models used to explain household
energy allocation behaviour These are the fuel stacking and fuel ladder models
as shown in Figure   The fuel stacking model shows that as people become richer,
they may be expected to move from traditional biomass fuels to more advanced and
less polluting fuels ( from wood to charcoal, kerosene, and then to gas)  The
fuel ladder model postulates that fuel switching is mainly observed when there
is significant increase in income The fuel stacking model is where  household
use multiple fuels In this model, households continue to use more than one fuel
as income increases Figure  Fuel Stacking and Fuel Ladder Models  In  survey on
consumption patterns in Kenya, it was revealed that in Kenya, consumers engage
in Fuel stacking rather than Fuel switching (KIPPRA, 2009)  The challenge is to
move consumers up the energy ladder Biomass, which is at the bottom of the
energy ladder, provides 60% of cooking energy needs in Kenya  Although price is
major influence in the choice taken, other factors that also influence the
preferred type of energy include income, fuel quality, convenience,
accessibility and availability The prices of conventional energy resources,
which are subject to structured commercial supply/demand markets, include the
cost of production plus profit margins and an array of taxes Traditional energy
resources such as wood fuel are often priced in an informal, less structured
market Thus, prices may only reflect the cost of extraction (labour) and
transportation The cost of the raw material ( tree replacement) is generally not
considered 86 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  Policies and Strategies
Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Energy Pricing and Socio-economic issues
Ensure that tariffs and charges are prudent, cost effective and set in
coordinated manner in consultation with relevant stakeholders     Ensure that
energy projects are completed on time to ensure security of supply and increased
access by consumers  The Government shall undertake to maintain  controlling
stake in the sector and link the economic policy with the energy policy    
   Provide incentives to encourage production and use of    modern energy
sources  Develop  framework to ensure implementation of local    content in
the energy sector  Develop  framework to ensure local communities benefit   
from energy investment in their regions  – ENERGY FINANCING, PRICING AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC ISSUES 87  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES  LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
Background  robust legal and regulatory framework is important for effective
implementation and management of energy and petroleum policies in the country
Challenges  Legal and regulatory framework for the sector that is not aligned to
the Constitution  Outdated and fragmented laws governing the energy sector
Overlap of roles and functions of institutions in the energy sector  Lack of
benefits sharing mechanisms and uncoordinated management of energy resources
Inadequate penalties for offences in the sector  Disjointed legal and regulatory
frameworks governing operation of government institutions that impact the
operations of institutions within the sector  Inadequate powers of the Energy
Tribunal due to contradictions in the Energy Act  Privatisation of strategic
state-owned enterprises in the energy sector  Policies and Strategies Short Term
Medium Term  Long Term  Legal and Regulatory Framework  Review and align the
energy sector legal and regulatory  framework with the Constitution
Incorporate provisions in legislation that will ensure that: () All the public
institutions in the energy sector adopt the requirements on national values and
   Constitutional principles under Article () All necessary and applicable
general rules of international law affecting the energy sector under Article ()
of the Constitution are complied with    () All ratified treaties and
international conventions affecting the energy sector under Article () of the
Constitution are adhered to    () Consumer rights as is provided for under
Article 46 of the    Constitution are protected () Where efficient
alternative cheaper modes of transport with adequate carrying capacity exist,
long distance road transport shall not be allowed    88 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018 Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Legal and Regulatory
Framework ()  prudent energy efficiency and conservation programme is developed
and implemented across the energy value chain     Review the institutional
mandates of the various public institutions in the energy sector to streamline
their respective mandates, businesses and operations     Enhance the
jurisdiction of the Energy Tribunal in the new    legislation  Enhance
penalties for offences in the energy sector; by providing minimum sentences and
classifying these offences as economic crimes     Provide and create
additional legal safeguards on utilization of land, environment and natural
resources critical to the development of energy infrastructure and service
provision  Provide appropriate mechanisms for access to information that also
protects the principle of confidentiality as provided under Articles 33 and 35
of the Constitution collaboration        Establish relevant stakeholders
to ensure coordination at policy, regulatory and operational levels on matters
relating to development of energy resources inter-ministerial of     Support
and encourage community policing initiatives to curb    vandalism of energy
infrastructure Ban scrap metal trade to deter vandalism    Retain ownership
and control of strategic energy sector    enterprises In cases where best
industry practices are adopted, efforts shall be made to align them with
existing legal framework     INTEGRATED ENERGY PLANNING  Background
Sessional Paper No  of 2004 identified the need to integrate energy planning
with the national economic, social and environmental policies, as energy are
critical input in the social economic progress of any economy At the sector
level, there are close linkages between the various forms of energy, which
necessitates integrated planning  The Energy Act, No 12 of 2006 assigned the
responsibility for development of indicative national energy plans to the Energy
Regulatory Commission In 2009, ERC established  committee with responsibility
for preparation of the Least Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP) in the
electricity sub-sector Planning committees for the petroleum, coal and renewable
energy subsectors, as well as one for the integrated energy planning are yet to
be established  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 89  Challenges  Inadequate structures and
systems for integrated planning and monitoring implementation of planned
projects  Inadequate capacity to carry out integrated energy planning  Lack of
petroleum and renewable energy master plans  Inadequate databases for all energy
forms  Weak linkages with other sectors of the economy  Delays in project
implementation due to cumbersome procurement process, financing challenges,
court action and poor governance  Occasional shortages or disruptions in supply
of petroleum products  Occasional power rationing and poor quality of supply, as
well as frequent power interruptions  Conflicting and competing interests
between various sub-sectors of the economy with regard to development and
utilization of energy resources Lack of coordination of planning between the
national and county governments Duplication of efforts leading to inefficient
allocation and utilization of scarce public resources  Policies and Strategies
Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Integrated Energy Planning  Establish
structures and systems for integrated sectoral planning and monitoring
implementation of planned projects  Develop adequate human resource capacity to
carry out       integrated energy planning  Collect and maintain data for
all energy forms     Strengthen linkages and synergy with other sectors of
the    economy  Establish framework for monitoring and evaluation of the  
 implementation of energy projects  Develop systems that ensure security and
reliability in    provision of energy services products  Ensure
implementation of the integrated energy master plan     Ensure that all
projects under the integrated energy master plan are implemented through
competitive bidding processes  Government may implement strategic energy
projects through State Corporations or PPP arrangements where necessary    
  90 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  RESEARCH AND HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT  Background Research and Development (&) as well as human resource
capacity development enhancement are key to the development of the energy sector
Challenges  Inadequate research, development and demonstration in the energy
sector  Inadequate funding for &  Inadequate promotion of local content
development in the energy sector  Weak linkages between the energy sector and
academia  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Research
and Development  Establish  Energy Institute to undertake training, research,
development, dissemination, nurture talent, innovation and to enhance capacity
building in the sector     Encourage energy sector entities to allocate
adequate    resources for research and human resource development  Promote
local, regional and international participation in technology-oriented    in
research activities, particularly research  Enhance research linkages between
industries and    academia  Ensure that institutions that provide human
capital development to build knowledge and technical capacity in the sector are
duly licensed and that their training programs are accredited for quality
assurance purposes     GENDER, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS
Background  Access to clean and reliable energy services products constitutes an
important prerequisite for fundamental determinants of human development,
contributing, inter alia, to economic activity, income generation, poverty
alleviation, health, education, gender equality and environmental safety  Youth
and persons with special needs have rights and entitlements enshrined in the
Constitution Gender inclusiveness must be incorporated in all Government
appointments, including Government institutions  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 91
Challenges  Imbalances in gender, youth and persons with special needs in
various positions in energy institutions  Inadequate implementation of policy on
gender, youth and persons with special needs mainstreaming  Inadequate public
awareness on the adverse health effects of use of wood-fuel and kerosene on
women and children  Inability to access and afford modern and clean energy
Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Gender, Youth and
Person with Special Needs  The Government shall comply with Article 27() of the
   Constitution  Mainstream gender, youth and persons with special needs
issues in energy policy formulation, planning, production, distribution and use
    Undertake public education and awareness on the benefits of    using
clean and modern services of energy  Undertake measures to make clean and modern
energy    services affordable and accessible  POLICY IMPLEMENTATION,
MONITORING AND EVALUATION  Background Effective monitoring and evaluation are
critical to the implementation of energy sector programmes and projects
Challenges  Lack of energy policy monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
Incomplete implementation of past energy policies  Policies and Strategies Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Policy Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation
Formulate  monitoring and evaluation framework for this    policy  Formulate
monitoring and evaluation framework for energy    programmes and projects 92
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018  DATA COLLECTION, MANAGEMENT AND
DISSEMINATION  Background Energy data is critical for strategic policies and
planning in the sector Integrity of the data must be maintained through
appointment of  single point of data collection, verification, compilation and
dissemination  Challenge Lack of an integrated mechanism for data collection,
management and dissemination  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Data Collection, Management and Dissemination  Enhance the capacity
of the central planning unit at the ministry to collect, maintain and
disseminate energy data  Ensure that the energy data is disseminated through the
      website of the ministry on  quarterly basis  SHARING OF BENEFITS
FROM ENERGY RESOURCES  Background  Article 62 () of the Constitution provides
that all natural resources are vested in the national government in trust for
the people of Kenya, while Article 202 () states that revenue raised nationally
shall be shared equitably among various levels of government  Some of the
benefits accruing from the exploitation of energy resources include profits,
training, employment, technology transfer and CSR programmes Article 66() of the
Constitution requires that investments in property shall benefit the local
communities and their economies  Challenges Lack of  clear framework for sharing
of benefits from exploitation of energy resources with the local communities  –
CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 93  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term  Long
Term  Sharing of Benefits from Energy Resources  The Government shall develop
and implement  legislative framework to ensure equitable sharing of benefits
accruing from the exploitation of energy resources between the local national
government, county government and community    the  The government shall put
in place transparent mechanism for the allocation of energy revenues raised by
the national and the county governments for the benefits of people of Kenya  
  LOCAL CONTENT  Background  All energy resources found in Kenya belong to all
citizens of the country and need to be exploited, developed and managed in
manner that benefits all Kenyans  As  developing economy, the country needs to
put appropriate policies in place to capture and retain value created from
energy resources to stimulate employment, entrepreneurship, value addition,
diversification, transfer of technology and knowledge across the value chain and
economy  Challenges  Absence of local content development policy  Inadequate
legislation for technology and knowledge transfer  Inadequate development of
local skills and know-how in the exploitation of natural resources and
infrastructure development  Inadequate legislative requirements for
collaboration between foreign investors in the energy sector and the local
investors  Absence of legislative framework to prioritise utilization of locally
available goods and services  Policies and Strategies Short Term  Medium Term
Long Term  Local Content  The government shall develop and implement local
content    policy  The government to develop and implement education
framework for human capital development to build knowledge and technical
capacity in the energy sectors     Establish capacity building programmes in
conjunction with local industry associations, local training institutions and
international institutions    94 NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Short
Term  Medium Term  Long Term  Local Content  The government to develop and
implement legislation for    energy industry linkages for capacity building
The government to develop and legislative framework to prioritise the
utilization of locally available goods, services and human resources implement 
   Government shall ensure the investors and contractors in energy sector
comply with local content requirements as specified in the policy and
legislation     Government shall establish  local content development and  
 monitoring unit  COMMUNITY ENGANGEMENTS, EXPECTATIONS AND CONFLICTS
Background The discovery of various natural resources in the country
particularly those related to energy sector such as geothermal, oil, gas and
coal has resulted in high expectations, confrontations and conflicts among
communities where these resources have been discovered Potential conflicts and
social unrest associated with exploitation of these resources can cause costly
delays to projects and operations In some cases, these situations can lead to
loss of lives and livelihoods among local populations, employees or contractors,
and bring about profound developmental set-backs  Challenges  Absence of
sustained engagements by the government  Inadequate laws and regulations that
promote waste management in the energy sector  Lack of enforcement of
environment, health and safety laws and regulations  Lack of pro-active and
sustained awareness and sensitization of public about timelines for exploitation
of energy resources  Land use conflict  Lack of civic and constitutional rights
at the grass-root levels  Inadequate of government driven mechanisms for
addressing and responding to conflicts and social unrests surrounding
exploitation of energy resources  Uncoordinated framework between the investors
and the communities  Inadequate implementation of communication policy and
strategy for stakeholders‘ engagement and consultation in energy sector  – CROSS
CUTTING ISSUES 95  Policies and Strategies Community engagements, expectations
and conflicts Short Term  Medium Term  Long Term   The government shall develop
and implement  legislative framework for pro-active and sustained engagement
with the governments, investors and communities in energy resource areas   
The government to develop and implement awareness programmes for the communities
to enhance constructive engagements process     The government to put in
place mechanisms to ensure that environment, health and safety compliance audits
are regularly carried out     The government to develop and laws and
regulations to govern waste disposal and management from energy resources
implement     The government to develop and implement  monitoring and
evaluation mechanism on regular reporting on stakeholders consultations    96
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Table Energy Generation Potential in
Floriculture Industry District Potential Energy Generation (/yr) Capacity (kW)
Nakuru 35,741 ,160 Thika ,935 ,040 Kiambu ,148 ,632 Kajiado ,552 ,496 Laikipia
,170 952 Nyandarua ,170 952 Meru ,574 816 Gatundu ,383 544 Machakos ,383 544
Nyeri ,383 544 Trans Nzoia ,383 544 Athi River ,787 408 Other ,150 ,220 Total
88,758 19,852 Source: Updated Rural Electrification Master Plan, 2009 Table
2Biogas Potential from Sisal Production Company Generation Potential Capacity*
(/yr) Rea Vipingo  ,750 DWA Estate Ltd  10,500 Taita Estate  12,600 Mogotio
Plantations 1080- ,300 Kilifi Plantations  ,750 Tabu Estate Ltd  ,750 Voi Sisal
Estate  700 Note: *Assuming 12 to 16 hours full load Source: Updated Rural
Electrification Master Plan  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 97 Table Nuclear electricity
generation figures around the world Nuclear Share in Electricity Production
Under Construction Country In Operation Percentage % Number Elec Expected Output
(MW) 25 - - 1340 ,906 - Number Electricity Generation (MW) 1635 375 ,918 ,884
,926 13554   - -   - Argentina Armenia Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Canada China
19  13  27,230 ,600 44  40614 ,982  Mainland  Taiwan  -   - -  - ,600 ,630 - -
4824 Czech Republic Finland France Germany Hungary India   58   22 ,930 ,769
63,130 20,339 , 889 6255     - -  -   - - - - -  -  ,653 ,360 - - 2028 - 4573
880 - - - - - 2070 - 2234 Japan Korea Republic Mexico Netherlands Pakistan
Romania Russia Slovakian Republic Slovenia South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland
Ukraine United Kingdom USA 42 24     37       15 15 98 3975222494 ,552 482 1318
,300 28264 ,814 688 ,860 ,121 8612 ,333 13,107 8918 99333 TOTAL 55,859 451
365,837 Source: Table collated from IAEA database, July 2017 98 NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY, October 2018 Figure - Nuclear Power Programme Milestones (Adopted from
International Atomic Energy Agency)  – CROSS CUTTING ISSUES 99 ACRONYMS AND
GLOSSARY OF TERMS ACRONYMS AGO Automotive Gas Oil (Diesel) BTU British Thermal
Units CCTs Clean Coal Technology CAPEX Capital Expenditure CBE Cross Border
Electrification CCGT Combined Cycle Gas Turbine CEEC Centre for Energy
Efficiency and Conservation CNG Compressed Natural Gas CRA Commission for
Revenue Allocation DPK Dual Purpose Kerosene EAC East African Community EAPP
Eastern Africa Power Pool EHS Environment, Health and Safety ERC Energy
Regulatory Commission ESI Electricity Supply Industry FiT Feed in Tariff FY
Financial Year GDC Geothermal Development Company Limited GDP Gross Domestic
Product GHG Green House Gases GoK Government of Kenya GWh Giga Watt Hour IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency IPPs Independent Power Producers KEBS Kenya
Bureau of Standards KenGen Kenya Electricity Generating Company Limited KETRACO
Kenya Electricity Transmission Company Limited KIPPRA Kenya Institute of Public
Policy Research and Analysis KIRDI Kenya Industrial Research &Development
Institute KNEB Kenya Nuclear Electricity Board koe Kilogrammes of Oil Equivalent
KPLC Kenya Power and Lighting Company Limited KR Kenya Railways 100 NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 KRA Kenya Revenue Authority kV kilo Volts KVA kilo
Volt Ampere kWh kilo Watt Hour LCPDP Least Cost Power Development Plan LNG
Liquefied Natural Gas LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas LRMC Long Run Marginal Cost
Ministry Ministry of Energy MMBTU Million British Thermal Units MMCFD Million
Cubic Feet per Day MoE Ministry of Energy MoU Memorandum of Understanding MSD
Medium Speed Diesel MTPA Million Tonnes Per Annum MW Mega Watt MWe Megawatt
Electric NEMA National Environmental Management Authority NGO Non-Governmental
Organization PPA Power Purchase Agreement PPP Public Private Partnership PV
Photo Voltaic RD& Research, Development and Dissemination REA Rural
Electrification Authority REP Rural Electrification Programme RERC Rural
Electrification and Renewable Energy Corporation RMS Regular Motor Spirit SMR
Small and medium sized reactor SAPP Southern Africa Power Pool ToE Tonnes of Oil
Equivalent VAT Value Added Tax Wp Watt Peak ACRONYMS AND GLOSSARY OF TERMS 101
GLOSSARY OF TERMS Conservation includes preservation, maintenance, sustainable
use and restoration of natural and cultural environment Consumer means any
person supplied or entitled to be supplied with electrical energy, oil, gas or
coal but does not include  person supplied with electrical energy, oil, gas or
coal for delivery or supply to another person Dispatch means the process of
precisely matching the outputs of generators with load in real time in
accordance with clause  of the Kenya electricity grid code of Distribution means
the conveyance of electrical energy through  distribution system Distribution
area in relation to  distribution network service provider means the area in
which the distribution network provider is licensed to distribute electricity
under the energy Act Distribution network means  network which is not
transmission network Distribution system means  distribution network together
with the connection assets associated with the distribution network, which is
connected to another transmission or distribution system Energy disaster
preparedness and management committee means the committee established under the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for energy to deal with disasters in the energy
sector Energy industry means the sector with fossil fuels (oil, gas and coal),
renewable energy and electrical energy as three key sources of primary and
secondary energy Electricity industry means the industry in Kenya involved in
the generation, transmission, distribution, retail and sale of electricity
Fossil fuels mean oil, gas and coal as primary sources of energy Generating
station means any station generating electricity, including any buildings and
plant used for the purpose, and site thereof, but does not include any station
for transforming (other than generator transformer), converting or distributing
electrical energy High Voltage (HV) means  nominal voltage above 33 kilovolts
Independent Power Producers (IPP) means electric power producers who sell their
outputs to public electricity suppliers under contracts often life-of-plant
contracts Local community means  sub-county in which  natural resource is
exploited Local Content means the use of Kenyan local expertise, goods and
services, people, businesses and financing for the systematic development of
national capacity and capabilities for the enhancement of the Kenyan economy Low
voltage (LV) means  nominal voltage less than  kilovolt Medium voltage (MV)
means  nominal voltage of more than  kilovolt but not more than 33 kilovolts 102
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY, October 2018 Net metering system means  system that
operates in parallel with the electrical distribution facilities of  public
utility and measures, by means of one or more meters, the amount of electrical
energy that is supplied It is an incentive for consumers of electrical energy to
sell renewable energy generated electricity to  retailer or distributor as the
case may be Reticulation means planning and construction of the network used to
supply energy to  consumer, and in the case of: () electricity, it is the
planning and construction of the network consisting of low and medium voltage
electric supply lines together with service lines to enable  consumer to get
supply of electricity () gas, it is the system through which  consumer gets
continuous supply of gas at the turn of  tap through  piping network or from
centralised storage system Retail means— () selling or offering to sell energy
to  consumer; () acting as agent or broker for  retailer with respect to the
sale or offering for sale of energy; or () acting or offering to act as an agent
or broker for  consumer with respect to the sale or offering for sale of energy
System Operator means  person appointed in accordance with the energy Act to
exercise system control over the power system Transmission means activities
pertaining to  transmission network including the conveyance of electricity
Transmission network service provider means  person who engages in the activity
of owning, controlling or operating  transmission system Use of system charges
means charges for use of the transmission or distribution system for the
movement of electrical energy, and includes wheeling charges ACRONYMS AND
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 103