DP/DCP/CPV//Add United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme and of the United Nations Population Fund Distr: General  August 2005
English Original: French Second regular session for 2005 - September 2005, New
York Items  and  of the provisional agenda Country programmes and related
matters Draft common country programme document for Cape Verde () Addendum UNDP
results matrix Summary This addendum to the draft common country programme
document for Cape Verde contains the results of matrices which refer solely to
the UNDP portion of the common country programme  () 240805 250805 *0545119*
Agency-specific results matrix: UNDP          /  /    / Country programme
outcomes/outputs Resource estimates (United States dollars) / Country programme
impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners Democratic
governance National priority: Promote good governance, strengthen effectiveness
and ensure equity so that Cape Verde can continue its progress towards
sustainable levels of development   UNDAF impact: National institutions enforce
policies based on  human rights- and equity-based approach in order to ensure
good governance and enable the country to graduate from the group of least
developed countries (LDC)  Programme to support the country’ strategy for smooth
transition from the LDC group  Institutions and population groups define and
implement appropriate strategies to consolidate socio- economic gains in the
context of the country’ graduation from the group of least developed countries
(LDC)  Capacities of national institutions responsible for implementing the
strategy for LDC graduation are strengthened and appropriate resources are
mobilized (organization of sectoral round tables, international negotiation,
sharing of experience) Number of agreements negotiated United Nations agencies,
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: financial and/or technical
support TRAC: 400 000 DSS: 150 000 Resources mobilized Cost-sharing
arrangements: 800 000 Staffing enhanced DGCI: executing agency TTF-DG: 100 000
NGOs/CSOs: implementing agencies Netherlands, World Bank, EU, IMF, ADB:
budgetary aid and technical support  Capacities for management and coordination
of international aid and awareness of new resource transfer modalities are
strengthened Rate of implementation of aid according to new transfer modalities
Portugal, Luxembourg, USA (MCA): various financing (cost-sharing and/or parallel
financing arrangements) Proportion of budgetary aid in country assistance  The
strategy for communication on the outcome of transition is established Number of
communications produced Country programme outcomes/outputs Resource estimates
(United States dollars) Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs
Outcome indicators Role of partners TRAC: 250 000 United Nations agencies:
financial and/or technical support Degree of citizen satisfaction in relation to
the functioning of State institutions  The country’ public administration
responds more effectively to citizens’ needs (capacity- building, civic centres)
Programme to support major State reforms and capacity-building in public bodies
Cost-sharing arrangements: 150 000 DGCI, DGAP, National Assembly, DGAE, CNE:
executing agencies TTF-DG: 100 000 Level of implementation of State reforms
NGOs/CSOs: implementing agencies Number of draft laws adopted  The Parliament is
closer to citizens and works more effectively in its legislative activities and
the monitoring of Government actions Luxembourg, Portugal, EU, USA, Austria,
France, ADB: various financing (cost-sharing and/or parallel financing
arrangements) Frequency of parliamentary questions to Government on topical
matters  The strengthened electoral system and processes become more
participatory Rate of participation in elections Number of local government
officials trained  National institutions ensure application of gender equality
and equity in the political, economic, social and cultural fields  Programme to
support the promotion of decentralized authorities and local governance United
Nations agencies, UNODC, IFAD: financial and/or technical support TRAC: 200 000
Management capacities of local communities are strengthened Cost-sharing
arrangements: 100 000 TTF-DG: 100 000 Percentage of the budget allocated to
social sectors approved by the municipal council DGCI, DGAL, CNDH, CCCD, POP,
PJ, Ministry of Defence, MAI: executing agencies  Allocation of municipal
budgetary resources and monitoring of their use are conducted with citizen
participation in order to enhance spending in social sectors and those related
to childhood         /  /    Rate of spending in municipal budgets allocated to
the social sector / NGOs/CSOs, municipalities: implementing agencies / EU,
Austria, France, Portugal: various financing     Country programme
outcomes/outputs         /  /    Resource estimates (United States dollars) /
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of
partners / TRAC: 350 000 Variation in the crime rate  Strengthening of the
capacities of national institutions responsible for combating drug abuse and
ensuring the security of persons and goods  Programme to support strengthening
of the rule of law, protection of the security of persons and goods, gender
equity and the defence of citizens’ fundamental rights DSS: 50 000 Number of
anti-drug trafficking operations carried out Cost-sharing arrangements: 250 000
Degree of citizen satisfaction in relation to the protection of their rights
Strengthening of the capacities of the State and civil society for the promotion
and protection of human rights  Development and strengthening of the capacities
of national institutions responsible for implementing the National Gender Equity
and Equality Plan Gender-adjusted Human Development Index (HDI)  Application of
the legal framework in order to better satisfy demand for gender equity and
equality Gender-related laws adopted and implemented  National institutions
promote development of the information society throughout the country  Programme
to support national strategy on information and communication technology for
development  Strengthening of the capacities of national institutions
responsible for implementing the national -governance plan Level of
implementation of the national -governance plan United Nations agencies, ITU:
financial and/or technical support TRAC: 250 000 Cost-sharing arrangements: 100
000 DGCI, NOSI, ICT, MIT, INE: executing agencies TTF-DG: 100 000 Country
programme outcomes/outputs Resource estimates (United States dollars) Country
programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners
NGOs/CSOs: implementing agencies Level of popular information and education on
NICTs  Development of education and information programmes for the new
information and communication technologies (NICTs) EU, Austria, France: various
financing         /  /    / /     Country programme outcomes/outputs         /
/    Resource estimates (United States dollars) / Country programme impacts
Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners / Combating
poverty National priority: Reducing extreme poverty and hunger; promoting socio-
economic rights to combat hunger (PRSP)  UNDAF impact: The most vulnerable
communities are included and are parties to the country’ socio-economic
development process   The most vulnerable population groups are integrated into
development mechanisms through appropriate policies and programmes  Programme to
support strategies for national development, poverty reduction and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  The PRSP/MDG monitoring
system and the national statistical system are operational United Nations
agencies: financial and/or technical support TRAC: 110 000 Output monitoring and
assessment reports Cost-sharing arrangements: 200 000 PRSP updated/reviewed
DGCI, DGP, INE: executing agencies TTF-: 150 000 Number of legislative measures
for access to basic infrastructures and food products  Updating and review of
the PRSP Chamber of Commerce, municipalities, producers’ associations:
implementing agencies  Adoption of policies to facilitate improved access to
basic commodities Rate of access to micro- credit (gender/locality) World Bank,
ADB: various financing Number of legal provisions to improve access to land for
the poor  Programme to strengthen the participation of vulnerable population
groups in economic development  The national micro- credit system is functional
United Nations agencies, ILO: financial and/or technical support TRAC: 325 000
Cost-sharing arrangements: 20 000 Number of persons receiving training
(gender/age/locality)  Policies on land access strategy are implemented MTS,
DGAEA, ME, IEFP, DGDT: executing agencies TTF-: 150 000 Number of projects
implemented by  pool of associations, and number of volunteers in community
organizations  Improving access to the labour market for the poorest population
groups NGOs/CSOs, Micro- credit Federation: implementing agencies Austria,
Portugal, USA (MCA), ADB, ACBF: various financing  Improved capacities for
involvement in economic development for community and volunteer organizations
Country programme outcomes/outputs Resource estimates (United States dollars)
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of
partners TRAC: 400 000 Rate of creation of micro-activities and entrepreneurship
United Nations agencies, FAO, ILO: financial and/or technical support
Implementation of policies to promote activities in favour of vulnerable
population groups in the agriculture and fisheries sector, light industry,
tourism, handicrafts and traditional skills  National and international
institutions ensure the application of policies to improve national productivity
Programme to strengthen private-sector involvement in the economy Cost-sharing
arrangements: 300 000 TTF-: 150 000 MAAP/DGDT/DGI: executing agencies NGOs/CSOs,
Chamber of Commerce: implementing agencies  Strengthening of the private sector’
institutional and human capacities for involvement in the economy Number of
training courses conducted EU, USA, business development services: various
financing         /  /    / /     Country programme outcomes/outputs         /
/    Resource estimates (United States dollars) / Country programme impacts
Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners / Environment and
natural resources National priority: To develop infrastructure, promote land use
and protect the environment  UNDAF outcome: Population groups and national
institutions are stakeholders in the sustainable management of the environment
and enforce the principles of conservation of natural resources   National
institutions implement strategic and legal frameworks as well as environmental
monitoring and management mechanisms  Programme for monitoring of information
and capacity-building in environmental management  National reports on the Rio
Conventions are drafted and disseminated Number of national reports on the
developed conventions United Nations agencies, FAO, GEF, UNEP, UNCCD: financial
and/or technical support TRAC: 250 000 Cost-sharing arrangements: 200 000 Other:
550 000  The environmental information and monitoring system is operational
Information and monitoring system available MAAP, DGA: executing agent (GEF)
NGOs/CSOs, INIDA  National capacities for environmental management are developed
according to an action plan aligned with the second national environmental
action plan (PANA II) Number of national frameworks for institutions and
community associations trained in environmental management ANMCV: implementing
agents Netherlands, Austria, France, EU, US, KfW, WWF, IUCN: various funding
Country programme outcomes/outputs Resource estimates (United States dollars)
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of
partners TRAC: 500 000 United Nations agencies, FAO, GEF, UNEP, DDC, UNESCO:
financial and/or technical support National action plan for Cape Verde’
adaptation to climate change available  The national action plan for Cape Verde’
adaptation to climate change is drafted and implemented  Programme for
implementation of environmental conventions  Inhabitants are involved in the
protection and management of natural resources as part of the national heritage
and  source of economic development Cost-sharing arrangements: 650 000
Government cost- sharing arrangements:  700 000 MAAP, DGA, DGASP: executing
agents Number of community members who have mastered and apply terrestrial and
marine biodiversity tools  Communities master and apply terrestrial and marine
biodiversity management tools Other:  650 000 NGOs/SCOs, INIDA, INDP, INERF:
implementing agents (GEF and DDC) Number of community members who have mastered
and apply desertification control techniques  Communities master and apply
desertification control techniques Netherlands, Austria, France, EU, US, KfW,
WWF, IUCN: funding of various kinds  National institutions and civil society
ensure environmental disaster preventive management and response  Programme of
sustainable environmental conservation through access to microcredits  Young
volunteers contribute to job creation and poverty reduction through the
implementation of environmentally-related activities Number of jobs created by
young volunteers United Nations agencies, FAO, GEF, DDC, UNESCO, UNCCD:
financial and/or technical support TRAC: 200 000 Cost-sharing arrangements: 250
000 Other: MAAP, DGA, DGASP: executing agents UNCCD: 100 000  Communities apply
tools for sustainable natural resource use through access to small grants Number
of grants given Number of community members who apply tools for sustainable use
of natural resources UNV: 100 000 NGOs/CSOs, INIDA, INERF: implementing agents
GEF: 300 000 Netherlands, Austria, France, EU, USA, KfW, WWF, IUCN: funding of
various kinds         /  /    / /      Country programme outcomes/outputs
/  /    Resource estimates (United States dollars) / Country programme impacts
Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners / United Nations
agencies, FAO, OCHA, WMO: financial and/or technical support TRAC : 500 000
Number of local strategic environmental disaster prevention and response plans
developed and implemented Available local early-warning plans  Strategic
disaster prevention and response plans developed and implemented  Environmental
disaster prevention and response programme (recurrent drought, desertification,
migratory desert locusts, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis) Cost-sharing
arrangement: 500 000   Japan MAAP, Ministry of Defence, social welfare services:
executing agents  National disaster response institutions are strengthened
Luxembourg   risk and vulnerability map is established Available risk and
vulnerability maps NGOs/CSOs, INGRH, ANMCV: implementing agents Netherlands,
Portugal, CILSS: various funding Country programme outcomes/outputs Resource
estimates (United States dollars) Country programme impacts Programme/project
Outputs Outcome indicators Role of partners Human capital National priority: To
develop human capital and guide the education and vocational training system
towards priority areas of development UNDAF outcome: National and municipal
institutions and civil society ensure the integration of the right to socio-
economic inclusion for population groups in the context of the country’ social
and demographic transition  Education and health system modernization and
expansion programme  The most vulnerable sectors of the population enjoy the
right to access to quality education and health services  The quality and
sustainability of the national adult vocational training and literacy system is
enhanced Gender-specific literacy rate United Nations agencies, ILO: financial
and/or technical support Cost-sharing arrangements: 130 000 MEVRH, DGEA, MS,
CCS-SIDA, INE: executing agents  National institutions ensure implementation and
monitoring of progress on the achievement of human rights related to basic
social services  National institutions are supported in the implementation of an
information system which helps to ensure the monitoring and evaluation of
programmes and services Number of institutions having established  monitoring
and evaluation system NGOs/CSOs, municipalities: implementing agents Austria,
Portugal: various funding  National institutions and civil society are enhanced
to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic effectively         /  /    / /       Country
programme outcomes/outputs         /  /    Resource estimates (United States
dollars) / Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome
indicators Role of partners / United Nations agencies, UNAIDS: financial and/or
technical support TRAC: 140 000 Number of persons receiving assistance to
prevent risks  Persons in vulnerable situations have better access to services
for the prevention of STD/HIV  Support programme for the implementation of the
national strategic plan to combat HIV/AIDS Cost-sharing arrangements: 250 000
Other: MS, CCS-SIDA: executing agents  Care of persons living with HIV/AIDS and
their families is strengthened Number of persons under care Global fund: 760 000
NGOs/CSOs, municipalities: implementing agents  The participation of NGOs and
civic leaders, and the private, public and political sectors is strengthened
Changes in budgets to combat HIV/AIDS approved at the national and municipal
levels Portugal, France: various funding  HIV/AIDS awareness and the
availability of monitoring and evaluation mechanisms are enhanced Rates of
HIV/AIDS prevalence are known  The mobilization of sustainable financial and
technical resources is encouraged Financial and technical resources mobilized
Country programme outcomes/outputs Resource estimates (United States dollars)
Country programme impacts Programme/project Outputs Outcome indicators Role of
partners Social welfare National priority: To enhance the effectiveness and
sustainability of the social welfare system UNDAF outcome: National and
municipal institutions ensure an effective and sustainable social welfare system
Social welfare effectiveness and sustainability programme  Vulnerable sectors of
the population, particularly children and adolescents, enjoy their right to
social welfare, water and sanitation and to improved food security  The
capacities of national, central and local institutions and civil society are
strengthened to () enhance access to and the quality of water supply and
sanitation services and (ii) improve school and community hygiene Coverage rate
of clean drinking water and sanitation services United Nations agencies, ILO:
financial and/or technical support Cost-sharing arrangements: 100 000 MTS, ISPs,
IEFP: executing agents NGOs/CSOs, municipalities: implementing agents Portugal:
various financing Grand total: – Governance: – Poverty: – Environment: – Human
capital: – Social welfare: $  450 000 $  805 000 $10 450 000 $  280 000 $ 100
000 Grand total for the programme: $17 085 000         /  /    / /
DP/DCP/CPV//Add List of abbreviations and acronyms ACBF African Capacity-
Building Foundation ADB African Development Bank AN National Assembly ANMCV
Associação Nacional dos Municípios Caboverdianos (National Association of Cape
Verdean Municipalities) CCA Common country assessment CCCD Coordinating
Commission on Drug Control CCS-SIDA Coordinating Committee on AIDS Prevention
CILSS Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel CNDH
National Human Rights Council CNE National Election Council CSO Civil society
organization DDC Drylands Development Centre DGA Directorate General for the
Environment DGAE Directorate General for Election Support DGAEA Directorate
General for Adult Education Support DGAL Directorate General for Local
Administration DGAP Directorate General for Public Administration DGASP
Directorate General for Agriculture, Forestry and Animal Husbandry DGCI
Directorate General for International Cooperation DGDT Directorate General for
Tourism Development DGI Directorate General for Industry DGP Directorate General
for Planning DRHS Demographic and Reproductive Health Survey DSS Development
support services EU European Union FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations GEF Global Environment Facility HIV Human immunodeficiency virus
ICT Information and communications technologies IEFP Instituto de Emprego
Formação Profissional (Minister of Employment and Vocational Training) 14
DP/DCP/CPV//Add IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development ILO
International Labour Organization IMF International Monetary Fund INDP Instituto
Nacional de Desenvolvimento das Pescas (National Institute of Fishing
Development) INE Instituto Nacional de Estatística (National Statistics
Institute) INERF Instituto Nacional de Engenharia Rural  Floresta (National
Institute of Rural Engineering and Forestry) INGRH Instituto Nacional de Gestão
dos Recursos Hídricos (National Institute for Water Resources Management) INIDA
Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária (National Institute for Agricultural
Research and Development) ISPs Internet service providers ITU International
Telecommunication Union IUCN International Union for the Conservation of Nature
and Natural Resources KfW Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau MAAP Ministry of
Environment, Agriculture and Fishing MAI Ministry of Internal Administration MCA
Millennium Challenge Account MD Ministry of Defence ME Ministry of Environment
MEVRH Ministry of Education and Human Resources MFP Ministry of Finance and
Planning MIT Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport MS Ministry of Health MTS
Ministry of Labour and Solidarity NGOs/CSOs Non-governmental and civil society
organizations NGO Non-governmental organization NOSI Núcleo Operacional da
Sociedade de Informação OCHA Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
TRAC Target for resource assignment from the core TTF-DG Thematic trust fund
(democratic governance) TTF- Thematic trust fund (poverty) UN United Nations 15
DP/DCP/CPV//Add UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNCCD United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification UNCTAD United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNODC United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime UNV United Nations Volunteers US United States of
America WB World Bank WMO World Meteorological Organization WWF World Wildlife
Fund 16