ENERGY PROFILE Eswatini COUNTRY INDICATORS AND SDGS  Access to electricity (%
population)  Access to clean cooking (% population)  Renewable energy (% TFEC)
Energy intensity GDP per capita  Real GDP growth rate %  %    100%  %  83%
/           80%  %    60% %         58%   ' % 40%    -% 20%   -%  %  % 2018 2019
2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  Per capita renewable
capacity  Air particulate matter (PM2)  Public flows to renewables Urban Average
Rural WHO safe 16 152 18 14 150 16 12 148 14     10       / 12 )  146     /   (
10     144              142   140     138   2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 TOTAL ENERGY SUPPLY
(TES) Total energy supply in 2020 Total Energy Supply (TES) Non-renewable (TJ)
2015 11 759 2020 14 677 Renewable (TJ) 33 708 31 156 Oil Total (TJ) 45 467 45
833 28% Gas Renewable share (%) 74 68 Nuclear Coal + others Growth in TES Non-
renewable (%)  + - % 68% Renewables Renewable (%) - + Total (%) + - Renewable
energy supply in 2020 Primary energy trade Imports (TJ) 2015 15 313 2020 18 465
% % Hydro/marine Exports (TJ) Net trade (TJ)  329 - 12 984  003 - 15 462 Wind
Solar Imports (% of supply) Exports (% of production) Energy self-sufficiency
(%) 34  72 40 10 66 Bioenergy 97% Geothermal RENEWABLE ENERGY CONSUMPTION (TFEC)
Renewable TFEC trend Renewable energy consumption in 2020 Electricity Commercial
heat Bioenergy Geothermal Solar direct 32 35 32 % 29 29 27 30 26 25 )   ( 20
15      10 94%   2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  17% Industry Consumption by
sector Industry (TJ) Transport (TJ) Households (TJ) 2015 16 748   495 2020 12
736  11 166 44% Transport Households Other 39% Other (TJ)  428  049 ELECTRICITY
CAPACITY Installed capacity trend Renewable capacity in 2022 Non-renewable
Fossil fuels Renewable Hydro/marine Hydro/marine Bioenergy Solar  Wind
Bioenergy Geothermal  Total 10 179 62 11   106  189  Other Non-RE 95 Solar 33
Renewable share   56  100 Nuclear Wind Geothermal Hydro/marine Solar 35%  100%
Wind  59% Bioenergy 95%  ) % (                      %  Geothermal Capacity
change (%)  Non-renewable  ( Renewable    Hydro/marine     Solar   Wind
Bioenergy Geothermal Total    +   +  075    +  )   Net capacity change (GW)
Fossil fuels Renewable        80%  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022  Net
capacity change in 2022 (MW)  Non-renewable Hydro and marine               2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Solar Wind Capacity utilisation in 2021 (%)   Fossil
fuels % Nuclear Bioenergy Geothermal Hydro/Marine 47%   Solar % Wind Bioenergy
22% Geothermal  20 40 60 80 100 ELECTRICITY GENERATION Electricity generation
trend Generation in 2021 Non-renewable Renewable Hydro and marine Solar Wind
Bioenergy Geothermal Total GWh  460 259   200  461 %  100 56   43  100 Fossil
fuels Nuclear Other Non-RE Hydro/marine Wind Solar Bioenergy Geothermal
Renewable share  100%  100%        )    ( ) % (       Per capita electricity
generation (kWh)       -        Total Renewable  500           400   300  200
100    80% 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 LATEST
POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND LEGISLATION      ENERGY AND EMISSIONS Energy-related
CO2 emissions by sector Elec & heat generation CO2 emissions in Elec & heat
Other Industrial Transport Other Buildings %%  Coal + others            Gas
Oil 100%  2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 CO2 emission factor for elec & heat
generation Avoided emissions from renewable elec & heat Emitted CO2 RE Avoided
CO2 SWZ Africa World  000 90 80  500 70  000           60    /   500 ENERGY AND
EMISSIONS 50  000 40        500 30   000 20 497 394 500 10   2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided emissions based on fossil fuel
mix used for power Calculated by dividing power sector emissions by elec + heat
gen RENEWABLE RESOURCE POTENTIAL Distribution of solar potential Distribution of
wind potential Eswatini World Eswatini World 100% 100% 80% 80%               60%
60%                           40% 40% 20% 20% % % <260      >1060 <  -   -   -
-   -  > Wind power density at 100m height (/m2) Annual generation per unit of
installed PV capacity (MWh/kWp) Biomass potential: net primary production
Indicators of renewable resource potential   Solar PV: Solar resource potential
has been divided into seven classes, each representing  range of annual PV
output per unit of capacity (kWh/kWp/yr) The bar chart shows the proportion of
country' land area in each of these classes and the global distribution of land
area across the classes (for comparison)     Onshore wind: Potential wind power
density (/m2) is shown in the seven classes used by NREL, measured at  height of
100m The bar chart shows the distribution of the country' land area in each of
these classes compared to the global distribution of wind resources Areas in the
third class or above are considered to be  good wind resource   Biomass: Net
primary production (NPP) is the amount of carbon fixed by plants and accumulated
as biomass each year It is  basic measure of biomass productivity The chart
shows the average NPP in the country (tC/ha/yr), compared to the global average
NPP of - tonnes of carbon 200 10   tC/ha/yr  11 = Global average of - tC/ha/yr
Sources: IRENA statistics, plus data from the following sources: UN SDG Database
(original sources: WHO; World Bank; IEA; IRENA; and UNSD); UN World Population
Prospects; UNSD Energy Balances; UN COMTRADE; World Bank World Development
Indicators; EDGAR; REN21 Global Status Report; IEA -IRENA Joint Policies and
Measures Database; IRENA Global Atlas; and World Bank Global Solar Atlas and
Global Wind Atlas Additional notes: Capacity per capita and public investments
SDGs only apply to developing areas Energy self-sufficiency has been defined as
total primary energy production divided by total primary energy supply Energy
trade includes all commodities in Chapter 27 of the Harmonised System (HS)
Capacity utilisation is calculated as annual generation divided by year-end
capacity  ,760h/year Avoided emissions from renewable power is calculated as
renewable generation divided by fossil fuel generation multiplied by reported
emissions from the power sector This assumes that, if renewable power did not
exist, fossil fuels would be used in its place to generate the same amount of
power and using the same mix of fossil fuels In countries and years where no
fossil fuel generation occurs, an average fossil fuel emission factor has been
used to calculate the avoided emissions These profiles have been produced to
provide an overview of developments in renewable energy in different countries
and areas The IRENA statistics team would welcome comments and feedback on its
structure and content, which can be sent to statistics@irenaorg IRENA
Headquarters Masdar City  Box 236, Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates  Last updated
on: 8th August, 2023