                                        AL             (              ) Ministry
of Natural Resources and Energy Swaziland National Energy Policy TABLE OF
CONTENTS Ministerial Foreword Executive Summary List of Figures Acronyms and
abbreviations  vii xi xii  INTRODUCTION  BACKGROUND   THE NEED FOR  NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY   SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONTEXT   THE PROCESS OF FORMULATING THE NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY   VISION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  ENERGY POLICY OBJECTIVES
STRUCTURE OF THE POLICY DOCUMENT 10  DEMAND SECTORS12  AGRICULTURE 12
Overview12  Main issues 12 Energy supply for rural agriculture 12  Energy
efficiency in the agricultural sector13  INDUSTRY AND MINING13  Overview13  Main
issues 14 Reliability and cost of electricity supply 14  Energy efficiency and
conservation in industry 15   COMMERCE AND SERVICES 15  Overview15  Main issues
15 Energy efficiency in the commerce and services sector 15   TRANSPORT 16
Overview16  Main issues 17 Co-ordination on transport energy matters 17  Energy
efficiency in the transport sector 17   HOUSEHOLD ENERGY18  Overview18  Main
issues 18 Rural households 18   Rural wood fuel supply 19  Rural wood fuel
conservation 20  Fuel substitution20  Co-operation in rural development21
Knowledge transfer and information dissemination21  Urban households 22  Grid
electricity 22  Energy savings and energy efficiency in urban households 22
Peri-urban energy 23    SUPPLY SECTORS 24  COAL24  Overview24  Main issues 25
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy      Substituting imported coal for indigenous coal25 Establishment of
coal-fired thermal power station in Swaziland 26 Potential for coal-bed
methane26 Pricing and taxation of coal 26 Time-frame for coal utilisation27
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS 27  Overview27  Main issues 29  Regulation of the petroleum
industry29  Marketing and distribution 30 Commercial fuel storage facilities30
Procurement31 Involvement of locals31   Use of indigenous biofuels 31 Pricing
and distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)32   ELECTRICITY 32  Overview32
Main issues 35 Restructuring of the Electricity Supply Industry (ESI)35
Electricity infrastructure 36   Production37  Hydro potential, wind and solar
energy37 Independent Power Producers (IPP) 39  Tariffs40   RENEWABLE ENERGY41
Overview41  Main issues 43 Renewable Energy Action Plan43  Information,
awareness and demonstration 43  Financing of renewable energy applications 44
Capacity building and knowledge transfer 44  Quality assurance and standards in
renewable energy45 Technology promotion45   Solar water heaters 46 10 Charcoal
46 11 Briquettes47 12 Other technologies47  RURAL ELECTRIFICATION 49  OVERVIEW49
MAIN ISSUES50  OBJECTIVES FOR RURAL ELECTRIFICATION 50  ELECTRIFICATION OPTIONS
50  Grid electrification 51  Off grid electrification 51  PRIORITISATION AND
PLANNING 52 Prioritisation 52  Schools, health care facilities and other
essential public services 52  Agricultural, commercial and industrial
development areas53  Residential areas/ domestic dwellings53 Planning and
targets 53  RURAL ELECTRIFICATION MASTER PLAN54 Rural Electrification Agency 54
The Rural Electrification Fund 55      CROSS CUTTING ISSUES56 ii Energy Policy
Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
SECURITY OF SUPPLY 56  Overview56  Main issues 57 Strategic stocks for oil
products 57  Increasing security of supply for electricity 58  Energy
conservation59   ENVIRONMENT 59  Overview59  Main issues 60 Energy and
environment linkages 60   Emissions 61  Waste61  HEALTH AND SAFETY62  Overview62
Main issues 62  Households 62 Industry 63   ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND SAVINGS63
Overview63  Main issues 63  National Energy Savings Association (NESA) 64
Awareness raising and information dissemination64 Energy management65  Building
standards65  Energy efficiency within Government institutions 65   Energy
appliance labelling 66  Demand Side Management66 10 Removal of barriers67
ACCESSIBILITY TO ENERGY FOR LOW-INCOME GROUPS 67  Overview67  Main issues 68
Energy options for low-income households 68  Financing energy for low-income
households 69   Affordability and energy pricing69  GENDER AND ENERGY70
Overview70  Main issues 70 Participation of women in energy programmes71  Energy
careers for women 71   EMPLOYMENT CREATION71  Overview71  Main issues 72
Increasing employment opportunities 72   QUALITY ASSURANCE AND QUALITY
STANDARDS72  Overview72  Main issues 73 Standards and testing73   RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT (&) 74  Overview74  Main issues 74 Research strategy and programme
75  Policy research and development 75  ENERGY PLANNING 75 Overview75 Main
issues 76 Planning 77 10 iii Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy 11 REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
TRADE AND CO-OPERATION77 Overview77 Main issues 78 Regional energy trade 78
International energy trade 78 Reducing trade barriers 79 Energy investment and
political risk insurance79  INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION80  OVERVIEW80  MAIN ISSUES80  ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL
FRAMEWORK 80  MEANS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE POLICY80  STRENGTHENING AND
ESTABLISHMENT OF ENERGY GOVERNANCE INSTITUTIONS81  Overview81  Main issues 82
Establishment of an Energy Department 82  Petroleum Inspection Unit 83  Regional
Energy Units 83  Establishment of National Energy Forum 84  Intra-Governmental
planning 84   Fuel Pricing Committee 84 Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
Secretariat 84  10 Establishment of local energy committees and use of
traditional structures85 11 Strengthening of local energy organisations 85 12
Swaziland National Committee for the World Energy Council86  ENERGY REGULATORY
AUTHORITY 86  Overview86  Main issues 86 Establishment and operations 87
POLICY PRIORITIES, MONITORING AND EVALUATION88  POLICY PRIORITIES88  Short-term
priorities 89  Medium/long term priorities91  REVISION, MONITORING AND
EVALUATION OF THE ENERGY POLICY 92  Policy review and revision92  Monitoring 94
Evaluation 94   MINISTER’ ANNUAL ENERGY STATEMENT 95  THE WAY FORWARD 96 Annex :
National Policies and International Conventions Relevant to the Energy Sector
Annex : Energy Balance 1999 Annex : Current Players in the Energy Sector Annex :
Institutional Framework Organogram Annex : Summary of Policy Statements Annex :
Glossary of Terms 97 101 102 104 106 112 iv Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Swaziland National
Energy Policy September 2003  Swaziland National Energy Policy Ministerial
Foreword An energy assessment carried out when the Ministry of Natural Resources
and Energy was established focussed on the country’ high dependence on energy
imports and energy security This dependence is due to the country being
landlocked The concern about energy security is still relevant today and will
continue to be in the future Energy is  vital commodity in all the sectors of
society and is the engine for economic growth for the development of the country
Hence, the challenges in the energy sector are to ensure that there is an
adequate and reliable supply of energy and that it is used efficiently to
sustain our economy, our standard of living, and our national security The
energy sector formulated strategies that are in line with the National
Development Strategy (NDS), which has set  standard of living target for the
country and  place in the world order, intended to be achieved in the year The
strategies in the NDS placed  need for the development of  comprehensive energy
policy that would encompass all the various policy initiatives, action plans,
studies, research and demonstration projects The Ministry approved the
formulation of an energy policy in order to guide the energy developments of the
country In terms of energy resources, Swaziland has substantial coal and
hydropower resources, and its sugar and wood based industries produce large
volumes of biomass residues Successful tapping of these indigenous resources in
an environmentally sound manner can be vital for creating employment and to
reduce poverty The over-reliance on wood fuel in the rural areas has seen our
resources diminish, to such an extent that it is now  serious problem to collect
firewood in some rural areas The challenge of the National Energy Policy is to
make sure that Swaziland has  policy which clearly establishes priorities and
plans for the short, medium and long term There is no doubt that the Policy will
face challenges of improving accessibility to energy Improving accessibility of
energy supplies implies investigating ways and means by which energy services
can be delivered, reliably and affordably in an environmentally and socially
acceptable manner, especially in rural areas where most of the population live
Policy interventions have been formulated to address equitable access to energy
as  basic element, key to the development of economic activity Furthermore,
because energy availability and use affect all sectors of the economy, policies
to address the global market impact have been considered including the New
African Initiatives as the result of the establishment of the African Union (AU)
The country is heavily dependent on commercial energy imports, mainly
electricity and petroleum products Hence, the energy policy places great
importance in energy conservation and efficiency on all the sectors of our
economy Policy interventions to use energy wisely have been formulated in order
for us to reduce energy imports and use our limited fossil resources efficiently
for the benefit of future generations Regional and international co-operation
has been given the attention they deserve in the policy It is fully recognised
in the energy policy that there is  need to develop indigenous energy resources
and have adequate energy reserves to sustain the economy in case of supply
disruptions  am aware that the trend dominating assistance in the energy sector
is to work towards liberalisation of energy markets However, my Ministry
recognises that to move beyond the market based approach and reach the low-
income groups will require strong political action, as it Swaziland National
Energy Policy September 2003 vi Swaziland National Energy Policy will not be
achieved through the market My Ministry will continue with efforts to extend the
grid to rural areas and strengthen the electricity network The policy has
recognised that there will be significant challenges and obstacles to be
overcome and priorities and policy interventions have been carefully analysed
and will continuously be reviewed to meet National objectives  am in no doubt
that the National Energy Policy will be instrumental in developing the economic
activity of the country  look forward to the continued debate on the
implementation of these policies The role of women and the youth in the future
will certainly be enhanced The Policy also addresses energy pricing and
institutional frameworks in which the energy sector functions, including options
for  conducive investment climate The policy recommends taking the energy agenda
to the traditional structures as experience has proved that programmes that do
not involve communities to set their own priorities, do not succeed The Policy
is about laying foundations, the market access issues, the infrastructure issues
and the human development issues  would like to thank all stakeholders for
identifying the policy objectives in line with the vision of the NDS especially
their contribution throughout the two and  half-year process Special thanks to
industry and the Energy Policy Advisory Committee for their valuable time in the
process, the other Ministries who participated in this project, and to the
Danish Government and consultants for their support and assistance The tireless
efforts of the Project Management Group deserves praise in seeing this process
through to its final steps Finally,  trust that the National Energy Policy will
achieve its main objective to provide energy to all the citizens of the country,
to contribute to the eradication of poverty, to increase employment in
sustainable manner and to reduce the country’ heavy dependence on energy imports
MFOMFO NKAMBULE MINISTER OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY Swaziland National
Energy Policy September 2003 vii Swaziland National Energy Policy Executive
Summary Introduction Generally, energy sectors have been undergoing rapid
transformation in recent years at  global, regional and national level These
changes have included market reforms aimed at improving the services offered to
consumers and encouraging investment This has required Governments to provide an
enabling environment The Government has taken an active role in establishing an
overall development programme for the country, through the National Development
Strategy (NDS), to address social, economic, political and environmental issues
The critical dimensions of the quality of life are poverty eradication,
employment creation, gender equity, social integration and environmental
protection The Swaziland National Energy Policy has been developed to address
the challenges of the transformation of the energy sector and the overall
development of the country It has been formulated through extensive stakeholder
consultation at all levels and sectors throughout society Based on this
stakeholder consultation and the aspirations of Government,  vision of the
National Energy Policy has been formulated as: Ensuring that the development
goals of the country are met through the sustainable supply and use of energy
for the benefit of all the citizens of the country The vision of the Policy
underlines the importance of the availability and accessibility of energy to
cater for the development needs of the Swazi nation Energy should be affordable
and the national energy resources should be harnessed with optimum efficiency,
whilst ensuring due attention to environmental concerns The vision underscores
the importance of sustainability: Swaziland must have  National Energy Policy
that plans for the future but meets the needs of today With this in mind, the
key objectives of the Policy are: () Ensuring access to energy for all; ()
Enhancing employment creation; () Ensuring security of energy supply; ()
Stimulating economic growth and development; and () Ensuring environmental and
health sustainability These objectives are the foundation for the formulation of
the policy statements The Policy is structured according to the demand sectors,
supply sectors, rural electrification, cross cutting issues and implementation
Demand The chapter on demand highlights the issues and policy direction in the
context of the five main demand sectors: agriculture, industry and mining,
commerce and services, transport and households (urban and rural) The focus of
the Policy in the commercial sectors is on an efficient utilisation of energy in
the carrying out of economic activities, and ensuring that appropriate, reliable
and quality supply of energy is available Due to the limited mining and
manufacturing activities in the country, there are presently no energy intensive
industries However, plans and strategies for the future have been established to
meet such demands For households, both rural Swaziland National Energy Policy
September 2003 viii Swaziland National Energy Policy and urban, it is essential
that access to energy services is increased, especially in relation to
affordability Of major concern in rural areas, are localised shortages of wood
fuel; strategies have been developed to address this issue Basic energy needs
should take into account costs, access and health issues However, the
environmental effects of household energy use are severe on the rural people who
use wood fuel as their primary source of energy Government will investigate fuel
substitution and appropriate, safe and efficient appliances, the ability to
acquire these appliances and the effect of subsidies Supply The supply of energy
mainly relates to the use of coal, petroleum products, electricity and renewable
energy There are large coal resources in the country, that are presently under
utilised If used in an efficient and sustainable manner, there are  number of
benefits to the country in terms of strengthening the economy and creating
employment, providing  secure local source of power, and trading power within
the region All of the coal used in the country’ industry is imported, mainly
because industrial equipment used locally is not designed for indigenous coal
All coal mined in the country is exported despite being environmentally cleaner
than imported coal The Policy has attempted to address this issue, as coal
mining can increase employment in the country and the development of projects
such as  thermal power project could sustain our coal mining industry Government
will also investigate options for the utilisation of local coal and the resource
potential of coal bed methane Clean coal technologies to reduce the
environmental impacts of coal will be promoted in all coal projects whether
small or large, including research on suitable equipment for utilising
indigenous coal The coal industry will remain in the private hands to encourage
investment and competition Petroleum products are the foundation of the
transport sector and are presently regulated by Government This will continue in
order to protect consumers in all areas of the country and ensure affordable
pricing, especially in relation to paraffin, which is seen as an essential fuel
for low-income households One of the main concerns for Swaziland’ petroleum
industry is the ownership and the non-involvement of locals It has always been
the desire for Government to have minimum intervention and regulation in this
industry to encourage competition and investment The policy challenges are to
increase diversification of petroleum products procurement, develop  pricing
mechanism suitable for the country in line with SACU, if appropriate, and
increase the storage capacity of products to mitigate against supply disruptions
Petroleum Act will be developed to maintain regulation, set  time-frame for
price controls to be removed and phase out the Service Station Rationalisation
Plan The Act will also set  clear legislation of involving locals in this
industry Opportunities for natural gas development in the region will be
followed with the objective of diversifying energy supplies in the country
Electricity supply and use is one of the most important themes within the energy
sector in Swaziland This is in terms of both supporting commercial activities
and supplying power to domestic consumers In order to improve the efficiency of
the industry and attract private investment, Government will continue with its
programme of liberalising the Electricity Supply Industry and corporatisation of
the utility In conjunction with this process, it is important that the supply
infrastructure is continuously upgraded and improved to meet the needs of
industry and society This also includes the sustainable utilisation of local
energy resources and ensuring Swaziland National Energy Policy September 2003 ix
Swaziland National Energy Policy tariffs are transparent and cost-reflective
Creating an infrastructure attractive to Independent Power Producers (IPPs) will
allow more indigenous local power generation, resulting in amongst others, an
increased diversity of energy supplies, job creation, and  reduction in energy
imports Renewable energy is one such local resource that should be fully
maximised, as it can bring both access to energy and environmental benefits This
includes the sustainable use of biomass resources ( wood fuel, industrial waste
such as bagasse and pulp), hydropower, solar power and wind Hydropower is
presently being used in the country to provide  substantial component of the
power supply There is  much greater potential both in terms of grid connected
and off- grid in order to contribute towards rural power needs Solar is also
under utilised in the country and programmes will be developed to ensure greater
uptake of solar electricity and solar thermal technologies Wind power and other
technologies will be investigated Presently, the Ministry is undertaking
resource assessment of the wind and solar potential for the country Rural
Electrification Policies for rural electrification are addressed in  separate
chapter, as this is one of the key challenges facing Government in the light of
the 77% of the population living in rural areas Access to adequate energy
supplies is  key element of Government’ rural development strategy The
Government is therefore developing strategies to extend the electricity grid to
all areas of the country This is seen as an essential component towards the
social and economic upliftment of all citizens of the country Stakeholders in
defining the direction of rural electrification policy, established  goal for
the Ministry, whereby access to electricity is made available to all citizens of
the country by This is in line with the objectives, as stated in the National
Development Strategy, which are to: “ensure improved access to  range of energy
services for the whole population in urban, peri-urban and rural areas”; “make
electricity available and affordable in rural areas so as to improve social
economic development and welfare”; and “to ensure sustainable fuelwood
management” Many rural homesteads are widely scattered and not properly
resettled In view of this dispersed distribution of the population, rural
electrification will have to rely on  range of technology options for different
areas and environments Electricity can be made available to rural areas through
connection to the national grid and through off-grid solutions Grid
electrification will focus on densely populated resettled areas and areas with
high development potential Resettlement will facilitate increased access to the
grid and reduce costs for reticulation Off-grid technologies may include solar
PV, wind, micro- and mini-hydro power systems, biogas, biomass, hybrid systems,
diesel and petrol generator systems An overall prioritisation strategy has been
adopted through consultation with stakeholders The priority is to first extend
the grid to schools, health care facilities and other essential public services,
and second to agricultural, commercial and industrial development areas
Consideration will also be given to areas with  high potential for economic
development In conjunction with the above prioritisation, the electrification of
homesteads is vital It is intended that, where viable, grid extensions be routed
through resettled areas Investments in rural electrification are to be strictly
prioritised and planned in such  manner that they provide maximum benefit
according to the goal, policy objectives and the availability of resources
(funds, technical expertise etc) Swaziland National Energy Policy September 2003
Swaziland National Energy Policy Cross Cutting Issues In addition to the demand
and supply of energy, there are  number of issues that cut across all of the
sub-sectors Security of supply is one such issue Swaziland is  landlocked
country and as such is heavily dependent on energy imports, in particular
petroleum and electricity Government therefore needs to ensure that there are
strategic stocks and diverse supply routes for petroleum, secure electricity
supplies and the maximising of local resources in terms of power production
Security of energy supply can also be improved through the conservation of
energy and diversification of sources Other cross-cutting issues include:
environment, health and safety, energy efficiency, access to energy for low-
income groups, gender, employment creation, quality assurance and quality
standards, research and development, energy planning, and the need to take
cognisance of regional and international energy trade and co-operation Policy
recommendations for all these issues have been developed in line with the vision
and policy objectives These issues provide linkages with other sectors, which
impact on energy developments In the area of research and development, the
priority of Government in the short term will be policy related research and
evaluation of technologies and demonstration programmes Institutional Framework
One of the major comments by stakeholders during early consultation was that the
Policy be “implementable” In order for this to happen, it is essential that an
appropriate institutional framework is in place This includes the public and
private sectors, donors, organisations such as NGOs, CBOs etc, and the general
public Within Government, an Energy Department will be established with an
appropriate budget and expertise This includes the establishment of  Petroleum
Inspectorate to monitor compliance with fuel standards and legislation,  Policy
Research Unity and Regional Energy Units  National Energy Forum will also be
established to provide an independent platform for energy users and to advise
Government on policy issues Local energy organisations and community based
committees will also be strengthened It has been recognised that human resource
development is essential for both the public and private sector The need to
transform and develop appropriately trained and skilled human resources has been
highlighted Investigations will be conducted to establish the sectors’ skills
requirements and recommend human resource development strategies and programmes
Energy Policy Priorities Financial and human resources are limited within
Government Therefore it is essential that policy statements are prioritised
according to the policy objectives and needs in terms of short term and medium
to long term Government in its poverty reduction strategies has identified
number of projects, which would require support from the Energy Sector Hence the
need to establish priorities aimed at facilitating Governments goal of overall
economic development Conclusion Implementation of the Policy is essential in
fulfilling Government’ overall development objectives The next phase in the
development of the National Energy Policy will be the development of  National
Energy Policy Implementation Strategy This Strategy will outline the
methodologies on how the activities will be carried out, by whom and the
resources required Swaziland National Energy Policy September 2003 xi Swaziland
National Energy Policy List of Figures Figure : Gross domestic product, 1998
prices Figure : Total final energy consumption by energy carrier, 1999 Figure :
Total final energy consumption by demand sub-sectors, 1999 Figure : An overview
of the policy formulation process Figure : Agricultural energy consumption, 1999
Figure : Figure : Energy consumption in transport, 1999 Figure  Total
electricity supply, 1999 Figure : Policy review     12 13 16 34 93 Industry,
mining and services energy consumption, 1999 xii Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Acronyms and
abbreviations xiii Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy AFREC CBO African Energy Commission Community
Based Organisation Clean Development Mechanism Carbon Dioxide Danish Co-
operation for Environment and Development Deputy Prime Minister Demand Side
Management Energy Regulatory Authority Electricity Supply Industry Energy Sector
Management Assistance Programme (World Bank) Economic and Social Reform Agenda
European Union Government of Swaziland Gross Domestic Product Global Environment
Facility Gigawatt Hours (109 Watt hours) In Bond Landed Cost Independent Power
Producer Integrated Resource Planning Kilovolt (103 Volts) Kilowatt (103 Watts)
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Ministry of Education Ministry of Finance Ministry of
Health and Social Welfare Ministry of Public Works and Transport Ministry of
Economic Planning and Development National Meteorological Services Ministry of
Natural Resources and Energy Motor Vehicle Accident Fund Megawatt (106 Watts)
National Energy Management Committee National Development Strategy National
Energy Savings Association Non-Governmental Organisation OECD Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development Polychlorinated Biphenyl Public Enterprise
Unit Public Service Obligation Photovoltaic Research and Development
Rationalisation Plan Rural Development Area Public Sector Management Programme
Renewable Energy Association of Swaziland Rural Electrification Committee
Southern African Customs Union Southern African Development Community Southern
African Power Pool Select Committee on Rural Electrification Swaziland College
of Technology Swaziland Environment Authority Swaziland Electricity Board Small
Enterprise Development Company Solar Home System Small to Medium Scale
Enterprises Swaziland National Energy Policy Project Sulphur Dioxide Swaziland
Post and Telecommunications Corporation Single Wire Earth Return Tera Joule
(1012 Joules) United Nations Development Programme United Nations Education and
Science Council United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change University
of Swaziland Voluntary Agreements Vocational and Commercial Training Institute
World Energy Council PCB PEU PSO PV & RATPLAN RDA PSMP CDM CO2 DANCED DPM DSM
ERA ESI ESMAP REASWA REC ESRA SACU EU GoS GDP GEF GWh SADC SAPP SCORE SCOT IBLC
IPP IRP kV kW LPG MoE MoF MoHSW SEA SEB SEDCO SHS SME SNEPP MoPWT SO2 SPTC MEPD
MET SWER TJ UNDP MNRE MVA MW NEMCO UNESCO UNFCCC NDS NESA UNISWA VA VOCTIM NGO
WEC  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy  INTRODUCTION  Background The energy sector has been undergoing
rapid transformation in recent years at  global, regional and national level
These changes have included market reforms and the introduction of appropriate
regulation Governments have been withdrawing from directly managing markets and
their role has progressively moved towards setting up sound rules which are
administered by impartial regulators There has also been  progressive movement
towards pricing energy to reflect the true costs of supply Consequently, in many
cases this has resulted in higher energy prices, which have in turn stimulated
greater efficiency of energy supply and use However, there is also strong
emphasis towards ensuring access and affordability of energy services to all of
the population The major task for the Government of Swaziland therefore is to
achieve  balance between its economic and social responsibilities Within the
Southern African Development Community (SADC) region, the energy sector reform
process has been moving at  fast pace during the last five years The prime
objectives have been to increase efficiency and attract and facilitate
participation by private investors and financiers In 1996, the SADC Heads of
States approved the SADC Energy Protocol The main objective of the Energy
Protocol is to promote the harmonious development of the regions’ national
energy policies and matters of common interest for the balanced and equitable
development of the regional energy resources During recent years the Kingdom of
Swaziland has made major efforts to formulate and reach consensus regarding
overall national development policies and action plans These have culminated in
the National Development Strategy (NDS), which embodies the long- term vision
for the development of Swaziland The overall vision set out in the NDS is that
“By the year 2022, the Kingdom of Swaziland will be in the top 10% of the medium
human development group of countries founded on sustainable economic
development, social justice and political stability” Underlying the vision in
the NDS is the focus on the quality of life in the country The critical
dimensions of the quality of life are poverty eradication, employment creation,
gender equity, social integration and environmental protection These are, in
turn, crucially linked to education, health and other aspects of human resource
development When translated to energy policy development, the vision infers that
the energy policy should therefore also strive to promote sustainable economic
development, social justice and political stability, by supporting poverty
eradication, employment creation, gender equity, social integration and
environmental protection An energy policy needs to be based on the overall
development policies and in particular policies with relevance to the energy
sector, such as public-private partnerships, environment, business promotion,
privatisation, etc  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  The need for  National Energy Policy The
scientific definition of energy is ‘the ability to do work or conversion of this
capability to motion ’ In the context of the National Energy Policy, energy
impacts on all sectors of society and the economy Energy activities relate to
both the supply and demand Energy carriers and sources can include petroleum
products (petrol, diesel, paraffin and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)), solid
fuels (coal), electricity, renewable energy (hydro, wind and solar) and the use
of biomass (wood fuel, wood waste and bagasse) Energy is crucial to economic and
social development, and to alleviation of poverty Developments in the energy
sector at  global, regional and national level have necessitated the
institutionalism of concrete policy guidelines to channel the development of the
energy sector in the Kingdom of Swaziland The Ministry of Natural Resources and
Energy agreed, together with stakeholders, that an energy policy be formulated,
in accordance with other sectoral policies, so as to contribute to the
attainment of the NDS Vision Furthermore detailed studies covering, amongst
others, strategic fuel depots, household energy, solar energy and rural
electrification, have reached  similar conclusion that policies in these areas
must be put in place It has therefore been found pragmatic to formulate
comprehensive policy to cover all the areas of energy One of the major issues
requiring urgent policy guidance is the security of energy supply, emanating
from the fact that Swaziland is landlocked and imports most of her energy
requirements The formulation of the energy policy is also  response to the
country’ commitment to regional co-operation The SADC Energy Protocol clearly
urges Member States to develop national energy policies that should enhance the
provision of energy co-operation and integration in the context of the
principles of the SADC Energy Regional Co- operation Strategy and Policy The
Kingdom of Swaziland is party to  number of conventions and agreements at
global level Globalisation, the new international environmental agenda, and
market reforms are some of the new developments of recent years Swaziland
therefore needs an energy policy that learns from and takes advantage of these
emerging international developments Thus in 1997, Ministry embarked on the
preparations for the formulation of  comprehensive national energy policy for
the country Once in place the energy policy will have to be followed by the
formulation of appropriate legislation and implementation strategies for the
various sub sectors of the energy sector so as to provide  sound framework for
politicians, investors, energy suppliers and consumers Government is committed
to building the economy and improving the access to energy for all its citizens,
hence the need for the policy The policy formulation process has been supported
by the Danish Government as part of the Swaziland National Energy Policy Project
(SNEPP)  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy  Socio-economic context  Introduction An understanding of the
socio-economic context within which the policy will be implemented is crucial in
the development of the energy sub-sector policies Thus, this section attempts to
highlight the social and economic environment prevailing in Swaziland and
relates the consequent impacts on the energy sector Swaziland is  landlocked
kingdom situated in the eastern part of southern Africa, sharing borders with
the Republic of South Africa to the North, South and West and the Republic of
Mozambique to the East It covers  land area of 17,364 km2  Physiography
Swaziland is divided into four geographical zones The western-most zone, the
Highveld, with the capital Mbabane, lies at an average altitude of ,300 metres
and covers 29% of the country The climate is temperate The land is not generally
suitable for crop cultivation, but well suited to forestry Swaziland’ large wood
and pulp industries are situated in this region The subtropical, hilly
Middleveld covering about 26% of the country lies at an average altitude of 700
metres It is the most densely populated part of Swaziland, and the main
commercial and industrial centre is situated in the Matsapha industrial area The
relatively dry Lowveld, covers 37% of the area and lies at an altitude of 200
metres Swaziland’ large agro-industries, mainly sugarcane, and coal deposits can
be found in this region It is relatively sparsely populated Near the border with
Mozambique, the land rises to an altitude of 600 metres This region is referred
to as the Lubombo plateau, which covers the remaining % of the country It is
climatically similar to the Middleveld  Transport infrastructure Traditionally,
the country’ most important link abroad is the rail link to Mozambique and South
Africa There is  good road infrastructure, providing access to most parts of the
country, and Manzini airport services regular flights to Johannesburg and
regional airports  Population and demography According to the 1997 census, the
population was 980,722, with 77% of the population living in rural areas and 23%
living in urban and peri urban areas In 1997, 172,416 households were
registered, with 34% of the households situated in urban areas Company towns
established in connection to the major industries; sugar, pulp and timber, are
significant component of urban settlements During  the population growth was %
per year This relatively high rate is expected to be somewhat reduced in the
coming years due to the HIV/AIDS pandemic There is also  movement towards
increased settlement in urban areas Educational  Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy development is  high
priority and the literacy rate is about 75% for both males and females The
relatively high population growth at  time of sluggish economic growth means in
real terms,  worsening of the standard of living for the average Swazi This
poses  serious challenge in the provision of affordable energy services to the
general population whose average income level is decreasing  The economy In the
late 1980’, the economy of the country grew rapidly However, analysis conducted
in the Swaziland Poverty Reduction Strategy indicates that the gains from the
past were being eroded Indications show that at present 66 % of the population
live below the poverty level Government has formulated poverty reduction
strategies that will require the support of basic energy services Energy is
vital to fighting poverty and the policy will develop  conceptual framework on
the understanding of energy in relation to poverty Government has formulated
Population Policy, whose goal is to improve the quality of life by influencing
trends as well as responding to challenges such as HIV/AIDS Official statistics
indicate that the unemployment ratio was around 22 % (1995 estimates) and is
still increasing As expected, females have  higher unemployment rate than males,
and there is higher unemployment in rural areas compared to urban areas The
performance of the Swaziland economy, which is dominated largely by export based
agricultural and agro-based manufacturing production, has been sluggish in
recent years, largely  reflection of the vulnerability of primary production to
climatic and external factors The Swaziland economy, like most of the region,
depends heavily on South Africa The major forms of dependence include the areas
of trade, investments and energy (electricity, petroleum products and coal) Per
capita income (GDP/population) in 1998 amounted to ,791 Emalangeni (Figure ),
ranking Swaziland among the lower middle-income developing countries The
Lilangeni is linked at par to the Rand Figure : Gross domestic product, 1998
prices 4000 Others 3500 Government services Transport Wholesale and retail
Construction Electricity and water 3000            2500  2000 1500 Manufacturing
1000  Forestry and mining Agriculture 500  1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995
1996 1997 1998 Year  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy Over the period  the economy grew at an average
rate of % This high growth rate has however diminished in recent years From 1996
to 1998 the growth rate averaged % per year Since 1998 the economic growth has
even further reduced The growth is mainly driven by the manufacturing sector,
accounting for 37% of the GDP It must be noted that the manufacturing industry
is dominated by only  few large firms Agriculture is mainly based on subsistence
farming, cash crops and livestock The contribution to GDP amounts to 10%
However, manufacturing of value-added products largely originates from the agro-
based industries: sugar processing, wood pulp production and fruit canning Most
energy for these activities is provided through human labour or animal power,
though tractors and other electrical equipment are used to some extent The
energy statistics for the sector are dominated by the few industrially operated
wood, fruit and sugar cane cultivation companies and do not represent
traditional farming Nevertheless, electricity and diesel are the dominant
commercial energy carriers used by the sector contributing about 47% and 44%
respectively in The dominant role of the manufacturing sector in GDP is also
reflected in the share of the total employment in the private sector compared to
the public sector The public sector accounts for 15% of GDP, however the growth
has been negative since From an energy perspective the agricultural and
manufacturing sectors are not only interesting as sectors with  large energy
demand, but also in that these sectors in their production provide useful by-
products that contribute to the energy supply The sugar and pulp industries in
particular produce vast amounts of biomass by-products that are used for process
heat and electricity production Swaziland imports the major energy carriers:
petroleum products, electricity and coal Figure  indicates that, the country
imports almost half of its total energy requirements in the form of coal,
petroleum products and electricity The high import of energy products has
negative impact on the country’ balance of payments Figure , indicates the
distribution of energy demand according to the various sectors Figure : Total
final energy consumption by energy carriers, 1999 (37,395 TJ) Coal 16% Biomass
49% Petroleum products 25% Electricity 10%  Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Figure : Total final
energy consumption by demand sectors, 1999 (37,395 TJ) Agriculture % Households
25% Industry and services 54% Transport 18% The 1999 Energy Balance (Annex )
details the energy demand and supply for the country according to fuel types,
imports, exports and demand sectors  The Process of formulating the National
Energy Policy In the past,  number of technical, economic and institutional
studies have been conducted on the Swaziland energy sector These studies,
provided  foundation for the formulation of the energy policy Although the
Ministry has been able to establish energy data, technology information and
elements of energy strategies, the need for  comprehensive national energy
policy and strategies for implementation remained The policy formulation project
began in August, It has been  consultative and participatory activity with the
involvement of stakeholders and decision makers at strategic points throughout
the process (see Figure ) This has been through creation of  dialogue between
the expert process consisting of the Energy Section of the Ministry, assisted by
international, regional and national consultants and: stakeholders representing
the energy supply industries, users and utilities; governmental, regional and
local decision makers; and selected groups of energy consumers Three national
workshops were held to capture and include views from all key stakeholders and
to create consensus on major issues and priorities  number of working groups
were formed to deliberate on the following specific areas: () (ii) (iii) Use of
energy in areas not connected to grid electricity; (iv) Security of energy
supply and overall governance of the energy sector; Use of indigenous resources
for the generation of electricity and heat; Energy savings and energy
efficiency;  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy () (vi) (vii) Supply and use of electricity Utilisation
of indigenous coal; Import, storage and utilisation of petroleum products; and
Workshops and interviews in rural areas were carried out to gather first-hand
information on key priorities within communities, main energy problems,
appropriateness of different technology options and organisational issues These
were complemented by consultations with Tindvuna Tetinkhundla An Energy Policy
Advisory Committee was established to assist and advise the policy formulation
process, comprising senior Government officials and senior representatives from
selected organisations Consultation with decision makers took place to review
policy options at key stages of the policy formulation process; Figure  outlines
the policy formulation process since The energy policy formulation process ran
parallel with  process on the formulation of  Rural Electrification Policy This
process was carried out under the Ministry’ programme on restructuring the
Electricity Supply Industry (ESI) of Swaziland One activity of the ESI
restructuring process was to address the issue of improving access to
electricity services for the population and the local economy, particularly in
rural areas This situation is particular to the country due to the majority of
the population living in rural areas Numerous donors have shown interest in
assisting in developing the electricity infrastructure in rural areas The high
importance of this subject and the high political priority gave rise to the
development of  separate chapter on rural electrification  Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Figure : An
overview of the policy formulation process WORKING PROCESSES IN THE PROJECT
GROUP (MNRE and consultants) STAKEHOLDER INVOLVEMENT CONSULTATIONS WITH DECISION
MAKERS (mainly the Minister and the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee)
Individual stakeholder Consultations (August – December 1999)
Outlining/adjusting the project context (December 1999 – January 2000)
Individual stakeholder Consultations (February- March 2000) Submission of
Cabinet Paper (March 2000) Stakeholder Workshop No Consultation on Discussion
Doc no  (September 2000) Elaboration of Discussion Doc No  (Issues Paper and
Energy Sector Review) (March – September 2000) Community Workshops Consultations
on issues and policy options (February 2001) Stakeholder Working Groups Regular
meetings/reporting (February – June 2001) Stakeholder Workshop No Consultation
on Disc Doc No  (August 2001) Elaboration of Discussion Doc No (Policy Options
Paper) (June-August 2001) Community Workshops Consultations on Discussion Doc
(September – October 2001) Elaboration of Disc Document No (First draft National
Energy Policy/ White Paper) (assistance from En ergy Policy Advisory Committee)
(October 2001 – January 2002) Consultations with: • The Honourable Minister •
Parliamentary Portfolio Committee (February 2002) Stakeholder Workshop No
Consultation on Discussion Doc No  (February 2002) Final consultations with: •
The Honourable Minister • The Principal Secretary (May 2002) Final comments from
stakeholders to 2nd Draft National Energy Policy (May 2002) Elaboration of: 2nd
Draft National Energy Policy Paper (April 2002) Elaboration of final Draft
Energy Policy paper (June 2002) Submission of final Draft National Energy Policy
to Cabinet (June 2002)  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  Vision of the Na tional Energy Policy Based on
wide stakeholder consultation and the aspirations of the Government, the Vision
of the National Energy Policy has been formulated as follows: Ensuring that the
development goals of the country are met through the sustainable supply and use
of energy for the benefit of all the citizens of the country Mission statements
will be developed for each sub-sector based on this overall Policy vision
Energy policy objectives The vision of the Policy underlines the importance of
the availability and accessibility of energy to cater for the development needs
of the Swazi nation Energy should be available at an affordable cost to all
citizens of the country The national energy resources should be harnessed with
optimum efficiency whilst ensuring due attention to environmental concerns The
vision also underscores the importance of sustainability: Swaziland must have an
energy policy that plans for the future but meets the needs of today With this
vision in mind, the key objectives that the policy must pursue can be outlined
as follows1: ) Ensuring access to ener gy for all Access to energy for all
sectors of the economy and in particular to rural areas is  key development
ingredient Currently, there is  high dependence on wood fuel, which is not
evenly distributed throughout the country and very few rural households have
access to electricity Supply of other energy carriers in remote areas is in many
cases difficult due to cost limitations and poor transportation infrastructure
Access to energy should not only concern the physical availability but also the
affordability Affordability of energy is  major concern for low-income
households and needs to be adequately addressed ) Enhancing employment creation
Creation of employment is  prime element in the overall strategy on poverty
reduction Given the high level of unemployment in Swaziland, energy solutions
should contribute to the creation of employment possibilities for locals
Employment creation may either be directly in the energy sector or created
indirectly as  result of competitiveness of the sector  These energy policy
objectives (inline with the NDS) were agreed upon in the First Stakeholder
Workshop  Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy ) Ensuring security of energy supply Deleted: , Security
of energy supply comprises both short term and long term concerns Short term
security issues are those related to the availability of energy carriers on  day
to day basis and include; the quality of the supply, reliability of the
infrastructure, and the stability of energy imports Longer term security
concerns include the stability of international agreements on energy import
infrastructure and price as well as development of the country’ own energy
resources Being landlocked, Swaziland’ energy import is heavily dependent on
relatively few supply alternatives and transportation routes This is especially
the case for petroleum products and electricity ) Stimulating economic growth
and development Deleted: , The energy sector can contribute significantly
towards economic growth through initiatives that emphasise efficiency in energy
sector management Access to cost- effective and reliable energy also promotes
economic development through increased competitiveness of industry This is an
important contribution to the national economy Increased use of indigenous
energy resources and efficient energy use, thereby reducing the need to import
energy, will stimulate growth of the national economy and improve the balance of
payments In order to support economic growth and development, it is essential
that there is  sustainable institutional framework in place ) Ensuring
environmental and heal th sustainability World-wide, energy is recognised as the
main source of global pollution Emissions of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and other
harmful substances resulting from the energy sector are  serious concern
globally The local environment is equally important for the future development
of Swaziland Deforestation, air pollution from vehicles and industry, indoor
pollution due to cooking with wood fuel and disruption of ecological systems due
to hydropower are examples of environmental impacts of energy supply and use
Care must therefore be taken that the proposed energy policy options are based
on an environmentally sustainable approach and ensure the protection of public
health These five policy objectives are the foundation for the formulation of
individual policy statements, in line with the NDS  Structure of the policy
document The energy policy document has been structured into eight chapters The
first chapter gives an introduction to the energy sector, describes the context
of the energy policy and introduces the vision and objectives of the energy
policy The second and third chapters contain details of policies governing the
demand and supply sectors, respectively 10 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy The fourth chapter lays
out policies on rural electrification Rural electrification has been addressed
separately from the general section on electricity since it is one of the key
challenges facing Government The fifth chapter deals with policies on cross-
sectoral topics such as environment, gender, security of energy supply, and
international co-operation The sixth chapter addresses the implementation of the
Policy and the strengthening of relevant institutions It has to be emphasised
that the Policy, if it cannot be implemented, will fall short of its purpose
Therefore this chapter gives forethought on how the policy implementation is
envisaged However, detailed policy implementation issues such as the use of
means, the need for financial and human  esources and the specific role of key
stakeholders are not addressed in the document and will need detailed and
careful analysis during the formulation of  strategy for implementation Chapter
seven gives  reflection on the priorities of the policy within the short and
medium/long term and how the energy policy should be revised, monitored and
evaluated These priorities are linked to the energy policy objectives  time
frame for policy implementation is furthermore an area for the subsequent
implementation strategy The last chapter, chapter eight, describes the way
forward Chapters two to six follow  generic format that can be described as
follows: • Background information to introduce the major features of the
sector/section; • The key issues that face the sector; • Motivations for
particular policies; •  clear statement of Government’ policies, written in bold
italics; • Where necessary or appropriate: - Targets - Details on the
implementation - Mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation The policy statements
are defined mainly in terms of the responsibility and commitment of Government,
“Government will ensure…” Although Government is seen as the focus of the
policy, the lead Government agency, implementing the National Energy Policy,
will be the Ministry of Natural Resource and Energy, through the Energy
Department The role of Government is to create an enabling environment for the
policies to be carried out Apart from Government Ministries and institutions;
the private sector, NGOs, or other organisations may carry out the
implementation The specific roles of the key players will be defined in the
implementation strategy 11 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  DEMAND SECTORS  Agriculture  Overview
Agriculture plays  critical role in the economy as  food provider and  major
contributor to exports However, it is not  major energy consumer and accounts
for only about % of the total energy used in Swaziland The energy requirements
for large farms include energy for satisfying on-farm and off-farm operations,
which depends on agricultural development policies This has resulted in
agricultural practices changing within the country as commercial agriculture
expands onto Swazi Nation Land Irrigation is  major energy consuming activity in
this sector Traditional agriculture as practised by individual households and
communities, involves  significant amount of human and animal energy, which is
difficult to quantify Figure  describes the consumption of energy within the
agricultural sector This is mainly in terms of commercial energy use Figure :
Agricultural energy consumption, 1999 (,025 TJ) Petrol % Electricity 47% Diesel
44% Aviation fuel %  Main issues The main challenges in improving agricultural
energy use are as follows: • Stimulating the use of more efficient machinery and
processes; and • Optimising energy supply and end use options so as to best
benefit small scale, rural farmers  Energy supply for rural agriculture
Traditional farming is an important element of the livelihoods of rural
communities The energy policy aims to complement agricultural policies on
improving agricultural productivity in rural areas An adequate and reliable
supply of diesel and electricity is important for enhancing rural farming 12
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy Government will ensure there is adequate access to all appropriate forms
of energy to support rural farming There will be  need to identify the energy
supply problem areas with the full involvement of the Ministry responsible for
agriculture  Energy efficiency in the agricultural sector  number of activities
can be undertaken to reduce the amount of energy required for agricultural
output Practices such as increased use of timers, computerisation and use of
low-energy pumps could reduce energy requirements for irrigation and improve
competitiveness of agricultural products These activities could result in
benefits to the individual farmer and ultimately to the energy sector in general
Government will promote measures to improve efficiency of energy use in
agriculture, such as the provision of information and use of low-energy
equipment  Industry and mining  Overview The industrial sector, including the
mining sector, is the major energy-consuming sector in Swaziland comprising 54%
of the total energy consumed in The industrial sector is dominated largely by
export orientated agro-based production Soft drink concentrates, sugar and
woodpulp are major export revenue earners The sector has been volatile in recent
years due to difficult conditions in international markets This has led to the
closure of  number of firms and the establishment of new, mainly textile
orientated firms Figure : Industry, mining and services energy consumption, 1999
(20,487 TJ) Coal 21% Bagasse 35% Petroleum products % Electricity 12% Wood incl
by-products 26% 13 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy The energy demand from the mining sector
comprises only the Maloma Colliery and the Kwalini quarry (at Nokwane) The
demand from the mining sector has been reduced substantially in recent years due
to the closure of the Mpaka coal mine, the Dvokolwako diamond mine and the
asbestos mine at Bulembu Figure  illustrates the breakdown of consumption of
energy in the industry and mining sector (note: this also includes the commerce
and services sector) Energy demand in the industrial sector is concentrated on
the sugar and wood based industries Supply of commercial fuels to the industry
has progressively improved, but major concerns still remain regarding the
reliability of electricity supply Power outages within this sector, even for
short period, can result in losses of production, however this situation is
improving as  result of the ongoing system-strengthening programme The cost of
energy, particularly electricity and coal is also  matter of concern to industry
There is  significant scope for increasing efficiency of energy use in this
sector This makes sense for at least three reasons Firstly, energy supply
infrastructure is costly Therefore, inefficient use of energy results in
investment in energy supply equipment that is in excess of what is actually
needed Secondly, excessive energy consumption increases the production costs of
goods Consequently, these goods will be less competitive in inefficient use of
energy compounds the environmental problems within the energy sector The most
important of these problems are the reduction of local air quality due to air
pollutants and the production of gases that contribute to the greenhouse effect,
resulting in climate change the market Thirdly,  Main issues The main issues for
energy in industry are as follows: • Ensuring rational electricity tariffs for
industrial consumers; • • Stimulating energy savings and efficiency practices
within this sector Improving the quality and reliability of electricity supply;
and  Reliability and cost of electricity supply The supply of reliable power is
crucial to production processes and is  key parameter for investors Hence, there
is  need to have cost-reflective tariffs in this sector The continuing programme
of electricity supply system strengthening seeks to address the quality and
reliability of supply The Government has been encouraging the development of
industrial areas in selected locations outside the Manzini-Mbabane corridor It
is necessary therefore that the electricity supply infrastructure is geared to
support this objective Government will ensure continued improvement of the
electricity supply infrastructure for the industrial sector as part of the
overall strategy for attracting investment 14 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Energy efficiency and
conservation in industry Since industry is the largest energy consumer category,
it is also the category with the most significant energy efficiency and
conservation potential There are numerous activities that can be carried out to
improve energy efficiency in industry, however prioritisation of the most
appropriate activities is necessary Energy efficiency improvements and
optimisation in areas such as lighting, motor driven systems, and steam systems
are possible in most firms  programme covering the food and beverage industry
has been operating since 1995 under the auspices of the SADC Industrial Energy
Management Programme The programme’ main focus has been on the capacity building
of managers, engineers, technicians, lecturers of technical colleges and
consulting engineers Government will initiate an energy efficiency and
conservation programme to encourage energy savings Activities in energy
efficiency and conservation in industry will be initiated, prioritised and
implemented in co-operation with the appropriate industrial organisations
Commerce and services  Overview The sector comprises  large range of energy
users, including offices (both Government and private), retail, education,
health care facilities and catering Data on the energy usage patterns in this
sector is very poor In general this sector is well supplied with energy
carriers, however the most frequently cited problem is the poor reliability and
quality of electricity supply This sector also presents numerous opportunities
for improvements in energy efficiency such as heating, ventilation and air
conditioning, building energy management systems, hot water generation, lighting
and appliances  Main issues The main challenges for energy provision and use in
this sector are: • Ensuring quality and reliability of energy supply; and •
Stimulating energy savings and efficiency practices  Energy efficiency in the
commerce and services sector It is important that there is  high quality and
reliability in the supply of energy in order to develop the sector and allow it
to operate efficiently Energy efficiency practices in the commerce and services
sector are not institutionalised mainly due to  lack of awareness The Government
sub-sector presents large opportunities for programmes on 15 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy energy savings
particularly in Government and public buildings World-wide experience has shown
that zero-cost or very low cost measures can be implemented in this sector
Government will implement an awareness-raising programme for the commerce and
services sector on energy efficiency and conservation measures Government will
ensure that an energy management programme for all her institutions is
implemented  Transport  Overview The transport sector is crucial to Swaziland
Most journeys are work related However, an important problem is the acquisition
of data, for example to differentiate between fuel used for passenger
transportation and that used for freight Nearly all passengers on public
transport are conveyed by road as are the majority of goods In general,
transportation in Swaziland consists of several travel modes, but the dominant
modes are road travel (passenger transport) and freight (goods transport) Modes
of road transport for passengers in the country include the conventional bus,
midi- bus, mini-bus, sedan taxi and private car However, in regional and
international terms, car ownership levels are still very low and the majority of
the population use public transport  transport policy is in place, which
addresses the main issues in this sector However, there are  number of energy
related issues, which deserve to be addressed by the energy policy also The
transport sector is the dominant consumer of petroleum fuels and is responsible
for about 18% of the total energy demand Air pollution from the transport sector
is directly related to the combustion efficiency of petroleum fuels Figure
describes the energy consumption patterns for the transport sector Figure :
Energy consumption in transport, 1999 (,672 TJ) Jet fuel ,% Diesel 49,% Petrol
50,% 16 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy  Main issues The key challenges in this sector as far as energy
use is concerned are: • Integrate and improving co-ordination in the
administration and implementation of the energy policy, the transport policy,
the environmental policy and other related policies; • Promoting an optimum and
efficient use of transport energy; and • Managing the environmental and public
health impacts resulting from the use of transport energy  Co-ordination on
transport energy matters Policies on transport energy should complement the
related national policy on transport There is  need for closer co-operation on
issues such as the establishment of an appropriate linkage between petroleum
product prices and bus fares (as long as both are regulated) Other matters of
co-operation include the monitoring and regulation of the efficiency,
maintenance and age of vehicles on public roads Government will integrate and
harmonise implementation of the various national policies related to the
transport sector Government will forge closer links among her agencies to assist
this process  Energy efficiency in the transport sector The gradual change of
the local fleet towards newer models ensuring proper combustion of fuels as well
as stricter applications of proper maintenance of vehicles can play  significant
role in improving management of transport energy More efficient vehicles will
result in tangible benefits in terms of  cleaner local environment However,
regulations to promote this change should take into account the needs of
transport users, particularly public transport users Government will promote
fuel saving measures in the transport industry There is also  need to improve
efficiency in the use of fuel in the rail and air transport sectors Currently in
the country, rail transport is dominated by diesel powered engines Government
will progressively procedures so as environmentally friendly modes of transport
inspection to stimulate development of more energy efficient and tighter
maintenance and introduce This policy has to be implemented in close co-
operation with public vehicle operators Information on vehicular efficiencies
and benefits of proper maintenance are strategies that need to be employed 17
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy  Household energy  Overview In the following sections, the energy needs
within rural and urban households are dealt with according to the different
options for access to energy and the varying patterns of consumption The
Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy, with assistance from the World
Bank/United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Energy Sector Management
Assistance Programme (ESMAP), produced  Household Energy Strategies report,
based on surveys carried out in 1993/This report highlights some of the key
challenges and recommendations for both rural and urban energy Energy itself is
not  basic human need, but is critical to the achievement of other developmental
and social objectives For example, staple food on which people depend often
requires energy for preparation and preservation  Main issues The main issues
for improving energy services in households are: • Improving the reliability of
the grid electricity infrastructure; • Making electricity available to as many
households as possible; • Provision of electricity at affordable prices to
improve the rural household energy situation and to attract entrepreneurial
activity in rural areas (see Chapter  for details); Increasing accessibility to
and affordability of sustainable energy in rural areas; • • Security of energy
supply; • Integrating provision of appropriate energy services into wider
development programmes and improving co-operation between agencies involved in
rural development; • The effects and impacts of deforestation and providing
wide range of energy options so as to reduce pressure on indigenous forest
resources; • Strengthening efforts aimed at empowering women; • Stimulating
energy savings and energy efficiency practices in households; • • Ensuring that
rural energy programmes are planned and implemented in  fully Implementation of
proper resettlement strategy; participatory manner; and • Ensuring the supply of
energy services to peri-urban areas  Rural households About 77% of the total
population, equivalent to about 114,000 households, live in rural areas (1997
census) Data on energy use in rural areas is limited and discontinuous It is
known however, that most energy in rural areas is used for household purposes,
predominantly in cooking Generally in the rural areas, gender is an important
issue, 18 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy because in many cases the women are responsible for not
only the cooking and heating in the house but also for collecting firewood,
often over long distances Energy issues therefore place  specific workload on
the majority of the female population Traditional fuels, firewood in particular,
are still dominant in cooking and heating in rural areas Based on  forestry
inventory carried out in 1999, it is estimated that the indigenous forest area
of Swaziland is 652,000 ha while the commercial forest area is 136,700 ha
indicating  total forest cover of about 45% of the total land cover The
indigenous forest cover is dwindling and this is being felt by rural households
in some areas who often have to travel long distances for their wood fuel needs
It is estimated that in 1999, the annual consumption of wood fuel in rural areas
was 347,000 tonnes (Energy Balance 1999) This demand outstrips supply and is
threat to the sustainability of the resource It is however worth noting that
there are regional differences between sources of wood fuel in Swaziland,
enhancing local shortages and surpluses Previous Government interventions have
concentrated on supply side measures, specifically encouraging the planting of
trees for firewood purposes This intervention produced mixed results but
generated numerous lessons, which could benefit future initiatives Transitions
to other energy carriers has not been satisfactory Only about  % of households
have access to electricity (see Chapter  on Rural Electrification) It estimated
that 30% use paraffin and 10% use LPG, for cooking The main constraints have
been the low incomes of the rural populations as well as inadequate distribution
systems of these carriers in rural areas Although the use of renewable energy
technologies, primarily solar PV systems is still minimal, it has been
increasing steadily over the past years  Rural wood fuel supply Since wood fuel
will continue to be the dominant energy resource in rural areas in the
foreseeable future, means to replant trees and ensure  security of supply should
form part of  broader sustainable forest management strategy Government will
ensure the participatory establishment of multipurpose woodlots and individual
tree growing so as to increase rural wood fuel supply However, it is noted that
wood fuel is just one of the many end-uses of trees and as such the goals of
woodlot projects should be wider than just provision of wood fuel Additionally,
emphasis should be placed on participatory sustainable forest management in
order to build support from local communities Communities will be encouraged to
establish communal and individual multipurpose woodlots located closer to areas
of consumption Other methods of establishing woodlots will be investigated and
promoted The establishment of individual woodlots will be promoted, as the
ownership is clear from the onset 19 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Rural wood fuel conservation
Measures to increase supply can only make  difference in the long term Shorter
term measures such as improving the efficiencies of the use of wood,
particularly in households need to be explored Most wood and biomass fuels are
used in open fires with tripods and three legged pots This system has  poor
conversion efficiency In higher income households, wood is burned in heavy iron
coal stoves These stoves are inappropriate for firewood and most have even lower
conversion efficiencies than  three-legged pot on an open fire There is  need
for further demonstration and research on improved wood fuel stoves that could
be suitable for and acceptable to rural communities It is now general knowledge
that promotion of improved wood fuel stoves alone is insufficient in relieving
pressure on wood resources Therefore action in this area will include other
objectives such as the reduction of indoor pollution, reduction of the financial
costs of cooking and enhancement of convenience Government will promote the
development and dissemination of improved cooking technology as part of  wider
strategy on the reduction of wood fuel consumption Lessons learned locally and
from other parts of the world will be reviewed and taken into account
Stakeholders will be exposed to  variety of appropriate technologies before
choices are made Environmentally friendly and energy efficient appropriate
technologies will be promoted Standards will be developed in order to adopt
appropriate and safe equipment in the country  Fuel substitution Encouraging
substitution of wood for other energy carriers could help to relieve pressure on
forests as well as the burden of wood fuel scarcity on women The major available
options are paraffin, LPG, electricity, coal, biogas and solar cookers Best
means of availing suitable alternatives to wood fuel, such as LPG, paraffin,
electricity, wood fuel briquettes and solar cookers will be advocated Fuel
substitution has technological and cost implications Appropriate equipment such
as higher quality paraffin stoves and solar stoves may not be easily affordable
to low- income households Close co-operation between Government and the private
sector is crucial Government will encourage the establishment of demonstration
projects to show the different technologies, which could be adopted This effort
will assist in the promotion of the acceptable technologies in order to ensure
access to appropriate services in rural areas Energy savings practices will also
be demonstrated and promoted for use in rural households 20 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy It is
recognised that improvements in the selection and use of energy options in
households can only be realised once women are fully involved in the decision
making process This relates to benefits, access, ownership and control  Co-
operation in rural development Numerous development projects and programmes are
always in progress at any one time in the rural areas In some instances
different agencies plan and implement projects without consulting other agencies
with  potential interest in the areas concerned While duplication is not always
harmful, it is often not the best way of utilising scarce resources Co-operation
and dialogue among institutions such as Government, NGOs, communities and donor
agencies needs to be enhanced so as to realise the full benefits of programmes
aimed at rural areas On the other hand it is recognised that provision of energy
alone cannot solve rural problems but that energy can play  significant part
within broader development programmes Government will ensure meaningful
integration of energy within broader rural development interventions through
forging dialogue and co-ordination among agencies and communities involved It is
recognised that it is difficult to provide energy services in rural areas due to
the dispersed nature of settlements Government, through the National
Resettlement Policy will promote resettlement to facilitate cost-effective
infrastructure development The financing of schemes to increase access to energy
is crucial for uplifting the quality of life for rural households Government
will encourage the use of credit schemes for energy projects for rural
households  Knowledge transfer and information dissemination Education and
knowledge transfer is  key instrument for improving the quality of energy
services in rural areas Rural communities require information and education on
alternative energy technology options, new technology options, limitations,
costs and operational know-how National awareness raising programmes and action
strategies aimed at improving education and information dissemination on energy
technology options, costs and technical know-how will be developed and
implemented Government extension workers, NGOs, CBOs and community leaders will
form  cornerstone of  strategy to implement this policy Once energy supplies are
improved, Government will promote the use of energy efficient equipment and
raise awareness on energy saving methods 21 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Urban households For
the purposes of this document, urban areas are those defined in the Urban
Government Act or gazette; and settlements associated with large companies, so
called company towns Urban energy requirements consist mainly of the commerce
and services sector as well as the household sector About 23% of the total
population and the equivalent of approximately 58,700 households live in urban
areas (1997 census) In major urban areas and company towns, an estimated 40 – 50
% of households use electricity Paraffin and LPG are used extensively as cooking
fuels for lower income households Wood fuel is  minor and declining fuel in
urban centres, and is used for both cooking and for space heating Distribution
of energy to households, primarily coal and LPG in company town still persists
There are however, indications that LPG and electricity are gradually displacing
coal in company towns Electricity is the most preferred energy carrier for end-
users in urban areas Frequent power cuts especially under severe weather
conditions are the major concern of households The tariff system, which allows
cross-subsidies between consumer categories, results in relatively low
electricity prices for households However, this is still unaffordable to many
households  Grid electricity Electricity is the energy carrier of choice for
routine household chores Electric cooking, though not the most efficient in
terms of energy use, is convenient and relatively safe Electric lighting can
improve the standard of living and assist education and income generating
activities etc Most gadgets and equipment around the households are designed to
be powered by electricity Therefore, access and reliability of the electricity
service is  key factor in raising the standard of living for urban households
The electric power system in urban areas will be upgraded and maintained in
order to deliver  quality and reliable service to urban households Innovative
means of improving service delivery to urban areas will be developed Such
innovative means could include easier and quicker methods for reporting and
responding to faults; convenient payment arrangements; and methods to improve
system integrity Government will encourage utilities and service providers to
increase connectivity of urban households The actual provision of electricity
and the attraction of new consumers is the domain of utilities and service
providers In urban areas, increasing the number of connections will benefit the
utilities and service providers, subsequently increasing the economies of scale
of their operations  Energy savings and  nergy efficiency in urban households
Rational use of energy and cultivation of  culture for energy conservation in
households has not received sufficient attention Many households are not aware
of the cost saving 22 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy opportunities resulting in the use of more
efficient appliances and how to differentiate efficient from inefficient
equipment There are also low cost energy saving opportunities in applying
correct building practices and improvement of the thermal performance of houses
There is thus  need to formulate programmes suitable for both low-income and
higher income households to stimulate energy conservation Demonstration
programmes can form  key element in the implementation of energy savings and
conservation Co-operation with energy service providers is necessary for
sustainability of this effort An awareness creation programme and action
strategy aimed at improving energy savings and conservation in urban households
will be developed and promoted Many of these strategies under urban households
will also apply to rural households  Peri-urban energy The term “peri-urban” in
this document refers to areas outside formal urban boundaries and jurisdictions,
which are in the process of urbanisation These areas are characterised by high
population density; fast and unplanned growth resulting in, amongst others, poor
health and environmental conditions; poor service infrastructure; lower income
levels; unclear jurisdiction in matters of planning, land tenure and land
transfer and fluid boundaries Furthermore, people in peri-urban areas are
reluctant to invest due to insecurity of land and property ownership This
includes investing in energy services The energy needs of peri-urban areas are
to an extent  hybrid between those of rural and urban areas and are the least
understood Paraffin plays  more significant role in energy provision but there
is  gradual transition to LPG and electricity Bottlenecks in the transition to
electricity use are the relatively high connection costs, wiring costs,
appliance costs and the general insecurity of ownership The energy needs and
characteristics of peri-urban areas will be examined and the means of improving
access to appropriate energy services will be determined and applied 23 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
SUPPLY SECTORS  Coal  Overview Coal is the only naturally occurring fossil fuel
in the country The coal reserves, defined as “run-of- mine” reserves, amount to
million tonnes, while the probable and potential reserves are estimated to be at
least  billion tonnes Swaziland therefore holds large resources that are
untapped At present the Maloma Colliery is the only operating mine Maloma
exports all of its production, which fluctuates considerably due to market
conditions In 2000, the production was 228,000 tonnes compared to the 1998 level
of 410,000 tonnes Another mine, EmaSwati Coal Mine based at Mpaka, was closed
mainly due to the low international coal prices around 1990-Other potential
mining areas are at Mhlume, Hlane, Lubhuku, St Philips and Mpaka Area  The coal
reserves consist of semi-anthracite and anthracite coal, which have  high energy
content and low content of volatiles and sulphur While anthracitic coal can be
used for power generation, it is presently more valuable if sold for industrial
purposes Domestic anthracitic coal is therefore exported for use in the
metallurgical and cement industries, while cheaper bituminous coal is imported
from South Africa for use as  fuel In 1999, imported bituminous coal amounted to
243,000 tonnes While the anthracitic coal has good characteristics for use in
the metallurgical industry, when used as  fuel it has some limitations, such as
poor ignition characteristics and clinkerisation of ash The most appropriate
indigenous coal that could be used in industry, as well as for power generation,
is semi-anthracite, which constitutes the greater part of the national coal
reserves However, both the anthracite and semi-anthracite coals would require
retrofits to boilers, stoves etc if they were to be used locally Most of the
bituminous coal imported from South Africa is used in the sugar and pulp
industries and to  lesser degree in households In some cases coal is used for
combined heat and power generation within the industries Import of coal is
mainly done directly by the industries While the export of the indigenous coal
is beneficial to the overall economy of Swaziland, there is  need to review its
use for energy purposes within the country This would have advantages with
regard to employment, particularly in the mining sector, security of energy
supply and establishing  local market to sustain the mines Domestic anthracitic
coal is also less polluting than imported bituminous coal in terms of sulphur
emissions However, coal is one of the most polluting fuels with high emissions
of CO2 There are therefore both advantages and disadvantages regarding the
increased use of coal The benefits of coal use must therefore be weighed against
the global and local 24 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy environmental consequences Another important
question is national security of energy supply If investments are to be made for
intensified use of indigenous coal it must be ascertained that the supply
actually is available and will continue to be in the longer term Local coal
could potentially be used for the following industrial purposes: gasification
plant fuel, cement and ceramics kiln fuel, thermal power generation fuel, in the
manufacture of carbides and electrodes, and as  reductant in the ferro-alloy
industry Such industries are not yet present in Swaziland For household purposes
it should be noted that coal used indoors can cause health problems and local
environmental problems However, the local anthracitic coal is  low smoke fuel
compared to imported low quality bituminous coal and therefore not as damaging
to both health and the local environment The lack of  Mining Policy in Swaziland
in the past has been  hindrance in the development of the mining industry in
general Once the Mining Policy is in place, there may be some interesting
possibilities for an increased use of Swaziland’ coal resources However, these
must be weighed carefully against the drawbacks, which include health
considerations, global and local environmental effects and costs  Main issues
From an energy point of view, the key policy issues in this sector include the
need to: • Establish the real costs and benefits of expanded coal use in the
country and if feasible, ensure  conducive and enabling environment so as to
encourage development and investment in the coal industry in Swaziland; • Ensure
that the environmental damage resulting from the use of coal is monitored and
kept to  minimum; • Maximise skills and expertise from returning employees in
the coal mining industry; and Improve production in local coal mines •
Substituting imported coal for indigenous coal Use of indigenous anthracite and
semi-anthracite coal could enhance energy security of supply, benefit balance of
payments and reduce local pollution However, indigenous coal is more expensive
and requires investment in retrofitting of boilers, stoves etc If such equipment
can be produced in Swaziland this may also benefit local employment in the
manufacturing industry and the use of returning miners’ expertise and skills in
increasing coal mining operations Government will conduct  cost-benefit analysis
regarding increased use of indigenous coal in the industry and households taking
due consideration of the environmental and health consequences The use of clean
coal technologies will in particular be assessed by all stakeholders involved in
the utilisation of coal 25 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  Establishment of  coal-fired thermal power
station in Swaziland Swaziland today imports electricity from South Africa at
relatively low unit price, making indigenous electricity generation less
favourable from  purely economical point of view However, the present surplus of
generating capacity in South Africa is expected to diminish in the coming years
In the medium term, import prices for electricity may increase significantly,
thereby making local power generation more attractive The establishment of
power station may also allow Swaziland to be an active player in the SAPP with
the potential to sell power in the regional market The 400kV line and
electricity network strengthening has made it possible to import and export
electricity within the SADC region  number of feasibility studies have been
carried out by the private sector regarding the establishment of  coal-fired
thermal power station However, these studies focused on commercial and financial
interests rather than the social, economic and environmental interests of the
country  feasibility study on the establishment of  coal-fired thermal power
station will be conducted This study shall include strategic considerations such
as increased security of supply and the question of mining semi-anthracite coal
from the now closed coal mine and from other potential sites This study shall
also assess the environmental and social aspects and the involvement of locals
in the mining industry Government, in co-operation with the private sector,
could jointly conduct the study  Potential for coal-bed methane There are no
known coal-bed methane reserves in Swaziland but there may be need for further
investigation to ascertain if such additional energy resources could be
available  barrier for such an investigation is the costs involved The resource
potential for coal-bed methane and its use for energy purposes will be
investigated  Pricing and taxation of coal Currently, prices are not regulated
and there are neither incentives nor levies or extra taxation for using coal for
energy purposes Pricing mechanisms , if developed, could be powerful instruments
used to support policies on the use of coal and the type of coal used Government
will investigate the appropriateness of various pricing incentives and taxation
so as to encourage the use of clean coal technologies Studies on the potential
uses of local coal may facilitate the implementation of policies Means of
implementing this policy could include approaches such as stimulating 26 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
mechanisms whereby the use of clean coal technologies is rewarded and
regulations whereby the use of dirtier technologies is restricted  Time-frame
for coal utilisation Since Swaziland’ known resources of coal could cover more
than 500 years of production, the need for future coal supply and present
consumption are not in conflict Government will facilitate sustainable and
expedient utilisation of the coal resources by private sector interests, in line
with sustainable human development goals articulated in the NDS There is  need
to provide  conducive environment for investments in coal mining and the
establishment of coal based local enterprises The Mining Policy will address
these concerns and hence make it easier for prospective investors to undertake
mining operations Local coal mines will be encouraged to increase production,
especially for export In addition, it is necessary to keep an up-to-date data
system to monitor the coal resources  Petroleum products  Overview Swaziland
holds no known reserves of oil All petroleum products are imported from the
Republic of South Africa through five international oil companies: Shell, BP,
Engen, Total and Caltex The petroleum products are imported via rail and road
and in most cases distributed from the storage depots in Matsapha Presently,
there are two main suppliers of LPG and  number of suppliers of lubricating oils
The Government considers the supply of petroleum products to be of strategic
importance Therefore prices of petrol, diesel and illuminating paraffin are
subject to regulation Petrol and diesel are significant inputs in the production
process and are  livelihood for many local businesses in public transportation
The price of illuminating paraffin on the other hand is monitored because it is
fuel for low-income groups The market sets prices of the other petroleum
products such as lubricating oil, jet fuel, heavy fuel oil and LPG The price of
LPG is at present not regulated even though mainly low- income households use it
With regard to pricing of petroleum products the global trend is to leave the
pricing to market forces For Swaziland the situation is that all petroleum
products are presently imported from South Africa where there is  regulation of
product prices The In-Land- Bonded-Cost (IBLC) of the product to the port of
Durban, deemed to be purchased from Bahrain and Singapore, influences the cost
of landed fuel at Matsapha (import parity) Additionally, Government imposes the
following taxes and levies: Fuel Tax, Sales Tax, Customs and Excise Duty, Fuel
Oil Levy and MVA (third party insurance) The profit 27 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy margins for
the industry and retailers, other costs related to handling, transportation and
storage of the products are added, finally giving the retail price at the pump
The main influences on the calculated prices are the international oil prices
and the exchange rate between US $ and the Lilangeni The same pricing model
(IBLC) is used in all SACU Member Countries The Ministry monitors international
pricing conditions as well as each product’ slate position on  monthly basis
Proposals for changes in the prices of regulated products are discussed and
recommended by the Fuel Pricing Committee The Committee comprises
representatives from Government Ministries, the petroleum sector and consumer
interests The Fuel Price Controller, in consultation with the Minister for
Natural Resources and Energy, approves prices based on the Committee’
recommendations One of the roles of the Ministry is to protect the interests of
consumers and to ensure access to affordable petroleum products The number of
retail stations is controlled through the Petrol Rationalisation Committee The
committee has the objective of controlling the number of retail outlets so as to
maintain economic viability in the industry while also encouraging high service
standards for the consumer and public The committee achieves its role through
Service Station Rationalisation Plan (RATPLAN), which is  five-year-plan The
RATPLAN is not  legal document but an agreement amongst the five companies and
Government on the sharing and location of sites and the number of retail outlets
The Ministry will embark on the process of updating, amending and consolidating
existing pieces of to produce an all-embracing and comprehensive Petroleum Act
Relevant legislation includes the Fuel Oil levy Act of 1980, the Price Control
Order of 1973, and the Petroleum legislation of In addition,  draft bill has
also been completed, to establish an Energy Regulatory Authority primarily for
the electricity sector However, it is intended that regulation of the petroleum
sector will be incorporated at  later date legislation on petroleum Security of
supply especially for petroleum products continues to be  problem Current
petroleum fuel storage capacity stands on average at - days This is considered
to be very low compared to other countries and  cause for concern because
Swaziland, as  landlocked country, has few alternative options in case of major
supply disruptions, which could for example be as  result of accidents in
refineries, natural disasters etc In 1990, the Ministry embarked on
prefeasibility study concerning strategic fuel depots and  feasibility study on
ethanol blending using the molasses from the three sugar mills in the country
There is therefore  need to conduct studies that will investigate the viability
of establishing strategic stocks for the country, including the site, size and
organisational structure The possibilities for blending petrol with ethanol or
other biofuels also needs to be investigated There are large natural gas
resources in the region that have been discovered and are being exploited The
Ministry, through regional and international forums, will explore 28 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
opportunities for taking advantage of this energy resource for the
diversification of energy supplies to the country  Main issues The challenges
for the petroleum sector include the following: • Regulation of the petroleum
industry; • Ensuring adequate product availability in rural areas while not
undermining the oil industry’ economic competitiveness; • Ensuring stable and
reliable product availability for the country’ various economic sectors; •
Achieving regional competitiveness and fair pricing of petroleum fuels; •
Encouraging meaningful and sustainable participation of locals in the industry;
• Ensuring that jobs, particularly on the forecourts, are not jeopardised and
that new jobs are created; and • Ensuring adequate commercial storage of
petroleum products  Regulation of the petroleum industry The Government
regulates the petroleum industry in the country,  petrols, diesel and paraffin
All companies importing and distributing petroleum products must be registered
with the Ministry The retailing of petroleum products is regulated through the
RATPLAN Pricing is regulated using the SACU In-Bond-Landed-Cost (IBLC) model
Swaziland’ petroleum market is closely linked to SACU, which implements the
system of regulating petroleum product prices according to the IBLC formula This
formula is undergoing review in order to make it relevant for today’ trading
environments as well as to improve its transparency Price regulation shall be
maintained in the short term and will be subject to review so as to ascertain
its appropriateness and relevance in the longer term Government will closely
monitor the oil market and pricing issues in practice and evaluate the need for
revised regulation of the petroleum product prices The procedures for price
regulation will be reviewed in the proposed Petroleum Act In the longer term the
liberalisation of the petroleum market will be considered subject to regional
developments The Government, in collaboration with the Oil Industry and SACU
and/or SADC Member States, will also strive to work towards  pricing mechanism
that reflects the true costs of importing products into the country Meanwhile
the Government will consider if regulation of oil prices shall only apply to the
wholesale prices and let the local market determine the retail prices Government
will investigate deregulation options in the medium to long term The regulatory
framework will be monitored and reviewed on  regular basis or in the event of
significant development in the regional or international environment 29 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
Government will investigate the regulation of other petroleum products The
regime of price regulation in Southern Africa will need to be taken into account
The Ministry is presently the regulator on petroleum prices, however the
regulatory function may be transferred to the proposed Energy Regulatory
Authority (ERA) at  future date  Marketing and distribution The Service Station
Rationalisation Plan (RATPLAN) intends to secure availability of oil products
around Swaziland by regulating the number of outlets while taking economic
development of the oil industry into consideration Regulation of service
stations and fuel outlets by means of the Rationalisation Plan will be
maintained, and modifications to the Plan will be effected every five years For
effectiveness of the RATPLAN, Government will ensure that newcomers in the
market also comply In future, trading licenses for petroleum wholesale and
retail should be obtained from the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy in
order to improve governance of the sector This will be reflected in the proposed
Petroleum Act, including legalising the RATPLAN In the meantime, closer co-
ordination between the Ministry of Enterprise and Employment and the Ministry
when issuing licenses for petroleum marketing is necessary Since access to
modern energy services in rural areas is one of the key objectives of the energy
policy, means to improve supply and distribution of petroleum products in rural
areas should be investigated Government in collaboration with the oil industry
(including LPG suppliers) will develop effective means of ensuring adequate
access to petroleum products Government will work closely with local businesses
involved in the petroleum industry especially the dealer councils and
associations  Commercial fuel storage facilities The oil industry’ storage
facilities are located in Matsapha Normally the storage holds supply for - days
of operations, while dealers hold - days of supply At present there are limited
possibilities to expand the storage facilities in Matsapha These stocks are
maintained to secure smooth operation of the supply chain under normal
circumstances In case of major disruptions in the oil supplies, these stocks may
not be adequate This is  critical issue because, being  landlocked country,
Swaziland has few alternative supply routes for fuel in case of supply problems
Government will require commercial companies to store  minimum quantity of
stocks to ensure fuel availability 30 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy An appropriate minimum will be
determined in collaboration with the oil industry taking into consideration the
costs involved  Procurement Procurement of oil products for commercial use is
natural part of the industry’ activities, which may be best taken care of by the
companies in the market Government’ interests are in ensuring good product
quality so as to protect local consumers and also encouraging diversity of
product sourcing Government will put in place quality control measures that will
ensure that marketers of oil products adhere to agreed product specifications -
including environmental considerations - and that these conform to regional
and/or international standards Government needs to carefully consider in the
future investigating means and ways to participate and get involved in the
procurement of this product This could be done in the most cost-effective manner
in partnership with one of the players in the industry Government will ensure
diversification of the sources of petroleum products imported into the country
so as to enhance security of supply as well take advantage of competitively
priced fuels available in the international markets The establishment of
refinery has also been debated on several occasions; however the size of the
local market and the logistical problems in exporting from the refinery, as well
as the huge investment costs do not favour such an idea at present However, in
the medium to long term, the establishment of  refinery may be an option and
this position will be reviewed when the need arises  Involvement of locals
Today, all oil companies are foreign international companies trading as local
companies More local involvement in the industry could be achieved through the
development of programmes to assist interested locals in entering the market
Other opportunities include increased involvement of locals in providing
services to the industry such as the maintenance of dispensing and other
technical systems Government will ensure the oil industry increases the
involvement of locals Government is also considering the establishment of
national oil company responsible for the strategic stockholding, in co-operation
with the oil industry  Use of indigenous biofuels There are some plants that can
be grown specifically for oil extraction to use  biofuel,  maize rape seed,
sunflower seed, jathropa cursas, and euphorbia Some of the oils can directly
substitute petroleum fuels like paraffin and diesel, although blending with
other fuels is the predominant method of using biofuels It is technically
feasible to 31 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy produce ethanol from molasses,  by-product of sugar
manufacturing There are presently two companies in the country producing ethanol
from molasses Ethanol can be used as  supplement for petroleum; but it must be
ensured that the petrol meets the required specifications for the country’
vehicles The use of ethanol will have positive environmental effects and also
benefit the balance of payments and economic development in the industries
concerned Ethanol blending with petroleum takes place in some countries and many
of the technological problems have been resolved The commercial introduction of
this option in the local market is therefore the main issue Government will
conduct further investigations on blending ethanol with petrol with  focus on
introducing products in the local markets It is envisaged that  small-scale
demonstration project will be commissioned in consultation with vehicle dealers
and the oil industry, before embarking on  full-scale scheme, if this option is
found appropriate  Pricing and distribution of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) The
LPG market is not regulated, as is the case for other petroleum products; and
the suppliers and dealers are not part of any stakeholder group The price for
LPG varies considerably across the country It is to  high degree used in the
urban and peri-urban areas by low and middle income households; the distribution
to remote areas is costly Government will monitor pricing of LPG products more
closely and will facilitate  closer dialogue between herself, suppliers and
dealers The need for price regulation of LPG will be investigated Government
will also ensure the distribution of information on the safe use of LPG
Electricity  Overview Electricity supply and use is one of the most important
themes within the energy sector in Swaziland The organisational infrastructure,
the technical performance, and delivery mechanism are just  few of the
challenges the sector faces The mission for the Swaziland electricity supply
industry is to provide affordable and accessible electricity to meet social and
economic needs, in  financially and environmentally sustainable manner, while
optimising the use of national energy and infrastructure resources The global
trend is liberalisation of the electricity sector The objectives of this
liberalisation are that electricity should be produced more efficiently and
traded in 32 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy competitive markets and thus result in lower tariffs New
investments and new players could also be attracted to the business This
situation puts specific emphasis on how the sector should be regulated and how
the existing utilities shall be reorganised in order to survive in the new
environment with increased competition Swaziland’ electricity supply is to  high
degree dependent on imported electricity from South Africa This is  cause for
concern with regard to security of supply since almost all supplies come from
one source Increased utilisation of local energy resources – hydro, coal,
biomass, solar and wind - could alleviate this problem However, the situation
today is that electricity imports are relatively cheap due to excess capacity in
the region Therefore new technologies may seem uneconomic in the shorter term In
the longer term the regional excess capacity is expected to diminish and imports
prices may therefore increase making other supply alternatives more attractive
Also, Swaziland faces challenges regarding the security, reliability and quality
of supplies as the local electricity supply often experiences power cuts This is
consequence of  combination of poor weather conditions with excessive lightening
and  weak power grid with little reserve capacity The country has for  long time
been supplied from three 132 kV lines The integration of the 400 kV transmission
line will now improve the power supply situation Another important question is
the extension of electricity supply Only about 20% of the population are
connected to the grid and there is  huge gap between the urban and rural
households with regard to connection On average % of urban households are
connected, whereas in rural areas only about % of the households are connected
Access to electricity is considered an important part of the standard and
quality of life and alleviation of poverty Social and economic consequences of
extended supply must therefore be carefully considered and evaluated against
each other Further extension of the electricity supply is not only  technical
problem The major problem is that extending the grid into sparsely populated
areas is uneconomic from the utilities point of view, because the electricity
consumption is too low compared to the grid extension and maintenance costs In
1999 electricity counted for 10% of Swaziland’ total energy consumption Of the
total electricity consumption of 988 GWh, 15% is consumed by the households, 14%
by the agricultural sector while industry, commerce and services account for 71%
Most of the electricity consumed in industry can be attributed to  small number
of large companies The Government owned Swaziland Electricity Board (SEB) has
monopoly on the import, distribution and supply of electricity through the
national grid SEB operates according to the Electricity Act of 1963 and the
Public Enterprises (Control and Monitoring) Act of In addition to the
electricity supplied from SEB, some of the major industries produce electricity
for their own industrial consumption and for their company towns These 33 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
companies are connected to the national grid but do not sell the generated
electricity to SEB As described in figure , the total electricity supply in
Swaziland in 1999 amounted to ,100 GWh Of this 639 GWh (%) was imported from
South Africa by SEB 196 GWh (%) was produced from domestic hydro power plants,
mainly operated by SEB SEB also produced  GWh (%) from their diesel generator
The industries produced 264 GWh (%) Figure : Total electricity supply, 1999
(,100 GWh) Industrial generation % Import % Hydro % Diesel plant ,% In the
National Development Strategy it is stated that future options for the
development of the Swaziland electricity supply industry shall be identified and
options for competition and private sector participation shall be investigated
Swaziland is  party to the SADC Protocol on Energy of 1996 and  member of the
Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) The SAPP enables SEB to trade freely within
the Power Pool with respect to purchase of bulk power and energy The SADC Energy
Protocol states that the members of SADC shall strive towards an integrated
power system that would be productively used and optimally managed in an
environmentally sound manner The protocol sets forth the following guidelines
for regional integration and co-operation: electricity trading and power pooling
shall be promoted within the SAPP; integrated resource planning in the
electricity sector shall be promoted;  regional electricity master plan shall be
developed; and common regional standards, rules and procedures relevant to
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity shall be promoted,
particularly in areas where the region holds  comparative advantage The
electricity infrastructure shall be developed and utilised in an environmentally
sound manner, and electricity projects shall be subject to environmental impact
assessments in conformity with agreed standards Universal and affordable service
to all citizens and the importance of quality customer service in national
electricity policies shall be emphasised 34 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Main issues There are
therefore many challenges facing Swaziland’ electricity sector These may
include: • The globalisation trend in the world towards liberalising energy
markets with consequences on ownership, re-organisation and investment; •
Ensuring reliability and quality of power supplies; • Inefficiencies in the
Electricity Supply Industry; • Introduction of  regulatory framework capable of
securing  market oriented electricity supply industry, which at the same time
attracts new players and investments; Increased use of indigenous energy
resources for electricity generation, thereby contributing to the security of
supply; • • Securing development of the sector in an environmentally sustainable
manner; • Ensuring continuing increase of quality and reliability of electricity
supply; • Affordability of electricity supply for consumers; • • Increasing
access of electricity throughout the country; and Increasing cost reflectivity
and transparency of electricity tariffs  Restructuring of the Electricity Supply
Industry (ESI) As in many countries in the region, the ESI in Swaziland is
undergoing major reforms that intend to liberalise the industry and allow more
effective private sector participation Presently, the legislation and regulation
of the Swaziland ESI is based on the 1963 Electricity Act This Act is considered
amongst all parties to be outdated and not reflective of recent developments in
the ESI Government’ objectives for the ESI, among others, are to: • • Facilitate
economic development by increasing access; • Attract/ facilitate private sector
involvement in the ESI; • Mobilise finance; • • Reform the legal and regulatory
framework; • Improve ease of connection and reduce costs; • Increase public
acceptability; • Enhance security of supply; and • Ensure consistency with
international trends Improve quality and reliability of supply; Increase
commercialisation/customer orientation in the ESI; In March 1998, Cabinet made
decision to corporatise the utility and establish an independent regulatory
authority The aim of the restructuring process is to facilitate the
commercialisation of the ESI through  new legal framework and regulatory reform
This will allow private participation and third party access, enable the
monitoring of performance and allow reform and transparency in pricing In this
context corporatisation 35 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy means the transfer of SEB from  Governmental
parastatal to  company operating under the Companies Act Following Government’
decision,  review of the 1963 Electricity Act was undertaken and new Electricity
and Energy Regulatory Authority Bills will be in place in the short term The
legal status of SEB will evolve in stages in line with Government’ Privatisation
Policy The initial corporasitation will not affect the ownership, as the new
company will remain fully owned by Government An independent Energy Regulatory
Authority, once in place, will be responsible for the monitoring and controlling
of the industry and the issuing of licences In the initial stages, it will
regulate the electricity industry; in the future its mandate will be expected to
cover the whole energy sector Realising that Swaziland is  small country, steps
would be undertaken to ensure that, before the electricity market is unbundled,
the market will be developed to sustain itself and to make sure that the energy
supply is not neglected Government will continue with the present restructuring
process and will investigate the various commercialisation opportunities for the
electricity supply industry  timetable for restructuring will be put in place in
the short term, with clear objectives and targets and procedures for review and
monitoring Through the restructuring of the electricity supply industry
Government will ease the way for attracting investments to the power sector This
process will also identify opportunities for the involvement and empowerment of
locals  Electricity infrastructure Prior to 2000, electricity was imported from
South Africa through three 132 kV lines with  total capacity of 96 MW
Subsequently  400 kV transmission line between Mozambique and South Africa
through Swaziland has been established, adding 250MW to the capacity Although
the 400 kV line was built with the intention of supplying power from Eskom to an
aluminium smelter in Maputo, it also contributes to Swaziland’ security of
supply, as SEB is tapping power from the line The integration of the 400 kV line
into the national grid will improve the quality of supply to industry Power
outages within this sector, even for  short period, can result in huge losses of
production This situation is improving as  result of the ongoing system-
strengthening programme Later on this improvement will also be realised in
households once the system integration project is finalised and further
upgrading of the national grid has taken place The Government has also been
encouraging the development of industrial areas in selected areas outside the
Manzini-Mbabane corridor It is necessary that the electricity infrastructure be
geared to support this objective Government will continue to facilitate
improvement of the electricity supply infrastructure and thus improve the energy
supply service 36 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy This will also be beneficial to the industrial sector as
part of the overall strategy for attracting investment  Production In 1999, the
domestic electricity production amounted to 460 GWh SEB produced 190 GWh from
the hydropower plants at Edwaleni, Ezulwini, Maguduza and Mbabane  privately
owned hydro plant also produced  GWh, and SEB produced  GWh from their diesel
unit Installed capacity of the SEB hydro plants is 41 MW and the diesel units
add  MW The remaining electricity production came from independent producers,
mainly from the major industries Ubombo, Mhlume and Simunye sugar mills and the
pulp industry Together these four companies produced 264 GWh, 27% of the
electricity consumed in Swaziland, thus contributing considerably to the overall
supply For the sugar mills the electricity produced is mainly based on bagasse
and coal The pulp industry utilises black liquor,  by-product in the pulp
production process, together with wood waste and bark All electricity produced
is co-generated with steam for industrial processes, and is used for their own
industrial purposes and for supply to the nearby company towns At present there
are no arrangements for selling self-generated electricity to the grid, but this
will in future be facilitated with the coming of new legislation for the sector
The restructuring of the electricity supply industry will also facilitate access
to the market for third party producers by creating  level playing field and as
such pave the way for increased security of supply An important feature within
the production sector could also be the utilisation of domestic coal in power
production as dealt with under Section  on Coal Government will ensure there are
clear guidelines for opening access to the national grid Increased utilisation
of indigenous energy resources for electricity will improve security of supply,
create job-opportunities and stimulate the economic growth Due to the relatively
low import prices at present these opportunities are more relevant in the medium
term Government will carry out investigations and promote efficient and
environmentally sound technologies for the utilisation of indigenous resources
for electricity production  Hydro potential, wind and solar energy As mentioned
above, SEB produces the major part of hydro-based electricity in Swaziland SEB’
hydro-based installed capacity is MW 37 Energy Policy Final Revision September
doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Additional capacity could come
from the Maguga Dam The Maguga power plant could, once developed, operate with
capacity of 19 MW in peak periods There is  modest potential for run-of-river
plants particularly in the scale of less than 1MW, which might be suitable for
local off-grid solutions possibly in combination with other stand-alone
technologies Electricity generation from solar photovoltaic is increasingly
gaining ground in many countries Some of these systems are grid connected and
can be integrated into facades of buildings The costs however, remain very high
compared to traditional electricity technologies But the costs are decreasing
and for the time being, solar photovoltaic is  realistic alternative to supply
isolated areas with distances too long and costly for the normal grid World
wide, wind electricity generation has been growing rapidly in recent years In
many cases wind turbines provide  significant input to traditional energy
sources and are becoming increasingly economically attractive The competitive
situation of wind energy is dependent on the wind conditions and the alternative
supply costs Activities are being carried out in Swaziland to gain further
information on the solar and wind resources to help evaluate their economical
viability These renewable energy resources are necessary from an environmental
and security point of view However, economically these technologies must be able
to compete with traditional energy sources, which for the time being are
relatively cheap in Swaziland, otherwise they will have to be subsidised
Swaziland’ economic situation may not favour large scale subsidies, however
direct subsidies alongside other ways to support the development of renewable
energy sources, will be required The Kyoto Protocol, and the subsequently
developed instruments for investments in cleaner energy options, may support the
establishment of such systems in Swaziland and thereby subsidise the sector
Indirectly, investments in clean technology systems in Swaziland will reduce the
need for coal based electricity produced in other countries and be beneficial
both to the regional and global climate Renewable energy solutions and other IPP
technologies can also be supported by Public Service Obligations (PSO), which is
levy imposed on the users of an electricity grid Such provisions are common in
other liberalised electricity markets The initiatives on restructuring the
electricity sector are also  possibility to create an environment to facilitate
the entry of new technologies into the supply system Government will support
programmes promoting the utilisation of renewable energy resources for
electricity production Government will establish and support demonstration
plants aimed at promoting the utilisation of the various technologies 38 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
Another, often overseen, indigenous energy resource is the generation of heat
and power using waste incineration Use of landfill gas is also  possibility in
the future In the longer term when waste collection, disposal, and treatment of
waste is more developed and the quantities justify it, the possibilities for
utilising these resources should be further evaluated  Independent Power
Producers (IPP) Independent Power Producers (IPPs) refer in general to private
firms or other entities that produce energy for sale to the national grid and/or
for own purposes The existing local generators within the sugar and pulp
industries could be developed into IPP’ if they also delivered power to the grid
Presently, the installed capacity of independent industrial production plants is
approximately 50MW These industries may be able to increase their production of
electricity in order to be self- sufficient or to sell electricity to the
national grid if the playing field is level The following benefits could be
achieved: increased efficiency of energy conversion and use; increased diversity
of electricity supplies; job creation; reduction in electricity imports; and
reduction of harmful emissions There is  huge potential for the use of
indigenous resources in the production of electricity and process heat in
Swaziland The large coal reserves represent the most obvious resource but also
bagasse and wood waste could be utilised further Feasibility studies are being
considered on establishment of plants for further utilisation of bagasse From
the viewpoint of security of supply and local employment, utilisation of these
resources is desirable However, the viability of production of electricity is
highly dependent on the prevailing electricity prices in the region, which for
the time being are rather low It is therefore difficult for IPPs to compete with
the low import prices SEB obtain from South Africa Since the low import prices
are caused by an over capacity in South Africa, which is expected to diminish
over the coming years, prices in the longer terms are expected to increase and
thereby making production from IPP generators more financially viable The
challenge today for Swaziland is to establish  regulatory framework that enables
the establishment of IPPs, but at the same time realising that the establishment
of such generators is at present not financially attractive without incentives
It is possible that development of IPP’ which utilise renewable energy resources
can benefit from the international initiatives related to the agreements on the
Kyoto Protocol being developed by the UNFCCC Part of this agreement is to
develop mechanisms to support environmental friendly electricity production The
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) may support IPP solutions, which from  narrow
economic point of view are less economically viable The CDM guidelines are
currently being developed 39 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Government will create an enabling
environment to allow the establishment of IPPs in the country and support
projects to be implemented The private sector will be the driving force in the
establishment of IPPs The licensing procedures for IPPs will ensure the company
fulfils specified social responsibilities, as defined by the proposed Energy
Regulatory Authority The potential for IPPs will regularly be reviewed An
important aspect of this programme will be exploring the potential of
utilisation of CDM or similar funds with environmental objectives  secretariat
within the Government will be established to provide information on procedures
and developments under the CDM programme  Tariffs Electricity prices to
consumers differ considerably based on consumption patterns and requirements
However, the price the consumer pays does not necessarily reflect the true costs
of supplying the power Recent tariff studies indicate that domestic consumers
pay less than the actual costs of electricity service, whilst commercial and
industrial consumers are being overcharged (compared to the costs of supplying
them) The electricity tariff in the country is uniform for domestic consumers
However, there is  high cost of servicing rural domestic consumers due to the
low number of connections The situation, when some consumer groups pay more than
others and the differences are not justified in real cost, is referred to as
cross-subsidisation In principle, tariffs with cross subsidies should be avoided
and “true” cost reflective tariffs imposed However, there might be good reasons
for some cross subsidies  special tariff for low-income groups (poverty tariff)
would also have some social benefits There might also be  need to introduce more
flexible tariffs reflecting the regional situation where import prices vary over
the day and season Generally, there is  need that the way tariffs are
constructed and their relation to costs should be made fully transparent
Government will ensure that electricity tariffs are fully transparent and cost-
reflective There will continue to be  justification for some cross subsidisation
for rural consumers The options for more flexible tariffs (eg smart tariffs,
poverty tariffs etc) and cost reflective tariffs will be further investigated 40
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy  Renewable energy  Overview Renewable energy resources tap naturally
occurring flows of energy to produce electricity, fuel, heat, or  combination of
these energy types Swaziland has several renewable energy resources including
biomass, solar energy, and hydro energy Commercial biomass energy in the form of
bagasse and wood waste is used for heat and electricity production in local
industry The amounts of bagasse and wood waste converted to energy in 1999 were
about  million tonnes and 990,000 tonnes respectively Traditionally biomass,
especially wood fuel, constitutes about 90 % of the total energy consumed in
rural areas Wood fuel supply, mainly through indigenous forests, is declining
due to the unsustainable management of the resource Many people in rural areas
are now facing decreased wood fuel availability across the country In 1995
(Rural Household Energy Survey), the estimated total wood increment was 317, 000
tons, while the estimated demand was 475, 000 tons, implying  shortage of
158,000 tons In 1991, the Ministry undertook  countrywide project to demonstrate
woodlots for firewood supply The project had some success in some areas and
improved the wood fuel supply situation but it has not been formally evaluated
The Ministry has also been involved in  number of initiatives to promote
efficient wood stoves primarily through the private sector Swaziland’ wind and
solar regime is not well documented as limited data is available However,  long-
term resource measurement programme has been established Five sets of measuring
equipment were installed at National Meteorological Services (MET) and Rural
Development Area (RDA) sites around the country in early 2001, to ascertain the
wind and solar resource status Preliminary indications are that annual solar
averages are very favourable and lie between  to  kWh/m2 per day The most
popular use of solar energy has been in solar photovoltaic (PV) systems The
estimated installed capacity of solar PV is 56 kW peak mainly in private
residential systems, telecommunication systems and signalling systems on the
railways The Ministry has been involved in various initiatives to promote the
use of solar energy From 1992 to 1995, the Ministry established an extensive
solar pilot project mainly to electrify clinics and schools Several street
lighting, solar water heating and vaccine refrigeration systems were also
installed through the project The project also installed four solar water-
pumping schemes in different regions of the country The project results
indicated that there is sufficient solar irradiation in many areas throughout
the country However, there are certain institutional and technical barriers that
need to be overcome in 41 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy future projects to ensure improved project
sustainability and performance Other initiatives include the World Bank
sponsored Solar Market Development Project in 1998 and the UNESCO funded
Mphaphati Solar Village Project in In addition to these, the Government is also
signatory to the Harare Declaration on Solar Energy and Sustainable Development,
result of the World Solar Summit of There is  need to pay closer attention to
the area of passive solar applications, which could have major benefits in
building design and in food processing Wind resource measurement at 10, 20 and
30 metre levels are in progress and will assist in mapping the wind regime and
providing estimates of the wind power potential in the country Generally in
Swaziland, wind speeds are relatively low and grid-connected wind power
generation is unlikely to be  major option However, there could be  potential
for micro wind turbines ( for battery charging) On the other hand, wind pumps
have been in use in Swaziland for  number of years by farmers for water pumping
and irrigation This application seems to hold the greatest potential for wind
energy in Swaziland, especially since mean speeds slightly below 4m/ could be
sufficient for their viable deployment Hydro power plants with  total capacity
of MW are being operated by SEB in various sites in the country However, the
potential for mini or micro hydro plants has not been exploited  resource
assessment of the potential for application of these small plants has been
completed and indicates priority areas where  more detailed feasibility should
be focused The potential for other renewable energy resources such as geothermal
and “biofuel” crops (except ethanol from molasses) has not been investigated If
applied appropriately, renewable energy resources are considered to be  very
important component of  sustainable energy system and can have the following
benefits: • Reduction of dependency on imported fuels; • Suitable for small off-
grid applications, and can play  significant role in the provision of clean
energy to rural and remote areas; and • Reduction of pollution and emissions
associated with conventional energy systems The above benefits may necessitate
the prioritisation of renewable energy technologies over conventional energy
technologies, even when it not the least-cost solution For example, solar
technologies may be given  higher priority than grid electricity or petroleum
products The Ministry developed  Renewable Energy Action Plan in 1997,
indicating  long-term programme for the development of renewable energy  number
of activities in the plan have already been undertaken but there are still
activities requiring attention, particularly in the area of biomass energy and
quality assurance of renewable energy technologies 42 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Main issues
Key challenges will have to be overcome, if  wider usage of renewable energy is
to be realised They include the following: • Lack of knowledge and public
awareness on renewable energy There is  need for dissemination of information
and demonstration; • Difficulty for renewable energy technologies to compete
with conventional fuels on  strict cost basis; • High investment costs compared
to conventional energy technologies, and financial issues such as: access to
finance, cost of finance and the risk associated with new technologies; • Lack
of relevant institutions with sufficient capacity to promote the use of
renewable energy technologies; and • Lack of  quality assurance framework and
appropriate standards  Renewable Energy Programme  Renewable Energy Programme
and Action, produced in 1997, is outdated, however  number of the activities
have not yet been carried out There are many developments in the area of
renewable energy and there is  need to update the action plan The Renewable
Energy Programme should be integrated into the National Energy Policy
Implementation Strategy  Information, awareness and demonstration Low level of
knowledge in the country about renewable energy technology options results in
low uptake of these technologies Options such as wood efficient stoves and solar
PV could significantly improve the levels of clean energy services particularly
in rural areas Most of these technologies are technically proven but there is
still need for social and adaptation research in order to promote their
dissemination Prioritised technologies will then need to be demonstrated in
order to build consumer confidence and increase knowledge Well prepared
information needs to be made available to the public and investors so as to
inform, educate and enhance decision making Government will develop  renewable
energy information programme and will establish and maintain an appropriate
renewable energy information system There will be  need to collate and enhance
existing information and to make this easily accessible to both local and
international interests Government will support and promote the dissemination of
information and demonstration of prioritised renewable energy technologies There
is need to have  facility where pilot projects can be carried out and tested;
known technologies can be demonstrated to the public for educational purposes
and awareness 43 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy Government will establish  centre for demonstration and
education on renewable energy and sustainable energy  Financing of renewable
energy applications While renewable energy technologies may be cost-effective
from  life cycle analysis basis, they often have higher capital costs as
compared to conventional energy technologies This makes diffusion of most
renewable energy technologies difficult since end-users, in particular
households and communities normally evaluate alternatives on first cost basis
rather than life cycle costs Four major financial problems are often encountered
in both small and large scale renewable energy, namely: • High capital costs:
initial investment into renewable energy is often unaffordable; • Access to
finance: accessing credit or loans to finance systems or projects is  problem,
particularly for perceived high risk areas such as Solar Home Systems (SHS); •
Cost of finance: when financing involves credit or loans, raising and servicing
these loans comes at  cost; and • Risk: All projects are exposed to risks, which
are often considered to be high when new technologies are involved Reducing and
sharing risk among key players is essential for the success of renewable energy
projects Appropriate financing mechanisms will be further investigated and
facilitated Such financing mechanisms could include co-operation and assistance
with existing credit and savings organisations in the country or could involve
international financial partnerships Government will also investigate
opportunities to develop incentives for renewable energy Such incentives may be
short term and have specific objectives and targets Financing incentives, such
as waivers on sales tax and import duties on selected technologies, will be
examined There will be  need to raise awareness among local credit agencies and
co-operatives Additionally, international finance provided in support of the
international environmental agenda will be sought Providing financial support to
renewable energy will allow the country to reap the benefits in terms of
accessibility of energy and the improvement of local and global environmental
conditions  Capacity building and knowledge transfer Relatively low technical
and institutional capabilities in the field of energy, and in particular
renewable energy, continues to be  hurdle There is  need for the inclusion of
renewable energy topics in the curricular of schools and tertiary institutions
This, hopefully will in-turn stimulate interest in pursuing energy related
careers Additionally, there is  need to strengthen the capacities and
capabilities of Government agencies, NGOs and the private sector in order to
allow them to deal more effectively with renewable energy applications and
programmes 44 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy Government will introduce and enhance where applicable,
topics on renewable energy and energy in general in educational and training
curricula and will encourage the provision of specialised courses in renewable
energy There will be need to produce appropriate educational material in order
to support this policy Furthermore,  dialogue will need to be established
between the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy, and training and
educational agencies in order to assess realistic means for achieving this The
capacities of development agencies, which promote and implement sustainable
programmes on renewable energy, will be strengthened  Quality assurance and
standards in renewable energy  key requirement for the widespread uptake of
renewable energy systems is to ensure the availability of good quality equipment
in the market It becomes important for end users to easily identify good quality
products against  known standard thus protecting them from unsafe and unreliable
products Typically, this is done through the development of standards or
approval ratings It is envisaged that this should be  regional programme
throughout SADC An appropriate centre for quality assurance and standards for
energy applications, in particular renewable energy technologies will be
established These policies will entail  number of steps including the
development of  quality assurance framework, development of technical
specifications for selected technologies, testing of new technologies and
promotion of the standards among end-users and other players in the country In
many cases quality standards can be adopted or adapted from those in use in
other countries Government will support the establishment of the centre in
collaboration with donor organisations This will also serve as  “centre of
excellence” in as far as sustainable energy applications are concerned
Technology promotion Renewable energy technologies are  key element of
sustainable energy future Technologies with relevance to the Swaziland situation
include: • Solar photovoltaic systems (solar PV); • Solar water heaters; • Wind;
• Micro (<100kW) and pico hydro (<5kW); • Efficient use of biomass; • Biogas; •
Woodlots; and • Hybrid (wind and solar) 45 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy In order to prioritise
between the above technologies, for example when designing and implementing
technology promotion programmes, Government will carry out  cost- benefit
analysis Government will promote demonstration units to display these
technologies, for example through Tinkhundla centres  Solar water heaters
Preliminary investigations have shown that there is  large potential for the use
of solar water heaters in residential and commercial buildings Presently, water
heating in residential and commercial buildings is carried out through electric
water heaters, which in turn creates  large electricity demand that could
otherwise be avoided Government will encourage  wider use of solar water heaters
in residential and commercial buildings through promotional means and support
for private sector initiatives The capital cost for solar water heaters in
Swaziland is relatively high There could thus be  need to support means of
production of certain components within Swaziland Other benefits of this policy
will be the creation of employment and stimulation of small businesses The
Ministry, in conjunction with the private sector, will need to implement focused
awareness and promotion campaigns, in particular with professionals and
developers in the building sector The cost savings resulting from the use of
solar water heaters have been demonstrated in many countries The Government is
paying high electricity bills, part of which is  result of water heating in her
public buildings and institutional living quarters Government will develop
programme to install solar water heaters on all her institutional buildings
feasibility study will be required to analyse the costs and benefits in
comparison to and in combination with other solutions Based on international
experience and on the local conditions, it can be estimated that Government
could save at least 15% of its annual electricity bills 10 Charcoal Charcoal
production is clearly inefficient in terms of energy, but is convenient due to
the high energy density of charcoal as compared to wood Therefore, it could be
relatively cost–effective to transport charcoal from areas such as the highveld,
with surplus of wood fuel resources, to areas such as the lowveld, where there
are resource constraints While charcoal usage for routine cooking in urban and
peri-urban areas of Swaziland is currently not common, lessons from other
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa are of striking relevance In these countries,
rapid urbanisation created  demand for low cost fuels for 46 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy the growing
low-income groups Ultimately, since electricity and petroleum fuels could not
address this situation, biomass fuels, in particular charcoal, emerged into the
urban energy markets This situation happened so rapidly catching Governments
off-guard and unprepared, resulting in severe deforestation of indigenous
forests Therefore, it is necessary to carefully monitor the slightest
indications of growth of  charcoal market and put in place quick and efficient
measures to control it or to ensure orderly development The general production
of charcoal for the household cooking market will be encouraged if it can be
clearly shown that it will be environmentally sustainable Charcoal production
could be promoted primarily in the highveld and in exceptional cases where the
encroachment of bush or alien species needs to be controlled In other areas, it
will be discouraged There are many different types of charcoal kilns The thermal
efficiencies of these kilns vary widely, depending on the technology adopted
Government will investigate  framework for establishing efficiency standards for
charcoal kilns The establishment of  licensing framework for charcoal producers
will also be investigated 11 Briquettes Briquettes are small fuel bricks made
from compressed material, often from waste paper, sawdust, coal dust etc The
Ministry initiated pilot projects to test the manufacturing and sale of these
bricks There is  large potential market in the country, especially in areas
where there are wood fuel shortages Briquettes can be manufactured on both
small scale on an individual basis and also on  commercial scale, especially at
or close to industries with  suitable waste Government will further investigate
the manufacturing and utilisation of briquettes to satisfy energy needs 12 Other
technologies As technology advances new discoveries have emerged that can
enhance power production and use Although these technologies are at an early
stage, it is incumbent on Government not to overlook their importance for future
use as power producers The technologies may include, fuel cells and geothermal
Geothermal energy is also  potential renewable energy resource that can be
utilised in the country Since the geothermal resource does not fluctuate with
the seasons, it is  stable source of power/steam generation There are at least
nine hot springs in Swaziland 47 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy with temperatures ranging from 33o  in
the south of the country to about 52o  in the north For power generation
however, the temperatures may be relatively low There are two tectonic plates
traversing the country from the north at Matsamo and Mhlume at an angle of about
30o longitude The technology behind the development of geothermal heat/steam
production, including power generation, is at an advanced stage in countries
like the United States of America, New Zealand, Japan, United Kingdom, Germany
and others Government will investigate the opportunities for the adoption of
other clean and renewable energy technologies 48 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  RURAL ELECTRIFICATION
Overview Rural Electrification is  high priority issue in Swaziland Access to
adequate energy supplies is  key element of Government’ rural development
strategy The aim of Government is to provide  climate and infrastructure that
will progressively maximise the quality of life and energy security of the
people of Swaziland and make the best of the country’ natural resources The
Ministry therefore is developing plans to extend the electricity grid and
provide access to electricity to all areas of the country This is seen as an
essential component towards the social and economic upliftment of all citizens
of the country In the rural areas of Swaziland, the vast majority of homesteads
and  large number of public facilities are without adequate access to
electricity This can be attributed to the high costs of extending distribution
lines to dispersed communities in rural areas Rural Electrification is  non-
viable activity for any electricity utility especially if the densities of
households are low, as is the case in Swaziland With the present rate of
electrification the situation will remain unsatisfactory for the rural
population for many years The low connection rate in rural areas was mainly due
to the high capital costs in paying for the infrastructure In 1999, less than %
of rural communities had access to grid electricity, which results in
prevailing marginalisation of rural people Furthermore, social and economic
development in rural areas may also slow down the current trend of migration to
urban areas The Government has been addressing the problem of rural
electrification for the last decade through  number of studies and programmes
Rural electrification includes all areas of the country not presently covered by
an electricity grid infrastructure and where grid extension is deemed not viable
on purely commercial terms Rural electrification may also cover electrification
of peri-urban areas, where appropriate The goal for the Ministry is that access
to electricity is made available to all the citizens of the country by This is
in line with the NDS and has been developed through extensive consultation and
has been supported and ratified by stakeholders The objectives of the NDS, for
accessibility of energy services under the Fuel and Energy Sector are to:
“ensure improved access to  range of energy services for the whole population in
urban, peri-urban and rural areas”; “make electricity available and affordable
in rural areas so as to improve social economic development and welfare”; and
“ensure sustainable fuelwood management” 49 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Main issues The main
challenges in implementing rural electrification are: • access to electricity to
dispersed homesteads Due to the relatively long distances between most
homesteads in rural areas, the costs of grid extension is prohibitively
expensive; • access to electricity to Government institutions, such as schools,
clinics etc in order to improve essential services in rural areas; • accessing
funds for rural electrification as it is  costly exercise; • addressing the
necessity to create  balance between the supply and demand for electricity; •
prioritisation and planning procedures should ensure an equitable and
transparent distribution of resources; and identifying the appropriate non-grid
options should grid extension not be viable In some instance, for example when
community is far from the existing national grid, non-grid solutions may be
appropriate •  Objectives for rural electrification To achieve access to
electricity throughout the country, the following objectives for rural
electrification have been developed: • • to support the development of rural
areas in the country in  sustainable manner; to promote the productive use of
electricity in rural areas in order to facilitate socio-economic development; to
improve living conditions by satisfying the basic need of electricity supply; to
promote electrification of public facilities in order to facilitate the delivery
of services to rural areas; to provide access to electricity to as many
homesteads as possible in order to slow down the rate of wood fuel consumption;
to improve the social gap between rural and urban communities in order to limit
migration; and to contribute towards poverty alleviation • • • • • These
objectives are closely linked to other development strategies of the Government,
including: infrastructure development (communications, environment, water supply
and human settlements); agriculture, land and rural development; economic
services; education and training; health and social welfare; gender; and
disadvantaged groups  Electrification Options Approximately 77% of the
population live in rural areas (1997 census), many living in widely scattered
homesteads In view of this dispersed distribution of the population, 50 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
rural electrification will have to rely on  range of technology options for the
different areas and environments Electricity can be made available to rural
areas through connection to the national grid and through off-grid solutions
Grid electrification Grid electrification involves extension to the national
grid to consumers at  standard voltage and quality of supply Government will
pursue grid electrification particularly in densely populated resettled areas
and areas with high development potential This will be in line with Government’
Resettlement Policy, whose main aim is to utilise the country’ resources for the
benefit of as many people as possible The costs are greatly reduced in supplying
electricity services to resettled areas  Off grid electrification Off-grid
technologies are stand-alone sources of power that can supply  mini-grid system
or  one-off user They rely on either natural resources such as the sun, wind,
water or biomass to drive them, or fuel being brought in Off-grid
electrification options may be more appropriate and could be implemented in
areas remote from existing grid lines and less densely populated, where grid
connection may be too costly Such technologies include: • photo-voltaic systems
(solar PV): these systems offer an opportunity to meet small-scale demands for
electricity such as for lighting, medicine cooling, communication, computers),
entertainment (radio and TV) etc; projectors, education overhead ( • wind: wind
turbines may be encouraged in areas where there is  constant source of wind at
adequate wind speeds to produce electricity Low wind speed turbines may be
suitable for small-scale demands; • micro- and mini-hydro power systems: small-
scale hydro power is presently in limited use, but for locations close to
rivers, streams and canals, it may be an attractive option for the development
of mini-grids or for individual homesteads; • biogas: these systems may be
appropriate for lighting purposes where there is  continuous supply of
biodegradable matter (cattle, pigs, chicken, vegetable waste etc); • biomass:
organic matter such as crop residues, forest trimmings or wood from sustainably
grown trees can be used for power generation; 51 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • hybrid systems:
combination of two or more of the above technologies would give  greater
security of supply depending on the availability of resources; and • diesel and
petrol generator systems: this type of power supply is to some extent already
being used at public facilities and private enterprises Government will
encourage the development of demonstration projects for the various off-grid
technologies For example PV systems and solar water heater systems for school
and clinics Government will also investigate the appropriateness of sustainable
renewable energy technologies to assess their potential future application for
off-grid electrification There are other technologies, for example gasification,
and more complex hybrid systems that could be explored in the future to meet the
energy requirements of the country  Prioritisation and planning Investments in
rural electrification are to be strictly prioritised and planned in such  manner
that they provide maximum benefit according to the goal, objectives and the
availability of resources (funds, technical expertise etc)  Prioritisation
through consultation with An overall prioritisation strategy has been adopted
stakeholders, as  methodology for extending the grid to rural communities and
increasing access The first priority is to extend the grid to schools, health
care facilities and other essential public services, followed by agricultural,
commercial and industrial development areas Prioritisation will also take
account of areas with  high potential for economic development, where
appropriate  Schools, health care facilities and other essential public services
The quality of education in non-electrified schools in rural areas is hampered
by  lack of electrified services such as laboratory equipment, audio-visual
equipment, computers etc The lack of electrified services in school staff
quarters may also make it difficult to encourage teachers to remain in or be
attracted to non-electrified schools These factors tend to aggravate the
inequality of opportunities between rural and urban students The low percentage
of students from rural high schools attending higher education can be partly
attributed to the limited electricity services 52 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy The level of service
provided by rural clinics is also highly dependent on electrification, which can
improve the possibilities for refrigeration of medical drugs and vaccines,
allowing for  wider range of treatments Lighting will also improve the safety,
security and living conditions for clinic staff Electrification of clinics
provides major benefits to the surrounding communities Access to clean water is
fundamental requirement for health and hygiene in rural communities Non-
electrified communities may be short of clean water even for basic needs;
electricity is an ideal energy source for water pumping Other essential public
include: services which would telecommunication stations, tinkhundla, Rural
Development Areas (RDAs), rural veterinary services, and rural police stations
and posts for electrification could receive  priority Government will ensure
that all schools, clinics and essential public services in rural areas are
provided with electricity  Agricultural, commercial and industrial develo pment
areas For agricultural, commercial and industrial development, priority needs to
be given to the electrification of specified growth areas  rural electrification
programme must be integrated with the development of small to medium scale
enterprises, linking with programmes aimed at stimulating the rural economy, for
example SEDCOs, rural growth centres etc Important user groups include
irrigation, water pumping, shops and other large and small power users These
user groups are expected to consume more than the average household thus
contributing to the financial viability of the programme Government will ensure
that agricultural, commercial and industrial development areas are provided with
electricity  Residential areas/ domestic dwellings Electrification of homesteads
is vital to the quality of life of the rural population It is intended that
grid-extensions to public institutions be routed, where viable, through
resettled areas Resettlement will facilitate increased access to the grid and
reduce costs for future reticulation Domestic reticulation may come later on
demand basis Government will facilitate the reticulation of domestic dwellings
in an affordable manner in conjunction with the utilities The programme for
implementing the above policies will be outlined in the Rural Electrification
Master Plan  Planning and targets In view of the vast demand for electricity
supply infrastructure in rural areas compared to the resources available,
thorough planning procedure is required The overall purpose 53 Energy Policy
Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy of
planning is to ensure that the programme of rural electrification meets the
policy objectives to the largest possible extent The planning process needs to
take account of the differing goals and objectives in relation to the time
scale, long-term and short-term The long-term plan will define the overall
programme and the targets required to meet the vision of access to electricity
for all by Short-term electrification planning will be based on  three-year
rolling plan to be updated annually The plan will identify  broad range of
potential projects to be implemented each year for the entire period Targets
will be set annually according to the resources available Short-term planning
will also deal with specific implementation issues Targets will include
estimated connections per year through rural electrification, with specific
estimated targets for schools, clinics, households etc The electrification plan
would be made public in order to allow individuals, particularly those in rural
areas to be able to make informed decisions regarding their energy supply
options  Rural Electrification Mas ter Plan  Rural Electrification Master Plan
is necessary to detail an implementation framework for electrifying rural areas
Government will manage and direct the implementation plan through the setting up
of an institutional mechanism with key stakeholders and the strong involvement
of the private sector Government will develop  Rural Electrification Master Plan
Rural Electrification Agency Where there have been successful rural
electrification programmes throughout the world, they have been initiated and
supported by governments Power utilities have been unable to carry out these
activities alone due to the non-commercial nature of rural electrification The
challenge of rural electrification calls for an inclusive and integrated rural
development approach involving all stakeholders  Rural Electrification Agency
will be established to implement and monitor rural electrification The Rural
Electrification Agency will carry out the planning and be responsible for
overseeing the implementation and monitoring of rural electrification and
ensuring that targets are met 54 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  The Rural Electrification Fund It is
recognised that funding of rural electrification is very expensive and the
returns are limited Government has to investigate the various sources of
financing in order to meet the goal of improving access to electricity
dedicated fund will be established and used to provide financial support to
rural electrification The operational mechanisms and structure of the fund will
be outlined in the Rural Electrification Master Plan Although access to
electricity is an important prerequisite for rural development, this alone may
provide little development unless co-ordinated with other types of services
Continuing intra-Governmental co-operation, co-ordination and communication is
vital for the success of rural electrification 55 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  CROSS CUTTING ISSUES
Security of supply  Overview Swaziland is  land-locked country and is heavily
dependent on the import of electricity, petroleum products and coal This
dependency on energy imports is  potential problem both in the short and longer
term It can lead to price fluctuations, and supply problems in the case of
disruptions in the supply chains due to factors outside of national control
Natural disasters and technical problems could also affect the supply situation
Energy supply problems will impact upon the agricultural, industrial, and
commercial sectors as well as the general public In 1999, all coal used for
energy purposes was imported from South Africa On the other hand, substantial
quantities of Swaziland’ coal were exported for industrial use All petroleum
products were imported from South Africa In total, 44% of available energy
supplies were imported, however this average disguises the fact that 100% of
petroleum products are imported as well as 58% of the electricity supply The
remaining electricity supply is attributed to  few main industries producing for
their own purposes and SEB’ hydropower plants It is therefore clear that
Swaziland is heavily dependent on imported fuels from few sources Wood fuel,
bagasse and other such products are available domestically Swaziland holds no
known reserves of oil and all petroleum products are sourced from South African
refineries Most of the products are distributed from the commercial storage
facilities in Matsapha, although distribution directly from South African
refineries to consumers and filling stations in Swaziland also takes place These
storage facilities in the country are very limited in terms of security of
supply The stocks held by the companies are part of their normal operations and
not intended for emergency situations In the past, Swaziland used to import all
her petroleum products from Mozambique This route was however discontinued due
to supply disruptions In 2001, the vulnerable supply situation was accentuated
as  result of accidents in South African refineries causing some local shortages
of diesel Swaziland used to import electricity through three 132 kV lines The
establishment of the 400 kV line added to the security of supply for electricity
Swaziland’ participation in the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) offers yet
other supply alternatives Security of supplies can be increased by various means
such as: increased use of indigenous resources, diversification of supplies and
energy conservation Strengthening of the regional and international co-operation
will also improve the situation In some cases, especially for petroleum
products, establishment of emergency stocks is also  relevant option 56 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
Heavy dependence on imported petroleum products is not  problem unique to
Swaziland The OECD countries (North America, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and
Western European countries) are also highly dependent on imported petroleum
products and would face the same problems as Swaziland in case of supply
problems Consequently, OECD countries have entered into  co-operation agreement
to alleviate the effects of possible supply disruptions An important part of
this agreement is an obligation to hold emergency petroleum stocks corresponding
to at least 90 days of net import Built into the agreement is an obligation to
share available supplies in case of supply problems and co-operation on crisis
management Within the European Union the countries are furthermore obliged to
hold stocks corresponding to at least 90 days of consumption of petroleum
products These arrangements were made in the light of the international supply
disruptions in the 1970’ and 1980’  Main issues The main challenges in ensuring
an adequate security of supply in the country are: • Dependence on imported
petroleum products from one source; • Commercial petroleum stocks are relatively
limited and not intended to cope with major supply disruptions; • The major part
of electricity supply is imported and domestic production (except for hydro
power plants) is dominated by  few large industries producing for their own
needs; • Bituminous coal is imported for energy use while domestic anthracitic
coal is exported for industrial uses Swaziland holds considerable reserves of
anthracitic and semi-anthracitic coal; • There is  potential for an increased
use of indigenous resources of biomass such as bagasse and wood waste in
industry; • Energy could be used more efficiently and savings introduced and
thereby increasing security of supply; • Need for  contingency plan to deal with
supply disruptions; and • Diversity of supply  Strategic stocks for oil products
Presently, Swaziland only stores oil products for operational needs As
landlocked country, Swaziland has few alternatives in cases of supply
disruptions In July 2001, the disruptions in diesel supplies accentuated the
problem Part of the stocks could be held by the industry through increasing
operational stocks, which are relatively low Such arrangements could be made
through voluntary agreements with the oil industry or through regulation
stipulating certain stock levels Such arrangements would however require
control system to ensure that the stocks are actually there Another problem is
that the possibilities to expand the present facilities in Matsapha are
restricted due to physical constraints 57 Energy Policy Final Revision September
doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy It is however recognised that
reliance purely on commercial stocks is not enough  pre- feasibility study
carried out in 1991 dealt with various models for construction and location of
strategic stock depots This study could still form the background for an updated
study of the possibilities for holding strategic stocks There has been  strong
need for strategic stocks of petroleum products in Swaziland The oil industry or
the Government or the two in co-operation could establish such stocks The
planned feasibility study on strategic stocks to be developed shall address the
questions of ownership, operations and organisation of the stocks Government
will also develop plans for dealing with supply disruptions in co-operation with
the private sector Government will ensure that strategic stocks for petroleum
products are established in the country  feasibility study will be carried out
and is necessary before  final decision to implement this policy is made
Government will ensure that contingency plans are in place to deal with supply
disruptions in the country beyond the normal established reserves Government
will require commercial companies to store  minimum quantity of stocks to add to
the security of supply Alternative import possibilities from Mozambique could
also be investigated to improve diversity of supply However, procurement of
petroleum products remains the responsibility of the oil industry The
possibilities of blending ethanol,  by-product from the sugar industry, would
also help to reduce imports  Increasing security of supply for electricity The
major means for increasing security of supply for electricity are the
diversification of supplies and increased indigenous power generation The new
400 kV line is improving the situation in conjunction with the country’
participation in the SAPP With regard to increased indigenous production various
options will be explored for the utilisation of bagasse, wood waste and coal
With regard to coal, it is stated that  cost-benefit analysis should be
conducted on increased use of indigenous coal in the industry  feasibility study
on the establishment of  coal-fired thermal power station shall also be carried
out Depending on the results of the analysis such initiatives may benefit the
overall economy, bring employment opportunities and contribute significantly to
security of supplies 58 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy The policies on promotion of the utilisation of
renewable energy sources and IPPs for electricity production, could increase
security of supplies Mechanisms are required in the short term to allow
independent power producers (IPP) to enter the market  strategy will be drawn up
and the potential reviewed on  regular basis Government will investigate
opportunities for increased local power generation and will endeavour to take
advantage of the availability of cheap power in the region through the SAPP
Government will investigate other supply chains regionally and internationally
to ensure diversification of energy supply to improve security  Energy
conservation Security of supply is not only  question of providing the necessary
energy supplies In the end use sector, initiatives on increased energy
efficiency and energy savings benefit the economy and the environment Such
initiatives also contribute to the security of supply by reducing the dependency
on imported energy Energy efficiency and conservation measures have proven that
capital investment on new energy supplies can be delayed when applied
effectively Government will develop an energy efficiency programme amongst the
energy sub- sectors of the economy Increasing energy conservation and efficiency
could assist the country to use its energy resources in  cost-effective manner,
reduce energy shortages, lower the country’ reliance on energy imports, mitigate
the impact of high energy prices and reduce pollution Government will have to
collect and disseminate accurate information on energy consumption and encourage
industries to use more energy efficient technologies  Environment  Overview It
is the duty of all nations to ensure that the resources of each and every
country are used in  sustainable manner that is not detrimental to the populace
of that country or its environment The impacts of damage to the environment can
be felt both locally and globally and there is plenty of evidence world-wide to
lay claim to this fact Many areas in Swaziland are now suffering the effects of
deforestation and land degradation; pollution in  number of rivers has built up
to such  level that many species of aquatic life are disappearing and the waters
are becoming  health hazard Climate change and global warming, once  hotly
debated subject, is now becoming  reality It is foreseen that major shifts in
climate and weather patterns throughout the planet may result, however the
effects are not fully understood 59 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Such problems have given way to
number of initiatives aimed at stemming the damage to the environment On  local
level, Government established the Swaziland Environment Authority (SEA), which
has developed environmental regulations and the Swaziland Environmental Action
Plan, and there has been an emergence and strengthening of NGOs with
environmental agendas On  global level,  number of significant international
initiatives have been developed and agreed upon, such as the three Rio
Conventions, namely Biodiversity, Desertification, and Climate Change, which
resulted in the Kyoto Protocol The increased awareness of these issues has also
stimulated greater corporate environmental responsibility in  number of large
companies and organisations Presently, the pricing of energy does not take
account of the environmental costs associated with its generation, distribution
and utilisation However, such “true-cost” pricing will require accurate and
comprehensive environmental data It is also important to ensure that this is not
in conflict with the objectives of ensuring access to energy for all and
stimulating economic growth  Main issues The main issues in developing  policy
which takes cognisance of the environment are: • ensuring the promotion of
energy related products which are not damaging to the environment; • control of
emissions; • development of “clean technology” power generation; • lack of
comprehensive environmental data and distribution of data; • the pollution
caused by the energy sector; • Conversion of waste products to energy; and •
Mainstreaming environment in the development process  Energy and environment
linkages Energy activities can impact both directly or indirectly on the
environment Much of the damage to the environment can be as  result of  lack of
awareness of the implications and consequences of these activities Government
will investigate and promote the use of environmentally friendly fuels, energy
products and technologies Awareness, regarding the energy sector’ impacts on the
environment, will be continuously transmitters, distributors and consumers) All
energy projects in the country should only be implemented following  thorough
environmental assessment and environmental management is built into all energy
projects increased amongst energy stakeholders (generators, Once the Energy
Regulatory Authority (ERA) is established, it will have powers to control the
activities of players in the energy sector There are therefore opportunities to
60 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy ensure that licence holders abide by generally acceptable
environmental principles The ERA will operate in close co-operation with the SEA
on environmental issues Government will ensure that environmental standards and
principles are included in the guidelines, regulations and licensing procedures
of the Energy Regulatory Authority Licensing for all energy projects will be
conditional on meeting environmental requirements  Emissions The utilisation of
energy resources and generation of power produces many emissions and waste
products Presently, these have not yet been quantified, especially with regard
to vehicle emissions Government will conduct  study on identifying harmful
emissions from all sub-sectors in the energy sector and methodologies and
prioritisation on how to reduce them Opportunities for the trading of emissions,
such as sulphur and NOx will be investigated More work to assess the
environmental implications of acid emissions from power plants should be
undertaken The phasing out of lead in petrol and sulphur in diesel are major
priorities for Government in the near future In the medium to long term, all new
vehicles will be mandated to use unleaded petrol and  maximum of 05% sulphur in
diesel Government will strictly control the fuel specifications in the country
Waste There is potential for the generation of power and heat from waste
products, for example through the utilisation of landfill gas or incineration
Good landfill management is essential to avoid leachates and water pollutions It
is also important that measures to detect hazardous wastes are in place to
prevent pollution Government will investigate opportunities for energy from
waste Disposal of waste oil in rivers is of major concern in terms of river
pollution At present there is  mechanism to prosecute and penalise those who
dump oil in the rivers, but it is not enforced Government will develop
legislation to ensure that all stakeholders in the oil and transport industry
manage their waste oil in an environmentally friendly manner Government will
adhere to the Basel Convention (see Annex ) and other conventions aimed at
trans-boundary waste oil exports In the medium to long term, Government will 61
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy investigate the opportunities on waste oil recovery and processing
systems within Swaziland The “polluter pays principle” will be supported This
requires that those causing adverse effects pay the full social and
environmental costs of avoiding, mitigating, and/or remedying those adverse
effects  Health and safety  Overview The Government has  responsibility to
ensure that the health and safety of the population is maintained There are many
activities, relating to people’ employment or day to day life that can seriously
impact on their health and safety The consequences of illnesses and accidents
also have large economic impacts in terms of the provision of health care and
reduced productivity There are many unsafe work practices that may cause injury
Some of these activities are related to poorly maintained equipment, others are
result of poor training on the part of the employer and  general lack of
awareness In the home, many fuels used on  daily basis are very hazardous, for
example: paraffin is both toxic and highly inflammable; LPG is explosive; wood
smoke can cause respiratory illnesses; and the unsafe use of electricity causing
electric shocks  Main issues The main issues in ensuring health and safety for
the population are: indoor and outdoor air pollution from wood fuel use; • •
poor quality equipment; and • energy related projects and their impact on public
health and safety  Households Many households continue to use paraffin stoves
and wood fuel on  daily basis Household energy studies conducted in 1995 found
that many households were affected by particulate pollution resulting in
respiratory problems The study also found that pollution levels in some areas
were at unacceptably high levels Government will investigate and promote the
safe use, storage and transport of fuels and energy technologies in all sectors
Health and safety for energy activities in the households and for energy
products can be developed through awareness raising and through legislation
Energy products, for example paraffin stoves, which are below international
standards should not be allowed in local markets Improper usage of candles, LPG
and paraffin can be hazardous in terms of potential accidental fires and
poisoning 62 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy  Industry Clean fuels, for example low smoke or local
coal, should be used as  substitute for bituminous coal It is necessary to
ensure that all new power plants and coal burning equipment, as  requirement,
install clean air apparatus even at the design stage Improved ventilation in
industrial areas should be enforced and so should the installation of correct
chimneys, to reduce health risks Government will assess the appropriateness of
present legislation to ensure the health and safety of the population, for both
the employees in the energy sector and consumers and users of energy products
Energy efficiency and savings  Overview Energy efficiency and savings aim to
reduce energy consumption at the end use level as well as in the supply system
Energy efficiency is about reducing losses within  technical energy system by
optimising energy use, while energy savings cover  broader conservation
methodology, including behavioural and operational issues Achieving energy
efficiency and energy savings is more of  behavioural problem than  technical
one Consumers of energy are primarily focused on their individual activities and
only secondarily on the implications of those activities: for example, the
energy required and energy wasted to implement the activity is not usually an
issue In order to fully understand and obtain appropriate solutions, data is
required for effective monitoring and evaluation of energy with  view to
forecasting future use and planning appropriately SADC, through the Energy
Sector Technical and Administrative Unit, implemented an Industrial Energy
Management Project which carried out energy audits in industry and recommended
energy efficiency measures Another component involved training engineering
consulting companies and engineering technical colleges The objective was to
sustain the energy management training and the activities of energy management
Training continued under consulting companies, while tertiary institutions
received support to conduct training and to incorporate energy
efficiency/management into their curricula The project also involved the
establishment of  National Energy Management Committee (NEMCO), where
industrialists met to discuss issues of interest on energy efficiency/management
Main issues The main challenges in achieving  more efficient use of energy are:
• Maximising energy savings and efficiency without compromising the policy’
prime objectives of access to energy for all and job creation; 63 Energy Policy
Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy •
Ensuring effective data collection, monitoring and analysis procedures are in
place; • Raising awareness on energy savings issues; • Encouraging investment in
energy efficiency programmes; • Encouraging consultancy expertise at  local
level; • Identification of energy saving potentials; and • Removing the barriers
to energy efficiency: information, institutional, social, financial and market,
and technical  National Energy Savings Association (NESA) There is need for an
organisation to oversee energy savings activities within the country
(demonstrations and awareness raising activities, promotion of energy efficient
appliances and equipment) and to advise Government on policy direction
Government will facilitate the establishment of the National Energy Savings
Association (NESA) to promote and implement energy savings activities across all
sectors in the country NESA would also act as an umbrella organisation for
similar bodies with  more narrow focus NESA would also be the body responsible
for the development and issuing of incentives and guidelines, such as energy
efficiency awards, stars and charters The private sector will be encouraged to
take  lead in this forum, although Government will provide support and
assistance It is essential that any such organisation established should be
fully sustainable in terms of capacity and funding  Awareness raising and
information dissemination It is essential that effective data collection,
monitoring and analysis is in place before awareness raising activities are
carried out It is acknowledged that data collection throughout the region is
difficult task, hence the need for adequate capacity to achieve this exercise
Appropriate and sustainable programmes are required to raise awareness in all
sectors on issues related to energy savings and energy efficiency, including the
available solutions However, there is need for co-operation and consultation
with all stakeholders concerned Government will formulate and implement
programmes on awareness raising and information dissemination on energy savings
Emphasis should be put on active rather than passive information, information
which will enhance other initiatives that actively empowers actors in the market
Information activities can be successful if they are carefully targeted, are
positive, and enduring Workshops, information centres, mass media campaigns
training and audits are typical instruments 64 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Government will
investigate introducing energy efficiency into the educational curricula This
would apply to primary, secondary and tertiary education In the education of new
generations, awareness and understanding of these issues should become the norm,
which can easily be translated into practice both in the home and work
environment Capacity building is also required in order to train and empower
locals to establish their own consultancies in the field of energy management
Energy management Energy management is being able to account for and optimise
all energy use Nominating positions with accountability for energy use should be
encouraged in all medium-scale and large organisations Government will promote
energy management skills and energy accountability in organisations across all
sectors Industry will be encouraged to establish energy managers’ positions,
which will enhance accountability in energy use and effective management of
energy resources  Building standards Large amounts of energy are used in the
heating, cooling and lighting of buildings Through the adoption of certain
practices and often simple variations to standard designs, large amounts of
energy can be saved in the operations and functioning of  building The greater
utilisation of natural light could reduce the need for artificial lighting and
create  more comfortable environment for the users of  building Likewise,
correct orientation and the use of shading and insulation can dramatically
reduce energy requirements for heating and cooling This will result in direct
financial benefits to whoever pays the bills Government will ensure that
building standards and regulations, which promote energy conservation in both
commercial and domestic buildings, are in place In order to encourage
individuals and companies to adopt energy efficient building practices,
Government should lead by example in the design and construction of her own
energy efficient buildings  Energy efficiency within Government institutions
There is  high wastage of energy within Government institutions, emanating from
lighting, air conditioning (heating and cooling), computers and other equipment,
and hot water requirements In many Ministry buildings, lights are left on all
through the night, as are computers, air conditioners and heaters Added to this,
electric water heaters are left on 24 hours per day, 365 days per year, when
they are actually only needed for  65 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy quarter of that time The water is
being heated when not required and the heat is lost needlessly If Government
aims to put in place  meaningful national programme on energy efficiency and
energy savings, it is first necessary to get her own house in order to set an
example to businesses and individuals Government will establish  long-term
programme for implementing energy efficiency and energy savings throughout her
institutions  demonstration programme will be established within  major
Government institution The demonstration will also include the installation of
solar water heaters, to assess their effectiveness, with the aim of establishing
large-scale programme Such  programme will include institutions such as boarding
schools, clinics, institutional housing etc  Energy appliance labelling
Labelling provides purchasers with information about the performance and energy
consumption of the equipment Labels can provide information helpful in
determining the life-cycle cost of appliances and other energy consuming
equipment Rather than just being aware of the initial price, purchasers are
informed on relative operating costs Labelling can also motivate manufacturers
to produce more efficient products  labelling programme could be best developed
within the regional context since it requires the co-operation of all
manufacturers Government will encourage development of an energy appliance
labelling programme at  regional level The Ministry will initiate, in co-
operation with the local manufacturers and the Swaziland Standards Authority,
programme for labelling their products as  way of encouraging  regional
programme  Demand Side Management In order to use the energy resources
efficiently, the utilities in the country will be encouraged to adopt Demand
Side Management (DSM) and Integrated Resource Planning (IRP) These tools are
part of  broader concept of resource planning that includes both demand- and
supply-side options to meet consumers’ needs for energy services IRP explicitly
incorporates energy efficiency and load management programmes as well as energy
and capacity resources Application of Demand Side Management principles will be
promoted within the electricity utilities Use of different electricity tariffs
can also be  way of DSM because peak consumption can be reallocated to off peak
periods in some cases Thereby costly investments in peak capacity can be saved
66 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy The Ministry will encourage and promote investment in the
application of these tools and energy efficiency programmes DSM requires an
extensive database before any detailed programme can be initiated  training
programme will be developed to assist the utilities in data collection and
management to effectively utilise these tools 10 Removal of barriers
Historically, it has been shown that most of the gains predicted in energy
efficiency measures are not realised in practice This is due to the various
stakeholders, including customers, manufacturers, financiers, utilities,
regulators and Government agencies, not using energy efficiently This poses
serious challenges because strategies may be required to reduce or remove
barriers that may prevent the full realisation of energy efficiency measures
Government will develop  programme to remove the barriers to the realisation of
energy efficiency The major barriers to implementation of energy efficiency can
be grouped as information barriers, institutional barriers, social barriers,
financial and market barriers, and technical barriers  Accessibility groups to
energy for low-income  Overview Access to energy by all citizens of the country
is one of the key objectives of the energy policy Ensuring access to modern
forms of energy to low-income households is  complex task Selecting
interventions for this group requires careful analysis in order to ensure
sustainability and that the chosen method suits both the target group as well as
Government’ social objectives It can be said in general that the majority of
low-income households are in rural areas and in peri-urban areas Since the
majority of the population lives in rural areas it can also be inferred that
efforts to widen access to modern forms of energy services for low-income groups
should focus mainly on rural communities Furthermore, policies aiming at
widening access should go hand in hand with those aimed at improving
affordability of these services Modern forms of energy services are useful only
to those who can adopt them Historically, subsidies have been used to promote
wider use of such energy carriers However, ensuring exclusivity of the benefits
of these subsidies to the target group has been almost impossible, resulting in
abuse of 67 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy these interventions by the relatively more affluent
Examples of this are the subsidies on illuminating paraffin and diesel Energy
pricing in the country is not  major issue as most energy prices, including
those regulated by Government, already reflect the economic cost of supply As
result, most consumers and industry are conscious of energy costs However, there
are structural adjustments which still need to be made in areas of electricity
and product pricing to improve incentives for efficient energy use  Main issues
Some of the main issues with regard to widening of energy access are: •
Affordability and energy pricing; • High investment and low returns in
increasing access; • Finding and pursuing least cost energy mix options to best
serve low-income households; • Providing financial assistance for the
development of energy infrastructure for serving low-income groups; • Design and
implementation of policies aimed at raising income levels of low- income
households; • Dispersed settlements, which do not encourage the development of
infrastructure to improve access to energy services; and • Ensuring availability
of appropriate micro-finance schemes to benefit the low- income group  Energy
options for low-income households Electricity is the most preferred energy
carrier even to low-income households Other energy options such as LPG,
paraffin, and solar energy are already in use to varying degrees For rural
households the “three–stone” cooking technology is the most prevalent, whilst
paraffin based technologies are the most prevalent among the low-income urban
and peri-urban households In general cooking technologies that use modern energy
carriers are available even in small towns throughout the country Awareness and
experience with high efficiency improved wood fuel cooking-stoves is very
limited The widespread take-up of energy options such as LPG and paraffin is
restricted in many rural areas by high prices Government will promote and
facilitate adoption of sustainable energy options in an effort to assist low-
income households This will include capacity building at  local level through
the development of commercial and technical skills necessary to support
dissemination of these technologies Such technologies could also include
programmes to reduce electricity connection costs, for example, local
manufacturing and assembling of components, low cost reticulation technologies
such as Single Wire Earth Return (SWER) and “ready-boards” (low cost alternative
to internal wiring) 68 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy The application of newer but promising
technologies such as solar cookers and briquettes will be investigated,
primarily through pilot projects and demonstrations Because of  lack of an
integrated rural development strategy and the dispersed nature of homesteads in
the country, Government will focus on the deployment of stand alone systems in
rural areas and encourage utilities to use pre-payment meters or load limiters
Financing energy for low-income households Energy infrastructure and equipment
is expensive and often beyond the means of low- income households If the
availability of modern forms of energy services is to be achieved, transparent
and targeted financial assistance for energy infrastructure and equipment will
need to be developed Means for absorbing all or part of investment as well as
future investment costs of energy infrastructure for low-income households will
be investigated Access to micro-finance to low-income households is also made
difficult by the high non- repayment risk Therefore it is almost impossible for
low-income households to acquire even small loans to finance energy investments
at  household level Existing efforts, for example through some NGOs, to assist
in small loans provision for the low-income are not enough and need to be
strengthened Government, in collaboration with other agencies, will continue to
search for the best ways of making micro-finance available to low-income
households  Affordability and energy pricing Improving accessibility of energy
supplies, implies finding means and ways by which energy services can be
delivered reliably and affordably in an environmentally sound and socially
acceptable manner Adoption of tariffs that will assist low-income groups is
practised in many countries The energy policy will investigate means of
introducing modern forms of energy at affordable but realistic energy prices
Subsidies aimed at assisting certain categories will be clearly defined and
accounted for, as part of the social responsibility for Government Government
will promote and encourage access to affordable energy services for low- income
groups Energy prices for low-income groups will take into consideration
affordability to ensure access to energy for all This could be done by analysing
the prices for all potential consumers in relation to available income, in line
with Government’ income and expenditure surveys 69 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Gender and energy
Overview Energy and the roles of women and men are socially and culturally
linked in many diverse ways These linkages evolve over time and vary across
income groups, between urban and rural households and from region to region Some
of these variations affect both men and women in the same way However, the role
of women in energy provision and their participation in different facets of the
energy sector have not been sufficiently addressed Therefore, in addressing the
issue of energy and gender, the focus is mainly on improving the situation of
women Swaziland like most African countries is  patriarchal society It is also
society with strong cultural and religious practices There are still
restrictions for women in terms of ownership of property, inheritance and credit
Government has acknowledged the need to address gender inequalities The NDS
articulates  number of priorities “aimed at eliminating gaps and offering equal
opportunities to all citizens irrespective of their sex”  comprehensive Gender
Policy is being formulated The long-term objective of this Policy is to
contribute to the process of mainstreaming gender equality in plans and
programmes of various ministerial sectors, NGOs, the private sector and other
agencies involved in national development The main issues, as defined in the
Gender Policy, are equal access, equal ownership, equal control and equal
benefits The livelihoods of most people in rural areas depend on the
availability of energy resources, primarily wood fuel The effects of the
shortage of wood fuel resources affect women more than it affects men, since
mainly wood fuel gathering is primarily the woman’ job However in areas with
acute shortages, wood fuel becomes  man’ problem, as the purchase and carting of
firewood must be done from areas outside the community Beyond the home, energy
is also  key productive asset Many women are engaged in activities such as food
processing, commercial vegetable growing, and sewing All these are greatly
facilitated by the availability of energy and can significantly improve  woman’
economic standing and consequently, the standard of living in her household With
regards to professions in the energy sector, it is notable that few women are
employed within energy institutions such as the electricity utility and other
energy service industries Of those women who are employed within the sector,
very few hold key positions  Main issues The issues and challenges relating to
gender and energy, include: • Limited awareness on gender issues in general in
the society; 70 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy • Stimulating greater numbers of women to enrol for
energy related educational programmes and to encourage women to pursue careers
in energy related fields; Integrating gender interventions for the energy sector
with the country’ overall agenda on gender issues; and • • Encouraging the
meaningful participation of both men and women in making energy choices
Participation of women in energy programmes Despite being  relatively new
concept in Swazi society, there is an increasing acceptability of the need for
mainstreaming gender within the country’ national policies Valuing the
contribution of women and improving their involvement in various facets of the
energy sector is important for ensuring successful policy implementation
Government will ensure that women are motivated to participate in energy
programmes and activities Guidelines and strategies for inclusion of gender
concerns in energy programmes will be developed and disseminated  Energy careers
for women The low representation of women in the energy industries and agencies
is of concern and steps to improve this situation will need to be taken There
are existing efforts to encourage females to take science subjects in schools
These need to be complemented by  more ardent promotion of the uptake of
science-related disciplines in tertiary institutions Similarly in the workplace,
there is  need to continue to encourage equal opportunities, in terms of
employment and promotions, to deserving candidates regardless of whether they
are men or women Government will promote greater enrolment of women in energy
related disciplines Furthermore, Government will vigorously promote that equal
opportunities be availed in energy agencies and energy-related industries
Employment creation  Overview With reference to the energy sector, employment
creation can be either directly in the sector itself or created indirectly by
the sector Employment creation is  key Government objective and  major objective
of the energy policy Direct employment prospects within the industry include the
electricity utility, the petroleum industry, electrical contractors and other
smaller service industries within the sector 71 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Main issues The key
issues to be considered in employment creation are the following: • Improving
skills and expertise in the field of energy, the lack of which is perpetuated by
the absence of  human resources development programme; Increasing the number of
energy related subjects in the institutes of learning; Increasing engineering
courses in the tertiary institutions – to discourage companies outsourcing
skills and services from outside the country; • Encouraging the small and medium
scale energy related companies; and • Developing  consultancy based system for
local empowerment within the energy • • sector  Increasing employment
opportunities The energy sector is  high skills area and Government should
promote the development and implementation of capacity building programmes These
programmes should address energy matters and the appropriate means required to
encourage job creation within the energy sector Comprehensive strategies should
be developed to build knowledge and entrepreneurial skills to encourage the
development of small and medium scale energy related companies Government will
facilitate the development of  human and institutional capacity building
programme for the energy sector This can be implemented through investigating
the potential for running appropriate courses at colleges and tertiary
establishments, and how this would be viewed and supported by the major
employers Programmes will be developed which support employment creation In
particular, opportunities for local manufacture of components required for rural
electrification will be investigated  Quality assurance and quality standards
Overview  quality assurance framework and quality standards are essential to
ensure that appropriate equipment is used for the correct purposes, and that
health and safety standards are upheld and the environment is protected Quality
standards give consumers an assurance that  technology will perform as
advertised and will not fail immediately or be  danger to the user Standards and
regulations related to energy efficiency are mainly applied to buildings, cars
and household energy-using appliances Regulations also provide  basis to
establish label protocols Standards and labels affect the market for energy
efficient products in 72 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy different ways Standards can set  minimum
efficiency value or ban certain appliances from the market which do not meet the
required standard Regulations and standards can be quite effective, however the
economic and energy effects of traded products extend beyond national borders
They can have trade implications and raise issues of competitiveness As  result,
regional and international co-operation is important The Standards and Quality
Act 2001 provides for the establishment of the Swaziland Standards Authority (
national standards body) The Standards Authority will prepare, promulgate and
implement national standards by adopting relevant international standards in
various disciplines as stipulated in the World Trade Organisation Agreement on
Technical Barriers to Trade Article   Main issues The main issues relating to
quality assurance and quality standards are: • Development of quality standards
and assurance mechanisms in the country for energy related products; • Ensuring
wiring of public buildings and homesteads is to  satisfactory standard There are
presently no wiring standards in the country; and • Developing an infrastructure
for testing of energy related products;  Standards and testing One way of
maintaining  certain standard and quality of products is to develop and or adopt
quality assurance practices in the energy sector Government will develop and
adopt appropriate quality standards for energy related equipment and activities
Such equipment could include solar PV and solar hot water systems, electrical
wiring, filling of LPG bottles, paraffin storage and bottling etc It is also
necessary that accredited testing stations are available to ensure that
standards are being followed Government may choose to develop her own standards
or adopt international standards or legislation as necessary Swaziland imports
most of its products and there is  need to ensure that these products are safe
for use and meet the required specifications Government will facilitate the
establishment and accreditation of quality testing units within the country This
will require the involvement of tertiary institutions, Government bodies and the
private sector The Standards Act also provides for the establishment of
accredited testing and measurement facilities to calibrate equipment against
national standards and to determine the quality of commodities (locally produced
goods and imports) 73 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy One popular tool for promoting energy
efficiency has been Voluntary Agreements (VAs) VAs refer to agreements between
Government and industries for wide range of actions by the industries These
actions may include negotiated agreements, self-regulation, codes of conduct,
and eco-contracts VAs are increasingly common, as energy efficiency is seen more
as  useful means to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and meeting other
environmental and economic objectives  Research and Developme nt (&)  Overview
As  developing country, the main focus for Research and Development (&) is on
applied research rather than basic research Priority areas of applied research
and development include the following: • Energy systems and technologies; •
Renewable energy technologies; • Energy efficiency at end-use, supply and
generation levels; • Integrated decentralised systems ( solar, diesel etc); •
Policy and regulation; and • Linkage between environmental issues and energy
Currently, no formal energy research programme is being undertaken by
Government, NGOs or the private sector This is partly because of the lack of
capacity to undertake such research Some energy related research is being
carried out by industry as part of normal operation strategies In addition, some
small firms are active in & for commercial interests Some NGOs and Government
extension services have also been involved in & on wood fuel stoves It is
important that & is carried out internally within the country to ensure that it
is focused and can directly address the needs of consumers, businesses and
Government policy & can also facilitate employment creation, through the
establishment of research centres & taking place within the country, should be
in line and in collaboration with regional and international research practices
to avoid duplication and to learn from experience  Main issues The following key
issues should be addressed in relation to research and development: • Developing
and communicating  clear prioritisation of research needs in the energy sector;
• Limited capacity to implement research; • Finding effective ways of
collaborating more closely with tertiary institutions and supporting their
research agenda; • Supporting the National Research Council; and 74 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy •
Defining the roles of Government, NGOs, tertiary institutions, energy suppliers
and the private sector in initiating research projects and funding of &
Research strategy and programme Local capacity and resource constraints dictate
that  strategy be developed to channel and focus energy research activities This
strategy will in turn facilitate the development of  programme detailing
priority activities and funding responsibilities The programme will in
particular allow for international collaboration and assistance Government will
facilitate development of an energy & strategy and programme based on national
priorities and taking advantage of research agendas of other sectors and
institutions The National Energy Policy will require periodic review to identify
areas requiring amendments There will be need also to conduct pilot projects for
the purposes of assessing various energy technologies This will require
extensive consultations with stakeholders in the design and implementation of
this strategy Such  research strategy could be developed and implemented in
collaboration with the National Research Council The strategy will also need to
be updated from time to time to reflect the nation’ & needs The active players
in the energy sector would be encouraged to participate in and fund these
activities  Policy research and development Policy & is crucial in the
monitoring and identification of needs which require policy interventions and
reviews, as may arise from time to time Policy research can identify gaps and
weaknesses of the energy policy and highlight the need for revision of the
policy Policy research is cross-cutting in nature and requires sensitivity to
social, political, technological, environmental and economic factors Government
will establish  Policy Research Unit within the Energy Department that will be
responsible for planning and undertaking policy-related research and development
The Policy Research Unit, in co-operation with other stakeholders, will be
responsible for gathering basic data, identification of policy issues and
identification of suitable policy options and their implications The Unit will
be part of the National Research Council, which is the umbrella body for the
country 10 Energy planning Overview Energy planning is  function within the
mandate of the Energy Section of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy
The tasks include: the monitoring and identification of 75 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy needs which
require policy attention; analyses of different options for the supply of
energy; assessment of the consequences of introducing energy savings and energy
efficiency programmes; and analyses leading to the concrete implementation of
the energy policy The present energy policy can be seen as the result of such
analyses finally leading to the development of the future energy system of
Swaziland In day-to-day operations, analyses are performed to identify the means
to increase security of supply, optimise the energy system from an economic
point of view and to introduce means of reducing the harmful environmental
impacts of energy generation and consumption Such analyses are necessary when
considering relevant investments in the energy system and also in prioritising
and directing the resources available from international assistance programmes
The introduction of Demand-Side Management (DSM) and Integrated Resource
Planning (IRP) are also closely related to the planning function The
availability of up-to-date and precise data on energy supply and consumption is
precondition for assessing the impact of the energy policy and for performing
analysis on the consequences of different policy options and finally on the
revision, monitoring and evaluation of the energy policy The dissemination of
information on energy matters also requires that quality data on supply and
demand are available The Ministry performs the task of collecting and processing
statistical data for the supply and demand of energy The data collection
comprises of existing data from the Department of Statistics on imports and
exports, as well as questionnaires to the main energy suppliers and consumers
followed up by interviews as and when necessary Response to these questionnaires
and inquiries has in many cases been positive from the industries and consumers
approached, even though there is no legislation on compulsory data collection On
the other hand, not all have responded There may therefore be  need for
legislation authorising Government to perform such surveys on  regular basis and
for the public to respond Such legislation would need to guarantee that the
responding companies are protected with regard to sensitive data Once received,
this data needs to be evaluated and processed in order to be usable for analytic
purposes and information to the stakeholders and the general public Main issues
The main issues regarding energy planning are: • Compulsory provision of energy
data; • Capacity to monitor and evaluate the sector; • High quality data is
prerequisite to carry out  reliable analysis and to prepare the Energy Balance
for the country; and • Reliable energy data will be an advantage for industries
and suppliers, who can obtain  more precise picture of their performance 76
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy Planning There is need to develop and strengthen the planning capacity
within the energy sector The establishment and maintenance of effective
management systems is essential in order to implement the energy policy and
ensure rational planning for the future There is also the need to maintain
energy research and development programmes tailored to the energy policy
Government will ensure that adequate means for collection of statistical data
are available Due care will be given to companies in order to protect sensitive
data from competitors In conducting energy surveys, the Ministry will ensure co-
ordination and communication with the Central Statistical Office It is also
necessary that an appropriate energy planning model is adopted, in order to make
simple assessments of the viability of potential energy projects Sufficient
capacity and training to implement and develop the model will also be required
11 Regional and international energy trade and co-operation Overview The economy
of Swaziland, as  landlocked country, is dependent on relations with its
neighbours and their outlets to the regional and international markets Swaziland
imports  major part of its electricity, and all petroleum products and coal
utilised in the local industry from her neighbours Exports of goods to the
region are sent via the harbours in Maputo in Mozambique, and Richards Bay and
Durban in South Africa Coal produced in Swaziland is exported to its neighbours
and internationally The SADC region has  huge potential in terms of energy
resources, most notably hydropower There is presently surplus power available
and more if all the hydropower potential could be developed The Southern African
Development Community Energy Protocol was developed in Its goal was to develop
regional energy co-operation amongst its members Other areas of focus are
information and experience exchange, training and organisational capacity, and
energy investment and financing Regionally, the energy sector is changing with
liberalisation, in line with international global trends being undertaken by all
Member States The energy sector is being opened up for new players, especially
the private sector, to enter the markets and to off-load 77 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Government’
regulation responsibilities This will facilitate energy trade in the region and
increase energy co-operation In 1995,  SADC Inter-Governmental Memorandum of
Understanding was formally established This resulted in the SADC Inter-Utility
Memorandum of Understanding, which established the Southern African Power Pool
(SAPP) The energy sector of Swaziland is integrally linked with the region, and
is characterised by influences of international trade and events Main issues The
main issues associated with regional and international trade and co-operation
include: • Ensuring increased energy trade regionally and internationally to
maximise economic and social opportunities and benefits for the citizens; •
Reducing trade barriers; • • Facilitating energy investment in projects and co-
operation; and • Reducing the impact of political risk insurance on energy
projects Increasing skills and technology transfer and enhanced information
exchange; Regional energy trade Regional relations are crucial to the well being
of Swaziland and its economic stability and success The energy supply depends on
imports in the region, which are in some sectors influenced by international
pressures, especially the oil markets Swaziland is actively involved in energy
trade and participates in all regional forums in order to increase supply
diversity and be  player in the regional markets Government will promote and
take full advantage of regional co-operation and will ensure the development of
legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks that are in harmony with regional
agreements To obtain the maximum benefit from regional co-operation, Government
will require  strong institutional capacity Continuous monitoring of regional
developments, especially those embraced by is required the agreements Swaziland
has entered Communication with other Governments in the region should be
enhanced to facilitate the exchange of information and experience Furthermore,
it will be necessary to promote capacity building and the training of
specialists to implement the policies on international energy trade and co-
operation into, International energy trade International energy markets have
serious influence on regional markets Swaziland has previously been exporting
coal to the international markets There are  number of international agreements
that Swaziland has entered into It would be beneficial to the country to feature
in all international energy organisations in order to follow global trends in
the energy markets There is  need for Government to establish prioritisation of
78 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy membership and participation in international organisations and
conventions There is need also to develop strategies aimed at the removal of
barriers to energy trade Government will actively participate and be  member of
international energy bodies and will establish national committees to pursue
international energy trade and co- operation The country could obtain maximum
benefit from membership of international organisations or bodies backed by
strong local committees Hence, there is  need to establish  National Committee
of the World Energy Council In the long-term  national energy council or forum
could be established with strong involvement of the private sector and other key
stakeholders Reducing trade barriers The country imports most goods and services
from the neighbouring countries and abroad Increased participation in energy
trade benefits the country’ development and also, in terms of diversifying the
sources of supply ensures security of supply There are however, many barriers in
the importation of energy equipment and products which need to be relaxed
Renewable energy technologies and energy efficient equipment that are
environmentally friendly require special attention Government will reduce trade
barriers on energy products addressing employment and environmental issues for
the country Energy investment and political risk insurance Investment in energy
activities by the private sector can enhance regional and international energy
trading Support for investors is essential and an enabling environment should be
created and maintained An enabling legal, regulatory, and fiscal and tax
environment, infrastructure capacity and proper controls should be in place
There is need for the establishment of instruments to cover political risks of
energy investment in the country, which are now  requirement of large investors
If such tools are not in place, energy investments will be unaffordable for most
developing countries and the potential for energy investment will be reduced
Government will investigate the necessary instruments to increase energy
investment and to cover possible risks to ensure maximum benefits without having
serious detrimental effect to the economy as  whole Political risk insurance
will need to be investigated by the Government to handle this important investor
requirement on large energy infrastructure projects There is also  need to
develop capacity in the country to handle international agreements, involving
political risk insurance 79 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  Institutional framework for energy policy
implementation  Overview The Ministry is dedicated to the development of the
energy sector of the country for the benefit of the country’ economy and its
citizens In the design of the policy project, every effort was made to identify
the institutional framework and the means to implement the policy All
stakeholders emphasised that Government should have an “implementable” National
Energy Policy Such  policy would require  strong support base to carry it
forward from the public sector, private sector, donors, organisations like the
NGOs, CBOs, etc and the public  strong co-ordination and communication role is
essential throughout the life of the policy  Main issues The main issues include
• Lack of institutional framework; • Limited capacity; and • Poor communication
and co-ordination  Establishment of ins titutional framework The Ministry is
committed to developing an implementation strategy and plan in order to make the
policy  reality It is necessary that once the plan is in place, the institutions
involved in the energy sector should use it in co-ordinating their activities
The strengthening of existing, and the establishment of new institutions should
be  priority for implementing the policy, in conjunction with an awareness drive
to all people of the country Government will create an institutional framework
to implement the National Energy Policy and to improve co-ordination  Means for
impleme ntation of the poli cy The means to be used in this energy policy can be
divided into the following categories: 80 Energy Policy Final Revision September
doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Overall governance of the
energy sector ( institutional changes, relationships to other sector policies,
international co-operation, local participation, development of action plans,
initiation of demonstration projects); • Regulatory means ( legislation,
efficiency standards, safety and environmental standards, standards for quality
assurance of products); • Voluntary and legal agreements between Government and
the key stakeholders,  the industry and the petroleum sector; • Economic means (
pricing mechanisms, economic incentives, fiscal allocation for specific
programs, levies and taxes); and Information activities ( labelling of
appliances, information and awareness campaigns, demonstration projects) •
Government will prioritise and assess an appropriate and effective means for
implementation to meet the National Energy Policy objectives and priorities
However, implementation of many of the initiatives contained within the Policy
will require substantial resources with regard to both capital and human input
All the required resources might not be available at the adoption of the policy
but may in some cases materialise when the policy is developed further
prioritisation of the initiatives is necessary in order to allocate the scarce
resources to the most important initiatives and in order to obtain the most
effective benefit from the resources available The allocation of national
economic resources and implementation of supporting legislation needs to be
approved by Government The prioritisation should provide  sound planning
structure for the policy implementation In general, the role of Government in
the energy sector should be limited to regulatory and policy intervention There
is need for legislation, which will provide incentives for more efficient
performance and at the same time enhance an efficient industry structure based
on private sector principles Government’ monitoring and legislative leadership
is required in order to protect consumers and to compensate for social and
undesirable effects, which may result from the profit oriented actions of the
private sector Policy goals and measures should be understood in the light of
the limitations on the national resources and the energy market The current
players in the energy sector are listed in Annex   Strengthening and
establishment of energy governance ins titutions  Overview The Ministry is
responsible for the general governance of the energy sector The Ministry is
responsible for the development and implementation of the National Energy Policy
and is accountable to Cabinet, Parliament and the general public 81 Energy
Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy
The Energy Section of the Ministry has  mandate to formulate long-term energy
policies, strategies and implementation plans for projects The Section has to
communicate with all stakeholders involved in energy activities, which include
the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee, Government departments, parastatals such
as SEB, energy suppliers and consumers, NGOs, researchers, and the tertiary
institutions The Ministry is tasked with the management and investigation of
demonstration projects It also has  mandate to improve and maintain regional and
international co-operation with bodies such as SADC, WEC, AFREC and foreign
governments and organisations with whom agreements have been entered into The
Ministry should establish strong links with other policies that have  bearing on
energy policies There is need for stronger co-ordination with the environmental
agencies of Government and with agencies dealing with poverty, health and safety
Emphasis will also be placed on gender issues The Ministry needs to formulate
legislation to govern and supervise the Government owned energy institutions and
to provide them with strategic direction on their operation activities  Main
issues The main issues in ensuring  unified and appropriate governance framework
are: • Development of  clear and transparent governance framework; •
Strengthening of existing organisations; • Establishment of new bodies, if and
when appropriate; and • Ensuring that the governance framework takes cognisance
of rural and traditional issues  Establishment of an Energy Department The
Energy Section within the Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy was
established to be responsible for the fuels and energy portfolio for Government
According to the review of the Government structures by the Public Sector
Management Programme (PSMP), the Energy Section was found to be hampered by
limited human resources capacity and required strengthening in  number of areas,
in particular, with regard to the handling of petroleum issues and also data
handling and analysis It was also found necessary that  research unit is
established Government will establish an Energy Department with an appropriate
budget and expertise The policy recommends the establishment of  Management
Board to provide independent capacity and monitoring of the Energy Department In
order for the Energy Department to function effectively, it should be headed by
Director who will report to the Management Board The Board will advise the
Energy Department and the Minister on energy issues in the country The
Department should be staffed with  multi-skilled 82 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy compliment of energy
engineers, scientists, energy economists, and  legal advisor specialising in
energy law The Department will provide the following services: • provision of
advice to the Minister and Principals; • establishing legislation; • developing
and reviewing policy; • managing the energy projects programme; • overseeing the
Energy Regulatory Authority, Rural Electrification Agency, parastatals and the
energy industry; and • administering energy acts, which includes exercising some
regulatory functions To enable the energy sector to function effectively,
research unit should be established within the Department to monitor and
evaluate the policy implementation, and/or recommend revisions when necessary
Petroleum Inspection Unit The import of petroleum products is an issue of major
concern to Government There are presently no mechanisms in place to ensure the
accurate recording of products brought into the country, their transportation,
storage, and quality There is  major need for Government to inspect and monitor
these products, for both ensuring correct payment of taxes and levies and to
ensure  good quality and safe product is available to consumers Government will
establish  Petroleum Inspection Unit whose role will be to oversee adherence and
compliance to petroleum standards and legislation Qualified inspectors will be
employed within the Energy Department and be provided with an adequate budget
The inspectors will monitor petroleum standards and fuel specifications for the
country They will also be involved in consulting with the Customs Department on
all imports entering the country  Regional Energy Units The Energy Section is
responsible for many rural energy issues However, the present infrastructure
does not have the capacity to address needs, projects and programmes at  local
level Government will establish Regional Energy Units The Regional Energy Units
will carry out extension work and assist in ensuring information is disseminated
to  broad spectrum of the populace The Units will be situated in regional
offices to address specific local energy issues and respond to queries from
stakeholders They will form part of the Energy Department and report to the
relevant Senior Officer 83 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  Establishment of National Energy Forum The
establishment of  National Energy Forum will provide independent platform to
debate issues on energy and advise Government on policy issues This will also
ensure that the development and implementation of the policy is consultative and
responds to the needs of the public The participants in the forum should be from
broad cross-section of include representatives from NGOs, CBOs, gender based
society and should organisations and disadvantaged groups, and representatives
from the different sectors of industry, agriculture and commerce Such  forum
will also assist in raising awareness of energy issues Government will establish
National Energy Forum, organisations to advise Government on energy policy
involving independent Specific legislation will be required to create the
National Energy Forum, defining its powers, functions and structures  Intra-
Governmental planning It is essential that co-ordination between Government
departments and Ministries is improved Many issues relating to energy are
relevant to other Ministries, for example petroleum impacts upon the issues of
finance and customs and excise Government will ensure there is greater co-
ordination and integration of planning of energy issues and policy
implementation The Public Policy Co-ordinating Unit is responsible for co-
ordinating planning and the harmonisation of policies  Fuel Pricing Committee
Proposals for changes in prices of controlled petroleum products are discussed
and recommended by  Fuel Pricing Committee The Fuel Price Controller in
consultation with the Minister approves prices based on the Committee’
recommendations The Fuel Pricing Committee will be strengthened to effectively
assess and advise on pricing in the petroleum industry The role of the pricing
committee will be reviewed periodically until an Energy Regulatory Authority is
established, which may take over the functions Specific training may be required
for members on petroleum issues regarding pricing  Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) Secretariat The Clean Development Mechanism has been developed through the
Kyoto Protocol and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) It allows industrialised countries to purchase “certified emissions
reductions” from projects in developing countries which mitigate climate change
Developing countries can also 84 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy benefit from additional financing
provided for projects that focus on sustainable development, as well as the
benefits of emissions reduction projects In order to develop projects under this
mechanism,  certain infrastructure is required to administer and support
projects and allow for monitoring and verification Presently the National
Meteorological Services are co-ordinating the Government’ involvement in climate
change issues Infrastructure shall be established in the country to facilitate
and encourage the Clean Development Mechanism and other similar developments
under arrangements  Secretariat will be established in close consultation with
the National Meteorological Services and the Swaziland Environment Authority 10
Establishment of local energy committees and use of traditional structures Local
people are best suited to address energy issues pertinent to specific
communities/ areas These groups can set up forums within the area to educate and
raise awareness on energy issues and also provide feedback to national or
regional committees and to Government Government will facilitate the
establishment of local energy committees within communities The committees will
be established by the local authorities and assisted by the Regional Energy
Units in co-operation with relevant NGOs These committees can either be new
committees or integrated within existing structures,  Natural Resource
Management Committees The energy policy also needs to recognise the existing
traditional authorities and structures in order for energy projects to be
successful This will increase local participation, raise awareness and minimise
potential conflicts Government will involve traditional structures in the
development and implementation of the energy policy The Government will have
mandate to update the public on energy issues through the established
traditional structures 11 Strengthening of local energy organisations There is
need to promote and encourage independent energy agencies and institutions that
enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the energy sector Such organisations
may include educational establishments, such as VOCTIM, SCOT and UNISWA, and 85
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy NGOs such as the Renewable Energy Association of Swaziland (REASWA) The
organisations may be involved in energy projects, research, demonstrations etc
The capacity of local organisations, with an interest in energy issues, will be
strengthened There is also  need to develop capacity within local consulting
companies Private sector activities should be delegated to these entities Funds
for training will be sourced to enhance our local consultancy companies and
institutions 12 Swaziland National Committee for the World Energy Council This
committee was established in 1989 in order for the country to benefit from the
World Energy Council This included participation in forums and research, and
access to literature on energy related activities throughout the world The
membership of the World Energy Council comprises more than 100 countries
Government will ensure that the Swaziland National Committee for the World
Energy Council is strengthened  Energy Regulatory Authority  Overview An Energy
Regulatory Authority (ERA) will be established to oversee the energy sector
within Swaziland Initially, its scope will be restricted to the ESI, however as
other energy industries are restructured ( liquid fuels, coal, renewables etc),
they can be added to the schedule The ERA will be responsible for the issuing of
licences to generators, the monitoring of the performances of the utilities and
IPPs, monitoring and controlling the selling cost in the chain, and new
distribution ( rural electrification) The ERA will also be responsible for
addressing complaints and queries from energy consumers  Main issues The main
issues surrounding the proposed ERA are: • Ensuring  shift from  monopoly
electricity market towards liberalisation; • Allowing fair and transparent
access to the market; • Ensuring affordable energy services for all; • Ensuring
certain standards of performance by the industry; • Bringing on board liquid
fuels and coal when the time is right and ensuring the correct legislation is in
place; and • Decreasing the regulatory role for Government and parastatals 86
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy  Establishment and operations New legislation is presently being
developed as part of the electricity supply industry restructuring process The
present Electricity Act of 1963 will be replaced with  new Electricity Act, an
Energy Regulatory Authority Act and an SEB Act The Energy Regulatory Authority
(ERA) will be established through the Energy Regulatory Authority Act The ERA
will report to the Minister of Natural Resources and Energy and Parliament The
main source of funding for the ERA will come from licence fees and levies from
the companies being regulated, in order to ensure the independence of the
organisation Government will establish the Energy Regulatory Authority and
ensure it has appropriate budgetary requirements to fulfil its functions Prior
to the establishment of the ERA, Government needs to ensure that all of the
appropriate guidelines and regulatory instruments are in place The ERA will be
designed in such  way that it could be integrated into an overall regulatory
authority for the country, which could regulate all sectors 87 Energy Policy
Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  POLICY
PRIORITIES, MONITORING AND EVALUATION  Policy priorities The development of
National Energy Policy sets out to enable the Government and private sector to
provide reliable, affordable and environmentally sound energy production and
distribution for the country The challenge facing Swaziland as  landlocked
country is to expand its economy to support  growing population and to increase
the standard of living of all citizens In light of the Government’ limited
financial and human resources, the various policy options presented have been
prioritised for implementation in the short to medium/long term The
prioritisation exercise will be monitored and co-ordinated with other Government
policy statements and directions The policy implementation is  dynamic process
Basic assumptions may change over time (such as energy prices) and priorities
may change as society develops It is therefore necessary to review the energy
policy regularly and evaluate if changes or improvements are necessary The short
to medium/long term goals are guidelines to indicate the priorities for the
energy sector, which Government needs to focus on to meet the overall vision of
the energy sector, which is: Ensuring that the development goals of the country
are met through the sustainable supply and use of energy for the benefit of all
the citizens of the country In order for Government to implement the National
Energy Policy  comprehensive implementation plan will be developed The plan will
focus on realistic fulfilment of the policy statements and elaboration of
strategies as well as  time frame for implementing the policies during the short
and medium/long term Each policy statement relates to the objectives, as stated
in Section   Ensuring access to energy for all;  Enhancing employment creation;
Ensuring security of supply;  Stimulating economic growth and development; and
Ensuring environmental and health sustainability Priorities have been
formulated, based on the policies and grouped according to the policy objectives
These have been separated into short term priorities and medium/long term
priorities Short-term is considered to be up to five years, medium to long term
is considered to be from five to twenty years, in line with National Development
Strategy 88 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy  Short-term priorities In the short term the Government
will concentrate on the priorities listed below The activities are those actions
and initiatives that the Government will take up in the implementation programme
Ensuring access to energy for all • Developing  Rural Electrification Master
Plan; • Providing electricity to all schools, clinics and essential public
institutions in rural areas and facilitate the reticulation of domestic
dwellings; • Developing  mechanism that will make prices affordable to rural
areas; • Developing effective means of ensuring adequate access to energy
services throughout the country, including financing systems; • Supporting
dialogue and co-ordination among agencies and communities involved in rural
development; • Establishing new electricity and regulatory legislation for
liberalising the electricity supply industry; • Consolidating all relevant
petroleum legislation into  Petroleum Act; • Establishing  detailed inventory
for mini and micro hydro power sites and the ranking of the sites with the
highest potential; • Developing wood fuel demonstration programmes and
information dissemination for sustainable energy use; and • Developing
conceptual framework on how to use sustainable energy to tackle poverty
Enhancing employment creation • Facilitating the energisation of rural areas and
create SME’ to assist locals to gain entry to the energy industry; •
Facilitating the development and implementation of  human and institutional
capacity building programme; • Establishing energy research and development in
line with the vision of the National Research Council; and Improving the
participation of women in energy programmes and activities and greater enrolment
in energy related disciplines •  Ensuring security of supply • Investigating the
establishment of  coal fired thermal power station for the country; •
Promulgating  regulation from the Fuel Oil Levy Act 1980, that will require the
petroleum companies to store  minimum quantity of stocks; • Developing
mechanisms for ensuring diversification of the sources of petroleum products
imported into the country; 89 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Establishing national strategic depots
for petroleum products sufficient to sustain the economy for  maximum of 90
days; • Actively participating in the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP) to
benefit from the increased electricity trade in the SADC region; and •
Maintaining co-operation with regional and international bodies dealing with
energy  Stimulating economic growth and development • Improving energy
governance and institutional capacity framework to implement the policy; •
Restructuring the Energy Office into an Energy Department; • Facilitating the
removal of barriers to energy trade and investment; • Establishing an Energy
Regulatory Authority (ERA); • Establishing fully transparent and cost reflective
electricity tariffs; • Liberalising the Electricity Supply Industry and
investigate the various commercialisation opportunities for the utility; •
Investigating means of achieving least cost retail prices of LPG and paraffin; •
Conducting  cost-benefit analysis regarding increased use of indigenous coal; •
Establishing infrastructure in the country to encourage developments under the
Clean Developments Mechanism (CDM) and other similar arrangements; • Developing
and adopting appropriate quality standards for energy related equipment and
activities; and • Developing an annual energy policy statement targeted at
stakeholders, politicians, investors and the general public, to be published by
the Minister  Ensuring environmental and health sustainability • Developing
programmes promoting the utilisation of renewable energy resources; •
Establishing  centre for demonstration and education on renewable energy and
sustainable energy; • Encouraging and enhancing where applicable, topics on
renewable energy and energy in general in educational and training curricula; •
Encouraging  wider use of solar water heaters in residential and commercial
buildings; • Formulating and implementing programmes on awareness raising and
information dissemination on energy savings; • Developing and implementing
quality control measures that will ensure that marketers of oil products adhere
to agreed product specifications – including environmental considerations – and
that these conform to regional and/or international standards; • Developing
legislation to ensure that all stakeholders in the oil and transport industry
manage their waste oil in an environmentally friendly manner; and Introducing
safety standards for LPG and paraffin equipment • 90 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Medium/long
term priorities These priorities are those activities and initiatives that will
be implemented in the medium to long term  Ensuring access to energy for all •
Ensuring that there is adequate access to all appropriate forms of energy; •
Developing sustainable financing mechanisms for the extension of the electricity
grid throughout the country; • Maintaining programmes on the manufacturing and
utilisation of briquettes to satisfy energy needs; • Facilitating and promoting
the adoption of sustainable energy options in an effort to assist low-income
households; and • Ensuring that energy prices for low-income groups take into
consideration affordability to ensure access to energy for all  Enhancing
employment creation • Continuing and maintaining the development of energy &
strategies and programmes; • Supporting the development and implementation of
capacity building in the energy sector; and • Encouraging the promotion of
entrepreneurship in the sector in co-operation with players in the energy sector
Ensuring security of supply • Investigating the resource potential for coal-bed
methane and its use for energy purposes; • Conducting further research on the
coal resources of the country; • Developing and implementing the blending of
ethanol with petrol, with  focus on reducing petroleum imports and improving the
environment; • Establishing  comprehensive study to evaluate the future energy
supply options; • Developing and implementing demand side management; and •
Promoting and taking full advantage of regional co-operation and ensure the
development of legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks that are in
harmony with regional agreements  Stimulating economic growth and development •
• Encouraging the integration, harmonisation and implementation of the various
Introducing and encouraging competition within energy markets; national
policies; • Facilitating the establishment and accreditation of quality-testing
units within the country; 91 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Establishing regulations for energy
management programmes for Government institutions; • Participating in
international energy bodies; and • Establishing mechanisms to increase
investment and to cover political risk insurance;  Ensuring environmental and
health sustainability • Reviewing and updating the Renewable Energy Action Plan
every five years; • Encouraging the use of clean coal technologies; •
Encouraging development of an energy appliance labelling programme; • Promoting
programmes supporting sustainable wood fuel use; • Promoting efficient and
environmentally sound technologies for utilisation of indigenous resources for
electricity production; • Encouraging the production of charcoal for the
household cooking market where it can be clearly shown that it will be
environmentally sustainable; • Establishing efficiency standards for charcoal
kilns; • Conducting  study to identify harmful emissions from all sub- sectors
in the energy sector; • Monitoring and assessing the appropriateness of present
legislation to ensure the health and safety of the population; and • Phasing out
leaded petrol and high sulphur diesel  Revision, Monitoring and Evaluation of
the Energy Policy  Policy review and revision Elaboration of  National Energy
Policy is not  one-time exercise Basic assumptions and priorities may change
over time The Policy priorities will require  substantial amount of resources in
order to be implemented and available resources may also change The Policy will
therefore have to be reviewed regularly in line with the national three- year
rolling plan The energy sector is in constant transition and development The
international oil crises in the 1970’ and 1980’ are examples of  politically
influenced impact on the supply sector Based on the experiences from these
crises, security of supplies, diversification of supplies, energy efficiency and
savings remain high on the energy agenda The global trend of liberalisation of
electricity and natural gas markets are examples of commercial developments with
huge consequences 92 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy The recent emphasis on the global environment
is also an example on how the international agenda for the energy sector is
concentrating on environmental issues in  broad sense It must therefore be
realised that the energy sector is constantly developing, both with regard to
technology, policy and management These changes will naturally affect the stated
policies, which with regular intervals will have to be reviewed and revised if
necessary Progress on the stated policies will also have to be monitored
regularly to ensure that the policy is actually implemented, and if this is not
the case, the reasons should be considered Figure  describes the process
required to review the policy This should be carried out at regular intervals by
the Policy Research Unit Figure : Policy review Prioritisation of Energy Policy
Objectives Determination of Energy Policy Statements Determination of Energy
Implemen tation Strategies Measurement and Assessments of Results The national
energy balance, supplemented with other indicators to describe the present
situation ( the present use of indigenous resources, the size of the national
stock of petroleum products, the emissions from the energy system of pollutant
gases etc), can be used as  base line for measuring the results of the National
Energy Policy in the future At regular intervals ( every year) the selected
indicators should be assessed, and the policy decision makers should then
consider if there is  need to adjust the means for implementation At greater
intervals ( every fourth – sixth year), the energy policy 93 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy statements and
the energy policy objectives should be discussed and adjusted if found necessary
Monitoring Monitoring entails maintaining  regular analysis of the
implementation of the policy and its impact Monitoring provides  useful feedback
loop to the policy development process so that future activities and strategies
can be modified, if necessary, in the light of past experience Monitoring of the
stated policies should be carried out once  year Some of the policy statements
can be easily measured and quantified For example, the level of households
connected to the electricity grid, or off-grid demonstration projects can be
quantified The stocks of petroleum products can also be relatively easily
quantified However, other policy initiatives may require  more complex or
qualitative approach  monitoring system for the National Energy Policy will be
put in place Annual monitoring reports will be produced containing details of
implementation progress, effects and impact of the policy Since all energy
initiatives have  consequence on the energy supply and demand,  regular update
of the energy statistics will be an important monitoring tool It will therefore
be essential that the energy statistics and the energy balance are updated every
year  Evaluation There is  need for periodical evaluation of the policy
Evaluation is  structured procedure applied in an objective way in order to
assess if the policy has actually brought about the expected benefit Such an
evaluation on  regular basis should be  natural part of policy implementation In
many cases, major energy projects are based on comprehensive feasibility studies
stating expected benefits for the specific project,  energy savings or reduced
costs Such projects should later on, when experiences have been gained, be
evaluated compared to the original expectations The National Energy Policy will
be subjected to  comprehensive evaluation in five year cycles This evaluation
exercise is not only intended to raise criticism but also to gain knowledge on
how projects or policies could be better planned in the future The monitoring
reports will be major inputs to the evaluation 94 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  Minister’ Annual
Energy Statement Introduction of an annual energy statement by the Minister for
Natural Resources and Energy will represent  good opportunity to inform the
public and stakeholders on recent energy developments An Annual Energy Statement
targeted at stakeholders, politicians, investors and the general public will be
published by the Minister The Statement could include an update on the policy
prioritisation plan to keep track on progress of the policy initiatives Adding
the latest energy statistics and energy balance would also be of benefit to the
Annual Statement 95 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy  The Way Forward The Ministry is committed to
ensure  sustainable supply and use of energy in the country, in an
environmental, economically and socially acceptable manner The Energy Sector has
large sub-sectors, hence the need for  strong institution, and co- ordination
and communication strategies To make the implementation effective, there is need
to increase capacity, both in the public and the private sector to achieve the
goals and the vision of the energy sector The policies will be translated into
action plans in  comprehensive National Energy Policy Implementation Strategy
This Strategy will detail the methodologies and programme for implementation of
the activities, the key organisation to will carry out these activities and the
resources required 96 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy Annex : National Policies and International
Conventions Relevant to the Energy Sector Several policies have strong linkages
with the energy sector (besides the NDS) The interrelations between these need
to be borne in mind in order to improve co-ordination and avoid contradictions:
National Transport Policy )  transport policy is now in place This policy does
not include explicit strategies on fuel-efficiency for vehicles Since the
transportation sector constitutes about 18% (1999) of total final energy demand,
the proper linkage between the transport policy and the energy policy is
important Transportation policy will directly influence the consumption pattern
of transportation fuels in the country National Forest Policy )  policy on
forestry and forestry legislation is underway Since the household sector depends
heavily on biomass fuels, the forest policy will have an impact on the energy
policy and vice versa For example the draft Forest Policy also includes
statement that “measures have to be taken to ensure sustainable supply of wood
fuel to meet the needs of communities…” Additionally, both the Forest Policy and
the Energy Policy have interests in the development of industrial forestry, the
latter being interested in generation of energy from forestry residues National
Environment Policy ) Environmental protection has evolved to be key to
sustainable development The draft national Environment Policy and the
Environmental Management Bill 2001 are aimed at enhancing, protecting and
conserving the environment and hence support the attainment of sustainable
development The most significant environmental issues with regard to energy use
are: deforestation resulting from wood fuel collection; air-pollution resulting
from combustion of wood and fossil fuel combustion; human health and safety due
to burning of firewood for indoor cooking and visual impacts of energy
infrastructure projects As such, the environmental policy will influence the
energy policy National Land Policy )  draft land policy has been prepared The
goal of this policy is to address and redress land matters with  positive
framework that inspires public confidence and encourages development towards the
vision of national development Land policy is important particularly in
consideration of the provision of energy in rural areas Land tenure structure
has also been identified as of importance when considering the sustainability of
forest reserves and hence wood fuel supply Resettlement Policy )  Rural
Resettlement Task Force under the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives has
drafted the National Resettlement Policy The purpose of this policy is to guide
the planning, implementation and monitoring of rural resettlement For rural
electrification, 97 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy proper resettlement will increase the economic
viability of many projects and hence increase access of modern energy in rural
areas Mining Policy )  project to formulate  mining policy is underway One of
the key objectives of the project is to establish  modern policy, legal and
institutional framework for exploration and mining activities in Swaziland,
taking into account investor’ concerns and goals as well as the objectives and
interests of the country The mining policy and the energy policy will overlap in
term of coal use and therefore coal policies have to be harmonised Privatisation
Policy ) Four main objectives describe the aims of the proposed privatisation
policy in terms of the energy sector First, the policy intends to relieve
Government of the burden of funding public enterprises Second, the policy will
provide for raising of finance for the Government through divestiture of
ownership of these enterprises Third, the policy aims to increase private
individual and corporate participation in public enterprises This could be
achieved through private ownership of shares by local Swazi individuals, groups
of individuals, or by private companies Private participation could also mean
privatisation of certain functions or services being undertaken by the public
enterprises thereby generating business opportunities for locals (outsourcing)
Fourth, privatisation is also expected to improve the efficiency of public
enterprises through pressure from private sector return requirements and
competition (where possible) This policy will have  significant impact on the
electricity industry in Swaziland since it will provide guidance for the
possible privatisation of SEB Gender Policy )  Gender unit has been established
within the Ministry of Home Affairs  Gender policy is not yet in existence There
are gender-related concerns in the energy sector, particularly the burden women
disproportionately bear in providing the energy needs of (rural) households
gathering wood fuel For this reason the gender policy will impact on the energy
policy and vice-versa Considerations could also be given to other energy sub-
sectors to investigate their gender sympathy  transport energy Climate Change
Convention ) The National Meteorological Services (NMS) is the focal point for
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) which was
established in Rio and ratified by Government in The objective of this
Convention is to achieve stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at  level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference
with the climate system The Convention supports the concept of sustainable
development, and calls for the development and sharing of environmentally
friendly technologies and information The Kyoto Protocol to this Convention
provides for flexible mechanisms in North-South co-operation in mitigating
climate change The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) allows industrialised
countries to purchase “certified emission reductions” by investing in projects
contributing to sustainable development of developing countries and at the same
time mitigating climate change Since energy contributes over 50% to climate
change, 98 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland
National Energy Policy there are opportunities for receiving finance for
projects which contribute to climate change mitigation Proposals are being
developed to establish  CDM Secretariat in the country Convention to Combat
Desertification (CCD) ) Swaziland ratified the CCD in National Action Programme
(NAP) has been formulated This convention is relevant to the energy sector due
to the contribution of the sector to deforestation Therefore the energy policy
needs to be cognisant of the NAP and the CCD in order to improve the efficiency
of dealing with this problem The Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives Land
Use Planning Section is the focal point for the Convention ) Convention on
Biological Diver sity (CBD) The CBD was ratified in It comprises three main
components: ) biodiversity conservation; ) sustainable utilisation; and ) access
to the benefits arising from biodiversity conservation NGO Policy ) Many energy
issues relate to improving access to energy services for rural communities NGOs
are often best placed to interact with these communities to assess their needs
and ensure the appropriate services are provided at affordable costs Health and
Safety ) Many activities and technologies relating to energy can be hazardous to
health, especially when not used correctly It is essential that consumers and
users of such are protected  National Environmental Health Policy is presently
being drafted This is viewed as an addendum or adjunct to the National Health
and Social Welfare Policy Document It addresses health issues across all sectors
including clean water supply, disposal and handling of wastes, food safety, and
pollution, to name but  few Issues relating to Health and Safety at Work are
contained in three laws: the Factories, Machinery and Construction Works Act,
1972, the Workers Compensation Act of 1984, and the Occupational Safety and
Health Act Law of the Sea Convention ) Articles 125 and 129 of the convention
give landlocked countries access to the sea This is of major relevance to
countries such as Swaziland when addressing security of supply issues For
example, there may be opportunities for importing petroleum directly to the
country Basel Conve ntion ) The Basel Convention addresses the issue of trans-
boundary transfers of waste Presently, Swaziland has not signed up to this
convention The major consequence is that the country can not export its waste
oil, some of which finds its way into the ground and river when storage
facilities are overflowing ) Population Policy 99 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy  National Population
Policy for Swaziland was developed to ensure  nation of healthy, prosperous and
economically productive people where population dynamics are consistent with
sustainable development, as envisaged in the National Development Strategy
Resettlement Policy )  draft Resettlement Policy is underway in order to
facilitate rural development and economic growth This will address key issues
such as: land acquisition; the concept of land use rights; relinquishment of
land; rational land use practices; choice of resettlement model; linking
objectives and methods of resettlement; institutional framework; role of
authorities; management of land disputes; and compensation Poverty Reduc tion
Strategy ) The overriding objective of Swaziland’ Poverty Reduction Strategy and
Action plan is to reduce the incidence of poverty in the Kingdom of Swaziland by
more than half from the current level of 66% to 30% by the year 2015 and to
eliminate it altogether by Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants
) The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants was opened for
signature in It aims to reduce the emission of organic pollutants such as
dioxins, PCBs, furens etc 100 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy       : SWAZILAND ENERGY BALANCE 1999
Unit: TJ Energy carrier Coal Gasoline Diesel Kerosene LPG Jet fuel Fuel oil
Electricity Wood fuel Bagasse Other Total Total primary Energy supply Production
Imports Exports     6461 12950 6461 12950 3747 4099 520 413 58 423 3007 12270
705 12270 9382 269 40649 9382 269 35576 18023 12950 3747 4099 520 413 58 423
2302                      Total transformation Public power plants Self
generation Distribution losses -587 -10 -10 -1103 -2105 551  950 -404 -3254 -
-2845 -404 -587 -1103 -2105 Total final energy consumption 5874 3747 4089 520
413 58 423 3558 11167 7277 269 37395  Sectorial consumption Agriculture Industry
and mining Transport Commerce & services Households total Households urban
Households rural Jet fuel includes aviation gasoline Kerosene includes
illumination paraffin and power paraffin Woodfuel includes: Firewood (comm and
non comm), industrial wood waste, bark and "Black liquor" Please note that
electricity consumption in industry and commerce and services is not
statistically well separated 58 340 450 348 3349 3291 491 26 1025 20487 6672
4375 423 12 2528 5184 7277 32 1499 1498  520 260 260 401 306 95 269  268 Other
comprises: candles, agricultural wastes and animal wastes 539 5983 437 484 55
5546 9211 2986 6225 101 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy Annex3: Current Players in the Energy Sector
The main organisations involved in the energy sector are briefly described below
() Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy In 1992, an Energy Office was
established in the Ministry, responsible for all energy related matters Its
mandate was to administer, manage and regulate all energy issues in the country
In order to achieve this mandate the Energy Office, referred to as the Energy
Section, has initiated, monitored and evaluated various projects and feasibility
studies over the years Notably, projects in the field of solar energy, rural
electrification, molasses-based ethanol production, household energy, coal
utilisation, energy management and electricity supply options have been carried
out to obtain technical and economical information required to be able to
achieve its goals and formulate policies on energy issues The Energy Section
also collects and analyses statistical information on energy consumption and
supplies, and advises Government, public institutions and the private sector in
all energy related matters Various energy models have been applied to establish
energy balances and forecasts () The Swaziland Electricity Board (SEB) SEB is
the state owned electricity utility SEB is responsible for most of the
generation and supply, import, transmission and distribution of electricity
Presently SEB is also the authority responsible for granting licenses to other
electricity producers (industry co-generation and small hydro) The Ministry of
Natural Resources and Energy is presently restructuring the electricity supply
industry and developing  new regulatory framework, which will apply to SEB ()
Ministry of Finance The Public Enterprise Unit (PEU) of the Ministry of Finance
is presently regulating and monitoring the activities and financial performance
of SEB as  Government enterprise, through the Public Enterprises (Control and
Monitoring) Act of PEU is also mandated to establish performance contracts with
all parastatals and to advise the line Ministries responsible for the utilities
() Swaziland Environmental Authority (SEA) SEA was established in 1992 to
address environmental issues within the country SEA is also responsible for the
issuance of Environmental Compliance Certificates for any projects, both small
and large The Environmental Management Bill, 2001, was developed to provided for
and promote the enhancement, protection and conservation of the environment and
where appropriate, the sustainable management of natural resources () Fuel
Pricing Committee This Committee assists the Ministry on an ongoing basis in
matters related to the pricing and supply of petroleum products It comprises
stakeholders from the petroleum industry, consumer associations, transport
associations and Government departments involved with petroleum issues The
committee meets monthly to review local, regional and international fuel prices
and their impact on the national economy 102 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy () Swaziland Petrol
Retailers Association The Association represents the petroleum retail industry
in matters pertaining to their general interests and participates in
negotiations with all regulatory authorities affecting the industry The
association represents all dealers in the country supplied by the different oil
companies () Independent Power Producers Some of the major industries produce
electricity for use in their production process and for adjacent company towns
These are the Ubombo, Mhlume and Simunye sugar industries and the Sappi Usutu
pulp industry Swaziland Plantations also operates  hydro generator In the light
of global energy liberalisation throughout the world, the role of Government in
the management of the energy sector should be limited to  regulatory role and
policy development This would provide for  more efficient performance of the
sector and could enhance an efficient industry structure rooted in the private
sector () Tertiary institutions and NGOs There is  long history of collaboration
and co-operation between Government and the tertiary institutions and NGOs on
energy projects and energy research 103 Energy Policy Final Revision September
doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Annex : Institutional Framework
Organograms Below are organograms depicting the proposed future institutional
framework and the linkages between the relationship between Government and the
relevant energy related organisations The second organogram describes the
internal structure within the Department of Energy Petroleum Industry Petroleum
Pricing Committee Energy Regulatory Authority National Energy Forum Department
of Energy Swaziland Electricity Board CDM Secretariat Independent Power
Producers Coal Industry Tertiary Institutions, NGOs and other Organisations
Local Energy Committees Traditional Structures 104 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Parliament Department
of Energy Cabinet Minister Parliamentary Portfolio Committee Principal Secretary
Director of Energy Management Board Director' Office Legal and Policy Unit
Energy Technical Services Division Energy Data & Economy Division Renewable
Energy Section Electricity & Coal Section Energy Efficiency Section Data &
Economy Section Petroleum Section Rural Electrificaiton Projects Regional Energy
Units Petroleum Inspection Unit 105 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy Annex : Summary of Policy Statements
• Government will promote measures to improve efficiency of energy use in
agriculture, such as the provision of information and use of low-energy
equipment () • Government will ensure there is adequate access to all
appropriate forms of energy to support rural farming () • Government will ensure
continued improvement of the electricity supply infrastructure for the
industrial sector as part of the overall strategy for attracting investment () •
Government will initiate an energy efficiency and conservation programme to
encourage energy savings () • Government will implement an awareness-raising
programme for the commerce and services sector on energy efficiency and
conservation measures () • Government will ensure that an energy management
programme for all her institutions is implemented () • Government will integrate
and harmonise implementation of the various national policies related to the
transport sector () • Government will promote fuel saving measures in the
transport industry () • Government will progressively introduce tighter
maintenance and inspection procedures so as to stimulate development of more
energy efficient and environmentally friendly modes of transport () • Government
will ensure the participatory establishment of multipurpose woodlots and
individual tree growing so as to increase rural wood fuel supply () • Government
will promote the development and dissemination of improved cooking technology as
part of  wider strategy on the reduction of wood fuel consumption () • Best
means of availing suitable alternatives to wood fuel, such as LPG, paraffin,
electricity, wood fuel briquettes and solar cookers will be advocated () •
Government will ensure meaningful integration of energy within broader rural
development interventions through forging dialogue and co-ordination among
agencies and communities involved () • Government will encourage the use of
credit schemes for energy projects for rural households () • National awareness
raising programmes and action strategies aimed at improving education and
information dissemination on energy technology options, costs and technical
know-how will be developed and implemented () • The electric power system in
urban areas will be upgraded and maintained in order to deliver quality and
reliable service to urban households () • Government will encourage utilities
and service providers to increase connectivity of urban households () • An
awareness creation programme and action strategy aimed at improving energy
savings and conservation in urban households will be developed and promoted () •
The energy needs and characteristics of peri-urban areas will be examined and
the means of improving access to appropriate energy services will be determined
and applied () • Government will conduct  cost-benefit analysis regarding
increased use of indigenous coal in the industry and households taking due
consideration of the environmental and health consequences () 106 Energy Policy
Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy •
feasibility study on the establishment of  coal fired thermal power station will
be conducted () • The resource potential for coal-bed methane and its use for
energy purposes will be investigated () • Government will investigate the
appropriateness of various pricing incentives and taxation so as to encourage
the use of clean coal technologies () • Government will facilitate sustainable
and expedient utilisation of the coal resources by private sector interests, in
line with sustainable human development goals articulated in the NDS () • Price
regulation shall be maintained in the short term and will be subject to review
so as to ascertain its appropriateness and relevance in the longer term () •
Government will investigate deregulation options in the medium to long term () •
Regulation of service stations and fuel outlets by means of the Rationalisation
Plan will be maintained, and modifications to the Plan will be effected every
five years () • Government in collaboration with the oil industry (including LPG
suppliers) will develop effective means of ensuring adequate access to petroleum
products () • Government will require commercial companies to store  minimum
quantity of stocks to ensure fuel availability () • Government will put in place
quality control measures that will ensure that marketers of oil products adhere
to agreed product specifications – including environmental considerations – and
that these conform to regional and/or international standards () • Government
will ensure diversification of the sources of petroleum products imported into
the country so as to enhance security of supply as well as take advantage of
competitively priced fuels available in the international markets () •
Government will ensure the oil industry increases the involvement of locals () •
Government will conduct further investigations on blending ethanol with petrol
with  focus on introducing products in the local markets () • Government will
monitor pricing of LPG products more closely and will facilitate  closer
dialogue between herself, suppliers and dealers () • Government will continue
with the present restructuring process and will investigate the various
commercialisation opportunities for the electricity supply industry () •
Government will continue to facilitate improvement of the electricity supply
infrastructure and thus improve the energy supply service () • Government will
ensure there are clear guidelines for opening access to the national grid () •
Government will carry out investigations and promote efficient and
environmentally sound technologies for the utilisation of indigenous resources
for electricity production () • Government will support programmes promoting the
utilisation of renewable energy resources for electricity production () •
Government will establish and support demonstration plants aimed at promoting
the utilisation of the various technologies () • Government will create an
enabling environment to allow the establishment of IPPs in the country and
support projects to be implemented () • Government will ensure that electricity
tariffs are fully transparent and cost reflective () • Government will develop
renewable energy information programme and will establish and maintain an
appropriate renewable energy information system () 107 Energy Policy Final
Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Government
will support and promote the dissemination of information and demonstration of
prioritised renewable energy technologies () • Government will establish  centre
for demonstration and education on renewable energy and sustainable energy () •
Appropriate financing mechanisms will be further investigated and facilitated ()
• Government will introduce and enhance where applicable, topics on renewable
energy and energy in general in educational and training curricula and will
encourage the provision of specialised courses in renewable energy () • The
capacities of development agencies, which promote and implement sustainable
programmes on renewable energy, will be strengthened () • An appropriate centre
for quality assurance and standards for energy applications, in particular
renewable energy technologies will be established () • Government will promote
demonstration units to display these technologies, for example through
Tinkhundla centres () • Government will encourage  wider use of solar water
heaters in residential and commercial buildings through promotional means and
support for private sector initiatives () • Government will develop  programme
to install solar water heaters on all her institutional buildings () • The
general production of charcoal for the household cooking market will be
encouraged if it can be clearly shown that it will be environmentally
sustainable (10) • Government will investigate  framework for establishing
efficiency standards for charcoal kilns (10) • Government will further
investigate the manufacturing and utilisation of briquettes to satisfy energy
needs (11) • Government will investigate the opportunities for the adoption of
other clean and renewable energy technologies (12) • Government will pursue grid
electrification particularly in densely populated resettled areas and areas with
high development potential () • Off-grid electrification options may be more
appropriate and could be implemented in areas remote from existing grid lines
and less densely populated, where grid connection may be too costly () •
Government will encourage the development of demonstration projects for the
various off-grid technologies () • Government will investigate the
appropriateness of sustainable renewable energy technologies to assess their
potential future application for off-grid electrification () • Government will
ensure that all schools, clinics and essential public services in rural areas
are provided with electricity () • Government will ensure that agricultural,
commercial and industrial development areas are provided with electricity () •
Government will facilitate the reticulation of domestic dwellings in an
affordable manner in conjunction with the utilities () • Government will develop
Rural Electrification Master Plan () •  Rural Electrification Agency will be
established to implement and monitor rural electrification () •  dedicated fund
will be established and used to provide financial support to rural
electrification () 108 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33
Swaziland National Energy Policy • Government will ensure that strategic stocks
for petroleum products are established in the country () • Government will
ensure that contingency plans are in place to deal with supply disruptions in
the country beyond the normal established reserves () • Government will
investigate opportunities for increased local power generation and will
endeavour to take advantage of the availability of cheap power in the region
through the SAPP () • Government will develop an energy efficiency programme
amongst the energy sub-sectors of the economy () • Government will investigate
and promote the use of environmentally friendly fuels, energy products and
technologies () • Government will ensure that environmental standards and
principles are included in the guidelines, regulations and licensing procedures
for the Energy Regulatory Authority () • Government will conduct  study on
identifying harmful emissions from all sub-sectors in the energy sector and
methodologies and prioritisation on how to reduce them () • Government will
investigate opportunities for energy from waste () • Government will develop
legislation to ensure that all stakeholders in the oil and transport industry
manage their waste oil in an environmentally friendly manner () • Government
will investigate and promote the safe use, storage and transport of fuels and
energy technologies in all sectors () • Government will assess the
appropriateness of present legislation to ensure the health and safety of the
population, for both the employees in the energy sector and consumers and users
of energy products () • Government will facilitate the establishment of the
National Energy Savings Association to promote and implement energy savings
activities across all sectors in the country () • Government will formulate and
implement programmes on awareness raising and information dissemination on
energy savings () • Government will investigate introducing energy efficiency
into the educational curricula () • Government will promote energy management
skills and energy accountability in organisations across all sectors () •
Government will ensure that building standards and regulations, which promote
energy conservation in both commercial and domestic buildings, are in place () •
Government will establish  long-term programme for implementing energy
efficiency and energy savings throughout her institutions () • Government will
encourage development of an energy appliance labelling programme at  regional
level () • Application of Demand Side Management principles will be promoted
within the electricity utilities () • Government will develop  programme to
remove the barriers to the realisation of energy efficiency (10) • Government
will promote and facilitate adoption of sustainable energy options in an effort
to assist low-income households () • Means for absorbing all or part of
investment as well as future investment costs of energy infrastructure for low-
income households will be investigated () • Government, in collaboration with
other agencies, will continue to search for the best ways of making micro-
finance available to low-income households () 109 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Government will
promote and encourage access to affordable energy services for low-income groups
() • Government will ensure that women are motivated to participate in energy
programmes and activities () • Government will promote greater enrolment of
women in energy related disciplines () • Government will facilitate the
development of  human and institutional capacity building programme for the
energy sector () • Government will develop and adopt appropriate quality
standards for energy related equipment and activities () • Government will
facilitate the establishment and accreditation of quality-testing units within
the country () • Government will facilitate development of an energy & strategy
and programme based on national priorities and taking advantage of research
agendas of other sectors and institutions () • Government will establish  Policy
Research Unit within the Ministry that will be responsible for planning and
undertaking policy-related research and development () • Government will ensure
that adequate means for collection of statistical data are available () •
Government will promote and take full advantage of regional co-operation and
will ensure the development of legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks
that are in harmony with regional agreements () • Government will actively
participate and be  member of international energy bodies and will establish
national committees to pursue international energy trade and co-operation () •
Government will reduce trade barriers on energy products addressing employment
and environmental issues for the country () • Government will investigate the
necessary instruments to increase energy investment and to cover possible risks
to ensure maximum benefits without having serious detrimental effect to the
economy as  whole () • Government will create an institutional framework to
implement the National Energy Policy and to improve co-ordination () •
Government will prioritise and assess an appropriate and effective means for
implementation to meet the National Energy Policy objectives and priorities () •
Government will establish an Energy Department with an appropriate budget and
expertise () • Government will establish  Petroleum Inspectorate whose role will
be to oversee adherence and compliance to petroleum standards and legislation ()
• Government will establish Regional Energy Units () • Government will establish
National Energy Forum, involving independent organisations to advise Government
on energy policy () • Government will ensure there is greater co-ordination and
integration of planning of energy issues and policy implementation () • The Fuel
Pricing Committee will be strengthened to effectively assess and advise on
pricing in the petroleum industry () Infrastructure shall be established in the
country to facilitate and encourage developments under the Clean Developments
Mechanism and other similar arrangements () • 110 Energy Policy Final Revision
September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy • Government will
facilitate the establishment of local energy committee within communities (10) •
Government will involve traditional structures in the development and
implementation of the energy policy (10) • The capacity of local organisations,
with an interest in energy issues, will be strengthened (11) • Government will
ensure that the Swaziland National Committee for the World Energy Council is
established (12) • Government will establish the Energy Regulatory Authority and
ensure it has appropriate budgetary requirements to fulfil its functions () •
monitoring system for the National Energy Policy will be put in place () • The
National Energy Policy will be subjected to  comprehensive evaluation in five
year cycles () • An Annual Energy Statement targeted at stakeholders,
politicians, investors and the general public will be published by the Minister
() 111 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National
Energy Policy Annex : Glossary of Terms Bagasse Organic residue from sugar
processing It is frequently used as  fuel for power generation Biofuels Fuels
derived from organic matter that can be used to substitute other fuels Biomass
Organic, non-fossil material of biological origin constituting an exploitable
renewable energy resource Carbon Dioxide (CO2) The gas formed in the ordinary
combustion of carbon, given out in the breathing of animals, burning of fossil
fuels etc It is  major contributor to climate change Coal  readily combustible
black or brownish-black rock formed from plant remains that have been compacted,
hardened, chemically altered, and metamorphosed by heat and pressure over
geologic time The most common types found in Swaziland are anthracite and semi-
anthracite Cogeneration The production of electricity and another form of useful
energy (such as heat or steam) used for industrial, commercial, heating, or
cooling purposes Cost-reflective In relation to electricity tariffs, whereby the
price is representative of the actual cost of supplying electricity For example,
industrial electricity tariffs should be lower than those for domestic
customers, as they do not involve the lower voltage networks Cross subsidy When
prices are not cost-reflective, one sector is supporting lower prices in the
other Present trends are to phase out cross subsidies, however they may
sometimes be necessary for social reasons Electricity generation The process of
producing electric energy or transforming other forms of energy into electric
energy The amount of electric energy produced is expressed in watt-hours
(Wh/kWh/MWh/GWh) Energy The capacity for doing work Energy has several forms,
some of which are easily convertible and can be changed to another form useful
for work Most of the world’ convertible energy comes from fossil fuels that are
burned to produce heat that is then used as  transfer medium to mechanical or
other means to accomplish tasks Electrical energy is usually measured in
kilowatt-hours, while heat energy is usually measured in British thermal units
Eskom The parastatal electricity utility for the Republic of South Africa 112
Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18 10:33 Swaziland National Energy
Policy Ethanol  type of alcohol, manufactured frequently from molasses, and used
as  petroleum substitute Fossil fuel Any naturally occurring organic fuel formed
in the Earth’ crust, such as oil, coal and natural gas Geothermal Utilisation of
heat energy from deep inside the earth  Wells are drilled to exploit the steam
or hot water This is either converted to electricity or utilised directly
Greenhouse gases Gases which, when concentrated in the atmosphere, prevent solar
radiation trapped by the Earth and re-emitted from its surface escaping The
result is  rise in the Earth’ near surface temperature Carbon dioxide is the
largest in volume of the greenhouse gases and others include halocarbons,
methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perofluorocarbons, and sulphur
hexafluoride Gross Domestic Product (GDP) The total value of goods and services
produced by labour and property in the country Hydropower The production of
electricity from the kinetic energy of falling water In-Bond-Landed-Cost (IBLC)
Model used by SACU countries to determine petrol retail prices Independent Power
Producer Wholesale electricity producers (other than the Government parastatal
SEB) that are unaffiliated with the utility Unlike traditional electric (IPP)
utilities, IPPs do not possess transmission facilities and in most cases sell
power to the grid Lilangeni/emalangeni The legal currency of the Kingdom of
Swaziland This is currently fixed at par with the South African Rand Member
States Countries which are members of SADC Methane Hydrocarbon gas, can be
formed through the breakdown of organic matter in the absence of oxygen, for
example when organic waste is buried Ministry The Ministry of Natural Resources
and Energy with the Government of Swaziland Off-peak Electricity usage patterns
vary throughout the day Early in the morning and early evening, the demand is
high, and the cost of electricity is expensive During periods of low usage (off-
peak), the cost of supplying electricity is cheaper It is therefore in the
interest of the utility to 113 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc -18
10:33 Swaziland National Energy Policy encourage high users to change their
patterns and use more during off- peak periods Photovoltaics Direct-current
electricity generated from the sun’ rays through solid state semiconductor
devices that have no moving parts Poverty The state of having insufficient
income, consumption possibilities, and human development, and  lack of access to
and control over assets, with consequent insufficient education and health
Renewable Energy Energy obtained from sources that are essentially inexhaustible
(unlike, for example, fossil fuels, of which there is  finite supply) Renewable
sources of energy include conventional hydroelectric power, wood, waste,
geothermal, wind, photovoltaics, and solar thermal energy Southern African
Customs Union (SACU) Involves Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa and
Swaziland The aim of SACU is to provide co-operation in terms of trade Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Angola, Botswana, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Lesotho, Seychelles, South
Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Zambia Tindvuna Tetinkhundla
Councillors for constituencies 114 Energy Policy Final Revision September doc
-18 10:33