Table of Contents:  UNDP within to the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/SWZ/ /  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework  The Kingdom of Eswatini is faced with sluggish economic
growth, fiscal crisis, high levels of unemployment, poverty and inequality
Nearly 59 per cent of the population live below the poverty line and per cent
below the extreme poverty line The country’ Human Development Index (HDI) value
grew steadily from 545 in 1990 to 608 in 2018, placing Eswatini in the medium
human development category However, when the HDI value is discounted for
inequality it falls to High levels of poverty and extreme poverty combined with
inequality are critical impediments to making sustained progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals Women, young people, people living with
disabilities and people living with HIV/AIDS are the poorest and most vulnerable
members of society  Eswatini has  Gender Inequality Index value of 569, ranking
it 141 of 160 countries Even though per cent of parliamentary seats are held by
women, only 30 per cent of adult women have reached at least  secondary level of
education compared to percent of their male counterparts For every 100,000 live
births, 389 women die from pregnancy- related causes and the adolescent birth
rate is 77 births per ,000 women aged  years The rate of female participation in
the labour market is per cent compared to for men, and Swazi women are more
likely to own micro-enterprises and less likely to own small and medium-sized
firms due to lower educational attainments and hence lesser formal employment
prospects  Eswatini is  landlocked country with an open economy As  member of
the Common Monetary Area with Lesotho, Namibia and South Africa, its currency is
pegged at parity with the South African rand Eswatini is  member of the Southern
African Customs Union which includes Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and South
Africa, allowing for free movement of goods internally within the Union and
distribution of customs and excise taxes among the membership This is the
largest single contributor to the revenue base, accounting for over 40 per cent
of total revenue on average over the past four years  The National Development
Plan (2019-2021) and Strategic Road Map () prioritize sustainable economic
growth and inclusive governance to ensure that economic opportunities reach
those furthest behind However, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
exposed the country to immense vulnerability related to the slow economic
performance at the regional level and is expected to exacerbate extreme poverty
and inequality  The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNSDCF) will contribute to national goals by investing in five priority areas,
drawing on evidence from the Common Country Analysis, thereby repositioning the
United Nations within the emerging development context of the country and the
accelerated response in the Decade of Action Deriving from these priority areas,
based on the UNDP comparative advantage and  theory of change and in partnership
with the Government and the United Nations, this country programme will invest
in the priority areas of poverty reduction, climate change and efficient
governance 1National Development Plan 2019-2021/Government of Kingdom of
Eswatini, 2018, Swaziland Household Income and Expenditure Survey  UNDP, 2019
Human Development Report  UNDP, Briefing Note for countries on the 2019 Human
Development Report (Eswatini)  Ibid  Op Cit footnote   The Strategic Road Map
identifies five priorities for government policy action: () ease of doing
business; () fiscal consolidation and arrears management; () infrastructure,
investment and innovation; () culture of excellence and priority; and () social
safety net It also identifies five growth sectors for economic turnaround: ()
agriculture; () tourism; () manufacturing and agroprocessing; () mining and
energy; and () education and information and communication technology
DP/DCP/SWZ/  This country programme will maximize the UNDP integrator role8 in
supporting the Government in leaving no one behind and strengthening
institutions to reach those furthest behind first As the thematic lead on
governance and inclusive growth, UNDP will do this by: () Providing thought
leadership in integrating policy design and implementation with capacity
development of front-line institutions, in partnership with national and United
Nations partners; () Focusing on normative inputs to uphold human rights-based
approaches while offering innovative “next generation UNDP” solutions which
ensure that women, persons with disabilities, persons living with HIV/AIDS, the
poor and marginalized groups receive support; () Strengthening public sector
institutions by applying an intersectoral, issue-based approach; () Facilitating
innovative financing options, technology-based solutions and innovations led by
the Accelerator Lab; () Bringing to bear the UNDP global and regional networks
of expertise to strengthen resilience to drought, climate change, vulnerability
to poverty and the impacts of COVID- Building on lessons learned including the
recommendations of the evaluation9 of the last country programme, this country
programme has identified specific areas of intervention that form  cohesive
response to  definite set of national challenges, using  focused approach and
strategic partnerships  Working within the Delivering as One modality, UNDP will
anchor its support to the United Nations Country Team (UNCT) on its integrator
role, while drawing on the collaborative advantage offered by the diversity of
the United Nations system UNDP will tap into the diversity of development
approaches offered by collaboration between UNDP, the United Nations Children’
Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and United Nations Entity
for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN- Women) to fully unlock the
ability to address the multidimensional nature of poverty and inequality The
expertise of partners and the UNDP Global Policy Network will be harnessed to
support the ambitious agenda of national plans, combining the multidimensional
approaches of the United Nations system under the UNSDCF to accelerate
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals  UNDP envisages that the
socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 will be deep and prolonged It will tailor its
engagements to the pre-COVID-19 economic situation and adapt to changes induced
by the pandemic by working closely with national leadership and the UNCT under
the overall United Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic response to
COVID-II Programme priorities and partnerships The country programme, which
coincides with the commencement of the Decade of Action towards accelerated
progress on the Sustainable Development Goals, has been directly derived from
the UNSDCF and is fully aligned with the National Development Plan (2019-2021)
and the Strategic Road Map () of the Kingdom of Eswatini It has been developed
through  process of wide-ranging consultations with national counterparts, the
United Nations, civil society, academia and the private sector In line with the
UNDP Strategic Plan, , support will be provided through  combination of policy
advice, technical assistance, financing and programme implementation modalities
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-9Independent country programme evaluation: Eswatini,
DP/DCP/SWZ/ / UNDP will adopt  six-pronged strategy of partnerships to support
the agenda of leaving no one behind and reaching the furthest behind first: ()
UNDP will synthesize the collaborative advantages of different United Nations
agencies by providing an integrator platform Through joint programming, UNDP
will tap into the inputs of partners and strengthen access of national
institutions to specialized knowledge, capacities and expertise UNDP will take
the lead in working with UNICEF, UNFPA and UN-Women on implementation of the
common chapter of their strategic plans at the country level to address the
multidimensional nature of poverty  combination of Delivering as One, joint
programmes and the common chapter will harness the collaborative advantages and
value addition of the country programme to the national agenda; () UNDP will
endeavour to work with national leadership in strengthening government cost
sharing to develop both financial linkages and programmatic alignment with
government plans and budgets for effective integration, to ensure sustainability
and scalability of programme interventions; () UNDP will deepen engagements with
bilateral partners like the Governments of Italy, India, Kuwait and the United
States, and multilateral partners like the International Monetary Fund, World
Bank, European Union, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA),
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), Global Environment Facility (GEF),
Green Climate Fund, World Economic Forum and the African Development Bank, and
build partnerships for private financing from the private sector (such as the
YPO network) UNDP will strategically position itself to move from funding to
sustainable financing The Accelerator Lab will offer  platform to explore
partnerships locally, regionally and globally; () Through efforts to develop and
nurture national and subnational leaders to champion the Sustainable Development
Goals in this Decade of Action, UNDP will host regular advocacy events, at the
national and international levels, led by the champions to garner people’
participation; () UNDP will strengthen institutional partnerships with the
Ambassadors of the SADC countries located in Eswatini This interface will be
critical for UNDP work in the areas of productivity and employment generation
UNDP will leverage the partnership opportunities offered by key regional
instruments such as the African Continental Free Trade Area and the African
-Trade Group; () In collaboration with the UNDP Finance Hub,  development
finance assessment will be undertaken to strengthen national capacities for
partnerships with non-traditional sources, especially private sector financing
and foundations Portfolio  Inclusive economic growth The UNDP contribution
towards this portfolio is underpinned by the theory of change as established in
the poverty-environment nexus10 that if agricultural productivity is improved
through climate-smart technology, structural impediments for the production and
marketing of select crops (sugar cane and maize) are addressed and post-harvest
losses are reduced; if local value chains, especially in agri-business,
technology and tourism are strengthened and made sustainable; if micro-, small-
and medium-sized enterprises are supported through improved regulations, access
to credit and energy; then agricultural productivity will increase, benefiting
the 77 per cent of the population dependent on it, women will have improved
access to markets and youth will have enhanced access to economic opportunities
UNDP will deploy signature solutions , ,  and  for contributions to this outcome
area Three interrelated solutions are planned to ensure that growth is inclusive
and leaves no one behind: () policy and regulatory regimes for the management of
natural resources, environment, biodiversity and chemical use; () data and risk-
informed development 10 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office, 2010, Evaluation of
UNDP Contribution to Environmental Management for Poverty Reduction: The
Poverty- Environment Nexus   DP/DCP/SWZ/ policies, plans, systems and financing
incorporate integrated and gender-responsive solutions to reduce disaster risks
and enable climate change adaptation and mitigation; and () solutions for
universal access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy Past UNDP successes
in supporting climate-smart agriculture will be scaled-up in partnership with
the Government, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and
the World Food Programme, and will include supporting farmers, especially women
farmers, to increase their income from commercial agricultural activities
through improved water resources, watershed management, drip irrigation and
access to improved field-based storage facilities, formal markets and revolving
loan facilities To improve livelihoods and to agribusinesses and agricultural
processing will be better linked to regional value chains Through the
Accelerator Lab, innovative, technology-driven solutions will enhance business-
to-business integration incomes, micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises
related In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, UNDP will support implementation
of the recommendations of the socioeconomic impact assessments, with special
focus on informal workers (particularly women and other vulnerable populations)
and micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises UNDP will support coordination
and integration of existing humanitarian and social protection responses to
reduce duplication, fragmentation and inefficiencies, improve coverage and
strengthen institutional capacities In the recovery phase, UNDP will support
innovative and cost-effective business solutions to strengthen informal
enterprises and entrepreneurs and improve productive capacity and
competitiveness To promote  circular economy, which has the dual potential of
creating new jobs and livelihoods while improving waste-management, UNDP will
adopt  holistic approach whereby every type of waste is part of  closed-loop
process chain, thus creating  sustainable value chain for the waste management
economy Towards protecting the biodiversity of Eswatini, UNDP will contribute to
the management of the protected area network with  focus on supporting systems
for integrating land and natural resource management that transforms the current
patchwork of protected areas into  network, while creating incentives for all
Swazis – land management agencies, conservancies, private landowners and tourism
operators – to work together towards conservation and sustainable economic
development Developing  livelihood and ecotourism infrastructure will further
promote economic activity and generate income for the communities living around
the protected areas Regional institutional linkages will be leveraged to create
opportunities for strategic regional collaboration to enhance tourism UNDP will
support strategies to increase the innovation and entrepreneurship skills,
productivity and income potential of young men and women by testing cost-
effective and scalable market-based solutions for the Sustainable Development
Goals, especially in the areas of renewable energy and environment
sustainability This will include: () building capacities and developing skills
for youth groups and individuals by providing sustainable extension services,
mentorship and entrepreneurial training for innovative solutions that promote
renewable energy and are environmentally sustainable; and () leveraging funds
for increased access to finance by establishing  guarantee facility and security
for business loans The GEF Small Grants Programme will support community-led
innovations to bring together environmental gains with improved livelihoods
opportunities UNDP, in partnership with United Nations agencies and civil
society, will support efforts to scale up initiatives to empower young people
and women to participate fully in economic and other spheres of life in order to
derive maximum benefits from the demographic dividend This will include
facilitating legal, policy and institutional reforms to remove structural
barriers to women’ empowerment UNDP will support the implementation of the
newly-adopted Act on Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence through improved
DP/DCP/SWZ/ / access to legal aid, orientation for police on how to manage
gender-based violence cases and facilitation of adjudication with prosecution
and courts To mitigate job losses induced by COVID-19, UNDP will leverage
partnerships with regional instruments like the African Continental Free Trade
Area and African -Trade Group, to focus on expanding information and
communication technology as  sector with greater job-creation potential Beside
the positive impact on job creation, such engagements will create more avenues
for improving foreign reserves which in turn will impact macroeconomic
conditions UNDP will support the development of innovative, technology-driven
policy and financing solutions to create renewable energy capacities in the
country Such capacities will strengthen the sustainability of micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises Using its regional and global presence, UNDP will
develop integrated partnerships with regulatory institutions, the private sector
and international agencies to design policy responses that can fully unlock the
development potential of renewable energy UNDP will advance the Administrator’
Climate Promise initiative to support Eswatini in defining its nationally
determined contribution To address emerging issues related to the COVID-19
outbreak and climate-induced disasters such as droughts, UNDP will support the
National Disaster Management Agency to develop an integrated response to
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation This will include use of
technology such as installation of early warning systems Regional interventions
like the African Continental Free Trade Area and SADC, regional priorities and
the institutional bench-strength that the country has already created through
COMESA, will be leveraged to position Eswatini for new economic growth
opportunities by addressing underlying structural challenges and developing
resilience to the COVID-19 impact As host to the Southern Africa regional
headquarters of the African - Trade Group, Eswatini has real potential to
develop technological solutions that can be  source of growth and job creation
Portfolio  Efficient and participatory governance The UNDP contribution to this
portfolio is underpinned by the theory of change that if the systems and core
institutions for governance are strengthened; if institutions have the capacity
to deliver rule of law, justice, security and basic services to those at risk of
being left behind; and if government institutions engage with men, women and
communities, including the most marginalized ones, equitably; then businesses
can thrive and help address social and economic inequalities UNDP will approach
the development of this enabling environment by deploying signature solution
Safeguarding human rights is important to combat inequalities and offer
necessary checks and balances to ensure that businesses promote inclusive
economic growth Adopting  whole-of- government approach, UNDP will support
national leadership in building capacities for integrating the Sustainable
Development Goals into national plans and budgets while facilitating innovative
use of Goal-based disaggregated data to inform national and sectoral plans and
budgets Working closely with key national oversight institutions such as
Parliament and the Commission on Human Rights and Public Administration, UNDP
will strengthen the orientation of lawmaking, representation and oversight
functions towards the Goals Special focus will be on engaging Parliamentary
leadership to enhance accountability, particularly on budget scrutiny, and
develop committee structures that can take charge of the Goals (including
ensuring development of timely credible data and reports from relevant
institutions) By integrating the Goals into plans and budgets and supporting
their monitoring and oversight with digital solutions, UNDP, with other United
Nations partners, will contribute to creating an enabling environment for
reaching the furthest behind first Given the interconnected and complex nature
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, support to strengthening
financing frameworks at country level will be taken forward as part of broader
efforts to support Eswatini on Sustainable Development Goal-   DP/DCP/SWZ/
related reforms UNDP will support an integrated national financing framework
through the development finance assessment and integrated financing solutions as
part of the overall UNCT approach to supporting the Government to implement the
2030 Agenda UNDP partnered with the national leadership to design the master
plan for economic recovery Taking this forward, UNDP will focus on strengthening
national coordination capacities through sector-wide approaches for planning,
financing and results-based management to enhance efficiencies and coordination
and supplement Sustainable Development Goal-centric data for policy reform
Towards mitigating the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, UNDP will facilitate
dialogue for developing fiscal policy responses, while supporting the monitoring
and development of policy stances to the pandemic Positioning the country to
respond to the challenges and opportunities of COVID-19 will be central to
economic recovery UNDP will also support both investment mapping for the Goals
and impact investing to mitigate risks to reaching the Goals due to the COVID-19
pandemic key implementation strategy for the country programme is through
partnerships with civil society organizations (CSOs) UNDP will engage CSOs in
testing innovative solutions and creating evidence for scaling-up UNDP will
support civil society efforts to undertake monitoring of progress towards the
Sustainable Development Goals and international human rights treaties To enhance
government efficiencies, UNDP will support the deployment of innovative digital
solutions to specific areas of fiscal management, aid coordination, regional
integration and strengthening of regulatory functions Through the Accelerator
Lab, UNDP will support and promote the use of innovative digital solutions to
enhance efficiencies Given the critical guidance provided by international
conventions and treaties for building/strengthening of national systems, UNDP
will support the Government to monitor the frequency and quality of reporting
undertaken on these instruments To ease private sector participation in economic
growth and further strengthen macroeconomic fundamentals that can attract
investments, UNDP will support efforts to strengthen the rule of law as  key
enabler for economic productivity and employment generation This includes
strengthening judicial enforcement of contracts, protecting the rights of
investors and strengthening case management in the judiciary Special attention
will be given to advocating for and supporting the establishment of the
Commercial Bench to accelerate adjudication of commercial cases and enhance the
judicial response to civil disputes On improved access to justice and upholding
rights of citizens, UNDP will support strengthened institutional mechanisms for
legal aid, making them especially accessible to people living with HIV/AIDS and
other marginalized communities This will be complemented with the support to
establish the Law Review Commission to domesticate international human rights
treaties and improve the country’ human rights status In line with the national
priority to promote ethical leadership and enhance transparency, UNDP will
support strengthened, gender-responsive legislative and policy frameworks for
developing credible anticorruption machinery  central element of this effort
will be to support the revision of the 2007 national anticorruption strategy
Such  strategy will reinforce the country’ ability to attract more private
sector investments which will be critical for management of macroeconomic
stability and creation of private sector-led growth and jobs UNDP will support
the enactment and implementation of  gender- responsive Leadership Code of
Conduct Bill which has the potential to enhance the legitimacy and transparency
of government institutions and stimulate investor confidence Across the
portfolios, UNDP will support the Government to maximize benefits from South-
South and triangular cooperation This will include work with the International
Parliamentary Union to improve the functioning of the legislature, and knowledge
exchange   DP/DCP/SWZ/ / with SADC on strengthening judicial institutions, legal
aid and digital case management Cooperation will be sought for strengthening
national capacities on disaster risk management and reduction, especially in the
context of climate change III Programme and risk management This country
programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels
with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework The
programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response
to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in
coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks
Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness
will be charged to the concerned projects The decline in grant-based official
development assistance necessitates greater national responsibility for
financing development using domestic resources In this context, UNDP will expand
partnerships with the private sector, non-traditional partners and international
financial institutions, investing UNDP regular resources in innovative solutions
while leveraging other funding for scaling-up assistance UNDP will convene
business coalition, which will coordinate and leverage financing for the
Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will continue to support the Government in
accessing vertical funds for climate change adaptation and mitigation,
management of environmental resources and biodiversity In line with the United
Nations business continuity plan, UNDP will utilize the existing risk management
committee and national and subnational multisectoral response coordination
mechanisms as key avenues for mitigating programme and project risks The
implementation of the UNSDCF and the country programme will begin with
significant high- risk exposure to the impact of COVID-19 on the overall economy
Although not yet fully quantified, that country programme implementation will
begin in  recession While the impact of the pandemic is multidimensional, the
effect on employment is evidenced by  significant slowdown in the tourism sector
To mitigate this impact, UNDP and the UNCT will engage with national leadership
in developing policy responses, guided by the United Nations framework for the
immediate socioeconomic response to COVID-19, while also supporting regional
engagements the Government’ scenario analysis suggests The country’ past
exposure to extreme climate events and shocks create conditions for  significant
slowdown in agricultural productivity The potential occurrence of another such
event during the country programme period poses risk to its implementation To
mitigate this impact, agriculture value chains will be targeted with resilience
strategies together with strengthening of early warning systems and focusing on
natural resource management systems Eswatini is categorized as  lower-middle-
income country, which makes it difficult to access concessional financing and
limits resource mobilization options To address the complexities of the economy
and the contrasting social indicators, innovative financing solutions built on
multi-stakeholder partnerships will be applied This requires the country office
to ensure that its investment and seed funding in key priority areas can
leverage additional resources and partnerships In partnership with the United
Nations Department of Safety and Security and the UNCT, UNDP will closely
monitor safety and security issues and, if access to certain areas is difficult
or staff are at risk, will work through civil society partners and utilize
digital solutions This will enable UNDP operations to continue, sometimes in
remote and isolated   DP/DCP/SWZ/ locations, while prioritizing the safety and
security of UNDP staff members and their families IV Monitoring and evaluation
The country programme’ contribution to the Sustainable Development Goals will be
influenced by the ability to identify patterns of extreme poverty To this end,
UNDP and United Nations partners will invest in strengthening national
capacities for statistical research in developing maps of “extreme poverty
hotspots” which will create  firm baseline for the country programme
interventions on the journey towards UNDP will assume leadership in working with
United Nations agencies and development partners to strengthen national
capacities in monitoring data related to the Sustainable Development Goals This
will strengthen the country’ systems to monitor progress towards the Goals and
reinforce the position of UNDP as  thought leader At least  per cent of the
programme budget will be set aside for monitoring and evaluation UNDP will
systematically apply direct project cost to reflect the costs incurred with
project management support to ensure financial sustainability The UNDP
monitoring and evaluation framework will be aligned to the UNSDCF UNDP will work
with partners to conduct joint reviews and account jointly for both development
results and financial resources through reporting, evaluations and audits UNDP
will rely on national data and data from regional organizations,
monitoring/human development reports and other development partners’ reports
Gaps in data in the results and resources framework (see annex) will be further
developed as part of the project initiation phase UNDP will strengthen its
monitoring and evaluation systems and articulate theories of change for each
project, with causal linkages to outcomes and emphasis on the sustainability of
programme results The UNDP gender marker, used to monitor programme expenditures
and improve planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality, will be
better integrated into UNDP programmes during this cycle, and 15 per cent of the
programme budget will be allocated to monitor gender-related results UNDP will
intensify efforts to communicate, using innovative tools to reach diverse
audiences Partnering with think tanks, UNDP will conduct research on targeted
issues to inform programming and decision-making   DP/DCP/SWZ/ Annex Results and
resources framework for Eswatini () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic recovery
underpinned by inclusive and sustainable growth COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR
EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2025, women, men and youth, including
marginalized persons, contribute to and benefit from economic progress, through
access to decent employment, equitable social economic opportunities,
sustainable enterprise opportunities as well as resilient, financially
sustainable social protection systems RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  – Advance
poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF
DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME ($) INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS Proportion of population living
below the national poverty line, by sex and age (SDG ) Source: State of
Environment Report; Strengthening National Protected Area of Swaziland
Frequency: Annual Regular $,513,000 Output1: Strengthened policy and regulatory
regimes at national level for the management of natural resources, environment,
biodiversity and chemical use (Strategic Plan integrated results and resources
framework (IRRF) ) Office of Prime Minister, Office of Secretary to Cabinet and
Head of Public Service, Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Eswatini
Environment Authority, Eswatini National Trust Commission Other: $21,900,000
Baseline : % (2019) Target: 50% (2025) Indicator : Area of natural resources
that are managed under sustainable use, conservation access and benefit-sharing
regime (IRRF: ): () Area of land and marine habitat under protection (hectares)
() Area of existing protected area under improved management (hectares) ()
Number of shared freshwater ecosystems under cooperative management () Area
under sustainable forest management (hectares) () Biodiversity () Amount of
chemicals reduced or disposed (metric tons) Baseline: 15% of 17,364 km2 (606
km2) (2020) Target: 10% of 17,364 km2 (,3km2) Source: Eswatini National Trust
Commission Report Frequency: Annual  Number of deaths, missing persons and
directly affected persons attributed to disaster per 100,000 population
Responsibilities: Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs Coordinating
Assembly of Non-Governmental Organizations Baseline:18,331 (2019) Target: Less
than the global average per 100,000 population GEF, GCF Output : Capacities of
small-scale food producers (in agriculture) strengthened to adopt inclusive
value-chain approaches in agriculture and allied sectors to address marketing
bottlenecks and losses in post-harvest Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Commerce, Industry and Trade, National Agricultural Marketing Board, Eswatini
Water and Agricultural Development Enterprise, Central Bank Indicator1: # of
small holders’ cooperatives and micro-, small and medium- size enterprises
(MSMEs) supported with innovative technology and financing solutions to enhance
value addition and reduction of post-harvest losses (IRRF: ) Baseline:
Smallholders’ cooperatives – ; MSMEs – (2020) Target: Smallholders’ cooperatives
– 10 ( led by women) and MSMEs – 10 ( led by women) Source: Ministry Reports
Frequency: Annual African Development Bank (AfDB), GEF, GCF 10  DP/DCP/SWZ/
Output : Policies and incentive frameworks governing MSMEs (in tourism and
(ICT)) strengthened to mitigate COVID-19 impact and generate sustainable
enterprises for employment Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs,
Eswatini Tourism Authority, Eswatini Revenue Authority, Eswatini Investment and
Promotion Authority information and communication technology Indicator : # of
new sustainable jobs created through tourism (including allied sectors) and ICT
(disaggregated by male, female, persons with disabilities) Baseline Unemployment
rate of 23% () Target: Less than 20% Source: Tourism and ICT Sector performance
Reports Frequency: Annual Private Sector United Nations agencies, WTO Indicator
: # of locally developed innovations/solutions identified and tested towards
enhancing employment of women, youth and persons with disabilities Baseline:
Target: Source: SDG Data, Central Statistical Office Frequency: Annual Policy
and Programme Coordination Unit World Bank, AfDB, European Union UNCDF Central
Bank and Commercial Banks Indicator : # of regulations adopted in relation to
Ease of Doing Business in the country Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Source: Annual
company survey exercises Frequency: Annual Office of Prime Minister, Office of
Secretary to Cabinet and Head of Public Service, National Disaster Management
Agency (NDMA) Ministry of Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Ministry of
Agriculture Output : Data and risk-informed development policies, plans, systems
and financing incorporate integrated and gender-responsive solutions to reduce
disaster risks, enable climate change adaptation and mitigation (modified IRRF:
) Indicator : Existence of data-informed development and investment plans that
incorporate integrated solutions to reduce disaster risks and enable climate
change adaptation and mitigation (IRRF: ) Baseline: No (2020) Target: Yes
Source: NDMA Reports Frequency: Annual Key Authorities/ Agencies/Board/ CSOs
Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy (MNRE) Ministry of Commerce, Industry
and Trade, Output : Solutions adopted to achieve universal access to clean,
affordable and sustainable energy (IRRF: ) 11  DP/DCP/SWZ/ Indicator : # of
renewable energy technologies and energy efficient solutions developed and
applied to accelerate uptake at the local level (with 50% beneficiaries being
women and 10% for persons with disabilities) Baseline:  (2020) Target: 10 Data
source: Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy (MNRE) reports Frequency:
Annual Renewable Energy Association of Eswatini, Ministry of Environment of
Italy International Renewable Energy Agency NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good
governance and fiscal stability -public finance management, efficient service
delivery COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2025, oversight
bodies and government institutions at national and regional level operate in an
independent, participatory and accountable manner, ensuring equal access to
justice and services, with  systematic, participatory implementation and
reporting mechanism for its human rights obligations and Sustainable Development
Goals with  focus on leaving no one behind RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  –
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development Source:
National Development Plan (NDP) and Sector Review Reports Output : Capacities
developed across whole of government and Parliament to integrate SDGs and human
rights including gender equality into national planning and budgets Office of
Prime Minister Regular $,300,000  Statistical capacity indicator for Sustainable
Development Goal monitoring (SDG ) Office of Secretary to Cabinet and Head of
Public Service Other $,000,000 (to be mobilized) Baseline: No Target: Yes
Corruption Perceptions Index Indicator2 : # of gender-responsive national and
sectoral development plans integrating SDGs Baseline: NDP- 011 (2020); Sector
Development Plans:  (2020) Target: NDP -; Sector Development Plans:  Source: NDP
and MEPD Reports Frequency: Annual Frequency: Annual Central Statistical Agency
Baseline: 34 (2019) Target: 45 Responsibilities: Central Statistical Agency
Parliament Ministry of Economic Planning and Development (MEPD) CSOs, women’
groups Indicator : # of reports (including maps of extreme poverty hotspots)
published by Central Statistical Agency used by sectors for SDG-based policy and
planning Baseline:012 (2020) Target: Sectors Source: NDP and Central Statistics
Office reports Frequency: Annual United Nations agencies Ministry of Finance,
MEPD, Ministry of Public Service Central Statistical Agency Indicator2:
Parliamentary Committee on SDGs established and operational Baseline:  (2020)
Target: Source: Parliamentary Reports on SDGs Frequency: To be determined
UNCTAD, UNECA, ILO, AfDB United Nations agencies Indicator : # of adopted legal,
policy and institutional reforms to remove structural barriers to women’
empowerment Baseline:  (enactment of the Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence
Act in November 2019, Gender Policy December 2019) Target:  11NDP and sector-
level plans alignment is partial 12SDG-informed policies and planning
instruments are limited 12  DP/DCP/SWZ/ Source: Gender Unit Reports/Deputy Prime
Minister’ Office Frequency: Annual Indicator : Law Review Commission to
domesticate international and regional human rights treaties is established and
operational Baseline: No (2020) Target: Yes Source: Ministry of Justice reports,
Law Review Commission reports Frequency: Annual Output : National ccoordination
capacities for economic recovery strengthened with special attention on COVID-19
economic impact Indicator2: # of sectors with innovative financing solutions and
capacity development plans for implementation of economic recovery master plan
with integration of COVID-19 impact Baseline: (2020) Target: Data Source: Sector
Progress Reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of dialogue and
coordination platforms/mechanisms established to address the socioeconomic
impact of COVID-19 (IRRF: ) Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Source: NDMA and MEPD
progress reports Frequency: Annual Output : Use of digital solutions enabled for
improved public services and other government functions in implementing the SDGs
(modified IRRF: ) Ministry of Public Service Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation Indicator2: # of digital technology solutions adopted
by government with special focus on fiscal management, aid coordination regional
integration Baseline:  (2020) Target: (Fiscal Management);  Aid coordination;
Regional Integration Source: Reports to Parliament Frequency: Annual Ministry of
Justice and Constitutional Affairs ITU Royal Science and Technology Park OHCHR
Indicator : Existence of digital solution to monitor frequency and quality of
reporting on international conventions and treaties (IRRF:  & ) Baseline: No
(2020) Target: Yes Data Source: Ministry Reports 13  DP/DCP/SWZ/ Frequency:
Annual Output : Capacities of key rule of law institutions at national and
regional levels (tinkhundla) strengthened for transparency, ease of doing
business and equal access to justice Ministry of Justice and Constitutional
Affairs Indicator : Existence of gender-responsive legal framework for
establishing Commercial Bench developed and implemented Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes Source: Judiciary Reports Frequency: Annual Judiciary Ministry of
Tinkhundla Administration & Development Eswatini Anti-Corruption Commission
Indicator : % of vulnerable people (disaggregated by men and women) benefiting
from legal aid services Baseline: 013 (2020) Target: 10% (of which 40% will be
women) Source: Judiciary Reports Frequency: Annual CSOs Parliament Commission
for Human Rights and Public Administration Lawyer’ Association Local Government
United Nations agencies Indicator : Existence of functional digital case
management system Baseline: No (2020) Target: Yes Source: Judiciary Reports
Frequency: Annual Indicator : # of Anticorruption measures for improved
transparency and accountability implemented Baseline:  (2020) Target:  Source:
Anti-Corruption Commission Reports Frequency: Annual 13UNSDCF-identified
vulnerable groups disaggregated by sex will be used for roll-out of legal aid
services 14