Papua New Guinea Country Energy Security Indicator Profile 2009 Papua New Guinea
Country Energy Security Indicator Profile 2009 Prepared by the Energy Programme,
Economic Development Division Secretariat of the Pacific Community Suva, Fiji
2012 © Copyright Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), 2012 All rights for
commercial / for profit reproduction or translation, in any form, reserved SPC
authorises the partial reproduction or translation of this material for
scientific, educational or research purposes, provided that SPC and the source
document are properly acknowledged Permission to reproduce the document and/or
translate in whole, in any form, whether for commercial / for profit or non-
profit purposes, must be requested in writing Original SPC artwork may not be
altered or separately published without permission Original text: English
Secretariat of the Pacific Community Cataloguing-in-publication data Papua New
Guinea Country Energy Security Indicator Profile 2009 / Prepared by the Energy
Programme, Economic Development Division, Secretariat of the Pacific Community
Energy policy – Papua New Guinea  Power resources – Papua New Guinea  Energy
security – Papua New Guinea  Title II Secretariat of the Pacific Community
7909953 AACR2 ISBN: -- Table of contents Acknowledgement   Foreword  vi
Abbreviations  vii Country profile  Energy context  FAESP key energy security
outcome  — access to energy  FAESP key energy security outcome  — affordability
FAESP key energy security outcome  — efficiency and productivity  FAESP key
energy security outcome  — environmental quality  10 FAESP action theme  —
Leadership, governance, coordination and partnership 11 FAESP action theme  —
Capacity development, planning, policy and regulatory frameworks  12 FAESP
action theme  — Energy production and supply  13  Petroleum and alternative
fuels  13  Renewable energy  14 FAESP action theme  — Energy conversion  15
Electric power  15 FAESP action theme  — End-use energy consumption  16
Transport energy use  16  Energy efficiency and conservation  16 FAESP action
theme  — Energy data and information  17 FAESP action theme  — Financing,
monitoring and evaluation  18 iv  NG Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica tor   of
il  200  Acknowledgement The Framework for Action on Energy Security in the
Pacific (FAESP) country energy security indicator report 2009 was prepared by
the Energy Programme of the Economic Development Division of the Secretariat of
the Pacific Community (SPC) SPC would like to thank European Union Energy
Initiative–Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI PDF) for providing funds to carry
out in-country technical activities and collect the data required for the energy
security indicators The cooperation of the many contributors to this booklet is
gratefully acknowledged The source note below each table credits the various
government and private sector agencies that have collaborated in furnishing the
information for the booklet  PN  Country Ene rgy Security Ind ic  to   rofil
00  Foreword In August 2010 at the 41st Pacific Islands’ Forum at Port Vila,
Vanuatu, the Forum Leaders for endorsed the Framework Action on Energy Security
in the Pacific (FAESP): 2010–2020 as the regional blueprint for the provision of
technical assistance to the energy sectors of Pacific Island countries and
territories (PICTs) FAESP encompasses the Leaders’ vision for an energy secure
Pacific, where Pacific people at all times have access to sufficient sustainable
sources of clean and affordable energy and services to enhance their social and
economic well-being In order to better appreciate the impacts of FAESP and its
implementation plan on the energy security status of PICTs, baseline energy
security indicators must be established, against which performance in future
years can be benchmarked The energy security indicators in this report derive
from  consultative process involving representatives of PICTs, regional
organisations, the private sector and development partners The process
culminated in the adoption of IPESP and its monitoring and evaluation framework,
the energy security indicators, at the Inaugural Regional Meeting of Ministers
of Energy, ICT and Transport in April Solomone Fifita Deputy Director (Energy)
Economic Development Division, SPC As  first attempt to improve the transparency
and accountability in the energy sector, there is obvious room for improvement
Lack of access to reliable and sufficient data is  common problem and this
monitoring and evaluation tool can only get better with the kind assistance of
the custodians of the energy sector data The Implementation Plan for Energy
Security in the Pacific (IPESP) (2011–2015) is  five-year plan for pursuing the
vision, goal and outcomes of FAESP It reflects the priority regional activities
that are to be collectively delivered by the participating members of the
Council of Regional Organisations in the Pacific (CROP) to support, complement
and add value to national efforts on energy security Solomone Fifita Deputy
Director (Energy) Economic Development Division, SPC vi  NG Countr   ner gy
Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il  200  Abbreviations ADB GJ PNGSEL Asian
Development Bank gigajoules PNG Sustainable Energy Limited ADO GoPNG PICTs
automotive diesel oil Government of PNG Pacific Island countries and territories
APEC HIES PPA Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation household income and expenditure
survey Pacific Power Association Ave ppm average parts per million HFO heavy
fuel oil carbon dioxide CO2 PPL PNG Power Limited ICCC Independent Consumer and
Competition Commission CSIRO Commonwealth Industrial and Scientific Research
Organisation PRISM Pacific Regional Information System (Statistics for
Development, Secretariat of the Pacific Community) IPBC Independent Public
Business Corporation DPK dual purpose kerosene IPP PV independent power producer
photovoltaic DPE Department of Petroleum and Energy JICA RE Japan International
Cooperation Agency renewable energy DHS demographic and health survey kWh SHS
kilowatt hour solar home systems  estimate kWp SIS kilowatt peak (Forum) smaller
island states — Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Republic of Marshall
Islands and Tuvalu Non-SIS members are Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon
islands, Tonga and Vanuatu EEZ exclusive economic zone km kilometre FAESP
Framework for Action on Energy Security in the Pacific LPG liquefied petroleum
gas FICs (The 14) Forum Island countries (SIS and non-SIS) MJ megajoules UNDP
United Nations Development Programme  (data) not available UNFCCC United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change GDP gross domestic product / (indicator)
not applicable GHG greenhouse gases vii viii PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic
to   rofi le   09 Country profile PNG Electricity Industry Policy 2011 ‘The
strategic objectives of the government are: () improving access in the provision
of electricity services; (ii) improving reliability of electricity supply; and
(iii) ensuring that power is affordable for all consumers’ Country Papua New
Guinea (PNG) Capital Port Moresby Capital island East New Guinea Population
,339,000 (2009 estimate) 462,243 km2 Land area Max height above sea-level ,697
(Mt Wilhelm) Geography Papua New Guinea, with over 600 islands, is the largest
of the Pacific Island countries Land mass is largely high volcanic islands The
land area covers the eastern half of the New Guinea mainland, the Bismark
Archipelago, the northernmost Solomon Islands of Bougainville and Buka and the
groups of islands off the easternmost part of the mainland PNG has an extensive
system of water bodies ranging from deltas, lagoons, rivers, marshes and over
,000 lakes Location 00° ; 00 °  EEZ ,120,000 km2   NG Countr   ner gy Secur it
Ind ica tor   of il  200  Climate Two seasons; the southeast trade winds season
(May to October) and the northwest monsoon (December to March); slight seasonal
temperature variation Rainfall Average approximately ,000 mm per annum 26° Mean
temperature Economy The leading producers of income in PNG are diverse with
strong industrial, service and agricultural sectors; exports include crude oil,
gold, silver, copper, copra, coconut oil, palm oil, coffee, tea, cocoa, tuna,
trochus, green snail, bêche-de-mer, pearl shell, cultured pearls, timber
products GDP per capita USD ,436 Currency PNG kina Exchange rate Kina/USD –
$3653 Languages Pidgin, English and more than 700 other languages spoken
Government Independent state and member of the Commonwealth Country
representative to SPC Secretary for Foreign Affairs & Trade, PO Box 422,
Waigani, NCD Papua New Guinea Tel: (675) 301 4121 Fax: (675) 323 1011 / 325 4886
Email: exedive@datecnetpg  PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09
Energy context Papua New Guinea is the only country that produces crude oil and
undertakes oil refining among the Pacific Island countries and territories In
2009, around  million tonnes of crude oil were extracted by Oil Search and
InterOil in PNG Crude oil products extracted by Oil Search are mainly exported
In 2009, around 95% of total crude oil products extracted were exported Since
2004, InterOil has been the only company to undertake refining, converting crude
oil into petroleum products Most of the crude oil refined by InterOil is
imported into the country from Singapore and Indonesia In 2009, InterOil
produced million litres of petroleum fuel products, meeting around 70% (million
litres) of the domestic market demand The remaining 30% is reflected to fuel
products imported by other petroleum companies in PNG such as Exxon Mobil
Recorded imports in 2009 (according to PNG National Statistical Office
statistics) accounted for million litres of diesel, million litres of petrol,
million litres of kerosene and kilotonnes of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) LPG
is mainly imported from Australia by Origin Gas Fuel imports for 2009 stood in
the vicinity of USD 17 million with the current gross domestic product (GDP) of
USD 91 billion In 2009, InterOil exported around  million litres of diesel and
55 million litres petrol to Nauru Other petroleum fuel products such as heavy
fuel oil, and natural gas are also consumed in PNG In the power sector, around
12% of households in PNG are connected to the electricity grid network PNG Power
Limited (PPL) is the main distributor of electricity and is granted exclusive
retail licence for the generation and distribution of electricity in and around
the Port Moresby area and 19 provincial centres In 2009, PPL generated GWh of
electricity, of which GWH was supplied to the electricity grid and GWh was sold
to the customers This recorded an estimated % in distribution loss Of the
electricity generated in 2009 by PPL, around GWh of electricity was contributed
from renewable energy (RE) sources, mainly hydro In addition to PPL, there are
other companies and organisations that generate and supply electricity in PNG
These include Western Power Ltd,  subsidiary of PNG’ Sustainable Development
Programme, which mostly supplies power to Western Province Other mining
companies, and palm oil, sugar and timber companies produce their own power in
areas not accessed by PPL The 2009 baseline energy security indicators presented
in this report are compiled and structured according to the four key energy
security outcomes and the seven action themes of FAESP Graphical comparison
included in the analysis provides  snapshot of PNG’ situation compared to other
Forum non-SIS and Forum Island countries   NG Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica
tor   of il  200  FAESP key energy security outcome  — access to energy No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes  Electrification rate (%) 12 The indicator tracks
the share of households actually connected to  utility grid Based on the
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) report, around % of households in PNG are
estimated to be connected to the utility grid Grid electrification access of
households in urban areas stands at % and in rural areas it is % Over 95% of the
households in PNG are reported to be living in rural and remote areas  Access to
small scale power rural (%)  The indicator tracks the share of rural households
with access to basic electrification (solar, pico hydro, small wind, community
grid) No data available  Access to modern energy rural (%) The indicator tracks
the share of rural households with access to modern cooking and lighting, which
specifically covers all forms of energy other than traditional biomass Estimated
access to modern energy is based on household access to radios, given that
radios need some basic form of modern energy (batteries and electricity) to
operate According to the DHS report, an estimated % of households have access to
radios This roughly points to the percentage of households with access to modern
energy in the rural areas  Access to modern energy urban (%) The indicator
tracks the share of urban households with access to modern cooking and lighting,
which specifically covers all forms of energy other than traditional biomass
According to the DHS report, an estimated % of households have access to radios
in PNG’ urban areas This roughly points to the percentage of household with
access to modern energy in the urban areas of PNG  PN  Country Energ  Security
Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 Access to small scale power rural Electrification rate
10% 25% 23% 20% % % 15% % % 22% 10% % 12% % %  % % Ave 14 FICs PNG Ave non SIS
PNG Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs Access to modern energy rural Access to modern
energy urban 40% 80% % % % % 30% 60% % % 40% 20% 20% 10% % % Ave non SIS Ave 14
FICs PNG PNG Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs   NG Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica tor
of il  200  FAESP key energy security outcome  — affordability No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes  The indicator tracks the fuel imports as
percentage of GDP The higher the figure, the more vulnerable an economy is to
world market price volatility The macro-economic affordability was calculated
from reference data provided by the PNG Bureau of Statistics website for the
total fuel imported over GDP, based on referenced World Bank data estimates for
PNG in 2009 (USD 447,171,34 / USD ,914,594,00) Macro-economic affordability
(percentage)  Electricity tariff (USD/kWh) 21 The indicator tracks the average
tariffs for the year (all tariff categories,  residential, industrial) Requires
commercial and averaging during the year as tariffs in most PICs are adjusted
several times  year Refer to the table on the right for reference calculation of
the average tariff  $21 $28 Commercial block (general customers) USD/kWh $18
Industrial block USD/kWh $20 Residential block — Easy Pay USD/kWh Residential
block — credit customers average USD/kWh $19 –30 kWh USD/kWh $14 >30 kWh USD/kWh
$24 Lifeline % % Relation between average tariff and lifeline tariff if
lifeline tariff exists Refer to the table on the right for the reference
calculation of lifeline precentage Electricity lifeline (%)  Referenced
electricity tariff calculation based on PNG Power Limited data the Household
energy expenditure load (%)   The indicator tracks the average household
expenditure for energy per year as  percentage of average household income No
data available  PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 Macro-
economic affordability 10% % % % Household energy expenditure load % % 20% PNG
Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs % 15% % 10% Electricity tariff %  % $40 PNG Ave non SIS
Ave 14 FICs $35 $33    /    $30 $21 $20 $10 $00 PNG Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs   NG
Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il  200  FAESP key energy security
outcome  — efficiency and productivity No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes
Energy intensity (MJ/USD)  The indicator tracks the amount of energy utilised to
produce  USD of GDP Calculated (49,000,000,000 MJ / $,914,594,203) Source: Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) 2009 report and PNG Bureau of Statistics 10
Productive power use (%) The indicator tracks the share of commercial and
industrial use of electricity in total supply The calculation is based on PPL
customers only Productive power use Energy intensity           100% 80% %
/  60% %     %          % 40%    20% %  PNG Ave non SIS Ave 14 FICs PNG Ave non
SIS Ave 14 FICs  PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 Provided
below are energy intensity graphs that are presented in terms of electricity
(kWh) and fuel (GJ) consumption against GDP when seen on  per capita comparison
Countries identified above the trend line are perceived to have higher than
average energy consumption levels per person when compared to their
corresponding economic wealth (GDP per capita) That is, countries above the
trend line are considered to be relatively energy inefficient compared to
countries below the trend line Energy intensity – kWh of electricity consumed to
produce  USD GDP per capita Energy intensity – GJ of import fuel consumed to
produce  USD GDP per capita 3500 100 Palau Palau 90 3000 )     /       /   80
2500 70     /       /    Niue Cook Islands 60 2000 (        Niue 50 Cook Islands
1500 40 RMI Nauru Nauru          1000 RMI Fiji 30  Fiji FSM 20 Samoa Samoa 500
FSM Tonga Tonga Tuvalu Tuvalu Vanuatu 10 Kiribati Solomon Solomon PNG PNG
Kiribati Vanuatu   $ $,000 $,000 $,000 $,000 $10,000 $12,000 $ $,000 $,000 $,000
$,000 $10,000 $12,000 GDP/capita/year GDP/capita/year – USD   NG Countr   ner gy
Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il  200  FAESP key energy security outcome  —
environmental quality No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 11 Carbon footprint
(tonnes of CO2) ,994,933 The indicator tracks total GHG emissions using embedded
carbon as  measure (not UNFCCC method) The following estimate is based on
petroleum fuel consumption from diesel (IDO &ADO), motor gasoline, kerosene and
cooking gas (LPG) only 12 Diesel fuel quality (ppm ) 500 The indicator assesses
the standard for sulphur () content of diesel fuel in parts per million (ppm)
sulphur Carbon footprint Carbon footprint per capita  ,000 ,702 14       /
,000 04                     ,250  ,000  ,000 ,995  ,000  ,000    61 ,000    PNG
Tot non SIS Tot 14 FICs PNG Tot non SIS Tot 14 FICs 10 PN  Country Energ
Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 FAESP action theme  — Leadership, governance,
coordination and partnership No FAESP Explanatory notes indicators Status of
energy administration (score) The indicator assesses the status the energy
administration has in the country (Score system: Energy ministry = ; Energy
department = ; Energy office = ) The Department of Petroleum and Energy (DPE)
was established to promote and regulate the development of petroleum and other
sources of energy for the long-term benefit of the state The department
comprises of two core technical divisions The Energy Division, which is involved
in planning and policy development work, data collection and analysis It also
advises government on energy sector issues that are closely associated with the
power sector and include rural electrification projects The Petroleum Division
is more concerned with crude oil and natural gas exploration and development,
with the industry controlled by foreign companies; InterOil and Oil Search being
two of the largest In the power sector, PPL is  corporatised, state-owned
enterprise, which has been granted exclusive retail licence for the generation
and distribution of electricity in and around Port Moresby area and 19
provincial centres The Independent Consumer and Competition Commission (ICCC) is
responsible for regulating electricity, petroleum and their pricing The Western
Power Limited, mostly supplies power to Western Province In the petroleum
sector, Oil Search, in partnership with other companies, is involved in crude
oil extraction and exports from PNG InterOil, on the other hand, undertakes
refining of crude oil extract into petroleum products which are then sold in PNG
Refined oil produced by InterOil meets roughly 70% of the domestic market demand
The remaining 30% is met by Exxon Mobil, which also imports fuel products into
PNG 13  The indicator assesses the status of the energy sector legislation in
the country (Score system: Updated energy act = ; Adopted energy policy = ;
Subsector act or policy = ) There is no energy act for PNG As of 2009, the
Energy Division had drafted two policy documents –  draft Energy Policy and
draft Rural Electrification Policy There are sub-sector acts governing the
energy sector, which include the following: the Electricity Industry Act of
2002, which provides for the functions and powers of the Electricity Commission
• (now PNG Power Ltd) to ‘plan and coordinate the supply of electricity
throughout the country and determine the standards and inspect and control the
application of all matters relating to the operations of the supply of
electricity’ the Independent Consumer and Competition Act of 2002, together with
the Electricity Industry Act of 2009, empowers ICCC with the responsibility for
regulating electricity, petroleum and their pricing the Organic Law on
Provincial and Local Level Government (1995) The Organic Law grants authority to
the 19 provincial governments and 299 local (district/sub-district) governments
to pass laws and develop regulations for electricity generation and distribution
in their areas of jurisdiction 14 Energy legislation (score)  • • 15 Co-
ordination and consultation (score)  The indicator aims to measure how decisions
and directions given at regional or subregional events translate into practical
action at national level (Score system: Meetings lead to relevant national
action = ; No action = ) PNG actively participates in regional activities and
PPL is  utility member of the Pacific Power Association 11  NG Countr   ner gy
Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il  200  FAESP action theme  — Capacity development,
planning, policy and regulatory frameworks No FAESP Explanatory notes indicators
16 Energy planning status (score)  The indicator assesses the state/quality of
energy planning It distinguishes between integrated planning and sub-sector (
power, petroleum) planning (Score system: Whole of energy sector plan/roadmap
operational with & framework = ; Sub-sector plan operational with & framework =
; Energy sector plans in preparation = ) In 2009, there was no endorsed national
energy policy and action plan for PNG However, PNG has  power sector development
plan in place 17 Energy sector regulation (score)  The indicator assesses the
energy sector regulation It measures the progress towards  regulator independent
of government or regulated entities (Score system: Independent whole of energy
sector regulator established = ; Whole of energy sector regulator established =
; Sub-sector regulator established = ) Sub-sector regulation existed in 2009,
including ICCC for economic regulation covering fuel and electricity pricing
Electricity standard and compliance regulation is currently with PPL but will be
transferred and taken on board by DPE as stated in the EIP by LPG prices are not
fully regulated 18 Enabling framework for private sector participation (score)
The indicator assesses the progress towards an enabling framework for private
sector participation in selling electricity to the grid (Score system: Standard
power purchase and petroleum supply agreements operational = : Standard
agreements for subsector operational = ; Standard agreements in preparation = )
No specific legislation was in place to support independent power producers’
(IPP) participation in the grid in PPL has full authority over the inclusion of
IPPs to supply into their grids As of 2009, Hanjung Power Ltd was the only IPP
that was selling electricity to PNG Power Limited 19 Private sector contribution
(%) 74 The indicator tracks the share of electricity produced by independent
power producers under  power purchase agreement The following arrangement
accounts for IPPs selling to PPL only 12 PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to
rofi le   09 FAESP action theme  — Energy production and supply  Petroleum and
alternative fuels No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 20 Fuel supply security
(days)  The indicator measures the number of days  country can keep operating in
case of  petroleum product supply interruption Calculation used if actual data
are not available (size of total petroleum storage (m3)/average petroleum
product consumption per day) No data available 21 Fuel supply diversity (%)  The
indicator measures the share of locally produced fuel (biofuel or fossil fuel)
as  percentage of total supply No data available However, vehicles and ships
being trialed to run on coconut oil are mentioned in selected reports Emirau
Marine Products Ltd in New Ireland has been using coconut oil in one of its
fishing vessels since Buka Metal Fabricator has also been using coconut oil in
its vehicles PNGSEL in 2009 was reported to be involved in the Pomio Biodiesel
Project 22 Fuel supply chain arrangements (score)  The indicator assesses the
control of countries over the fuel supply chain (Score system: Joint procurement
scheme operational = ; Participation in preparation of joint procurement
arrangements = ) No joint fuel procurement arrangement is applicable for PNG Oil
Search mines and exports crude oil from PNG InterOil has  refinery in Port
Moresby, where they refine crude oil to petroleum products and supply around 70%
of the market in PNG Exxon Mobil imports its fuel products from Singapore 13  NG
Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il  200   Renewable energy No FAESP
indicators Explanatory notes Renewable energy share (%) 01 The indicator
measures the share of renewable energy as  percentage of total supply for  given
year Referenced calculation takes into account only the RE supplied by hydro and
geothermal Data sourced from APEC 23 24 Renewable resource knowledge (score)
The indicator assesses the quality of knowledge of national renewable energy
potential (Score system: Comprehensive assessment of all RE resources including
cost for each source = ; Comprehensive physical assessment of all RE resources =
; Resource assessments fragmentary, under way = ) Resource data of renewable
energy sources are fragmentary in PNG Detailed hydro assessments were undertaken
by Japan International Cooperation Agency in the early 1980s Significant wind
monitoring activities were undertaken by the Commonwealth Industrial and
Scientific Research Organisation (CSIRO) in the late 1970s Reconnaissance
studies of the country’ geothermal potential suggest that the most promising
area for investigation is the northern coast of New Britain Islands 25 Least-
cost RE development plan (score)  The indicator assesses if data and information
on RE have been translated into  least-cost development plan that gives priority
to the most economical RE resource or application (Score system: Least-cost
development plan operational = ; Least-cost development plan in preparation = )
No specific least-cost development plan was in place for PNG in 14 PN  Country
Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 FAESP action theme  — Energy
conversion  Electric power No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 26 Generation
efficiency (kWh/) 69 The indicator measures the annual average fuel conversion
efficiency for diesel generation in power utilities Analysis is based on PPL
data only 27 Distribution losses (%) The indicator compares the amount of kWh
sold with the amount of kWh sent out from the power station Source: PPL 28 Lost
supply (SAIDI) – (hours)  The indicator tracks electricity outage time (hours of
lost supply per customer per year) 29 Clean electricity contribution (%) 81 The
indicator measures the share of renewable energies as  percentage of total
electricity supply The analysis takes into account the power production and
supply from PPL only  significant percentage of power is produced in the mining
areas, the palm oil factories, Ramu Sugar Limited, which is not taken into
account in this analysis 15  NG Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind ica tor   of il
200  FAESP action theme  — End-use energy consumption  Transport energy use |
Energy efficiency and conservation No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 30
Retail fuel prices The indicator tracks retail and wholesale fuel prices for
petroleum products (diesel, petrol, MPK, LPG) Retail price Wholesale price ADO
(USD/) ULP (USD/) DPK (USD/) LPG (USD/kg) 91  87      Sourced from ICCC Sourced
from ICCC Sourced from ICCC Sourced from ICCC 31 Legislative framework (score)
The indicator assesses progress towards  comprehensive legislative framework for
import of end-use devices (Score system: Comprehensive framework covering
transport, appliances, buildings = ; Legislative framework for one sub-sector
operational = ; Preparation of frameworks under way = ) No specific legislative
framework that regulates the importation of energy efficient end-use devices was
in place in 32 Appliance labelling (score)  The indicator assesses the state of
appliance labelling (Score system: Compulsory appliance labelling operational =
; Appliance labelling in preparation = ) No compulsory appliance labelling
programme adopted for PNG in The market share of product imports to PNG come
from Australia 16 PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 FAESP
action theme  — Energy data and information No FAESP indicators Explanatory
notes 33 Availability of national energy balance (score)  The indicator assesses
the availability of national key energy data to SPC data management unit and
other regional stakeholders (Score system: Comprehensive data sets covering
energy input conversion and end-use available  months after end of reporting
year = ; Partial data set available within  months = ; Partial data set
available within 12 months = ) Selected national energy balance has been
developed by APEC and the Asian Development Bank Energy datasets available are
fragmented with irregular data reporting 17  NG Countr   ner gy Secur it  Ind
ica tor   of il  200  FAESP action theme  — Financing, monitoring & evaluation
No FAESP indicators Explanatory notes 34 Energy portfolio (USD) 200,000,000 The
indicator tracks the flow of funding into the country’ energy sector Grant aid
commitments + loan commitments Indicative estimate from the Department of
Petroleum and Energy 35 Availability of financing information (score)  The
indicator assesses availability of national energy financing information to SPC
and other regional stakeholders (Score system: Comprehensive set of information
covering petroleum, utility and government financing = ; Partial information set
available within  months = ; Partial information set available within 12 months
= ) Financial data records of funded projects are available at the Energy
Division where indicative estimates of the latest spending could be provided
over  months Detailed financial accounts from the Ministry of Finance will take
longer 36 Monitoring framework (score)  The indicator assesses if there is
national energy sector & framework in place (Score system: & framework in place
= , No & framework =  ) No specific monitoring and evaluation framework in place
Selected monitoring and evaluation activities are available on funded projects
only 18 PN  Country Energ  Security Ind ic  to   rofi le   09 PNG energy
contacts Vore Veve Tel: (675) 325 3233 / 7189 4786 Fax: (675) 325 1678 Email:
vore_veve@datecnetpg Director Department of Petroleum and Energy Energy Division
Matt Morris Tel: (675) 321 2977 Fax: (675) 321 2916 Email: ipbc@ipbccompg Acting
Chief Executive Officer Independent Public Business Corporation Ministry of
Finance Website:  Lawrence Solomon Tel: (675) 324 3111 Fax: (675) 325 0008
Email: pmara@pngpowercompg Chief Executive Officer PNG Power Ltd Website:
Joseph Bariamu Tel: (675) 7109 0666 Fax: (675) 325 0008 Email:
bmehuwa@bismarckenergycompg General Manager Western Power Manoka Tel: (675) 325
2144 Fax: (675) 325 3980 Email: info@icccgovpg Commissioner Independent Consumer
and Competition Commission Website: