Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/GIN/  Programme rationale  Despite many natural and mineral resources,
Guinea is among the world’ least developed countries This is due to poor
macroeconomic performance, weak governance structures, political instability,
and insecurity in the late 1990s Since its emergence from political isolation,
via  new constitution and democratic elections in 2010, Guinea made considerable
progress until the crisis in involving the Ebola Virus Disease in Government
efforts to stabilize the macroeconomic framework were affected by the epidemic
The GDP growth rate1 dropped from  per cent in 2013 to  per cent in 2015 and per
capita income declined Fortunately, the economy recovered due to strong
performances in the mining and agricultural sectors, and an increase in
electricity supply Average growth is estimated at  per cent for 2016 to
Nevertheless, performance is hampered by limited economic diversification;
inadequacies in agricultural, mining and fisheries value chains; insufficient
support for entrepreneurship; poor employment opportunities for women and youth;
slow formalization of the informal sector, and weak community resilience to
crises and disasters  Overall performance has not translated into better living
conditions for people Efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
had little impact on reducing poverty and social inequalities: 55 per cent of
the population lives below the poverty line and there are strong urban (35 per
cent) and rural (65 per cent) disparities Close to  quarter of households do not
have access to improved sanitation, and 74 per cent have no access to
electricity (97 per cent in rural areas vs 26 per cent in urban centres) In
addition, urban unemployment doubled from  per cent in 2012 to 16 per cent in
Guinea’ Human Development Index (HDI) was 4148 in 2016, making it 183 out of 188
countries Estimates from poverty surveys indicate accelerated and inclusive
growth can have the biggest impact on poverty reduction in Guinea If growth is
equitably distributed,  per cent growth in private consumption can lead to  full
percentage point reduction in the poverty rate10  recent fragility analysis11
revealed Guinea is still in  “transition stage” and needs to strengthen its
institutions and state-civil society relationship for increased efficiency,
transparency, accountability and resilience  The quality of governance is low in
Guinea12  recent survey suggests citizen perception of public administration is
negative with 84 per cent of respondents stating that public services are
corrupt, while 77 per cent13 have limited trust in the justice system Women,
youth and people with disabilities are largely excluded from political debates
and decisions- making processes Women are  minority in leadership positions in
publi  and private enterprises, and underrepresented in political and electoral
processes Only per cent14 of national parliamentarians are women, and seven
government ministers out of 34 are women, which is below the 30 per cent
constitutional target The resumption of political dialogue following the Ebola
epidemic helped improve the socio-political situation Local elections are
scheduled for 2017 but the political and social system is fragile, characterized
by deferral of local elections beyond deadlines set out in successive political
agreements,15 which have led to political tension  lack of regular updates and
harmonization of legal and regulatory frameworks, policies and strategies on
rule of law, inclusive growth and environment weakens overall coherence, hinders
enforcement16 and effectiveness Fostering dialogue  World Bank Report, GDP per
inhabitant dropped in 2014 and 2015, by  per cent and  per cent, respectively
(see the National Plan for Economic and Social Development for 2016- 2020, and
the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, December IMF eight and
final review under the extended credit facility arrangement and financing
assurances  National Report on the development of the private sector, 2016 APIP
National report on the assessment of fragility, National Plan for Economic and
Social Development for 2016-Ibid  Human Development Report World Bank Country
Partnership Strategy for Guinea () 10 Ibid 11 National report on the assessment
of fragility, 12 Mo Ibrahim Index on governance 13 Provisional Commission on
National Reconciliation, June 14 National Gender Policy, Ministry of Social
Action and for the Promotion of Women and Children 15 Political agreements from
July 20l3, August 2015 and October 16 National report on the assessment of
fragility, DP/DCP/GIN/ among political stakeholders and strengthening relevant
public institutions are critical for safeguarding and sustaining peace, and
creating conditions conducive to economic transformation  Unemployment rates
among youth and women17 rates are high (per cent for women and 83 per cent for
youth)18 These groups have limited access to productive resources including land
and credit, and working women, youth and people with disabilities are engaged in
jobs in the agriculture19 and informal sectors where they do not have stable
incomes or social protection Poor economic opportunities and natural resource
management, along with environmental degradation, have led to  rural exodus and
massive emigration of youth20 Disenchanted youth radicalize and adopt extremist
views easier than their peers To meet these challenges the government developed,
with UNDP support,  program for the socio-economic integration of youth (),
which requires partners’ support  Environmental and natural resource management
risk factors need to be addressed to reinforce community resilience to climate
change shocks, and forge pathways to economic growth Guinean forests receded by
12 per cent between 1990 and 2014 due to inappropriate farming practices, poor
exploitation of forest resources, open-pit mining, and bush fires exacerbated by
climate change21 Mining operations create significant environmental impacts and
pose risks to social security and health Corporate social responsibility
policies are not well applied in areas affected by mining operations while the
governance process could be more transparent and inclusive Droughts, floods,
storms, extreme temperatures and coastal erosion affect the country’ long-term
development and require special attention when building resilience of the
economy and population  Responses are constrained by weak institutional
capacities across sectors Low levels of decentralization limits public access to
services, particularly in remote areas The lessons learned report on Ebola22
revealed the low resilience of public institutions and need to invest at sub-
national and community levels The government is strengthening decentralization
through the creation of regional development zones that will help build local
resilience The operationalization of these zones is  priority for effective
coordination, provision of services and development of supply chains in sectors
such as agriculture and extractive industries, but such reforms can only succeed
if the country has sufficient coordination and monitoring capacities Support to
aid coordination frameworks is  priority in governmental resource mobilization
The Common Country Assessment23 highlighted the country’ weak capacity in data
collection, analysis and dissemination, and the dysfunction of the statistical
system All of this hampers the formulation and effective monitoring of national
and sectoral development policies Additionally, poor coordination among actors,
weak planning and programming processes, and little public involvement limit the
degree of public support for government policies, and reduce the impact and
sustainability of development programs  To unlock Guinea’ potential, ensure
prosperity and equitable distribution of revenue, the government is committed to
tackling the root causes of poverty through its long-term vision24 for
prosperous, emerging Guinea by This vision is linked to Agenda 2030 and the
African Union Agenda 2063, and will be operationalized through four strategic
priority areas in the National Plan for Economic and Social Development: ()
promotion of good governance for sustainable development; (ii) sustainable and
inclusive economic transformation; (iii) inclusive development of human capital,
and (iv) sustainable management of natural capital  UNDP is well positioned as
multilateral organization in supporting the implementation of this vision UNDP
has partnered with the government in three areas: governance, building
institutional capacity, and supporting legal and regulatory reforms Good
practices include: 17 Light Survey for Poverty Assessment in Guinea, INS 18
Specific Survey on Employment and Decent Work, AGUIPE 19 General Census of the
Population and Housing, Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation 20
‘Advancing development approaches to migration and displacement’, UNDP position
paper for the 2016 United Nations summit for refugees and migrants 21 Report on
the state of the environment in Guinea, 22 Ebola lessons learned report (MPTF
2016) 23 UN Common Country Assessment, 24 “Vision 2040 for an emerging and
prosperous Guinea,” the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation,
January DP/DCP/GIN/ () knowledge products;25 (ii) strategic documents like the
national plan with an emphasis on the integration of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) and based on the fragility assessment that facilitated the
identification of accelerators of inclusive and sustainable development; (iii)
strengthened electoral and justice institutions, and (iv) revised legal and
regulatory frameworks that incorporate provisions from international conventions
and have made significant institutional contributions The evaluation of the
Second Priority Plan, financed by the Peacebuilding Fund, for 2013 to 2017
revealed significant progress has been made in improving relations between
citizens and national defense forces, thereby consolidating peace and security
Findings indicated gaps between police and justice sectors  UNDP focused on
youth and women’ empowerment to provide skill development and employment
opportunities to more than 400,000 young people (per cent girls) Efforts to
generate inclusive growth led to the economic and social empowerment of over 100
rural women’ groups (,000 women) through business, organizational and management
skill building and multifunctional platforms Such integrated approaches are
gaining popularity among communities and generate high demand from regions not
yet covered in the current country programme document (CPD) With regards
adaptation to climate change, the UNDP contribution includes the development of
policy framework for environmental sector management, identifying the most
vulnerable geographical areas to support the implementation of climate change
adaptation initiatives, and the formulation of  national adaptation plan to
support rural communities and increase resilience through ‘green jobs’ creation
The  CPD evaluation showed UNDP was quick to adapt and respond to socio-
economic and health crises, such as Ebola outbreak through community development
support projects It also revealed organizational interventions were fragmented
The consolidation of UNDP achievements in Guinea will be the guiding principle
for the proposed program with weaknesses addressed through focused scale up and
strengthened partnerships Leading partners are the World Bank (WB), European
Union (EU), Islamic Development Bank (ISDB), French Agency for Cooperation
(AFD), the Government of the People’ Republic of China, United States Agency for
International Development (USAID), and various non- governmental organizations
(NGOs) Priority areas selected by multilateral partners and the Government of
China include infrastructure, governance and capacity building in public
administration The main bilateral contributors (USAID and French government) are
focused on governance and the social sector ( water, health and education) UNDP
will rely on its comparative advantage and the lessons learned to consolidate
support and build accountable national institutions, promote job creation for
vulnerable groups (particularly youth, women and people with disabilities), and
reinforce local communities’ resilience to shocks Efforts are inspired by an
approach focused on inclusive participation, gender empowerment, local skills
and knowledge, and South-South cooperation Inter-organizational coordination
will be consolidated through Delivering as One (DaO) initiatives and
implementation of the 2018- 2022 United Nations Development Assistance Framework
(UNDAF) II Programme priorities and partnerships The overarching objective of
the CPD is to assist Guinea in creating conditions for sustainable inclusive
growth by building strong and responsible public institutions that are
accountable to civil society The development pathways that lead to this
objective include promoting good governance for sustainable development at the
national, regional, and community levels, combined with investments in economic
transformation and sustainable management of natural capital The programmatic
strategy depends on creating links between, and mutually strengthening, the two
pillars of the UNDP programme To ensure gains in economic growth are inclusive
and not eroded by political instability,  widening of democratic space is
required—mainly through the pursuit of inclusive participation of communities,
especially vulnerable groups Long-term political stability is protected by
inclusive and sustainable 25 Human Development Reports, MDG Implementation
Monitoring Reports, and Economic Impact Assessment Studies of the Ebola Epidemic
DP/DCP/GIN/ economic growth that produces jobs Since agriculture, fisheries,
livestock and forestry industries are the main sources of income for more than
70 per cent of the population, sustainable management of natural capital is
needed to mitigate the effects of shocks on the population and should be
mainstreamed within the two pillars The CPD was developed in consultation with
the government, national stakeholders, civil society, development partners and
United Nations organizations Focus areas are in line with national plan
priorities, anchored in the UNDAF , and aligned with outcomes of the UNDP
Strategic Plan 2014-The programme will support Guinea in the implementation of
Agenda 2030, the African Union Agenda 2063 and the roadmap for the Istanbul Plan
of Action for Least Developed Countries The CPD will focus support on achieving
10 of the 17 SDGs ( SDGs , , , , , 10, 11, 13, 15 and 16) Pillar One: Promoting
good governance for sustainable development This pillar strengthens government
capacity to improve political and economic management, promote economic
governance through strengthened public institutions, and increase civil society
involvement in decision-making and citizen control in fighting corruption
Disaggregated data will be mined, especially regarding gender, so specific
issues can be taken more closely into account when monitoring the SDG pathway
UNDP will continue supporting the harmonization and dissemination of legal and
regulatory frameworks to ensure local ownership and improve institutional
performance, as well as support ministries and institutions in addressing gaps,
identifying contradictions in new laws, decrees, codes, regulations, and
ensuring national compliance with international obligations and standards UNDP
will continue to support security sector reforms, rule of law and the
implementation of critical laws through advocacy, enforcement and monitoring
practices Plans are in place to improve the participation of civil society
organizations, women, youth and people with disabilities in political, economic
and social decision-making spheres UNDP will help build community capacity, and
advocate for increased female participation in public institutions and the
private sector UNDP will support the creation and operationalization of regional
development zones to exercise legal and constitutional privileges, and assist
the formulation and implementation of inclusive, participatory, socio-economic
and SDG-localized development plans This will be done regionally and in target
development zones where fast growth is anticipated and targets can be met
Specific attention will be given to youth and women’ employment, adaptation to
climate change, security and conflict prevention This will be done to strengthen
women’ participation, as voters, election candidates, monitors and observers,
alongside building the capacity of early warning systems for conflict, citizen
control and oversight local governments institutions and in Such interventions
will contribute to increased public trust in national institutions and ensuring
more inclusive and effective citizen participation, thereby promoting good
democratic governance and rule of law in line with SDGs 10 and The national
government will nurture partnerships with: () the European Union on elections,
institutional reforms and local development, through the National Indicative
Programme () and Civil Society Support Programme; (ii) the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), Open Society Initiative for West Africa,
and National Democratic Institute on conflict prevention and national
reconciliation, (iii) the European Union, governments of Japan and France,26 and
USAID collaborating on Security Sector Reform, and (iv) the private sector,
especially mining and ancillary sectors to capitalize on ongoing partnerships
with the Chamber of Mines Part of the programme includes forging new
partnerships with regional bodies on emerging and cross border issues such as
migration and risk management ( African Union, Economic Community of West
African States, and Mano River Union) Pillar Two: Economic transformation and
sustainable management of natural capital This second pillar focuses on
promoting inclusive growth through value chains in high economic potential
zones, job creation to sustain local, emerging growth, 26 Electoral Cycle
Support Project in Guinea  DP/DCP/GIN/ improving community resilience to shocks,
and reducing youth migration The following priorities under this pillar are: ()
building the capacity of professional unions and farmers associations to become
better organized and equipped to promote activities, comply with international
standards and access new market opportunities; (ii) supporting women, youth and
people with disabilities so income-generating activities, they benefit
entrepreneurship, decent employment, access to finance and integration of the
informal sector within sustainable value chains in the mining, agricultural and
fisheries sectors; (iii) promoting sustainable cities and villages, sustainable
waste management and promotion of green jobs, as well as supporting the
establishment of area-based waste management systems; (iv) building resilience
of vulnerable groups so they adapt to climate change and have improved access to
renewable energies and alternative technologies, and () building national
capacities in climate finance and resource mobilization UNDP will support the
Ministry of Environment, Water and Forests and the National Meteorological
Agency in implementing COP-21 commitments and facilitating resource mobilization
for opportunities arising from COP-Strengthening national statistics system is
crosscutting domain for UNDP to provide data that will improve strategic
planning, budgeting and integrated development management, monitoring and
evaluation These interventions will contribute to the achievement of SDGs , , ,
, , 10, 11, 13 and from The implementation of the second pillar relies on the
strong collaborations with  variety of partners The World Bank will work with
the government and UNDP on supporting Program for Village Communities (PACV) and
Mining Sector Governance Support Program (PAGSEM) The African Development Bank
(AfDB) will provide aid coordination and institutional capacity building Other
specialized United Nations organizations, the Multi- Partner Trust Fund Office
(MPTF) and European Union will work on youth employment while the Agence
Française de Développement (AFD) will focus on environmental issues with the
Green Climate Fund (GCF), the governments of Japan, China and Belgium, and the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) New partnerships will be developed with ISDB,
the Belgian Technical Cooperation and AfDB on value chain promotion in rural
areas for job creation to address unemployment among women and young people,
which will be an entry to respond to migration issues UNDP will develop
partnerships with the private sector to facilitate greater participation in
conflict prevention, sustainable waste management and alternative energy UNDP
will collaborate with the universities of Conakry and Kankan, the Conakry-
Rogbanè of Technology of Mamou Scientific Research Centre, the Higher Institute
and South-South and triangular cooperation will build on successful
parliamentary exchanges with Senegal, Niger and Burkina Faso, and be expanded to
other areas such as electoral assistance and justice reform UNDP will reach out
to new collaborators like Tunisia and Rwanda to provide guidance in promoting
the effective representation of youth and women in decision-making bodies
Collaborations will be made in the areas of microfinance ( crowd funding) and
rural and agricultural entrepreneurship with partners in Burkina Faso and
Cameroon The same will be done with green jobs with Benin UNDP will work closely
with other United Nations organizations on priority areas using the ‘Delivering
as One’ approach It will provide administrative and technical support to the
Office of the Resident Coordinator in facilitating joint programmes that address
development challenges related to SDG-localization; income-generating
activities; decent employment for vulnerable groups; sustainable value chain
promotion, and green jobs creation III Programme and risk management The country
programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as
the basis of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme Accountabilities of managers at the country,
regional and headquarters levels are prescribed in the UNDP Programme and
Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Controls Framework The
technical, programmatic and operational capacities and organizational structure
of the Guinea Country Office are aligned with the proposed programme UNDP will
DP/DCP/GIN/ strengthen the unit for strategic oversight to improve data
collection, knowledge management, and the monitoring and evaluation of
interventions The use of  national implementation modality will help reduce the
internal UNDP capacity Up to 70 per cent of Service Contract and Temporary
Appointment positions will end with the previous programme cycle Internal
allocation of other resources will include 25 per cent of direct project costs
charged to projects to support country office sustainability The programme will
be executed nationally UNDP and partners will capitalize on individual
capacities to select implementation modalities Based on  new capacity
assessment, remaining gaps will be identified and monitored through the
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers The United Nations Country Team will
conduct  macro- assessment of the public finance management system and micro-
assessment for relevant government bodies and civil society organizations This
will be done to identify risks related to the management of public resources and
assess the capacity of implementing partners to manage  harmonized approach to
remittances UNDP will implement the joint programming framework and business
operations strategies The risks to effective programme implementation are
institutional instability, deterioration of the security, and lagging
humanitarian support These risks are due to failed political dialogue; ethnic
polarization of the socio-political debate; poor management of electoral
process; insecurity in the sub-region (that could result in extreme violence and
the radicalization of youth), and possible resurgence of the Ebola virus The CPD
will be implemented in  context characterized by  reduction in regular resources
and uncertainty of funds Due to the possible reemergence of risks, some
activities can be reprogrammed or suspended UNDP will approach the private
sector through an intensive win-win approach to ensure direct involvement when
investing in value chains and promoting job creation The recent
operationalization of Guinea Airlines can facilitate mobility for continuous
programme delivery to hard-to-reach populations To mitigate risks related to
insufficient partnerships and resources, the country office will focus on its
resource mobilization strategy UNDP will strengthen the communication and
visibility of interventions; allocate direct costs to projects; update its
partner database The organization will explore new funding mechanisms with the
Green Climate Fund, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, ISDB and public-
private partnerships At present, ISDB is promoting an outsourcing approach under
corporate agreements with UNDP and other partners This approach has distinct
comparative advantages in building governance and institutional capacities, and
boosting grassroots level entrepreneurship and value chain development  strategy
will be developed in collaboration with national stakeholders to secure national
funding Emphasis will be placed on building the capacity of implementing
partners to improve the quality of interventions The UNDP country office will
project quality assurance, along with social and environmental standards that
improve programme quality To maintain good value for money and close existing
gaps, the country office will strengthen financial management controls and
project supervision, and improve upon its evaluation and capacity assessment of
implementing partners The UNDP country office has put  strategic oversight,
early warning and risk management mechanism in place through  business
continuity plan that analyses and assesses the national context, identifies
risks, and assesses risk management capacities through the management/mitigation
system This system is updated as the context changes If needed, the country
office will have the flexibility to modify planning, reallocate resources, and
trigger procedures that can address specific crises Security-related risks will
be addressed through early warning systems, political dialogue with the
Government of Guinea and donors UNDP will locally strengthen mechanisms for the
prevention, reduction and management of conflicts and natural disasters in
collaboration with United Nations organizations and the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS)  DP/DCP/GIN/ IV Monitoring and
evaluation Attention will be given to monitoring and evaluation to achieve
programme outcomes CPD indicators are aligned with national indicators, UNDAF
indicators, the UNDP Strategic Plan for  and relevant SDGs In collaboration with
partners, UNDP will support the development of national capacities in data
collection and monitoring and evaluation—in particular, the National Statistics
Institute for the production and regular dissemination of updated sex and
disability-disaggregated data on the SDGs UNDP will develop an integrated
monitoring and evaluation plan to ensure monitoring of efforts and achievement
of development outcomes Monitoring of activities and indicators will be carried
out by programme implementation units and the use of: annual reviews; semi-
annual monitoring meetings with the government and implementing partners; UNDAF
outcome group, technical and steering committees meetings, and joint field
visits with the government, development partners, civil society organizations,
the private sector and local communities To make monitoring more inclusive and
participatory, local focal points and decentralized state structures will
collect and share data UNDP will ensure the gender marker is incorporated into
all projects and programmes The gender marker will be used for resource
allocation, and in supporting the mainstreaming of gender, women’ empowerment,
and disability-sensitive elements into programmes The UNDP country office will
allocate  per cent of the country programme budget for monitoring and evaluation
activities, including resource mobilization tracking through the programme
pipeline follow-up, and data collection for baseline and periodic surveys
Experiences will be shared with other countries within the South-South and
triangular cooperation network so  reliable data system on the SDGs can be
established Evaluations will be carried out in accordance with the evaluation
plan and form part of the monitoring and evaluation framework of the national
plan The CPD will be subject to  mid-term and final evaluation UNDP will work
with United Nations organizations to conduct joint evaluations (mid-term and
final evaluations of the UNDAF ), and with the government and development
partners on thematic assessments and periodic surveys  discussion group has been
set up with academic institutions and universities (the University of Conakry,
the Conakry-Rogbanè Scientific Research Centre, and Mamou Technology Institute)
to promote renewable energy initiatives  DP/DCP/GIN/ Annex: Results and
resources framework for Guinea () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Promotion of good
governance for sustainable development UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP, Outcome :
By 2022, national institutions at the central, decentralized and deconcentrated
levels are inclusive, assuring and guaranteeing the rule of law, democracy,
security, social peace and an effective institutional governance in accordance
with the principles of human rights RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome :
Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability
are met by stronger systems of democratic governance Indicative resources by
outcome (in $ thousands) Data source and frequency of data collection27, and
responsibilities UNDAF outcome indicators, baselines and targets Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets)28 Major
partners/ Partnership frameworks Data sources: General Secretariat of the
Government, Ministry of Planning Ministry of Territorial Administration and
Decentralization (MATD)/ CENI/ Parliament/Ministry of the Environment; Transport
and Fishing Output : Legal/regulatory framework, policies and strategies on rule
of law, inclusive growth and environment are updated and harmonized Overall
quality index of national institutions (CPIA) Baseline:  in 2015 Target:  in
2022 Regular: ,070,129 Other: ,724,300 Indicator : Number of policies and
strategies developed/revised in the areas of the rule of law, inclusive growth
integrating human rights and gender Baseline: 17 Target: 27 Data sources: MATD/
CENI/ Parliament/ Ministry of the Environment (MEEF); Transport and Fishing;
Indicator : Number of legislative and regulatory texts available on the rule of
law, inclusive growth, integrating human rights and gender equality Baseline: 11
Target: 20 Data sources: MATD/ CENI/ Parliament/ MEEF; Transport and Fishing;
Parliament, Constitutional Court, Supreme Court Ministries: Justice, Social
Action, Citizenship, MATD, Planning and International Cooperation (MPCI), Mines
and Geology, Finance and Economy, Budget, Environment, Labour, employment,
technical Education and Vocational Training, Industry, SMEs and Private Sector
Promotion, Chamber of Mines, Defense, Security, Youth, Communications, Court of
Auditors, Parliament, INIDH, HCDH, CSO, CENI IOM, UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, WHO,
UNCDF AfDB, IsDB, EU, GEF/GCF, WB, Japan, GoG Indicator : Number of public
institutions with legal, policy and institutional frameworks in place for
conservation, sustainable use, access and benefit sharing of natural resources,
biodiversity and ecosystems Baseline:  Target: 24 Data sources: MATD/ CENI/
Parliament/ MEEF; Transport and Fishing; Data source: Mo Ibrahim Index Report
/CENI/Assembly Output : Legal/regulatory framework are strengthened to improve
CSO, women and youth participation in political, economic and social decision
making Regular: ,552,597 Indicator  Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance
Baseline: % Target: 50% Other: ,043,225 Indicator : Percentage of women and
youth in national parliament and local councils ) Women: Baseline: Parliament:
22%, communes: % regions: %, Target: Parliament: 40%, Communes: 30%, Regions:
30% Frequency: Biennial Data source: MPCI, Ministry of Justice/MATD/Sectoral
reports; ) Youth: Baseline: Parliament: %, communes: % regions: %, Frequency of
all data collection is annual Frequency of all indicator data collection is
Annual unless otherwise indicated  DP/DCP/GIN/ Target: Parliament: 30%,
communes: 30% regions: 30% Frequency: Biennial Indicator : Number of new or
strengthened laws and policies to increase women’, youth and CSO participation
in decision making Baseline:  Target:  Frequency: Biennial Output : Newly
created regional development zones are functional and exercise legal and
constitutional prerogatives Regular: ,622,726 Indicator  Percentage of women in
national parliaments and local councils Baseline: % Target: 40% Other:
11,767,525 Indicator : Number of regional zones created Baseline:  Target:  Data
source: Ministry of Justice/MATD Sectoral reports; Data source: Ministry of
Justice/ MATD/ Sectoral reports Indicator : Number of regional zones where UNDP
built capacities in gender sensitive planning, budgeting; Baseline:; Target: ;
Data source: Ministry of Justice/MATD/Sectoral reports; Output : Institutions
and organizations involved in strengthening democratic and economic governance
have the capacities to fulfil their mandate Regular: ,105,194 Indicator  Number
of national elections organized in  calm, transparent and credible manner
Baseline:  Target:  Data source: Official Journal, CENI, Parliament, Court of
Auditors, Other: 10,086,450 Indicator : Number of organizations involved in
civic education programmes and actively engaged in promoting electoral
participation Baseline: ; Target: 10; Data source: Ministry of
Justice/MATD/Sectoral reports; Frequency: Biennial Indicator : Number of
institutions/organizations with strengthened capacities in accountable
management, monitoring and evaluation Baseline: ; Target: 10; Data source:
Frequency: Biennial Indicator : Number of women participating as candidates in
local and national elections supported by UNDP Baseline: 35; Target: 100; Data
source: CENI Frequency: Biennial NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic
transformation and sustainable management of the natural capital UNDAF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP, Outcome : By 2022, the national institutions, civil society and
the private sector will have implemented the policies that improve food
security, sustainable management of environment, resilience of populations to
climate change and disaster risk management RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Outcome : Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating
productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and
excluded Output : The professional unions and farmers’ associations are better
organized and equipped to promote their activities Regular: ,090,376 Indicator
and : Unemployment rate of women Baseline:, Target:,90 Ministers: MPCI, Youth-
Technical and Professional Training, Industry, Small- and Medium-size
Enterprises, Mines and Geology, Agriculture, Fisheries -Civil society -Private
sector (enterprises, Employers’ Federations, Chamber of Mines) Decentralized
authorities Other: 15,769,696 Indicator : Number of professional unions and
farmers’ associations that have action plans Baseline: ,100; Target: 16,400;
Data source: INS/Sectoral Ministries; Data source: INS/Sectoral Ministries;
Indicator  and 2Youth unemployment rate Baseline: , Target: ,30 Indicator :
Number of skill-building schemes which expand and diversify the productive base,
based on the use of sustainable production technologies Baseline ; Target: ;
Data source: INS/Sectoral ministries; Indicator  and : Unemployment 10
DP/DCP/GIN/ Data source: INS/Sectoral ministries; Ministries: MPCI, Youth-
Technical and Professional Training, Industry, Small and Medium-Sized
Enterprises, Mines and Geology, Agriculture, Fishing; - civil society - private
sector (enterprises, employers’ federations; Chamber of Mines; Decentralized
authorities) IOM, UNICEF, UNFPA, UN-Women, WHO, UNCDF AfDB, IsDB, EU, GEF/GCF,
WB, Japan, GoG rate of people living with disabilities Baseline: Target :
Output : Women and youth benefit from income-generating activities and decent
employment within sustainable value chains developed in the mining, agricultural
and fisheries sectors Regular: ,533,974 Other: 18,022,510 Indicator : Number of
new full time equivalent jobs created for women and men 18+ years old Baseline:
46736 (: 11,682, : 35,054); Target: 50,236 (: 13,182; : 37,054); Data source:
MJ/METFP/ME/OSC; Indicator  : Rate of wage-earning women and youth in non-
agricultural employment Baseline: 27,% Target (2022) :40% Data source:
MJ/METFP/ME/OSC Indicator : Number of additional females that benefit from UNDP'
livelihoods interventions Baseline: 131,736 (: 46,736; : 85,000); Target:
137,736 (: 49,736; : 88,000); Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC; Indicator : Number
of new full time equivalent jobs created for people with disabilities Baseline:
904 Target: ,512; Data source: MJ/METFP/ME/OSC; Indicator : Percentage of women
and youth with access to credit Baseline:(2016):56% Target:(2022):65% Indicator
: Number of additional people with disabilities that benefit from UNDP'
livelihoods interventions Baseline: ,479 Target: ,887; Data source:
MJ/METFP/ME/OSC; AfDB, WB, MPCI, INS; - civil society- private sector Output :
The capacities of National Statistical Institute are enhanced to provide quality
data and analysis for development planning monitoring and evaluation and
decision-making Regular: ,217,996 Other: 11,264,069 Indicator : Number of
national frameworks with data collection and analysis capabilities Baseline: ;
Target: 25 Data source: MPCI/INS Data source: INS Indicator : Number of national
surveys supported that include disaggregated data on vulnerable groups
Baseline:; Target:  Data source: INS Data source: MEEF sectoral reports/sectoral
reports Ministries of Industry, MEEF GEF, civil society, private sector, local
communities Indicator   Food insecurity rate Baseline: % Target: 02% Output :
Households of targeted cities and villages have better access to alternative
technologies, renewable energies and healthy living environment Regular:
,110,622 Other: 14,528,890 Indicator : Number of households benefitting from
alternative technologies and renewable energies Baseline: 10,126; Target:
15,126; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports/ sectoral reports; Data source: MEEF
sectoral reports/sectoral reports Indicator   Rate of access of populations to
waste disposal system Baseline: % Target: 60% Indicator : Number of new
partnership mechanisms with funding for sustainable management solutions of
natural resources, ecosystem services, chemicals and waste at national and/or
sub-national level; Baseline:  Target: ; Data source: MEEF sectoral
reports/Sectoral reports Indicator : Percentage of female headed households
benefitting from improved energy access Baseline: 27%; Target: 30%; Data
reports/sectoral reports; source: MEEF sectoral 11 DP/DCP/GIN/ Data source:
Environmental sectoral reports, MEEF, Health, GEF, civil society, private
sector, local communities Output : The most vulnerable groups, have increased
capacities for resilience and adaptation to climate change Regular: ,622,726
Indicator- Number of persons affected by natural disasters per 100,000
inhabitants (by sex) Baseline: 295 Target: 100 Other: 12,712,779 Indicator :
Number of communes that integrated practices of resilience and adaptation in
their local development plan Baseline: 74; Target: 100; Data source: MEEF
Sectoral Reports/Sectoral report; Indicator : Number of women and youth able to
adapt their economic and living environment to climate change 2a Women Baseline:
,735; Target: ,000 2b Youth Baseline:; Target: Data source: MEEF sectoral
reports Sectoral reports; Indicator : Area of reforested/protected forest
ecosystems by UNDP Baseline: 916; Target: ,916 ha; Data source: MEEF sectoral
reports /Sectoral reports; Indicator : Number of climate information systems put
in place and operational Baseline :; Target: ; Data source: MEEF sectoral
reports Sectoral reports; Indicator- Reforested areas (ha) Baseline: 199,200 ha
Target: 300,000 ha Data sources: Sectoral reports Output : National environment
and natural resources management institutions have strengthened capacities in
resource mobilization and improved access to climate funding Regular: ,587,660
Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Economy, Planning and International
Cooperation, GEF, civil society, private sector, local communities Other:
,080,557 Indicator : Number of funded projects submitted by environment and
natural resources management institutions Baseline: 12; Target: 17; Data source:
MEEF sectoral reports/Sectoral reports; Frequency: Annual Indicator  Amount
mobilized by environment and natural resources management institutions for the
implementation of new projects Baseline: $16,389,000 US dollars; Target:
$60,000,000 US dollars; Data source: MEEF sectoral reports /Ministry of Economy
and Finance; Frequency: Annual 12