Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships: Page:  III Programme and risk management   : Page:  IV Monitoring
and evaluation : Page:  DP/DCP/ETH/  Programme rationale  Ethiopia is building
on an impressive foundation of development progress The country’ Human
Development Index rose to 470 in 2018, an increase of per cent in less than
generation Annual real growth of gross domestic product (GDP) averaged  per cent
during the period 2010 to 2018, one of the highest rates globally, leading to
six-fold increase in per capita income but without  dramatic increase in income
inequality: the Gini coefficient rose from 28 to 33 between 2005 and The
incidence of poverty declined from per cent in 2005 to per cent in 2016,
equivalent to lifting 15 million people out of poverty The multidimensional
poverty index fell in absolute terms from 545 to 489 between 2011 and 2016, with
deprivations receding across all 10 indicators and regions (except Somali) The
under-five mortality rate declined by over 55 per cent between 2005 and 20193
and net primary school enrolment reached 100 per cent in At the same time,
infrastructure investments have, among other things, lifted the rate of access
to electricity from 14 to 43 per cent between 2005 and  Despite  generally
positive development trajectory, significant structural challenges, reflecting
country in transition, will determine future development potential and
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals The first key challenge is
demographic, with multiple facets: an impending demographic transition, with
potential demographic dividend;  youth bulge, with over 70 per cent of the
population below 30 years of age, that makes the task of human capital
development, achieving higher labour productivity and job creation difficult;
and accelerating urbanization, starting from  low base, with  doubling of the
urban population expected between 2013 and 2035, affecting both growth potential
and sustainability   second structural challenge has to do with gender
inequality Ethiopia has made substantial progress in reducing maternal
mortality, narrowing gender disparity in primary education8 and increasing
women’ representation in national parliament and the Federal cabinet Yet
Ethiopia scores 846 on the Gender Development Index, one of the lowest in the
world, and stands at 117 of 129 countries in the Sustainable Development Goals
Gender Index Women have markedly lower access to essential productive inputs and
services: only 51 per cent of women farmers are estimated to have access to
agricultural extension services;  per cent have access to credit;10 and just 40
per cent of married women own land with only per cent holding  land title These
disadvantages are compounded by negative social norms that hold back women’
voice and participation in community life and traditional practices such as
child marriage and female genital mutilation   third structural challenge
emerges from the State-led development model pursued in the past which has
yielded important gains in human development and infrastructure but also
inhibited the emergence of  thriving private sector playing  leading role in job
creation, productivity growth and diversification of the economic and export
base This is evident, among other things, in  ‘missing middle’ of active small
and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) Private sector development is stymied as well
by  range of other factors: macroeconomic imbalances, originating in part from
debt service obligations, which have limited access to vital foreign exchange;
small capital market and banking  Planning and Development Commission, Poverty
and Economic Growth in Ethiopia (1995 – 2015), Ibid  Ministry of Health and
United States Agency for International Development, Ethiopia Demographic and
Health Mini Survey Report, Ministry of Education, Education Statistics Annual
Abstract, 2016/Government of Ethiopia, Home-Grown Economic Reform Programme ()
Central Statistical Agency (CSA), Population Projections of Ethiopia,
unpublished, CSA, Ethiopia Demographic and Health Survey, Ministry of Education,
Education Statistics Annual Abstract, 2016/Food and Agricultural Organization of
the United Nations, Ethiopia National Gender Profile of Agriculture and Rural
Livelihoods, 10 United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN -Women) and CSA, Ethiopia Gender Statistics Report, DP/DCP/ETH/
sector; low skill levels in the labour force; absence of an innovation
ecosystem; and lack of access to energy   fourth structural challenge stems from
the current governance model, albeit on the cusp of change, which faces
significant stresses on issues of voice and participation, identity, justice and
the rule of law, transparency and integrity, and the nature of the Federation,
especially the appropriate balance between the centre and regions Furthermore,
even as regions begin to play  stronger role, their capacities, for example, to
plan for and deliver services and local development, are very limited All of
these factors can cause latent tensions to emerge as violence and displacement
and could play out strongly as Ethiopia heads into elections in 2020,  pivotal
step in its transition to  democratic polity  Finally, the long-term and wide-
ranging impacts of climate change pose  growing and structural risk to poverty
eradication and sustainable development, not least given  high level of
dependency on rain-fed agriculture and forests for food security, livelihoods
and access to energy As much as 10 per cent of GDP may be lost annually due to
climate change11 as increasing natural disasters, loss of water resources,
forests and biodiversity, and population displacement, especially from
ecologically fragile lowlands, take their toll Impacts on social cohesion and
peace are also likely to be considerable  In every aspect, there is the
additional factor of dynamics in the Horn of Africa and beyond, whether on peace
and security, management of natural resources, infrastructure development or
trade and investment The onset of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) poses  new
challenge with profound implications  National development policy is responding
proactively to these structural challenges and COVID- The Homegrown Economic
Reform Programme (HGER) calls for building  resilient and diversified middle-
income economy, driven by the private sector; eradicating extreme poverty and
hunger; building human capabilities; creating  modern policy and institutional
framework; and creating an efficient, resilient and well-functioning financial
market The HGER will implement  forthcoming 10-Year Perspective Plan which is
based on five strategic pillars: macroeconomic stability; quality of economic
growth; productivity and competitiveness; implementation capacity at all levels;
and  resilient green economy Underpinning both,  national jobs plan aims to
create 14 million jobs by 2025 by building  vibrant local private sector,
especially SMEs Major action is also underway to address COVID- In step with the
Government, UNDP needs to address structural challenges and promote
transformational change if it is to remain relevant in Ethiopia The evidence
demonstrates that it is well positioned to do so12 During the previous
programme, UNDP demonstrated particular strengths in creating an enabling
environment and/or advancing action in three key areas: job creation;
environmental sustainability; and democratic governance UNDP advised on the
creation of Ethiopia’ flagship industrial parks and was an early investor and
pioneer in job creation through youth-led entrepreneurship; supported
formulation of the national Climate Resilient Green Economy (CRGE) strategy;
helped establish  CRGE facility that has already mobilized over $200 million;
and emerged as the largest channel of Global Environment Facility (GEF) funding,
building  $90 million portfolio UNDP was also  first mover in the area of
democratic governance,  decision that has paid off in deep relationships with
key institutions and rapid response to new reforms Fresh opportunities have
emerged in electoral support13 and peacebuilding, where UNDP has quickly
established  strong presence Future work, however, also requires learning from
the past Multiple evaluations and  portfolio review14 have shown that UNDP
engagement requires  clearer focus and logic and  higher level of 11 Government
of Ethiopia, Climate Resilience Strategy, 12UNDP, Independent Evaluation Office,
Independent Country Programme Evaluation, Terminal Evaluation, Mainstreaming
Incentives for Biodiversity in Climate Resilient Green Economy of Ethiopia ,
2019; Midterm Review, Creating Opportunities for Municipalities to Produce and
Operationalize Solid Waste Transformation , 2019; Midterm Review, Implementing
Climate Resilient and Green Economy Plans in Highland Areas, 2019; Midterm
Review of United Nations Development Assistance Framework, 13 With the
Government of the United Kingdom as the anchor contributor in  coalition with 12
other donors 14 Op cit footnote 12; UNDP Ethiopia, Country Portfolio Review,
DP/DCP/ETH/ ambition commensurate with the scale of changes underway in Ethiopia
The portfolio has become fragmented,15 with insufficient connection among
related interventions The sustainability of results varies, and not enough
attention has been paid to scaling-up and exit strategies UNDP remains focused
on federal institutions but stronger partnership with regions is now essential
Systematic use of data and evidence is another key area for improvement All of
these issues, in turn, go to the heart of delivering on the UNDP role as
integrator of the United Nations development system II Programme priorities and
partnerships Aligned fully with the HGER and guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan,
, the emerging UNDP strategic offer for Africa and the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), the next programme will
assist Ethiopia to overcome its structural challenges as it strives to become
democratic, peaceful and prosperous middle-income country UNDP will support
successful transition to democratic governance, address drivers of conflict to
consolidate and build peace, foster enabling conditions for expanded job
creation by the private sector (especially SMEs) and accelerate the transition
to  green economy resilient to climate change Gender equality and women’
empowerment will be embedded across all areas of work These priorities
capitalize on strengths demonstrated under the past programme while adapting to
new realities and opportunities, retaining an ability to respond flexibly to
COVID-19 and other unforeseen developments Across all of its priorities, UNDP
will apply principles drawn from the human-rights based approach that are
strongly embedded in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, namely: ()
Inclusion, targeting those left behind, as defined in the Common Country
Analysis, especially women and youth ( years) and among them, those below the
national poverty line who are unemployed, exposed to violence, displaced, facing
discrimination, have  disability or are marginalized in civic and political
spaces Location targeting will focus on poorer secondary and tertiary urban
settlements and rural zones in three to four regions, identified with the
Government, that are representative of the highlands, rift valley and lowland
pastoralist areas () Resilience of individuals, especially women and youth,
(female-headed) households and communities, emphasizing increased capacities to
foresee, prepare for and bounce back stronger from  wide variety of shocks ()
Sustainability, ensuring that any development gains made are within the capacity
and resources of the country and do not compromise prospects for future
generations  To support  peaceful transition to  democratic polity, UNDP will
contribute to an enabling framework, deepening of critical capacities,
strengthening of norms and practices and greater voice and empowerment of those
left behind, especially women UNDP will help entrench democratic governance and
protection of human rights at both federal and regional levels, focusing on core
institutions This effort will target effective oversight and accountability;
increased transparency; continued policy, legal and regulatory reform that is
gender- responsive; follow-through on electoral support; implementation of the
Civic Engagement Policy; and strengthening of federal-regional linkages
Supporting institutional reform and renewal will be critical to delivering on
these transformational objectives In addition, UNDP will target research, skills
development and outreach initiatives to increase the influence of women and
youth on public policies and legal frameworks UNDP will pursue  step change in
the rule of law and access to justice, based on  sector-wide approach that
triggers  comprehensive change process delivering major advances within four to
five years, with clear benefits accruing to women To this end, UNDP will build
upon the recommendations of  proposed justice sector assessment to be conducted
jointly by Government and United Nations agencies UNDP will emphasize research,
strengthening of core systems and civic education and 15 Ibid Over 50 projects
in the portfolio at present, ranging in size from $100,000 to $40 million
DP/DCP/ETH/ outreach It will partner with civil society organizations (CSOs) and
universities to provide legal aid services for underserved groups (such as
women) and areas of the country UNDP will improve the transparency,
accountability and integrity of public institutions to support the fight against
corruption It will develop  biennial corruption perception survey to identify
policy priorities that can be reflected in the national anti-corruption strategy
and will help set up the legislative and policy framework for  national whistle-
blower system In parallel, UNDP will enable review and modernization of the
Civil Service Code of Conduct with integrity as  core principle; support
strengthening of systems and mechanisms for transparency and asset declaration;
and promote citizen monitoring UNDP will respond to changing federal-regional
dynamics through  local governance programme designed to strengthen presence,
capacity, civic engagement and accountability of local institutions UNDP will
help develop the database for development planning at local level, working
closely with sister agencies/entities It will also strengthen and, where needed,
develop participatory planning, budgeting, management and monitoring standards
and processes, building in  strong element of public input and engagement,
especially of women and youth, ensuring that capacities built are sustainable
UNDP will test South-South partnerships to offer timebound ‘surge’ expertise in
priority areas Underpinning the above, analysis will look at expanding fiscal
space at regional level, extending ongoing work on the estimation of regional
GDP UNDP will integrate social cohesion and peacebuilding in its work on
democratic governance, to mitigate risks and where needed respond effectively to
conflict and sustain peace, addressing the humanitarian-development-peace nexus
UNDP will provide policy advice and technical support to articulate  gender-
responsive national peacebuilding strategy, based on  comprehensive and
participatory conflict analysis, and help design and set-up  national peace
architecture bringing together state and non-state institutions at federal and
regional levels  key consideration will be the roll-out of  national youth
service Another will be to collaborate with CSOs to enable groups such as ethnic
minorities, women and youth to become agents of change and to build the
capacities of community leaders to resolve disputes peacefully, promote dialogue
and build trust Given the dynamic context in Ethiopia, UNDP will retain the
flexibility to respond to emerging needs Three are on the horizon:  targeted
institutional development programme supported by development partners; support
to the Prime Minister’ Office, potentially based on  shared platform with
foundations; and -governance  To help achieve shared prosperity, UNDP will
narrow its focus to financial inclusion and the ecosystem female entrepreneurs
targeting youth, especially young for entrepreneurship, UNDP will offer market-
based solutions for growth and development of SMEs in six dimensions: policy
advice; skilling; business development services; enterprise development; project
preparation and development; and finance The focus will be on connecting
elements of the ecosystem into one whole and transforming them This component
will tackle credit rationing for SMEs, ensuring that women gain access to
financing Special attention will be paid to linkages with supply chains
connected to large industrial and agro-industrial parks Much of this work will
happen in partnership with the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF)
and link with complementary support from international financial institutions
and bilateral donors, creating scope for new partnerships to scale up and
accelerate action South-South cooperation is expected to play  key role The same
partnership with UNCDF will involve  major push on digital finance as  launchpad
for financial in telecommunications, and the Government’ focus on innovation,
the partnership will take an ecosystem development approach to unlock policy and
regulatory challenges, work with providers to tackle network and distribution
infrastructure challenges, and tackle demand-side issues like access to phones,
digital and financial literacy and behavioural change This work will have
strong focus on innovations that inclusion Taking advantage of impending
liberalization processes, particularly  DP/DCP/ETH/ foster inclusivity and
reduce the digital divide for young female entrepreneurs, migrants and
smallholder farmers, among others Two broader initiatives on the innovation
ecosystem and innovative finance will underpin the work on entrepreneurship and
digital finance UNDP will deepen its partnership with national institutions,
MASHAV (Israel Agency for International Development Cooperation), Korea
International Cooperation Agency (KOICA), sister agencies and local
incubators/accelerators to strengthen the innovation ecosystem by addressing
policy, regulatory and institutional gaps, enhancing linkages among stakeholders
and improving access to finance and government services An innovative finance
lab will target research and policy advocacy, model development and small-scale
experimentation to facilitate introduction and application of innovative sources
of financing, including insurance  To sustain development gains and increase
resilience, UNDP will promote leapfrogging to  green economy and faster
adaptation to climate change UNDP will support efforts to adapt to and mitigate
the impacts of climate change and build resilience through piloting, learning
and scaling-up of tested adaptation practices in the ecosystems of the highlands
and lowlands that address the poverty-environment nexus Strategies will include
the integrated landscape approach for natural resource management and food
security, use of innovative models and tools for monitoring and gender
mainstreaming, and integration of climate resilience into policies and
strategies UNDP will continue to engage in implementation of gender-responsive
community action plans to ensure integrated adaptation and mitigation responses
that simultaneously tackle sustainability and poverty Support will be provided
for upscaling weather index-based and risk insurance systems At  broader level,
UNDP will help update Ethiopia’ nationally determined contribution as part of
the Climate Promise Initiative, and support preparation of the third national
communication under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and biennial reports UNDP will sustain and scale up its assistance for natural
resource management and conservation of biodiversity UNDP will support
implementation of the Government’ 10-year Forest Sector Development Plan (FSDP),
the REDD-plus mechanism and strengthening of forest sector institutions to
enhance conservation and development of forests for multiple benefits, building
on partnerships with the Governments of Denmark, Norway and Sweden Preventing
forest loss, promoting restoration and integrating sustainability into major
commercial crops such as coffee will be priorities to raise productivity, boost
livelihoods and reduce poverty UNDP will partner closely with regional and city
administrations on implementation of the FSDP and intensify private sector
engagement in the sustainable use of forest resources for value addition and job
creation, utilizing, among things, an emerging partnership with KOICA to tap
Ethiopia’ major bamboo forests UNDP will support measures to improve
conservation of biodiversity resources and sustainably manage protected areas
Action on combating desertification,  growing threat, will be accelerated UNDP
will focus on access to renewable, affordable and clean energy as  major
catalyst for the transition to  jobs-rich green economy, ensuring that women and
female-headed households benefit from this investment UNDP will work at the
three levels of policy analysis, advocacy and advisory services to de-risk and
create an enabling environment for the emergence of  market at scale for
renewable energy services; prototyping of business models and technologies with
private sector participation; and development of bankable projects to crowd-in
investment Partnerships with sister agencies will be emphasized as will South-
South cooperation, tapping ongoing collaboration with the Government of China
and others UNDP will build up its portfolio on sustainable urbanization,
continuing work on urban waste management, combining livelihoods improvement,
development of urban greenery and climate change mitigation Building on
continued support to the Beautifying Sheger Project in Addis Ababa,  Smart
Cities Hub will focus on solutions using digital and analogue technologies to
boost inclusion, sustainability and resilience, with  special focus on the role
of women in advancing the New Urban Agenda  DP/DCP/ETH/ UNDP will invest in
early warning and risk management systems to deal with the rising threat of
natural disasters16 Early warning systems will be developed in vulnerable
regions, linked to contingency planning UNDP will support the generation of
gender-disaggregated, multi-hazard disaster risk assessments and information
products with increased emphasis on hazard specifics and calculation of
associated damage and loss potential vis--vis various risk scenarios UNDP will
generate  climate and disaster risk governance baseline and strengthen disaster
risk governance, including for recovery; integrate disaster risk reduction into
national planning, budgeting and accounting systems; promote and support
tracking of disaster risk management investments; and draw attention to gender-
differentiated impacts and responses III Programme and risk management This
country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels
with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework The
programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response
to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used to
manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects The
government coordinating authority will be the Ministry of Finance Programming by
UNDP will emphasise its integrator role entailing  comprehensive approach:
policy analysis and research that bridges gaps between sectors and backs advice
and action with evidence; cross-sectoral development planning, dialogue and
coordination that applies  ‘whole-of- economy’ and ‘whole-of-society’ lens;
solutions that are integrative in design and partnership-building;17 innovation
across policy and interventions; capacity development for institutional
transformation; and cross-border collaboration Successful implementation of the
country programme will be affected by several risks: potential disruptions
linked to the 2020 elections and COVID-19; an uncertain macroeconomic
environment; public sector capacity challenges; weak integration of work between
federal and regional levels; exposure to natural disasters; and potential
conflict and displacement To manage risk, UNDP will promote greater risk
analysis using its policy research effort; develop early-warning mechanisms in
addition to maintaining project-specific and portfolio-level risk logs and
contingency plans; undertake risk-informed programming; apply the UNDP social
and environmental safeguards and accountability mechanisms; increase flexibility
by reserving up to  per cent of its annual Trac1 allocation in  ‘rapid response
facility’; and expand its presence at regional level IV Monitoring and
evaluation Key references will be the Government-United Nations national
monitoring and evaluation (&) guideline and programme implementation manual and
the results and resources framework UNDP will rely primarily on country-level
data sources and the gender marker will be used systematically UNDP will set
aside  minimum of  per cent of project budgets for &, aiming to strengthen
systems in partner institutions rather than establish parallel arrangements The
approved evaluation plan will be the 16 In line with the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction, 2015 -17 For example, the New Way of Working and
Durable Solutions Initiative and partnerships that bring together non-
traditional actors from the Gulf and elsewhere in the Middle East, foundations,
the tech sector and volunteer community (through United Nations Volunteers
(UNV))  DP/DCP/ETH/ basis for decentralized evaluations, the next independent
country programme evaluation and input into the midterm and final evaluations of
the UNSDCF key shift will be to invest in better country statistics UNDP will
work with sister agencies and development partners to strengthen the national
statistical system to significantly improve coverage as well as to strengthen
the granularity, quality, reliability and timeliness of data, , by age, sex,
location and characteristics such as disability, in order to create  stronger
foundation for tracking those left behind and refine targeting in programmes and
projects UNDP has already committed to supporting the development of
comprehensive & system for the 10-Year Perspective Plan and the existing Aid
Management Platform  DP/DCP/ETH/ Annex Results and resources framework for
Ethiopia () Home-Grown Economic Reform Programme ((HGER) PRIORITY: Building an
emerging market economy level policy and institutional framework UNSDCF OUTCOME:
By 2025, all people in Ethiopia live in  cohesive, just, inclusive and
democratic society Strategic Plan (SP) OUTCOME: Accelerate structural
transformations for inclusive and sustainable development UNSDCF outcome
indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities Major partners / partnerships frameworks Estimated cost by
outcome ($) Indicative country programme outputs  Voter turnout Output
Constitution and law-making, electoral and parliamentary processes strengthened
to promote inclusion, gender equality, transparency and accountability [modified
Integrated Results and Resources Framework (IRRF) ] Regular: $61 million Central
Statistical Agency (CSA), Ethiopian Broadcasting Authority (EBA), Ethiopian
Human Rights Commission (EHRC), Federal Anti- Corruption Commission (FEAC),
House of Federation (HoF), House of People’ Representativ es (HoPR), Ministry of
Finance (MoF), Ministry of Peace (MoP), Office of the Attorney- General (OAG),
Prime Minister’ Office (PMO), disaggregated by sex, (SP ) Baseline (2005):18 %
(Male %; Female %) Target: 85% (Male 50%; Female 50%) Other: $34 million Source:
National Electoral Board of Ethiopia (NEBE) Frequency: - Indicators  Extent to
which the NEBE has core capacities to conduct inclusive, credible and peaceful
elections 19 (IRRF ) • Baseline (2019): • Target:  year election cycle  Women’
participation in elections: (IRRF )  Conflict-related () proportion of women in
the voter registry deaths disaggregated by sex (SP ) • Baseline (2015): 48% •
Target: 50 % () proportion of women on the governing mechanism of the electoral
management body • Baseline (2019): 40% • Baseline: TBD Target: TBD Target: 45%
() proportion of seats held by women represented at Source: TBD Frequency: TBD
Federal and Regional parliaments • Baseline (2015): Federal % Regional 28% •
Target: Federal - 40%; Regional 35% For both  and  Source: HoPR, NEBE, EBA,
planned UNDP capacity assessments Frequency: annual, -year election cycle
Extent to which representative bodies at federal and regional levels have
improved capacities to undertake inclusive, effective, accountable, transparent
and gender-responsive law-making, oversight and representation (in specified
functional areas) 20 (modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019): 18 Data from 2005 have
been used exceptionally as this was the most recent competitive election 19
country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with Government
to measure three levels of core capacities: = Low,  = Medium,  = High 20
country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with Government
to measure three levels of core capacities: = Low,  = Medium,  = High
DP/DCP/ETH/ • Target:  NEBE, Planning and Development Commission (PDC), Regional
Bureaux for Finance and Economic Development (BoFEDs) Source: HoPR, Regional
Councils Frequency: annual Output  Capacities, functions and financing of rule
of law and national human rights institutions and systems strengthened to
promote and protect human rights, expand access to justice and combat
discrimination, with  focus on women and other marginalized groups [modified
IRRF ] Indicators  Number of strengthened institutions and systems supporting
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations
(modified IRRF ) Governments of Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Ireland,
Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom • Baseline (2019):  • Target:  Source: EBA, EHRC, NEBE, OAG, PMO
Frequency: annual  Extent of strengthened capacities for governance and
oversight of justice and rule of law institutions 21 (IRRF ) • Baseline (2019):
• Target:  Source: OAG, Supreme Court, NEBE, MoP Frequency: annual Output
Institutions and systems enabled to address awareness, prevention and
enforcement of anti-corruption measures across sectors [modified IRRF ]
Indicator  Number of policy, legislative or regulatory measures developed and/or
adopted to mitigate and remedy corruption risks at federal and regional levels •
Baseline (2019): Federal –  , Regional -  • Target: Federal – ; Regional -
Source: FEAC, OAG Frequency: annual Output  Capacities of federal and regional
institutions strengthened to promote gender-responsive, inclusive and
sustainable local development [modified IRRF ] Indicators  Extent to which
federal and regional institutions have improved capacities for participatory
local development planning, budgeting and monitoring22 (modified IRRF ) 21 Ibid
22  country- and institution-specific rating scale will be developed with
Government to measure three levels of core capacities: = Low,  = Medium,  = High
10 DP/DCP/ETH/ • Baseline (2019): Federal and Regional -  • Source: PDC,
Regional BoFEDs Frequency: annual Target: Federal – ; Regional -   Level of
participation of women and youth groups in local development planning, budgeting
and monitoring23 Baseline (2019):  Target:  Source: BoFED, MoF, PDC, CSA
Frequency: annual Output  Federal, Regional and subregional capacities
strengthened for reintegration, reconciliation, prevention and peaceful
management of conflicts [IRRF ] Indicators  Extent to which  gender-responsive
and risk-informed national peacebuilding strategy, adopted with UNDP support, is
under implementation 24 (modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019):  • Target:  Source:
MoP Frequency: annual  Existence of operational infrastructures for peace at
federal, regional and subregional levels with UNDP support25 (modified IRRF ) •
Baseline (2019): No • Target: Yes Source: MoP Frequency: annual  Number of
women’ and youth networks with strengthened capacity for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding as  direct result of UNDP support • Baseline (2019):  • Target:
Source: MoP, HoF, HoPR Frequency: annual HGER PRIORITY: Eradicate extreme
poverty and hunger UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, all people in Ethiopia benefit from
an inclusive, resilient and sustainable economy SP OUTCOME: Advance poverty
eradication in all its forms and dimensions 23 Ibid 24  rating scale will be
developed with Government to measure three levels of implementation: = Low,  =
Medium,  = High 25  binary indicator 11 DP/DCP/ETH/  Proportion of Regular $52
million BoFEDs, CSA, Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE), Ethiopia Investment
Commission (EIC), Job Creation Commission (JCC), Ministries of Trade and
Industry (MoTI) and of Innovation and Technology (MiNT), National Bank of
Ethiopia (NBE) Output  Capacities developed across the whole of government to
integrate the 2030 Agenda, the Paris Agreement and other international
agreements in development plans and budgets and to analyse progress towards the
Goals using innovative and data-driven solutions [IRRF ] Sustainable Development
Goals aligned with national development plan (modified SP 10) Other $36 million
Source: PDC Frequency: every  years Indicators Baseline (2017): 70% Target: 80%
Existence of development plans and budgets that integrate the 2030 Agenda across
the whole-of- government: (modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019): Yes - partial •
Target: Yes - full  Unemployment rate, by sex26 (Goal ) Source: BoFED, CSA, PDC
Frequency: annual, biennial  Number of federal and regional institutions with
data collection/analysis mechanisms providing disaggregated data to monitor
progress towards the Goals: (modified IRRF ) Source: JCC Frequency: annual
Baseline (2018): % (urban), 27% (Female) • Baseline (2019): Federal:; Regional:
• Target: Federal: ; Regional:  Target: 10% (Urban) 10% (Female) Source: BoFED,
CSA, PDC Frequency: annual Output  Marginalized groups, particularly the poor,
women, persons with disabilities and displaced are empowered to access
entrepreneurship services and financial and non-financial assets and services to
build productive capacities and benefit from sustainable livelihoods and jobs
[modified IRRF ] Governments of China, Germany, Israel, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, UNCDF Local accelerators Indicators  Number of gender-responsive policy,
legal, regulatory and institutional measures adopted at federal and regional
levels, with UNDP support to improve the enabling environment for MSMEs (IRRF )
• Baseline (2019):  • Target:  Source: EIC, JCC, MoTI, NBE Frequency: annual
Proportion and number of people accessing financial and non-financial services,
disaggregated by sex (IRRF ) Financial • Baseline: 35% (, with accounts in
formal financial institution) Target: 50% • Non-financial • Baseline: 90,000
people with access to business development services (45% female) Target: 200,000
(50% female, % with disabilities) • 26 Ethiopia does not have  single measure of
overall unemployment that is disaggregated by sex The closest proxy is the urban
unemployment rate 12 DP/DCP/ETH/ Source: DBE, JCC, NBE, World Bank Frequency:
annual Output  Institutional capacities strengthened through UNDP support to
design and implement innovative and gender-responsive solutions for sustainable
development Indicator  Existence of  comprehensive national innovation ecosystem
• Baseline (2019): No • Source: MiNT Frequency: annual Target: Yes HGER
PRIORITY: Build  resilient and diversified middle-income economy UNSDCF OUTCOME:
By 2025, all people in Ethiopia live in  society resilient to environmental
risks and adapted to climate change SP OUTCOME: Strengthen resilience to shocks
and crises  Number of Regular $96 million Output  Integrated and gender-
responsive climate and disaster risk governance systems strengthened to reduce
risks and vulnerabilities, improve early warning systems (EWS) and enable rapid
recovery [modified IRRF ] DBE, Environment, Forest and Climate Change Commission
(EFCCC), Ministries of Construction and Urban Development (MoCUD), Finance
(MoF), Water, Irrigation and Energy (MoWIE), National Disaster Risk Management
Commission (NDRMC) people that are covered by early warning information through
local governments or through national dissemination mechanisms (disaggregated by
sex) (SP ) Other $21 million Indicators  Number of Federal and regional
institutions incorporating gender risk-informed and integrated solutions in
their development and investment plans to reduce disaster risks and enable
climate change adaptation and mitigation (IRRF ) • Baseline (2019) Federal - 12;
Regional - :  • Source: NDRMC Frequency: annual Source: NDRMC Frequency: annual
Baseline (2019):  million Target: 48 million Target: Federal - 20; Regional -
Number of federal and regional institutions with multi- sectoral EWS and
contingency to limit the gender- differentiated impact of natural hazards
(modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019) Federal - ; Regional -  • Source: NDRMC
Frequency: annual  Number of sectors that have communicated the establishment or
operationalizatio  of an integrated policy/strategy/ lan which increases their
ability to adapt and mitigate to Target: Federal - 15; Regional -  Governments
of Denmark, Norway, Sweden, GEF, REDD+  Level of women’ leadership and
participation in crisis prevention, recovery planning and action 27 (modified
IRRF ) • Baseline (2019):  • Target:  27  rating scale will be developed to
measure three levels of leadership and participation: = Low,  = Medium,  = High
13 DP/DCP/ETH/ the adverse impacts of climate change, and foster carbon neutral,
climate resilient and becoming middle income country by (SP ) Source: NDRMC
Frequency: Annual Output  Gender-responsive legal and regulatory frameworks,
policies and institutions strengthened, and solutions adopted to address
conservation, sustainable use and equitable benefit sharing of natural resources
in line with international conventions and ] national Source: EFCCC Frequency:
annual legislation [IRRF Baseline (2019): 12 Target: 20 Indicators  Number of
gender-responsive measures in place for conservation, sustainable use, and
equitable access to and benefit sharing of natural resources, biodiversity and
ecosystems (IRRF ) • Baseline (2019):  • Target:  Source: EFCCC Frequency:
annual  () Proportion of important sites for terrestrial and freshwater
biodiversity that are covered by protected areas (SP ) Source: EFCCC Frequency:
annual  Existence of national legal codes for sustainable management of forests
Baseline (2019): % Target: % • Baseline (2019): No • Target: Yes Source: EFCCC
Frequency: annual () Proportion of population with primary reliance on clean
fuels and technology (SP )  Number of woreda-level gender-responsive integrated
land use plans prepared and implemented with UNDP support • Baseline (2019): 12
• Source: EFCCC Frequency: annual Source: MoWIE Frequency: annual Target: 54
Baseline (2019): 37% Target: 55% Output  Solutions adopted to increase access to
clean, affordable and sustainable energy [modified IRRF ] Indicators  Volume of
investment leveraged from public and private sources through UNDP and partner
support (modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019): $ million • Source: MoWIE, EFCCC,
DBE Frequency: annual Target: $20 million  Number of households benefiting from
solutions applied at scale to accelerate transition to improved energy
efficiency and clean energy (modified IRRF ) • Baseline (2019): 500,000 (30%
female-headed) • Source: MoWIE, EFCCC, DBE Frequency: annual Target:  million
(40% female-headed) 14 DP/DCP/ETH/  Number of women-led enterprises supported to
engage in the production and distribution of improved energy technologies •
Baseline (2019): 289 • Target: 500 Source: MoWIE Frequency: annual Output
Action on climate change adaptation and mitigation scaled-up, funded and
implemented across sectors Indicators  Number of sectors that verify application
and follow- through of the nationally determined contribution • Baseline (2019):
• Target: 12 Source: EFCC, MoF Frequency: annual  Number of measures adopted
with UNDP support to make cities and towns sustainable and resilient to climate
impact • Baseline (2019):  • Source: EFCCC, MoCUD Frequency: annual Target: 12
Existence of an operational national Smart City Hub • Baseline (2019): No •
\Source: MoCUD, Addis Ababa City Administration Frequency: annual Target: Yes 15