Copyright © IRENA 2015 Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material
featured herein are the property of the International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA Material in this publication may
be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that
all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears  notation that it is
subject to copyright (© IRENA, 2015) Material contained in this publication
attributed to third parties may be subject to third party copyright and separate
terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any
commercial use About IRENA The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is
an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries in their transition to
sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for
international cooperation,  centre of excellence, and  repository of policy,
technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes
the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in
the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-
carbon economic growth and prosperity Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA), Safiatou
Alzouma Nouhou (IRENA) and Mohamed Youba Sokona (IRENA) Acknowledgement IRENA
prepared this report in close collaboration with Yacob Mulugetta (University
College of London, UK), Ahmed Kayad Moussa (CERD, Djibouti) and Saida Omar
Abdillahi (Energy Conservation Agency, Djibouti) The report benefited from
review and consultations with the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, as
well as the Centre for Studies and Scientific Research of Djibouti IRENA wishes
to thank the following experts for their insights and constructive guidance
during the peer-review process: Daher Elmi Houssein (Secretariat of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development — IGAD, Djibouti), Yohannes Hailu
(Sub-Regional Office for Eastern Africa of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa — SRO-EA/ UNECA, Rwanda), Dick Jay (USAID), Georges Tadros
(Tratech) For further information or to provide feedback, please contact:
SAlzouma@irenaorg or publications@irenaorg Disclaimer This publication and the
material featured herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes All
reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the
material featured in this publication Neither IRENA nor any of its officials,
agents, data or other, third-party content providers or licensors provides any
warranty, including as to the accuracy, completeness, or fitness for  particular
purpose or use of such material, or regarding the non-infringement of third-
party rights, and they accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the
use of this publication and the material featured therein The information
contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of
IRENA, nor is it an endorsement of any project, product or service provider The
designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the
expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of
any region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries DJIBOUTI RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT IIII Ghana FOREWORD from the Minister of Energy in charge
of Natural Resources The renewable energy sector is recognised as  national
priority and plays an important role in Djibouti’ strategy for economic
development Our energy policy aims primarily to diversify and reduce dependence
on imported oil products, increasing the share of renewable energy and biofuels
to make Djibouti the first African nation using 100% green energy  In that
regard, the Ministry of Energy in charge of Natural Resources has reviewed the
potential of renewables for reliable clean, low-cost power generation,
developing  strategy for the next decade and an action plan for the coming five
years That study has led to the creation of  legislative and regulatory
framework for renewable-based power generation Moreover, ongoing institutional
reform has led to the establishment of an agency dedicated exclusively to the
promotion of renewable energy, “Djiboutian Agency for Energy Management” (ADME)
This new structure aims to develop synergies for effective collaboration between
researchers from the public and private sectors and nurture small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) to manufacture specific components of renewable energy
technology locally ADME is also responsible for identifying internal assets and
financial mechanisms to support alternative energy, boost renewable power
generation for self-consumption, and set appropriate incentives to make
purchases of green power and related equipment more affordable Executing these
tasks will obviously require bilateral and multilateral cooperation In that
regard, we welcome the initiative of the International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) to facilitate  Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) in Djibouti The RRA
consultations have helped in highlighting our strengths and weaknesses for rapid
renewable energy deployment based on various options, both on-grid and off-grid,
including the use of biofuels The outcomes of the RRA will contribute
significantly to the deployment of renewable energy in Djibouti, and their
implementation could result in effective diversification of our country’ energy
mix We do believe that with international support and cooperation, including
that of IRENA, Djibouti will soon reach its objectives of promoting and
developing renewable energy Djibouti fully supports IRENA’ mission, and our
experts are available to assist other countries in conducting their own RRAs Ali
Yacob Mahamoud Minister of Energy in charge of Natural Resources, Djibouti III
IVIV Ghana FOREWORD from the IRENA Director-General The Africa High-level
Consultative Forum held by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in
July 2011 highlighted the need for technical support to be provided to African
countries and regions to identify their readiness to scale up renewable energy
IRENA’ Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process, initiated as part of the
outcome of the forum, involves  holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions and
the actions needed to overcome barriers to deployment This is  country-led
process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support and expertise to
facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders Since 2011, more
than 20 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and the Caribbean,
Asia and the Pacific have undertaken the RRA process, which generates knowledge
of best practices and supports international cooperation around the accelerated
deployment of renewable energy technologies Djibouti,  strong and consistent
supporter of IRENA’ mission, is one of those countries Heavily dependent on
imported fossil fuels, Djibouti remains exposed to oil price volatility The
country’ power infrastructure must be rehabilitated to curb voltage
fluctuations, blackouts and other disruptions that affect industrial, commercial
and residential consumers alike As power demand increases to meet ambitious
economic development goals, Djibouti needs to look into power generation options
that are more affordable, reliable and predictable Djibouti has significant
geothermal, wind and solar energy resources that could be developed to address
its twin concerns of energy access and energy security Developing these
renewable resources would reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels and boost
employment As an active participant in IRENA’ Africa Clean Energy Corridor
initiative, Djibouti has the opportunity to position itself as an
intercontinental transmission link, helping to decarbonise the power sector in
the Arabian Peninsula as well as strengthening African energy security IRENA
wishes to thank Minister Ali Yacob Mahamoud and his team at the Ministry of
Energy for their dedication and generosity in hosting this study We are grateful
for their positive engagement and valuable input, which has given us additional
insights for further RRAs in Africa and beyond  sincerely hope that the outcomes
of the RRA consultations will empower Djibouti to pursue accelerated renewable
energy deployment IRENA stands ready to provide continuing support to the
country in implementing the actions identified, in the pursuit of an energy
sector transformation that ultimately reaches across continents Adnan  Amin
Director-General, IRENA  VIVI Ghana TABLE OF CONTENTS VIII VIII IX XI LIST OF
FIGURES LIST OF TABLES ABBREVIATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  INTRODUCTION   Country
background  The role of energy for development in Djibouti  Renewables Readiness
Assessment    II ENERGY CONTEXT   Regional context  Energy supply and demand in
Djibouti  Electricity generation, transmission and distribution  Renewable
energy resources: Potential    and use in Djibouti 11 III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT
FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 15  Key energy stakeholders and institutional arrangements
15 16 18  Energy policies and regulatory framework  Financing and investment IV
EMERGING ISSUES AFFECTING RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT 19  Grid-connected
renewable energy options  Off-grid renewable energy options  Opportunities and
constraints for scaling up renewable energy deployment 19 29 32  SUMMARY OF
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 35 VI REFERENCES 37 ANNEX 39 VII LIST OF FIGURES Figure
Country resources and potential interconnections  Figure  Total Primary Energy
Supply   Figure  Petroleum product consumption over time  Figure  Transmission
network in Djibouti  Figure  Power generation by the Ethiopian Electric Power
Corporation and EdD 10 Figure  Geological map of Djibouti 11 Figure  Global
horizontal irradiance for five stations in Djibouti 12 Figure  Average wind
speed of various sites in Djibouti at 40m 13 Figure  Wind speed at two different
sites as  comparison 14 Figure 10 Cumulative cash flow and payback period 21
Figure 11 Cumulative revenue and payback period for different electricity
selling prices 22 Figure 12 Levelised cost of generation with PV (comparison at
different system costs) 25 Figure 13 Levelised cost of generation of different
import duty levels in Djibouti 26 Figure 14 Life cycle cost for pumping
groundwater, comparison between PV and diesel (in USD) 31 LIST OF TABLES Table
Installed electricity generation capacity in 2011  Table  Status of the
electricity market  Table  Costs and assumptions for financial analysis 20 Table
Payback years for 300 kW PV system, using different system cost and tariff
figures 27 Table  Stand-alone and pico systems 30 VIII VIII Ghana ABBREVIATIONS
ADDS Djibouti Social Development Agency (Agence Djiboutienne de Developpement
Sociale) AfDB African Development Bank ADME Agency for Energy Management (Agence
Djiboutienne de Maîtrise de ’Energie) CERD Centre for Studies and Scientific
Research of Djibouti (Centre des Etudes et de Recherche de Djibouti)
Construction and installation & EAPP East African Power Pool EdD Djibouti
Electricity Company (Electricité de Djibouti) EUEI PDF European Union Energy
Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility EU European Union FiT Feed-in Tariff
GCC Gulf Cooperation Council GHI Global Horizontal Irradiance GDP Gross Domestic
Product GWh gigawatt-hour IPP Independent Power Producer IRENA International
Renewable Energy Agency kWh kilowatt-hour km kilometre kV kilovolt MERN Ministry
of Energy and Natural Resources (Ministère de ’Energie et des Ressources
Naturelles) / metres per second MW megawatt MWh megawatt-hour NGO non-
governmental organisation operation and maintenance & PPA Power Purchase
Agreement PV photovoltaic TWh terawatt-hour UNDP United Nations Development
Programme US United States USD US Dollar/cent VAT value added tax IX Example of
transmission lines in Africa / Shutterstock  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Republic of
Djibouti stands at  crossroad, faced with  number of critical challenges
associated with energy generation, distribution and use The country remains
heavily dependent on imported fossil fuels and power This exposes it to
fluctuating oil prices, creating uncertainties affecting economic and social
development Renewable energy costs have fallen significantly and are likely to
continue on  downward trend An increased demand globally for fossil resources is
likely to push energy prices up, while increased deployment of renewable
technologies pushes energy prices down in line with progress in technology and
economies of scale This offers an opportunity for Djibouti to rethink its energy
strategy, develop policies and build institutions that would make Vision 2035
into  reality Both quality of and access to electricity are key challenges The
existing power infrastructure in Djibouti urgently needs to be modernised and
upgraded Voltage fluctuation, spikes, blackouts, brownouts and other disruptions
have significant impacts on industrial, commercial and residential consumers The
continued dependence on imported fuel for generating electricity is also taking
its toll on the wider economy in Djibouti It uses up precious financial
resources that would otherwise be spent on addressing urgent social development
challenges Renewable energy is the only viable source of energy for the
electricity grid in Djibouti Power produced through renewable-based systems can
be fed into the grid, providing clean and  more secure power supply The country
has  highly urban population and can achieve universal electrification with
relative ease compared to countries in the region However, the government needs
to create the regulatory frameworks and modalities for Power Purchase Agreements
(PPAs) that would enable healthy cooperation between public and private entities
to develop Djibouti’ power sector The energy system in Djibouti has become
major burden to the economic and social system, and the status quo is
unsustainable To this end, Djibouti needs to explore and develop its indigenous
resources in its quest for new solutions to the problem of dependency on
volatile international energy markets In its ambitious Vision 2035 long-term
development plan, the Government of Djibouti recognises the importance of
developing these resources to meet both its economic and social development
objectives It is in the process of crafting the policies and regulatory
frameworks that would help harness these resources However, the government has
made clear that its objective is to meet 100% of domestic energy demand through
renewable energy by This vision can be realised for the following reasons: Off-
grid renewable power can meet demand in unserved rural areas in Djibouti and can
replace existing diesel systems Djibouti is yet to build its electricity
infrastructure in  planned and systematic manner At the moment, much of its
rural electrification programme relies on government funds, international donors
and the country’ utility, which is struggling to maintain service to existing
clients As  distributed and scalable resource, renewable energy technologies are
well suited to meet the need for power in remote areas However, it is also
important to design flexible mini-grids that can be integrated into the wider
grid in due course The Republic of Djibouti has significant renewable energy
resources, relative to the size of its population and scale of its economy
Djibouti’ abundant geothermal, wind and solar energy resources can be developed
to bring higher quality energy services to populations across the country
Djibouti has the opportunity to position itself as  transcontinental
transmission hub between the power pools in Africa and the Arabian Peninsula
(Yemen in the short term) By also becoming an outlet for clean energy, Djibouti
can create better energy security conditions for itself and play  part in
decarbonising the power sector in Yemen and beyond Renewable energy can meet the
twin goals of improving energy access and energy security in Djibouti The
development of local renewable resources can reduce the country’ dependence on
imported and expensive fossil fuels As the country’ demand for electric power
increases to meet the ambitious economic development programme outlined in
Vision 2035, Djibouti would need to look into affordable and reliable options
Djibouti is in dire need of rapidly building its technical and regulatory
capacity The level of skills in Djibouti does not match the magnitude of its
energy challenge The government will need to strengthen existing technical
institutions and build new ones to ensure the country indigenises XI its
knowledge system in technology development, finance, regulation and management
further action The report details the role renewable energy has had to date in
Djibouti and the policies implemented renewable energy support deployment It
aims to provide information on the potential for renewable energy technologies
to become integrated into the Djiboutian energy mix in  manner servicing the
country’ development priorities and goals This work fits well with ongoing
initiatives of the Djibouti policy and research Government As the Renewables
Readiness Assessment (RRA) outcome is implemented over the coming months, this
work will be developed further to  greater level of detail It will increase the
focus on other important aspects of sustainable energy transition, including
energy efficiency to Renewable energy could help meet Djibouti’ employment
creation challenge It is now widely recognised that the renewable energy sector
employs more people on  megawatt-hour (MWh) basis than the conventional energy
sector Djibouti is well placed to capitalise on this opportunity and reduce its
high rate of unemployment, currently at 60% This report discusses the energy
context for Djibouti, explores enabling environments for renewables, details
opportunities to develop the renewables sector, and concludes with
recommendations for The fault at Fiale Caldera Photograph: Government of
Djibouti XII  INTRODUCTION  COUNTRY BACKGROUND Djibouti lies at the southern
entrance to the Red Sea and covers  surface area of 23 000 square kilometres
(km2) It has 370 km of maritime coastlines, and shares borders with Eritrea,
Ethiopia and Somalia The country has  semi-arid climate, mainly stony semi-
desert, with scattered plateau and highlands This makes it very sensitive to
drought and water scarcity risks It has  highly variable and low precipitation
regime with an annual rainfall of  millimetres (mm) Temperatures are high at °
during the cool season and ° during the hot season in May to September This
contributes to high levels of evapotranspiration equivalent to  000 mm per year
Historical records show the Djibouti climate clearly experiences high
hydrological uncertainty, frequent dry spells and chronic water stress These
features are likely to be worsened by climate change, with wide-ranging
implications for the national economy, food security and human development
Djibouti has an estimated population of 900 000 people according to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP, 2014), growing at % per annum More than 70%
of the population lives in urban areas, with nearly 60% in the capital, Djibouti
City This demographic distribution is quite distinct from other countries in the
region, where the proportion of the rural population is larger The relatively
high concentration of people in urban areas presents its own challenges and
opportunities, especially as it relates to the provision of services like water,
sanitation and energy The Republic of Djibouti’ strategic importance has been
enhanced recently owing to  series of interlinked developments Most notable of
these is the increased inward investment, structural transformation and growth
of Ethiopia’ economy Moreover, the security challenges faced across the region
have created opportunities for Djibouti and raised its strategic importance
globally This is marked by the presence of the United States and other powerful
countries Djibouti’ economy grew steadily at an annual average of % in , peaking
to nearly % in 2008 before the financial crisis In 2012, Djibouti registered %
growth according to the African Development Bank (AfDB, 2012) Djibouti’ economy
is characterised by an extreme dualism The modern, commercial, export-oriented
urban sector contrasts with the rural sector, which is  subsistence economy
based on pastoralism, with very limited access to infrastructure, services and
markets according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF, 2013) The structure
of the economy is dominated by the service sector - transport, communications,
commerce and tourism These contribute to more than 80% of Djibouti’ gross
domestic product (GDP), and employ about 60% of the active population (IMF,
2013) The primary sector (agriculture and fisheries) contributes to about %,
while the industrial and manufacturing sector accounts for 17% of GDP The
country witnessed major structural changes in  as  result of  substantial inflow
of foreign direct investment in capital-intensive activities like port
infrastructure, roads, buildings and hotels Transport and related logistical
services remain the backbone of the economy The government launched  programme
to increase port activity in 2012 by building two ports as well as road
corridors Much of this is intended to meet the needs of the growing Ethiopian
economy Landlocked Ethiopia, which has  population approaching 100 million, is
the primary user of Djibouti’ port, and currently generates 85% of the trade
that moves through its container terminal The recent high growth experienced in
Ethiopia has helped transform Djibouti’ economy, and integrated the two
economies even further  While the activities relating to the service sector are
progressing well, the primary (, agriculture) and secondary sectors (,
manufacturing) continue to lag behind Industrial development is still held back
by high production costs, although these constraints could soon ease with
important new water and energy infrastructure projects and has made energy
access and energy security  strategic focus However, significant effort is
required for Djibouti to become energy secure and address the energy access
challenge At present, per capita annual electricity consumption is about 330
kilowatt-hours (kWh) against an African average of over 575 kWh and  global
average of over  770 kWh This makes the average Djiboutian citizen among the
lowest consumers of electricity in the world Moreover, about 55% of the
population does not have access to electricity, and the level of unmet demand in
the country’ power sector is significant This suggests Djibouti needs to close
the gap between electricity demand and what it is able to supply to its citizens
Lack of reliable and affordable energy is thus  major obstacle the ambitious
aims in Djibouti’ economic development plans Households in Djibouti rely heavily
on kerosene and traditional biomass to meet their basic energy needs
Unemployment in Djibouti is high at 60%, and poverty remains pervasive with
nearly 42% of the population living below the absolute poverty line (AfDB, 2013)
Djibouti has among the lowest health, education and other social indicators in
the world and was ranked 147th out of 187 countries in the 2014 UN Human
Development Index (UNDP, 2014) Enhancing employment opportunities and improving
social indicators is thus given  high national priority The National Initiative
for Social Development (Initiative Nationale pour le Développement Social) was
launched in 2007 to improve access to water and basic services to poor people
Djibouti is endowed with ample energy resources, considered sufficient for the
size of its population and the scale of its economic activities The country has
significant geothermal energy resources for generating electricity, estimated at
megawatt (MW) capacity It also has some excellent wind energy sites as well as
good solar energy resources These can be successfully harnessed for power
generation and for other energy services like water pumping and micro generation
to meet urban and rural energy needs Djibouti thus has the opportunity to take
advantage of the recent technical advances in clean energy technologies and
significant reduction in their cost to meet its growing energy demand This would
go some way to reducing energy import bills (, oil, natural gas, etc) However,
there is little experience of this apart from isolated solar photovoltaic (PV)
installations in rural villages The country has performed well in addressing the
macro economic challenge it faces, but  great deal needs to be done to maintain
the momentum and improve social development through education, health and water
services The way the energy system is structured and maintained will be critical
for realising these economic and social outcomes  THE ROLE OF ENERGY FOR
DEVELOPMENT IN DJIBOUTI In 2014, Djibouti launched an ambitious long-term
development plan, known as Vision The planning strategy aims to place the
country on  sustainable development pathway by strengthening the country’ human
capital, developing its private sector and reforming its systems of governance
The ambitious plan covers social and economic aspects with  focus on education,
tourism, fisheries, new information and communication technologies, transport
and logistics, industry, and energy Djibouti aims to make  power sector
transition, moving from 100% fossil thermal in 2010 to 100% renewable
electricity sources by This would be sourced mainly from geothermal, wind and
solar, as well as interconnecting with the Ethiopian grid, which is based on
hydropower Djibouti is at the heart of some of the major regional integration
programmes including the Intergovernmental Authority for Development The
Djibouti Government has major plans to expand these activities  similarly
ambitious effort is under way for Djibouti to benefit from the considerable
hydro-energy in Ethiopia Already, Djibouti draws some 60%-65% of its power from
this bilateral power arrangements, with further expansion planned to enhance the
reliability and quantity of imported power Djibouti is not yet  member of the
East African Power Pool (EAPP), but has submitted its application and plans to
become an important regional power platform initiatives Vision 2035 acknowledges
the importance of energy as  crucial input to economic development,  Lake Assal
Photograph: IRENA/ Sokona  RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT finalised the
service-resource pairs and defined the practical action that will set these
renewable energy subsectors in motion The RRA in Djibouti was led by the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (Ministère de ’Energie et des
Ressources Naturelles) (MERN) in close cooperation with the Agency for Energy
Management (ADME) It acted as an interface between the RRA support team: the
country consultant, international consultant, International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) and the key local stakeholders Experts drawn from key government,
private sector and civil society institutions were invited to  kick-off meeting
The consultant explained the nature and purpose of the RRA process and
introduced the Djibouti RRA country team members Several workshops were
conducted throughout the RRA Workshop activities included identifying renewable
energy service- resource pairs and prioritisation criteria, and filling in  set
of templates for each service-resource pair  final RRA workshop organised on 17
May 2014 This report is structured into five sections The first presents the
introduction covering country background and the RRA process in Djibouti The
second presents an overview of the regional energy setting, and contextualises
Djibouti’ national energy sector, the challenges it faces and an overview of
renewable energy potential and use It provides  detailed discussion of the
electricity sector The third section identifies institutions playing  role in
Djibouti’ energy sector and defines key energy policies and regulatory
frameworks, as well as the finance and investment conditions in Djibouti The
fourth discusses the RRA findings related to emerging concerns and enabling
conditions for scaling up the service-resource pairs identified It sums up the
related opportunities and constraints Finally, the fifth section presents the
recommended action necessary for scaling up renewable energy in Djibouti
Separation between the Arabian and African tectonic plates Photograph: IRENA/
Sokona  II ENERGY CONTEXT  REGIONAL CONTEXT The recent economic resurgence of
countries in East Africa has aroused  great deal of optimism about economic
transformation Fast growth in Rwanda and Ethiopia, and good economic performance
in Kenya, Djibouti, Uganda, Tanzania and Burundi have created  positive sub
regional outlook Concerns remain about the inclusiveness and broad-based nature
of such growth in the sub region, but per capita GDP figures show strong
improvements over the last decade Sustaining this growth trajectory requires
high energy inputs The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)
region faces an electricity supply deficit of about 20% (UN Economic Commission
for Africa (UNECA), 2011) The state of energy access in the sub region is
generally quite low, ranging from % in South Sudan, % in Burundi, 11% in
Democratic Republic of the Congo to 12% in Uganda The performance of Comoros
(46%), Djibouti (55%) and Seychelles (96%) is better Whilst East Africa benefits
from  variety of energy resources, they are unevenly distributed For example,
Ethiopia has significant hydropower resources as well as wind and geothermal
Kenya has wind and geothermal resources Tanzania has natural gas, and Djibouti
has geothermal, solar and wind Furthermore, the region is experiencing vigorous
oil and gas exploration The diversity and abundance of this resource base means
these resources can be developed on  larger scale and integrated into  regional
power grid, contributing to poverty reduction in the region (World Bank, 2012)
However, having the resources is one thing, but converting them into real use is
another Despite the benefits of integration, only  few projects are in progress,
though the numbers are growing They include the now complete 150 MW
interconnector from Ethiopia to Djibouti and  100 MW interconnector from
Ethiopia to Sudan  line has recently gone live between Kenya and Uganda, as well
as  second interconnector from Ethiopia to Djibouti (UNECA, 2013) In addition,
Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda are introducing power
interconnections expected to be operational by 2015, while the Kenya-Tanzania
interconnector project has secured finance to begin engineering work Tanzania
and Zambia are also working on an interconnector which, upon completion, will
connect the Southern Africa and East Africa regional grids (EAPP, 2012) Together
with the older Kenya-Uganda, Egypt-Libya and Burundi- Democratic Republic of the
Congo-Rwanda interconnections, the pipeline projects will stimulate connections
across East Africa, involving all current members Given that resources are
unevenly distributed, power grid integration in the sub- region can help improve
reliability and reduce the cost of power supply in the region This has been
amply demonstrated by the significantly reduced price of electricity coming
through the Ethiopia-Djibouti interconnection Djibouti is not yet  member of
EAPP However, its bilateral engagement with Ethiopia, like other bilateral power
agreements in the region, will shape the development of EAPP Since 2011, the
Ethiopia-Djibouti interconnection has enabled Djibouti to draw about 65% of its
electricity needs from Ethiopia Over 98% of Ethiopia’ electricity is from
renewable sources Prior to this, 100% of Djibouti’ power generation came from
oil products The cost of electricity at seven US cents (USD 07/kWh) from this
new regional source compares favourably with USD 30/ kWh from oil Out of the
total power supply, 97 gigawatt-hours (GWh) was imported from Ethiopia in 2012
(Africa EU Energy Partnership (AEEP), 2013), which roughly equates to savings of
about USD 36 million Ethiopian imports are regulated by  bilateral contract
establishing maximum energy trading of 243 GWh per year in  and up to 70% of the
Djiboutian load up to second transmission line is  planned to increase the
volume of electricity from Ethiopia The interconnection has had three
interesting effects: Figure : Country resources and potential interconnections
Djibouti decreased its domestic power production by over 37% in  once the
Ethiopian interconnector was commissioned ii Income from value added tax (VAT)
and the domestic consumption tax, both on oil products, declined sharply This
was due to electricity imports that reduced the state power company, Electricité
de Djibouti’ (EdD), use of oil The government obtained  bank loan to meet the
budget deficit, but the deficit appears to have been paid off iii The new
electricity supply from Ethiopia since 2011 has also cut inflation because fewer
oil imports are needed for power generation Inflation fell to an average of % in
2012 from % in 2011 (AfDB, 2012) The sub region’ aggregate electricity demand is
expected to grow from about 20 terawatt-hours (TWh) today to 50 TWh in 2018 and
120 TWh in This means the countries in the sub region will need to seriously
scale up the development of their energy resources (UNECA, 2013) To date, lack
of installed capacity has forced many countries to resort to expensive emergency
power generation, often operating as base load to mitigate the consequences of
load shedding Meanwhile, other countries have had excess capacity An
interconnected system would help to smooth out this surplus-deficit imbalance
and seasonal variability of energy resources like hydropower In addition, it
would create significant savings in foreign exchange, allowing countries to free
up these resources to be used for pressing development investments Source: SNC
Lavalin & Parsons Brinkerhoff, 2011  ENERGY SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN DJIBOUTI
Djibouti is  small country with  fast growing economy It has  dual energy system
with co- existing traditional and modern energy and practice, although the
traditional system composed of biomass has been shrinking over time Most people
live in towns, which influences the nature of energy consumption in favour of
modern fuels such as electricity, kerosene and Liquid Petroleum Gas Almost all
energy used in Djibouti is imported Eberhard, et al (2011) have shown that, from
purely economic standpoint, several countries would benefit from the opportunity
to reduce costs by their power Savings for countries such as Guinea- Bissau,
Liberia and Niger could range from USD /kWh The largest beneficiaries of
regional trade would be smaller nations that lack domestic hydropower resources
It is estimated that the cost savings by these countries generated by regional
trade could repay the requisite investment in cross-border transmission in less
than  year This depends on neighbouring countries developing sufficient surplus
power to export The experience of Djibouti is consistent with this analysis
Total Primary Energy Supply in Djibouti is dominated by biomass, accounting for
about 67%, with the remaining share from oil products in Over the last decade,
Total Primary Energy Supply has increased at  faster rate, as shown in Figure
The per capita energy consumption in 2012 was about 440 kilogrammes (kg) of oil
equivalent Biomass use has progressively decreased in urban areas as  proportion
of the total Kerosene has replaced biomass in Djiboutian homes, and renewables
account for negligible amounts of energy consumed across the whole country
However, better data are needed to improve the assessment of the biomass
contribution to the overall energy mix than half importing more  Figure : Total
Primary Energy Supply  Source: IRENA, based on data from United Nations
Statistics Division (excludes electricity trade) Petroleum product consumption
has been on the rise since 2005, particularly diesel and kerosene This is needed
by the transport and household sectors imported nearly 390 000 tonnes of oil
equivalent As also indicated clearly in figure , fuel oil consumption has
reduced since 2011 as  result of the interconnection with Ethiopia (Government
of Djibouti Société Internationale des Hydrocarbures (GoD SIDH) data, 2014) In
2012, Djibouti Figure : Petroleum product consumption over time Source: GoD SIDH
(2014) Petroleum imports cause major problems for the Djibouti economy as they
use up significant proportions of its foreign exchange This trend has been
increasing in , during which import bills have grown fivefold In 2012, the
country spent nearly USD 200 million in petroleum imports, which amounts to
about 20% of total imports The energy intensity of Djibouti, as measured in
terms of energy consumption per unit of GDP, has been declining over the past
five years, while it has remained unchanged in much of the East African sub
region (Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2013) Despite this decrease,
Djibouti’ energy intensity is still higher than the regional average, and
certainly higher than that in developed and emerging economies The high energy
intensity points to ample opportunities for Djibouti to improve the efficiency
of its energy system from production to end-use  Energy intensity is  measure of
the value of goods and services generated per unit of energy used, which allows
the energy efficiency of the whole economy to be evaluated It also reflects the
structure of the economy   ELECTRICITY GENERATION, TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION
The energy access challenge in Djibouti remains  major obstacle to the country’
development At about 55%, Djibouti electricity access is better than most
countries in the region Furthermore, rural and urban areas differ greatly in
terms of access to modern energy services (both electricity and heat for
cooking) Urban areas enjoy better conditions for improving access Three
important characteristics of the energy sector in Djibouti These include: )
diversification of the energy mix to reduce the country’ dependence on imported
fuel and electricity, enhancing the country’ resilience and opportunities for
the development of new assets ii) continued dominance of energy for heating and
cooling in the country’ energy balance against  backdrop of opportunities to
improve efficiency and fuel substitution iii) low access to modernised energy
services, especially in rural areas, where implementing well planned mini- grid
and stand-alone energy programmes can bring considerable wellbeing Djibouti
relies entirely on imported electricity and fossil fuel for electricity
generation This is mainly heavy fuel oil for the main power plants and diesel
for the provincial power stations These are operated by public utility company
EdD, which manages approximately 38 000 connections for the metropolitan area
Djibouti City The network is based on   km, 63 kilovolt (kV) cable connecting
the Boulaos and Marabout stations, and  225 kV amp interconnection line from
Ethiopia which covers about 65% of the national domestic needs during the summer
months (figure ) The distribution system within the city is at 20 kV Electricity
is supplied to the customers through around 300 distribution substations The
isolated system grids are based on lower voltage distribution networks
Electricity access in Djibouti is about 55% Figure : Transmission network in
Djibouti Source: Electricité de Djibouti Effective installed capacity in
Djibouti is around 126 MW (table ) Domestically generated power consists of EdD
thermal capacities, which rely primarily on ageing generation capacity running
on expensive imported fuel oil to produce baseload electricity The utility has
18 generating units running on heavy fuel oil in Boulaos and Marabout One 15 MW
generator is less than five years old, having started up in Meanwhile, 14
generators with  combined capacity of 78 MW are between  and 15 years old The
remaining capacity is at least 20 years old (AfDB, 2013) Due to the
unreliability of older generators, EdD effective generation capacity is limited
to 57 MW of the 126 MW installed Table : Installed electricity generation
capacity in 2011 Monthly fixed charge (Price/kWh)* Total capacity (MW) Power
plant location Boulaos Marabout Tadjoura 15    Main grid - Obock -  -
Interconnection Isolated Total Source: AEEP (2013) * Variable transmission
Djibouti is struggling to meet its growing electricity demand Over the past ten
years, electricity consumption has increased by about 75% Even with this
increase it is judged that effective demand is significantly higher (table )
According to  study by the European Union Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue
Facility (EUEI PDF, 2013), production has been growing at an estimated annual
rate of % over the last 40 years, but more slowly than demand Random and
scheduled power cuts are the consequence of this imbalance In 2009 and 2010, for
instance,  GWh of demand could not be met through the grid Since the
interconnection with Ethiopia, this figure has decreased to just under  GWh in
This has improved security of electricity supply The same study highlighted that
Djibouti’ demand will maintain its high growth rate Power demand for the main
grid is expected to rise by 70%-75% in , while demand for the isolated networks
of Tadjoura and Obock is expected to increase by % and % respectively over that
period Clearly, Djibouti will need to scale up its efforts to generate more
power from domestic sources and/or aim to import power from Ethiopia either
bilaterally or through EAPP Approximately 37% of electricity is consumed by big
industry and activity related to the sea port, airport, free zone and military
camps Residential consumers, including  social consumer category, account for
38% The remaining 25% is consumed by large retailers, public offices and
government offices (World Bank and Parsons Brinckerhoff, 2009) The service
sector and domestic load components dominate peak demand There are two daily
peaks between May and October, largely concentrated during the afternoon office
opening hours and in the early hours of the morning when air conditioning
systems are in use Table  summarises the evolution of the structure of the
electricity market in  in terms of consumer population, power sales, system
losses, power demand and energy demand Table : Status of the electricity market
ITEMS 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Customer population 37 766 39 246 40 756 41
888 41 888 70 000 System losses consumption (%) 21 22 22 23 16 16 Power demand
MW 56 57 63 64 70 77 Energy demand MWh 322 970 325 650 354 520 385 270 395 700
422 418      Energy demand growth rate (%)      Power demand growth rate (%)
Source: World Bank and Parsons Brinckerhoff (2009); EdD web page Load shedding
was especially frequent before the interconnection from Ethiopia came on stream
(table ), and still continues In 2011, grid losses represented about 16% of
electricity produced due to the poor state of the grid and illegal connections
It was common practice for many businesses, hotels and health facilities to rely
on private generation units on site They ran these plants at high cost, with
implications for the business Data on these backup off-grid systems are not
available The resulting effect of this system underperformance is high tariffs
for consumers and  rise in the number of high cost on-site private generation
units, which also weakened the financial position of EdD For example, the free
zone has invested in its own diesel generator plant with the associated separate
infrastructure This has also had  knock-on effect of reducing EdD capability to
raise sufficient revenue for expanding the electricity system, with wider
economic implications The lack of reliable, affordable power and the high cost
of energy are seriously limiting investment in Djibouti, thereby curtailing
growth in productive sectors such as manufacturing To meet future electricity
generation capacity, Djibouti is building the Jaban heavy fuel oil generation
plant with support from the Kuwaiti Government New capacity amounting to 45 MW
is due to be installed in 2015, and there are plans to expand this to 140 MW by
Moreover, AfDB has approved funding to expand the Ethiopia- Djibouti
interconnector by constructing  second 230 KV line, expected to start up in The
present PPA between the utility Ethiopian Electric Power Corporation and EdD is
governed by Ethiopia’ daily loads The arrangement does not include electricity
sales during the dry season in Ethiopia The supply of electricity is dependent
on hydrological conditions in Ethiopia’ hydroelectric dams and the availability
of surplus energy This arrangement works well for the two countries  During the
summer months — the rainy season in Ethiopia — hydroelectricity production in
Ethiopia exceeds demand It correlates with the high electricity demand season in
Djibouti when significant energy is required for cooling (figure ) Conversely,
weak demand in Djibouti during the winter months coincides with the dry season
in Ethiopia power may not necessarily be available when Djibouti needs it most
An agreement that gives  higher degree of guarantee to Djibouti over  longer
term would create better energy security conditions It would reduce the sense of
vulnerability felt by development planners in Djibouti Indeed, Djibouti would
need to invest in its own generation capacity in order to minimise its exposure
to potential future price increases or disruptions of power from Ethiopia, for
whatever reason The electricity supply from Ethiopia is not provided under
guaranteed capacity agreement, so that Figure : Power generation by Ethiopian
Electric Power Corporation and EdD (2012) Source: EdD Costs and tariffs
Electricity tariffs remain in the hands of the government, and are set by
ministerial decree from the Ministry of Economy and Finance in charge of
planning They are subject to review by MERN Tariffs are set according to number
of factors, such as electricity production cost (including operation cost),
social cost and other political economy criteria Electricity tariffs in Djibouti
are high and average USD 32/kWh, mainly as  result of increased oil prices and
technical and non-technical inefficiencies The EdD 2012 tariffs range from
social price of USD 153/kWh (lifeline tariff) to USD 426/ kWh paid by industry
and construction sites Retailers and government buildings are charged USD
397/kWh for their electricity (World Bank, 2012) The cost of electricity in
Djibouti is very high compared to USD 05/kWh in Ethiopia and USD 10/kWh in
Kenya, mainly because Djibouti’ primary electricity production sources depend on
petroleum products As part of the effort to increase electricity access by low
income households,  new law is under preparation to lower connection fees from
their present levels of USD 280-The overwhelming majority of people unserved by
the grid live in rural villages very distant from national grid lines The cost
to  utility of connecting these communities, which have low electricity demand,
would be prohibitive at this stage Djibouti will need substantial investments to
modernise its system as well as build new generation plants  parallel strategy
will be required to meet the energy needs of communities located far from the
grid Djibouti can achieve universal electricity access with relative ease
compared to other countries in the region given that it has  small rural
population scattered across small settlements It has considerable renewable
energy resource potential and therefore has the opportunity to create  more
renewable cost-effective grid and off-grid energy supply system However, the
Djibouti Government will need to speed up its policy formulation regulatory
framework development to create the appropriate incentives for new investment,
especially in the renewables area appropriate and 10  RENEWABLE ENERGY
RESOURCES: POTENTIAL AND USE IN DJIBOUTI is located west of the Gulf of Aden
rift in Djibouti (figure ) The figure also displays the geology of Djibouti and
the main geothermal prospects Approximately 12 geothermal provinces have been
identified in Djibouti based on locations of surface hydrothermal manifestations
More exploratory work is required before the fields are developed to produce
energy However, it is clear the various geothermal fields in Djibouti can
provide  low cost, reliable and renewable base load energy supply The energy
sector in Djibouti faces several challenges The country continues to struggle to
meet resource constraints due to its dependence on imported fuel and weak supply
infrastructure This is especially pronounced in rural areas where levels of
access to adequate and reliable energy services are limited due to low incomes,
low demand and greater distance from grid lines To this end, decentralised
energy systems could be developed to meet energy service shortfalls and future
energy needs The deployment of indigenous resources for the grid is important,
given the significant suppressed demand for electricity Figure : Geological map
of Djibouti Given its climate and geography, Djibouti has the potential and
opportunity to develop  portfolio of diversified renewable energy technologies
at different scales Djibouti benefits from good renewable energy resources,
especially geothermal, wind and solar energy These currently provide negligible
amounts of energy to the overall mix Djibouti’ significant untapped potential
resources offer opportunities for both urban and rural energy development The
government could capitalise on global developments in energy innovations that
could create new industries, jobs and capacities  summary of the resources and
potential available in the country is provided below Source: World Bank, 2012
Djibouti has experienced stop/start geothermal exploration Nevertheless, the
work completed so far has built up enough of  picture to attract significant
policy attention and exploratory activity Some of this outlined below Geothermal
energy resources The Republic of Djibouti is located within the Afar Depression
This is  geological triple junction structure formed by the intersection of the
Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the East African rifts (World Bank, 2012) Volcanic
and tectonic activity at this intersection has been occurring for 30 million
years  number of countries along this tectonically active region are exploring
geothermal energy as an option to meet their energy requirements Kenya has
already installed capacity, and Ethiopia is actively working towards developing
its geothermal field One important advantage of developing geothermal energy is
the flexibility it provides in comparison to other renewable energy systems Most
renewables are variable in nature and thus need to be paired with other
technologies that can provide the baseload Geothermal, however, provides secure
baseload power, and is hence better suited to replacing the existing heavy fuel
oil baseload power • : the two wells Asal  and  were shown to have good
temperatures, but only Asal  has produced geothermal fluid with high salinity •
:  detailed general inventory of geothermal resources was conducted by the
Djibouti Government and identified more areas of interest • : deep geothermal
exploration completed, consisting of ) two drilling wells in Hanle (Hanle  and )
ii) four other wells in the Assal Rift (Asal , , , ) and iii)  scaling and
corrosion study was performed on Asal , intended to assess the effects from
deposits and corrosion • 2007: the Government of Iceland pledged support to
develop Djibouti’ geothermal resource in the form of  proposal by Reykjavik
Energy Invest It would take total project risk including exploration risk as an
Independent Power Producer (IPP) developer and recoup investment and associated
return through  20-year electric tariff In Djibouti, various exploration
activities since the 1970s have demonstrated the existence of significant
geothermal resources in the Assal Rift Zone The Assal rift, which includes the
exploratory drilling focus of the Geothermal Power Generation Project, 11 The
technically exploitable geothermal energy potential is estimated at  MWe (AEEP,
2013) Assal-Ghoubbet is the only individual region with an economically
exploitable potential of more than 150 MWe (Ahmed Aye, 2009) the hot and humid
season However, even during these periods, the country receives enough solar
radiation (about - kWh/m²/day) to make use of solar energy applications
According to Pillot, et al (2013), about 82% of the country receives annual mean
global radiation of over  000 kWh/m² This amounts to 84  1013 kWh or about 20
000 times Djibouti’ annual electricity consumption While is appropriate for the
this resource regime deployment of large and small-scale PV systems, further
research is required into Concentrated Solar Power in Djibouti According to
IRENA (2012), Concentrated Solar Power plants require abundant direct solar
radiation for strong sunlight to be concentrated to the temperatures required
for electricity generation For the technology to be cost-effective, direct
normal irradiance levels of  000 kWh/m² or more would be required Lower levels
could work under some circumstances, and annual direct normal irradiance levels
of  400 kWh/ m² for Djibouti need to be explored further Solar energy resource
Djibouti shows tremendous solar potential As illustrated in figure , Global
Horizontal Irradiance (GHI), is - kWh per square metre per day (m2/ day)
throughout most of the country By comparison, Germany, which has nearly half the
world’ installed solar PV capacity, has few locations with  GHI above
kWh/m2/day Phoenix, Arizona —  city in the US Southwest famed for its solar
potential — has an average GHI of  kWh/m2/ day Djibouti has two peak periods of
insolation (March to April and September to October) with low diurnal variation
between maximum and minimum radiation values The lowest radiation values are
observed from June to August, coinciding with Figure : Global Horizontal
Irradiance for five stations in Djibouti (kWh/m²/day) Source: Higher Institute
for Scientific and Technical Research (Institut Supérieur ’Etudes et de
Recherches Scientifiques et Techniques) (ISERST, 1984) Solar energy applications
in use in Djibouti include PV for off-grid applications lighting,
communications, refrigeration, water pumping and other services such as
refrigeration There is also  pilot 300 kW grid-connected PV system Off-grid PV
systems have been in use in Djibouti for over 30 years Government and donors
have funded most of Djibouti’ PV investments electrification study funded by the
World Bank Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (2014), was
undertaken between 2011 and 2013 to assess rural electrification based on PV The
aim was to evaluate the opportunities and barriers to launching  programme of
mini-grids and stand-alone PV kits for 25 villages In the end, 19 villages were
selected The study employed two economic models:  non- concessional market for
PV products and  Public Private Partnership for mini-grids It delivered the main
guidelines for implementing  solar electrification programme through renewable
energy in rural More recently, PV systems are the subject of considerable in
Djibouti, both for off-grid and on-grid applications  PV rural interest 12  300
kilowatt-peak (kWp) grid-connected PV plant has been installed with the support
of the Japanese Government, costing an estimated JPN 610 million or  billion
Djibouti Francs The solar park occupies an area of  200 m² and consists of  440
PV panels It started up in January 2012, meeting the needs of the campus of the
Centre for Studies and Scientific Research of Djibouti (Centre des Etudes et de
Recherche de Djibouti) (CERD) Surplus power is fed into the EdD network During
the first year of operation, the plant produced 508 MWh of electricity This was
10% more than initially planned Output peaked in October 2012 at about 47 MWh
Reduced energy output was recorded for June, July and August due to relatively
high ambient temperatures and high levels of the Khamsin,  hot dry wind the
effort to lower investment risks to encourage private sector players to come
forth Wind energy resource Since 2000, the Government of Djibouti has explored
the potential wind energy resource in Djibouti in  variety of studies For
instance, CERD carried out an assessment in It selected 14 sites where 40  NRG
Systems towers were installed, and from which wind speed and wind direction data
were recorded for one year Finally,  wind pre-feasibility study was launched in
This data gathering campaign involved virtually the whole country It helped
quantify the resources and key strategic issues relating to grid-connected wind
farms, as well as rural energy applications like rural electrification and water
pumping These investigations have concluded that wind is  good potential source
of electricity production There is little private sector activity in the solar
PV sector, and active commercial markets are yet to develop in Djibouti There
are  few private sector players Moreover, the market is limited by its small
size It is partly constrained by high import tariffs and VAT amounting to over
33%, lack of regulation on quality assurance and the absence of supportive
government incentives and policies Figure  shows the wind resource distribution
across Djibouti Average wind speeds of -10 metres per second (/) (standard
deviation = ) are recorded at the coastal areas around the Gulf of Ghoubet Sites
like Ghoubet, Gaali-Maaba and Day also experience consistently high wind speeds
throughout the year with exploitable potential of  000 hours This offers
opportunities for grid-connected power generation, provided that suitable wind
turbine technology is selected and wind power wisely integrated to the existing
grid  grid stability study would be useful in the first instance to understand
the impact of fluctuating power supply to the national grid These coastal areas
are influenced by the Khamsin It blows from the West between July and September
when the wind is at its lowest levels but still high enough for power generation
The falling PV cost in recent years brings the technology closer to grid parity
in many parts of the world, providing potential for investment in grid-connected
PV in Djibouti too Djibouti’ high electricity generation cost offers an
important incentive for investors to play  role in grid-based PV However, it is
important to recognise that this is still  capital-intensive venture It will
require government direction to create the appropriate institutional and
regulatory framework as part of Figure : Average wind speed of various sites in
Djibouti at 40m Source: CERD, 2006  The Khamsin is powerful seasonal wind storm
that often carries large quantities of sand and dust It is generally experienced
about 50 times in Djibouti between June and August 13 The inland districts of
Ali Sabieh, Tadjourah and Dikhil show lower wind speeds during most months,
averaging at  / This is illustrated in figure  by  comparison between  coastal
and inland site In the southern section, represented by Bada Wein, the regime
over the year shows fairly constant winds along the Northeast and Southeast
respectively Average monthly wind speeds there are - / Although this is lower
than the coastal site of Ghoubet, Bada Wein nevertheless shows attractive wind
resources for electricity generation to supply both the main grid and mini-grids
Figure : wind speed at two different sites as  comparison Source: CERD There is
limited experience of wind energy projects in Djibouti Much of the experience of
wind energy is in water pumping, but that has remained at the pilot stage or for
private use Due to this limited experience, operation and maintenance (&)
capacity is undeveloped, much like the picture in other parts of Africa
desalination Meanwhile, China and Djibouti have signed an agreement to develop
wind resources in the Ghoubet area However, the distance of this area from urban
settlements and the grid lines has obstructed this plan If the geothermal plant
in Lake Abbe goes ahead, it is hoped that the two plants could share the same
interconnection This would make the wind plant cost-effective Wind power
projects have also been proposed in other areas, including wind farms of at
least  MW in Ali Sabieh, Bada Wein, Egralyta and Djibouti City Smaller systems
of less than  MW have been identified for Hol-Hol and Yoboki Small wind systems
have also been proposed for isolated areas, although the policy weight in wind
tends to back larger-scale projects In recent years, wind energy for electricity
generation has attracted some interest from the Djibouti Government,
multilateral institutions, donors and private investors The Ghoubet site in
particular has received considerable attention, and the European Commission is
considering  20 MW wind park there The plant is intended to provide power for
sea water 14 III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY  KEY ENERGY
STAKEHOLDERS AND INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS The energy sector in Djibouti
contains  multitude of players: government bodies and utilities, research
institutions, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and associations as well as
the private sector Some of these play several roles in policy, regulation,
financing, knowledge generation and advocacy Government/public sector
institutions Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (MERN), under the Office
of the President, is responsible for designing, defining and developing
government policy on energy and natural resources It defines rules, regulations,
statutory instruments and legislation for the energy sector including
electricity, petroleum products and renewable energy MERN oversees two important
government bodies, EdD and International Hydrocarbon Company (Société
Internationale des Hydrocarbures) Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministére de
’Economie et des Finances, Charge de ’Industrie et de la Planification) is in
charge of industry and planning and sets the electricity tariff The Directorate
of External Finance is responsible for implementing and monitoring new projects
The ministry is also involved in regulating and stabilising oil prices under
liberalised regime Electricity of Djibouti (Electricité de Djibouti) (EdD),
established in 1960, is  utility owned and run by the state, and has  monopoly
on electricity generation, transmission, and distribution EdD status and duties
are defined in decree / PWEDD of  February, The decree specifies that the State
of Djibouti is ultimately responsible for EdD obligations vis--vis third parties
and suppliers It also says that the electricity distributed by EdD can either be
produced by the utility or by facilities owned by third parties Electricity
tariffs offered by EdD are defined by  decree from the Ministry of Economy and
Finance, and subject to MERN review International Hydrocarbon Company (Société
Internationale des Hydrocarbures), under MERN supervision, is responsible for
hydrocarbon imports, processing and operations Imports are dominated by three
international oil companies - Shell, Total and Oil Libya Djibouti Social
Development Agency (Agence Djiboutienne de Developpement Sociale) (ADDS) was
created in Under the Secretary of State for National Solidarity, ADDS is
financially autonomous public legal entity that implements the National
Development Initiative for poverty reduction ADDS is responsible for the
implementation of rural electrification objectives in areas not covered by the
EdD grid The energy component of ADDS work is managed by the Directorate for
Rural Electrification Djiboutian Agency for Energy Management (Agence
Djiboutienne de Maîtrise de ’Energie) (ADME) is  public institution whose
mission is to promote energy efficiency and renewable energy in all economic
sectors ADME is responsible for several activities It communicates knowledge
relating to policy development on the rational use of energy It proposes
solutions for reducing the energy bills of 15 state institutions and homes,
recommending best practice It assists industry in energy demand management, and
integrates energy efficiency into industrial management systems It encourages
scientific research and assistance to reduce energy losses Finally, it develops
and ensures compliance with thermal standards for new buildings and old building
renovation Its goal is to encourage investment promotion in Djibouti through
policy of flexibility in investment operations and development of an enabling
regulatory framework and regulatory procedures As part of its investment
promotion and knowledge development role, the ANPI is responsible for promoting
investment opportunities and the incentive environment of the Republic of
Djibouti Within its investment remit, renewable energy is seen as an important
area to boost economic development and create high quality employment for the
economy The Ministry of Agriculture (Ministère de ’Agriculture) is in charge of
drilling wells in the geothermal sector for instance, as well as for using solar
pumps for groundwater wells Universities and research institutions Centre for
Studies and Scientific Research of Djibouti (Centre des Etudes et la Recherche
de Djibouti) (CERD) is  public scientific institution It is directly attached to
the Office of the President through the Ministry of Presidential Affairs, and
provides an institutional framework for researchers, scientists and academics
from all specialisms It conducts studies to evaluate renewable energy potential
in Djibouti and carries out pilot research that can feed into the energy
knowledge system The CERD solar laboratory, working under the authority of the
Institute of Earth Sciences, has installed  grid-connected 300 kW PV plant,
which it monitors and uses for scientific testing The Geothermal Energy
Development Office (Office Djiboutien de Développement de ’Energie Géothermique
- ODDEG) established by law 32/AN/7ème  January 20, 2014 under the President’
office with the aim identifying the various types of geothermal resources of the
country, carrying out the exploration work, recognition and study The National
Energy Commission (Commission Nationale de ’Energie - CNE) was established by
Presidential Decree 11 /MERN October Its job is to help the government plan,
implement and monitor the Djibouti National Energy Master Plan, and to update
the energy map of the country The University of Djibouti (UNiversité de
Djibouti) is responsible for offering training programmes in courses related to
energy It has recently established an engineering department, and is expected to
expand its limited training and research capabilities Private sector
institutions  few small private sector suppliers of renewable systems and
installers are operating in Djibouti The Djibouti Chamber of Commerce (Chambre
de Commerce de Djibouti) was established in 1970 by  group of local businesses
It has since evolved to become the principal representative institution of the
private sector at the national level Its main tasks are to represent the
viewpoints of economic players, present their opinions and proposals supporting
economic prosperity and poverty reduction, and promote development in the
Republic of Djibouti The Djibouti Chamber of Commerce also facilitates trade
engagements and helps raise awareness of issues that help strengthen domestic
markets among relevant private sector players It also carries out relevant
studies and data collection It has three departments: consulting, technical
assistance and training All economic sectors are represented in the decision-
making body through the General Assembly of 44 elected members and eight
executive members who support the president of the Chamber of Commerce Energy
features strongly in the organisation’ strategic focus  ENERGY POLICIES AND
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK The Republic of Djibouti’ Vision 2035 was launched in This
medium and long-term development strategy lays the foundation for future action
It is built on five main pillars: peace and national unity, good governance,
diverse and competitive economy, stronger human capital and regional integration
It takes into account socially important and promising sectors such as
education, tourism, fisheries, new technologies and industry The urgent need to
improve and modernise Djibouti’ infrastructure is an important aspect of Vision
This would be achieved using public and private sector investments in transport,
energy and information and communications technology In line with previous
development strategies, the vision has established  goal to promote renewable
energy resource use for electricity generation The aim is to actively pursue
fuel switching measures from fossil to renewable energy Government objectives
include the following: Investment Promotion Agency The National (Agence des
Investissements - ANPI) was established in Promotion Nationale de 16 transferred
must amount to 246 GWh (2010 consumption) The agreed tariffs for 2011 were USD
/kWh, depending on time of day and season in Ethiopia (wet or dry) • increase
electrification rates to 60% by 2015 • increase share of renewable energy
technologies to 87%-100% of energy mix • reform the electricity utility The
EUEI-PDF is conducting two important studies that will contribute to the
development of the power sector and the legal framework to underpin its
governance These are outlined below • refurbish and extend the power grid •
establish new interconnections Off-grid rural electrification objectives in
rural areas include the following:  ten-year National Strategy and five-year
Action Plan for the development of the electricity sector is under development
This strategy focuses on the approach, responsibilities and sources of finance
for conventional and decentralised electrification and for promoting renewable
energy sources Capacity building in the private as well as the public sector at
MERN, EdD and ADDS, among others, is considered  central activity to ensure the
strategy and action plan is successfully implemented • solar water pumping • PV
and small wind for community services (health and education) • household PV (30%
of rural electrification from solar PV planned by 2017) Djibouti has no
comprehensive energy policy Policies are under consideration to resolve the
country’ growing energy needs and its potential to deliver energy from
renewables The Electricity Law is under preparation This will have two important
functions It will develop appropriate regulations to promote cost-effective
generation, transmission and distribution of electricity It will set standards
for electricity services, determine appropriate tariffs and open up the
generation sector to IPPs This would focus mainly on the design of adequate PPA
schemes for the renewable energy sector Its second function is to define the
roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders, including institutions
responsible for their promotion, incentive measures and financing Decree /PREDD
of  February 1983 established the specifications for EdD These set out details
and concerning distribution, and operation This was further reinforced by decree
/PR/PM1 of 20 December transportation production, Ethiopian Electric Power
Corporation and EdD have  joint PPA Supply is in the form of power only, and
there is no capacity element The agreement stipulates that the volume of
electricity The landscape of Lake Assal Photograph: Government of Djibouti 17
FINANCING AND INVESTMENT market However, more time and confidence building is
required to encourage the private sector in Djibouti to invest to renewable
energy Local banks and microfinance institutions are averse to building
portfolio of renewable energy projects since their understanding of and
tolerance for technology risk is limited Moreover, most local banks lack the
capacity to plan, structure and appraise  renewable energy project with
appropriate financial instruments Combined with inadequate awareness, this
reinforces the perception that renewable energy technologies are too expensive,
unreliable and thus too risky an investment Donor assistance funds the majority
of the energy sector investments in Djibouti Eight separate projects are at
various stages of preparation/ implementation These are divided into the
following sets of energy sector development programmes: generation, and
distribution, and renewable energy development Many financing institutions fund
these projects These include the Islamic Development Bank, the Investment and
Development Bank of the Economic Community of West African States, and the
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International
Development The African Development Bank, World Bank, UNDP, EU, French
Development Agency (AFD), Japanese Government and Global Environment Facility
also fund these projects Government contributions towards these projects take
the form of counterpart funding mainly arising from internally generated sources
like direct and indirect tax, international trade tax and non-tax revenues The
government also regularly borrows from the international and local financial
markets to finance energy projects transmission This may change when the Energy
Law comes into force It may lead to the introduction of  renewable energy fund
for providing financial incentives, capital subsidies, production subsidies and
equity participation to renewable electricity projects The sources of finance
for the fund will include the National Budget, multilateral and bilateral
donors, donations, and various levies Finance from the renewable energy fund
would also be available for promoting renewable energy projects, for instance,
including capacity building for renewable energy development This would enable
the Government of Djibouti to take the opportunity to build the technical
capacities of local financial institutions, the private sector and civil society
on the business opportunities within the renewable energy sector Private player
incentives are minimal Organisations are allowed to produce power for their own
use but are not allowed to sell power to any end-user other than EdD Efforts are
under way to set up the regulatory framework and laws to encourage the private
sector to enter the renewable energy 18 IV EMERGING ISSUES AFFECTING RENEWABLE
ENERGY DEPLOYMENT Opportunities to develop the renewables sector in Djibouti are
explored in this section, which is divided into four subsections Each focuses on
different resources and conversion technologies, known here as service-resource
pairs The status of each particular subsector is reviewed, followed by the
issues that need to be resolved It then concludes with  list of actions
recommended by the RRA process  GRID-CONNECTED RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS Reliable
and affordable electricity is critical for economic development This means the
grid remains an important means to transform Djibouti’ economy and reach large
numbers of people at lower cost Djibouti has particular advantages since its
predominantly urban human settlement pattern lends itself to exploiting the grid
to widen reliable electricity access However, as in  number of African
countries, the grid in Djibouti faces formidable technical, institutional and
financial barriers The lack of reliable, affordable power is seriously
obstructing investment in Djibouti It limits the growth of critical productive
sectors such as industry and fishing Over the past few years, several renewable
energy technologies have become increasingly cost-competitive Their development
represents an important opportunity for countries like Djibouti to diversify
their supply options This section considers geothermal, wind and PV technologies
for Djibouti’ power sector, as they offer high short-term deployment potential
Geothermal power Exploration of geothermal energy in Djibouti goes back  long
way, as it has the potential to solve the country’ long-standing power
generation problem However, geothermal energy has yet to be developed to provide
electricity in Djibouti In 1987, the World Bank carried out some exploratory
drilling along with the Government of Italy, AfDB, UNDP, United States Agency
for International Development and the OPEC Fund It produced follow-up plans to
develop and construct the geothermal power plant that Djibouti needed because of
failure to achieve consensus on project design In the latest effort to develop
the country’ geothermal potential some 25 years later,  number of lessons were
learnt from the aborted 1987 geothermal project One is to smooth donor activity
coordination and produce  highly developed but simplified project design to
ensure co- financing Another is to put in place assurances that guarantee
payments to the IPP Since 1987, progress has been made in geothermal power
technology This means conditions in the Assal Rift in Djibouti are more viable,
and enables more advanced and complete field testing in the area The World Bank
recently financed the Menengai geothermal project in Kenya with  capacity of 400
MW This large- scale geothermal project could have  catalytic effect on
geothermal resource development in the East African rift system Djibouti is
building strong technical capacity that can be deployed to serve the sector’
human resource needs Djibouti’ plan to construct  geothermal power station with
total capacity of 50 MW is one of the projects currently planned across the sub
region In assessing the commercial viability of the project, the assumptions
used by the World Bank to 19 undertake the financial analysis are provided in
table  The exploratory stage of the project, amounting to about USD 31 million,
is funded by AfDB, World Bank, OPEC Fund, the Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program, Global Environment Facility and AFD This finance will cover
the riskiest part of the geothermal power generation project with concessionary
funds to ascertain the commercial viability of the resource in the Lake Assal
area This could provide the necessary incentives for an IPP to develop the 50 MW
power plant However, it is not yet clear whether the government will underwrite
this sunk cost to encourage IPPs to take the project forward Although Djibouti
is importing about 60% of its power from Ethiopia, it still relies on imported
oil to generate about 30%-40% of its power needs Table  shows that geothermal
power plants could significantly reduce the cost of generation by  margin of
nearly USD 20/kWh, compared to the heavy fuel and diesel now in use in Djibouti
Geothermal projects produce energy for decades at stable, affordable prices,
which reduces price volatility This helps avoid the price spikes impose severe
and energy crises that often economic penalties on business and local
communities Table : Costs and assumptions for financial analysis3 Activities
Costs and assumptions Exploratory drilling over  three-year time frame USD
million Capital expenditure for geothermal field development for  50 MW plant (,
USD 62 million per MW installed) Includes expenditure for the first three years
of exploration USD 181 million Capital structure of the IPP: base case Interest
on the debt portion 70:30 debt-equity ratio % per year over 15 years 15%-25%,
with the main case for the prospective IPP project being 20% Required rate of
return on equity Geothermal plant capacity factor 90% capacity factor = GWh
Operation and maintenance costs USD  million per year Depreciation of capital
assets 30 years Initial working capital USD  million Ten-year tax holiday, and
corporate income tax of 25% applying in subsequent years Taxes IPP to break even
at an electricity tariff USD /kWh Source: World Bank (2013) its low
environmental In addition to impact compared to other baseload power sources,
number of other attributes make geothermal energy attractive Its high capacity
value and capacity factor are very reliable The history of successful geothermal
exploitation in other parts of the world demonstrates both the reliability of
the resource and the dependability of the technology Geothermal power production
creates  variety of jobs across the project chain  recent study by IRENA (2013)
and Rutovitz and Harris (2012) provided further details on employment factors4
and regional multipliers Employment factors for geothermal plants for
manufacturing, construction and installation (&), and & are ,  and 40 job-
years/MW respectively To account for variations in labour productivity, regional
multipliers can be used The multiplier for Africa is   It is important to
remember that Djibouti has no experience of geothermal power generation  50 MW
overall project in the Philippines will cost at least USD 250 million, and that
is  mature and experienced geothermal environment Since Djibouti has never
developed  geothermal project and has had payment problems in the past, the
debt-equity ratio could be around  60:With higher capital expenditure, the IPP
break-even point could rise to USD /kWh  This covers the number of jobs
necessary to manufacture, construct and install one unit of renewable energy
generation capacity The number of jobs per unit of capacity is typically much
lower for & than for manufacturing, construction and Installation, although this
will vary according to technology  Regional multipliers, relative to OECD
countries, are used to account for differences in labour productivity between
different regions of the world (IRENA, 2013; Rutovitz and Harris, 2012) 20 Using
the above employment factor without the regional multiplier for Africa,  50 MW
geothermal plant could generate no less than  462 job-years in & and 35 jobs in
&M6 in Djibouti Achieving Djibouti’ geothermal potential of 300 MW could deliver
770 job-years in & and 210 jobs in & In  country like Djibouti where
unemployment is very high at about 60%, geothermal energy and other renewable
energy projects can provide benefits beyond energy service provision  stable and
reliable energy supply base and affordable energy market can have  significant
impact on the wider economy, both by creating indirect jobs and cutting energy
costs for businesses them is being made at the moment Two projects in the
pipeline are worth discussing The first is an agreement between Qatar Petroleum
International and the Government of Djibouti to build  60 MW wind farm
memorandum of understanding was signed in late 2013 to evaluate the plans for
this project The second project is known as Producing Safe Drinking Water and
Renewable Energy (Projet ’Energie Renouvelable) ’Eau Potable et de It relates to
the agreement through which the EU provides 90% funding for  EUR 46 million (USD
55 million) wind and water desalination plant in Djibouti The plant will
initially have  capacity of 22 500 m³/day, which will be expanded to 45 000
m³/day during the follow-up phase The new plant should provide sufficient water
for 200 000 people, over one quarter of the population Further initiatives are
planned, including  memorandum of understanding with Ethiopia for the
exploration and import of water From an energy standpoint, the interesting
aspect of the desalination initiative is the 20 MW wind farm, which is expected
to supply much of the power It will be built during the second phase of the
project energy Improving its self-generation capability enables Djibouti to
enter the regional power market as  power seller as well as purchaser,
strengthening its strategic position Geothermal and other renewable energy
resource development provide Djibouti with  route to sell baseload geothermal
power to Ethiopia during the dry season This is when Ethiopia’ hydropower
generation is restricted and thermal generation may be required to meet dry
season power demands As indicated above, Ethiopia’ dry season corresponds to
Djibouti’ low demand winter season This creates  potential market for Djibouti’
geothermal power through Ethiopia to other foreign markets connected to
Ethiopian grid generation Given the relatively good wind regime in Goubet,  pre-
feasibility analysis for grid-connected wind power generation was carried out by
the project developers It had  reference capacity of 20 MW (63 kilovolt amps)
with an annual generation rate of 82 GWh and system cost of USD  500/kW The
analysis showed  payback  period years for 20 years, system feeding of cost the
USD 075/kWh (see figure 10) The levelised cost On-grid wind There are no grid-
connected wind power generators in Djibouti However, recent wind resource
studies have confirmed that it hosts several excellent wind energy sites Four of
these show excellent potential, and the economic case for investing in of that
will operate grid about for the at Figure 10: Cumulative cash flow and payback
period  Manufacturing has been omitted from this calculation given that much of
the technology is likely to be imported, at least in the short term
Assumptions: capital range = USD  500 to USD  100/kW; annual & cost = USD 105/kW
(for 20 MW plant); project time = 20 years; inflation =%; discount rate =12% 21
result was also encouraging at USD 056/kWh This illustrates that the large wind
system can generate electricity at  rate competitive with the incumbent
generation system However, the payback period is on the high side, which means
the IPP would take longer to recover its investment Shortening the payback
period may require increasing consumer electricity tariffs The financial
viability of IPPs depends on the agreed price at which they can sell power to
the national grid or end-users At the moment, there is no arrangement in
Djibouti allowing organisations to produce power to sell as their core business
activity Figure 11 shows that the payback period for the 20 MW wind power system
varies significantly according to the selling price of power The same applies to
revenue that can be generated under different pricing regimes working on the
basis of predetermined stipulations over  number of years Strong offtake
agreements enable operators to make sufficient money to service their debts and
operate their systems Clearly, such agreements need to strike  balance between
affordability for businesses and the general public, and financial stability for
private operators This must not only allow them to stay in business but also
generate enough revenue to in upgrades and expansions These will be critical
concerns as the Government of Djibouti prepares its electricity laws and energy
strategies in line with Vision Further analysis was made using two separate
scenarios where the system is connected to the 230 kV transmission and to  new
63 kV system In both cases, the capital cost would rise to around USD  100/kW
and USD  900/kW respectively This yields  payback period of about years for the
230 kV and years for the new 63 kV system, and levelised costs of USD 065/kWh
and USD 060/ kWh respectively Alternatively, system would continue to depend on
cheap but not entirely reliable Ethiopian interconnection or through the EdD
thermal plants, which are costly ways of generating power The wind system solves
the twin problems of reliability and cost the electricity from the invest Figure
11: Cumulative revenue and payback period at different electricity selling
prices (in USD) Wind power in Djibouti can be harnessed to support  range of
productive sectors such as fishing This remains underdeveloped in Djibouti
largely due to  lack of energy services for cooling and processing Ice-making
and chilling is energy- intensive, but Djibouti has the energy resources to
kick-start an industry that could generate much needed employment opportunities
and significant economic benefits has considerable wind and other renewable
resources but has yet to develop policies or an investment climate adapted to
renewable energy Initiatives development and to stimulate investor confidence
would need to include appropriate measures like  Feed-in Tariff (FiT),  waiver
on import sales tax and corporation tax breaks for renewable energy developers
Major efforts will be needed to build an efficient administration and management
capacity to strengthen engineering, business, finance and contract negotiations
skills across the knowledge institutions The much awaited new Energy Law is
expected to resolve some of these fundamental shortcomings implementation Wind
power generation offers an opportunity to improve the electrification rate by
diversifying and harnessing the use of locally available resources This is
aligned with the government’ aspirations in Vision 2035 to boost the energy
infrastructure to transform social and economic conditions Djibouti in
government agencies, and 22 Lake Abhé Photograph: Government of Djibouti 215
job-years in & and 17 jobs in &M8 in Djibouti Djibouti has major potential for
significantly scaled up wind energy development This could bring further
benefits in terms of direct and indirect jobs, but also to the wider economy
However, the effect of local weather conditions9 on wind turbines should be
carefully considered when deciding on the size of systems and type of turbines
Wind can create some direct employment, although much of this will remain in the
manufacturing stage of the energy value chain Employment factors for wind plants
in manufacturing, & and & are  job-years/MW,  job-years/ MW and 20 jobs/ MW
respectively Using these factors and the regional multiplier for Africa of ,  20
MW wind plant can generate as much as  Manufacturing has been omitted from this
calculation given that much of the technology is likely to be imported, at least
in the short term  Djibouti experiences strong dust and sandstorms during the
summer months Dust, sand and temperature extremes can cause failures and
increase the frequency of repairs and maintenance to wind turbines 23 Box
Djibouti: From energy importer to transcontinental transmission hub Djibouti
intersects two continents linked by history and trade Energy could be traded
across the Red Sea, and Djibouti could become the bridge between two important
power interconnections, EAPP and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
interconnection The objective of the interconnection is clear It is intended to
increase diversity both in generating stock and in timing energy demand by the
load Larger systems require proportionately lower percentages of reserve margin
They are able to take advantage of any load diversity that may be brought about
by differences in the industrial or residential energy use patterns (Tabors,
2009)  number of developments bring into sharp focus the potential role Djibouti
could play in transcontinental power trade These are outlined below • EAPP
launched its master plan in This pointed to 12 new interconnection projects and
an additional 20 000 MW planned for the medium term (53% from renewables) This
does not include the Inga dam in Democratic Republic of the Congo • In 2010,
cross-border electrical trading through the interconnection network took place
for the first time in the GCC region This involved Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, United
Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman and Qatar but not Yemen • Electricity demand in GCC
countries has risen rapidly over the past 20 years and will continue to rise
sharply Power is mostly generated from oil and gas plants • GCC greenhouse gas
emissions have rapidly increased in the last 20 years The rapid rise in energy
demand and predominance of fossil fuels in the electricity mix has been largely
responsible for these increases • The majority of the utilities within the GCC
have heavily subsidised retail electricity rates Except for Qatar, this places
countries under extreme pressure as natural gas becomes increasingly valuable in
the international market Some countries have even begun to import coal Marginal
cost of peak electricity varies by country: for Kuwait it is USD 19/ kWh, Saudi
Arabia USD 22/kWh, Bahrain USD 10/kWh, Qatar USD 09/kWh and Oman USD 23/ kWh •
Discussions have recently started for Ethiopia to supply power to Yemen through
submarine transmission line via Djibouti Yemen has an installed capacity of
about  200 MW but delivers around 840 MW This amounts to  30% loss due to an
ageing distribution grid Power is heavily subsidised The average tariff is
around USD 06/kWh, but average operating costs for the utility are around USD
12/kWh Furthermore, capacity will need to grow to over  000 MW by 2020 to meet
demand Only 30% of Yemenis currently have access to electricity Energy access
and security in Yemen, fuel trade-offs and high carbon emissions in the rest of
the GCC are important concerns relating to individual national circumstances The
interconnection could improve energy security and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, providing that electricity is generated from renewable sources or
other low emission options Herein lies the opportunity for Djibouti to serve as
transcontinental transmission hub This would further enhance the nation’
strategic significance in regional energy and integration, and strengthen its
negotiating hand on matters related to energy African countries with surplus
power will benefit from  new market opening up for green energy and become
important players in the decarbonisation effort of Arabian Peninsula countries
GCC countries in particular would benefit by improving their climate change
record while acquiring affordable electricity, especially for Yemen This
initiative has all the hallmarks of  win-win situation, but further studies are
required to map out the benefits and costs for each player Scenario work would
also go some way to gain  better understanding of the dynamics between  range of
variables 24 in the Djibouti context In the 12 months following its launch in
January 2012, the PV power plant generated 508 MWh of electricity About 158 MWh
of the energy produced is consumed by the CERD buildings and the surplus 350 MWh
fed to the EdD network The system‘ energy balance showed that CERD annual energy
consumption amounted to about 438 MWh This means the PV plant could meet its
entire buildings energy demand, except during the peak summer months (June to
August) when this exceeds the amount produced by the PV system On-grid PV
Djibouti has outstanding solar resource conditions and thus offers the
opportunity for deploying  range of solar technologies as utility-scale plants
as well as in distributed end-use applications The cost of PV technology has
rapidly fallen across the world, enabling grid-based PV to achieve grid parity
in  number of markets It is fast becoming  genuine alternative for countries
faced with the twin challenges of energy access and energy security PV module
prices have declined sharply from USD 70/kW in 2009 to USD 20/kW in They may
fall yet further to USD /kW, making the balance of system  crucial determinant
of solar PV system costs (IRENA, 2013) These trends make PV  compelling product
for end-users in countries like Djibouti looking to diversify their energy
sources and build resilience into their energy system The PV project cost was
estimated at about USD  million (JPY 610 million) This equates to about USD 20
000/kW, which is very expensive However, the costs may contain other expenses
related to official development assistance that may not be clear to outside
observers For this reason,  separate analysis is needed to provide other
estimates closer to the market prices Today, solar PV installed costs in non-
OECD regions for utility-scale projects are USD  000- 000 kW If these figures
are applied, PV in Djibouti could be cost-competitive, especially for larger PV
systems where the benefits from economies of scale can be significant is some
experience of PV systems There in Djibouti, but it is restricted to the off-grid
PV sector However, with the help of the Japanese Government, Djibouti has
recently installed  300 kW PV system supplying energy to the CERD campus and
feeding the surplus to the grid Given the specific vulnerabilities of Djibouti’
power sector, policy makers are becoming more and more interested in exploring
the considerable economies of scale associated with PV grid developments The
grid-connected pilot project offers an excellent demonstration of the
opportunities and constraints associated with PV as  possible large-scale option
The cost of the above system has been recalculated using market data on PV
systems and real economic data from Djibouti10 Figure 12 shows the result of
this analysis The levelised cost results showed  wide variation depending on the
capital cost of the system This ranges from about USD  million to over USD
million over the system lifetime (figure 12) When viewed in terms of levelised
costs  cursory evaluation of the pilot project raises  number of important
features of PV-grid systems Figure 12: Levelised cost of generation with PV
(comparison at different system costs) 10 Assumptions: capital range = USD  000-
000/kW; annual & cost = USD 40/kW (for 300 kW plant); import duty = 26%; VAT =
%; project time = 20 years; profit margins = 15%; inflation =%; discount rate
=12% Adapted from IRENA Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2012 where solar PV
installed costs in non-OECD regions for utility-scale projects gives an average
value of USD  000/kW and  range of USD  000- 000 kW 25 in kWh,  generation cost
of USD /kWh is obtained (figure 12) This illustrates that larger PV systems can
bring economy scale benefits, making them competitive against fossil-based
electricity which at present has  generation cost of about USD 30/kWh in
Djibouti On the face of it, this makes the PV option attractive from cost and
security of fuel supply considerations Of course, there are other important
considerations such as the high initial costs of PV systems whereas fossil-based
systems have higher recurrent costs over the system lifetime However, as the
cost of PV systems continues to fall, their value as  reliable and cost-
effective option for power generation increases, particularly during daytime
peak electricity demand charged import tax and VAT on top of the initial cost
differs significantly from those that are not This means the generation cost can
rise with more expensive systems If the provision of affordable electricity is
an important goal, then regulation needs to reflect this  resolution exempting
PV-system components from import duties and VAT would go some way to levelling
the playing field between market-based PV systems and those benefiting from
donor support such as the one discussed above Reducing import tariffs cuts the
costs of grid-connected PV systems and renewables, so it would also make these
technologies more affordable to EdD Of course, such waivers are intended to help
end-users in the short term, but may undermine the emergence of  commercially
viable local PV manufacturing industry Although Djibouti may not be quite ready
for this leap, the country may consider  research, development and deployment
strategy that would consider manufacturing some of the PV components locally
This requires other reforms and policies that link science and technology with
industrial development There are two other important features that may impact on
the viability of PV as part of  long-term energy strategy for Djibouti’ power
sector Firstly, the country still has high tariffs on all imports at 26% and VAT
at %, which also applies to PV systems As shown in figure 13, the levelised cost
of generation of systems Figure 13: Levelised cost of generation of different
import duty levels in Djibouti (in USD) The second important feature affecting
the financial viability of grid-based PV relates to the agreed selling price of
electricity to the distributor or end-user - in this case EdD At present, EdD
imports power from Ethiopia at  tariff level of USD /kWh and sells power to
various users at USD /kWh depending the user type Employing these figures and
range of system costs, the payback period of the 300 kW system has been
estimated if electricity was delivered to EdD Table  illustrates the extent to
which this is  major factor, showing that the selling price of electricity would
need to be at least USD 15/kWh if the payback period for the system is to be
within the project timeframe of 20 years This indicates that for PV options, the
introduction of enabling instruments such as  FiT may be necessary attract
investors 26 Table : Payback years for 300 kW PV system, using different system
cost and tariff figures System Size USD 2000 /kW (/ import duty & VAT) USD 2000
/kW (with import duty & VAT) USD 3000 /kW (/ import duty & VAT) USD 3000 /kW
(with import duty & VAT) USD 5000 /kW (/ import duty & VAT) USD 5000 /kW (with
import duty & VAT) Selling Price USD 30/kWh USD 20/kWh USD 15/kWh USD 07/kWh
Key: yellow: years or less; light green: -10 years; dark green:  years; purple:
years; grey: more than 20 years The dust deposited on the PV panels is proving
challenging It is estimated that four grammes of dust per square metre can
reduce  solar panel’ efficiency by 40% (Gastli and Charabi, 2011) While Djibouti
enjoys excellent solar radiation, sand and dust movements create problems,
requiring regular panel cleaning This is especially difficult during the Khamsin
months of June to August The CERD plant is wiped with  dry cloth each day except
during rainy months, and distilled water is used two months of the year for
cleaning Using distilled water to clean  large solar plant of  200 m2 can be
expensive and labour-intensive In  country like Djibouti with low rainfall,
advanced surface coatings and advanced cleaning techniques would go some way to
solving this problem Research and development in this area is currently under
way, and most countries in North Africa and the Middle East stand to benefit
from innovations in this field country of its size Harnessing these resources to
meet growing energy needs, both domestically and across the region, should be an
important component of  long-term energy plan The RRA has revealed that  master
plan for the production and transmission of electricity is under preparation in
Djibouti Those preparing the master plan would need to integrate the demand and
supply side of the energy picture in Djibouti as well as coming up with short
and long-term plans These should consider multiple technology fronts, and
ultimately align the range of options as part of the country’ long-term energy
pathway The master plan should stimulate investment interest from the private
sector and also strengthen the country’ case for support from development
partners National policy on renewable energy needed Djibouti has no energy
policy As the energy situation in the country becomes more pressing and
opportunities become clearer,  policy addressing energy access, affordability,
resources and regional integration is now recognised as an important step The
RRA has underlined that widening energy access is  central national development
objective in Djibouti At present, about half the population benefits from access
to electricity Lack of access is especially acute in rural areas where less than
% enjoy electricity in their homes In addition, the RRA also raised concerns
over energy security and high electricity tariffs largely caused by the high
cost of imported fuel but eased noticeably by electricity from Ethiopia These
multiple challenges have helped provoke an important discussion on electricity
from renewables as  significant contribution to closing the supply gap To this
end, Djibouti requires an energy policy that embraces renewable energy as  key
component of  longer- term energy vision with  systematic road map for delivery
Djiboutian policy makers and potential investors are engaged in several
discussions on grid-based renewable energy However, the RRA findings The RRA
process has highlighted  number of technical opportunities and barriers facing
the transmission infrastructure in Djibouti The process also brought to light
some of the institutional, financial and capacity issues associated with
geothermal, wind and PV power generation to feed the grid These are discussed
below renewable generation and Long-term energy plan essential  long-term energy
plan is essential for Djibouti Such  plan should encourage energy efficiency,
and help develop clean, reliable and affordable energy systems that Djibouti
will need today and into the future As Djibouti plans its energy needs for the
next 20 years to support its Vision 2035, efficiency will be an important
resource to be considered It is the cleanest and most cost-effective energy
resource, and it enables consumers to reduce their energy bills On the supply
side, Djibouti has significant renewable energy resources for  27 country needs
to rapidly move away from ad hoc projects to well-coordinated programmes, and to
encourage investors and entrepreneurs to come forth Clearly, renewable energy
technologies are achieving grid parity in many parts of the world With the right
policy framework supported by strong regulatory instruments and functional
institutions, Djibouti stands to benefit significantly from technology
innovations and  new appetite for renewables investment It covers tariff
setting, licensing, incentives to attract private sector investment, and the
roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders The law will address
electricity generation and imports Other legislative elements could also be
introduced to enable renewables to gain traction in the energy market in
Djibouti Renewables are generally perceived as more expensive when compared to
conventional systems, although this perception is changing fast The technical
suitability and economic viability of integrating renewables into the grid go
hand in hand Pricing policies have been designed to improve their
competitiveness and drive investment into the renewable energy sector  FiT
scheme is one way to meet this challenge and the preferred option of Djibouti
However, it is not clear whether this is one of the options the EUEI-PDF
electricity law and strategy study will consider The design of the FiT is based
on the avoided cost methodology, given the fact that electricity generation is
based on imported fossil fuel subject to market fluctuation Given the high cost
of fossil-based generation, an appropriate FiT could act as  major stimulus to
the emergence of IPPs in Djibouti’ energy market As shown in the analysis of
wind, PV and geothermal systems, two important factors support this proposition
Firstly, Djibouti has considerable renewable resources, and secondly, the cost
of renewable technologies has dropped significantly Provided the legal and
regulatory conditions are in place, these two factors play to Djibouti’
advantage, allowing it to generate renewable power at  lower cost than fossil-
based systems Appropriately designed and negotiated FiTs would go some way to
set rates attractive to both private players and end-users The RRA has disclosed
significant ambition within Djibouti’ leadership to extract the country’ ample
renewable energy resources to meet national development goals Declarations to
achieve energy security through 100% renewable energy supplies are part of the
energy narrative at the highest level in government However, there are neither
specific guidelines nor  road map to realise this ambition The RRA process makes
clear that this vision needs to be firmly embedded in the upcoming energy policy
for the country It needs to be supported by specific studies and analysis These
need to demonstrate how the 100% renewable energy ambition can be achieved in
reality, what the cost implications are likely to be, and what options need to
be considered for financing The master plan under preparation should consider
these demands, which clearly have strong political support, as the discussions
during the RRA process have shown Vision and ambition needs to be complemented
by real policies and implementation mechanisms to deliver meaningful results
Strengthen legal system and regulatory framework Djibouti has no robust or clear
legislative and to govern electricity regulatory production The RRA process has
shown the lack of regulation and legal instruments is  major obstacle,
especially in constraining the participation of non- state actors such as IPPs
and other self-producers in power provision At present, EdD is the sole
distributor of power, and any other entity is not permitted to engage
commercially in the supply of electricity However, it was not possible to locate
legal document that clearly specifies the limits to private sector participation
in the power sector This vagueness in the law still prevents entities other than
EdD from entering the energy market framework Build up research and development
institutions At least in the near term, Djibouti will depend on technologies and
to  certain extent expertise from abroad At the same time, Djibouti will need to
work to strengthen and develop its human capacity and upgrade its energy
innovation systems to support domestic technology adoption and development CERD
and the University of Djibouti could play important roles in supporting capacity
development among practitioners, researchers and policy makers These knowledge
institutions could also support the manufacture of components through training,
information sharing, technical seminars and demonstration projects This would
raise the confidence of both development partners and private sector actors who
are in  position to provide grants for projects and invest in profit making
energy ventures Given these concerns, the Government of Djibouti is working
alongside development partners to reform the legal and regulatory framework to
enable private investment without undermining the public interest With the
assistance of EUEI- PDF,  draft Electricity Law is under preparation 28
institutions like CERD should go The role of beyond research and development in
technology development, dissemination and Data and information on energy
consumption in Djibouti are weak at best, and data available in different
institutions lack consistency This makes it notoriously difficult to plan,
develop and implement energy efficiency measures Data also need to extend
towards the supply side Inadequate data on solar and wind energy resources are
major obstacle to attracting investment due to the difficulties in developing
rigorous project proposals An institution like CERD could play  pivotal role as
data centre This would also allow it to build the required human and technical
capacity for regular energy demand surveys and renewable energy assessments,
both for the government and other clients Development partners and organisations
like IRENA could play  critical role in providing technical support and training
to CERD or  relevant institution acting as energy intelligence hub The Djibouti
Franc is ‘pegged’ to the US Dollar Anyone is entitled to open an account in
Djibouti Further, there is sufficient liquidity in the banks but there are not
enough energy projects coming from the private sector This is largely to do with
uncertainty in the sector and  weak regulatory framework adoption Quantify
direct and indirect employment Unemployment is high in Djibouti This will remain
difficult development issue given that the economy largely relies on service and
logistical labour-intensive This sectors, which are not concern is raised in
Vision 2035, within which industrial development and regional integration is
seen as an important way to add value to exports and meet the challenge of
unemployment Furthermore, Djibouti’ ambition to become the largest logistics hub
in Africa using 100% green energy is likely to bring both direct and indirect
energy jobs due to energy security Further research is required to quantify the
benefits in terms of local jobs in the energy sector itself under  range of
energy expansion scenarios Econometric studies are also needed relating energy
security to the broader economic benefits for Djibouti Provide business
incentives and develop skills The Government of Djibouti has made considerable
efforts to improve the business environment and reduce the high cost of
production ‘Doing Business 2014,’  World Bank report (2014), recently ranked
Djibouti at 160 out of 185 countries While this is an improvement from the 2013
report (172), entrepreneurs still face high production costs in addition to the
problems of access to energy, water, skilled workforce and telecommunications is
therefore not surprising that the business environment for renewable energy in
Djibouti remains weak Signs of improvement are visible with the emergence of the
master plan and work in progress to improve the regulatory and legal framework
governing energy The state should play  vital role in encouraging the private
players, protecting the public interest and introducing transparent processes by
taking measures described below  OFF-GRID RENEWABLE ENERGY OPTIONS It In line
with its Vision 2035, the Government of Djibouti places  premium on providing
its citizens with access to electricity Given an electrification rate of about
55% at present and increasing demand for power for social and economic
development needs, widening energy access occupies an important policy space in
Djibouti Ambitious targets are currently proposed with  focus on communities
that may not be able to obtain grid electrification in the near future Adequacy
of tax incentives for investors in energy The country’ import tariffs and VAT
make renewable technologies expensive and therefore obstruct the domestic
private sector from entering the energy market The government’ 26% duty on
imported goods and % VAT includes renewables and creates barriers to private
actors The RRA process and discussions with Djiboutian entrepreneurs has
revealed that removing duties is an It would encourage serious entrepreneurs to
do business in the renewables market To this end, an integrated approach will be
needed to balance needs, population distribution, costs and resources as well as
an understanding of the limits of conventional grid extension Various small-
scale, renewable energy technologies like solar PV and wind are maturing
commercially, along with new and innovative service delivery mechanisms This
means off-grid electrification has emerged as  viable alternative for
electricity access important financial incentive Djibouti has some experience
with off-grid PV electrification in clinics, schools, households and water
pumping Each of these is explored below Djibouti has the added advantage of
stable monetary system with no major currency problems 29 Off-grid PV
electricity The analysis also identified & as an important cost consideration
and critical for the long-term success of mini-grid programmes It was therefore
assumed that over  20-year period, replacement costs will be incurred for
inverters once and batteries twice, as well as labour costs This will bring the
& costs to USD /kW for systems in large villages The main decentralised
renewable energy promoted in Djibouti is PV solar, either as  stand-alone or
mini-grid system  recent project supported by the World Bank is worthy of
discussion, mainly because it proposes an ambitious and comprehensive plan to
widen electrification for rural communities This study by the World Bank Public
Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (2014) looked at  variety of business
plans for  range of income groups and community energy needs These include mini-
grids, stand-alone and battery charging systems (table ) The first two options
are briefly reviewed below Stand-alone systems The regions of Obock and
Tadjourah are proposed as the first non-concessional areas to offer stand- alone
PV systems For the first phase of deployment of stand-alone and pico-solar
systems, low income sedentary and nomadic communities (representing 65% of the
total population considered) were proposed as targets It is possible that the
demand for pico-solar is greater in such areas However, there may also be high
demand from homes and businesses in towns looking to supplement their energy use
through pico systems Pico-solar products are defined by their availability over
the counter, requiring little support for installation They suit semi-nomadic or
nomadic lifestyles Mini-grid The analysis showed that the initial investment
required to set up mini-grids in each of the villages is USD - million,
depending on size and daily energy requirements The total cost of this mini-
grid programme is estimated at USD million The unit cost for installed capacity
is around USD -/kW This is on the high side but within the margins encountered
in other similar programmes Table : Stand-alone and pico systems Average selling
price (USD) Targets (number of units) Size Type of system % of total 50 Wp*
Solar home systems 600 400 % 100 Wp Solar home systems  050 200 % 250 Wp Solar
systems for enterprises  250 60 % Solar lantern Portable 50  000 % Micro stand-
alone 120  000 %  660 Total number of units Source: World Bank Public Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (2014) *Watt peak Three matters need to be
noted here Firstly, the off-grid option using renewable energy is cost-
competitive with the traditional diesel system At present, the life cycle cost
of operating an off-grid diesel system over  20-year period is USD /kWh, mainly
due to the costs associated with fuel imports and transport  PV option or hybrid
(PV/diesel) system would compare favourably with this Secondly, rural
Djiboutians tend to have little cash This means rural electrification cannot
rely on the backing of the private sector alone Government involvement will
remain critical, so the government is working through ADDS to fill this gap This
means cost-saving opportunities are central to this effort Thirdly, rural areas
have little technical capability, which means ADDS will need to double its
efforts to bring in private sector entrepreneurs for systems installation and
maintenance Off-grid PV water pumping In Djibouti, groundwater sources account
for about 95% of the drinking water needs, so energy use for pumping water is
critical input to water access Diesel generators, PV systems and  few wind pumps
are currently in use The government has also announced its intention of
equipping 70 rural boreholes and 100 other wells with solar pumps 30 The source
of the energy used is critical to the overall cost of waterpumping systems As PV
technologies are coming down in price and the volatility of the fossil fuel
market increases globally, increasingly PV pumps are rapidly becoming attractive
options However, further cost analysis of the individual technologies is
critical to assess their viability in different parts of Djibouti In some is
favourable, areas where the wind speed mechanical wind turbines could be
attractive options  life cycle cost analysis conducted for Djibouti using
country-specific data showed that over the longer term PV performs better than
diesel (figure 14) and provides more stable water supply11 This illustrates the
emerging trends in prices and technology development favouring PV over diesel,
and is likely to continue into the future Figure 14: life cycle cost for pumping
groundwater, comparison between PV and diesel The need to provide water services
is not limited to the household sector, but also extends to commercial and
productive sectors Djibouti is pushing to improve its agricultural sector to
boost food security This means affordable and reliable energy for pumping water
for irrigation could play an important role in sustaining agriculture as
meaningful economic activity Further work will be needed to assess the case for
irrigated agriculture for food security as well as for employment generation
work awaits the policy makers as they prepare the institutional, regulatory and
policy environment for investment in distributed wind energy systems RRA
findings The RRA has highlighted the contribution of off- grid renewable systems
to raising energy access for rural communities in Djibouti Given the dispersed
character of settlements and the economic activities concerned, decentralised
systems are part of the solution to Djibouti’ energy access dilemma Some
specific findings from the RRA relevant to decentralised energy in Djibouti are
outlined below Off-grid wind power Wind power for rural electrification using
stand- alone and mini-grid delivery systems has come  long way With more data
and site assessments taking place in Djibouti, it is becoming increasingly
apparent that the country has some of the windiest sites in Africa This can
provide much needed power for rural as well as urban communities on
decentralised scale However, it is also important to recognise that Djibouti’
experience of wind energy is limited to  few wind pumps  great deal of
Importance of  clear rural electrification strategy In Djibouti, as in most
countries in the region, electrification initiatives tend to focus on grid-
based delivery mechanisms Grid-based options have limitations as they may not
reach remote or dispersed communities, and may even cause 11 Assumptions: PV
capital cost = system cost of USD  100; pump cost = USD  600, replaced every
years; annual & cost = USD 02 of capital cost; genset cost = USD  000, replaced
every  years; fuel cost = USD 15 per litre; project time = 20 years; inflation
=%; discount rate =12% 31  OPPORTUNITIES AND CONSTRAINTS FOR SCALING UP
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT people to move to electrified areas The RRA found
the recent ADDS village electrification campaign in Djibouti encouraging, and
recommended it should be scaled-up However, this needs to be part of  broader
and clearer strategy for rural electrification, which means collaborating with
wider government and NGO stakeholders Almost 80% of the population is urban
robust rural electrification strategy is therefore necessary laying bare the
needs of rural communities and providing clear guidance on how to achieve
progress in this sector This is critical since the broader energy policy can
easily marginalise these inhabitants The strategy would be aligned with local
provincial development plans as  way to link rural economic and social
development with energy services It would recognise that rural communities would
benefit most from  bottom-up strategy Such  strategy should define short, medium
and long- term access goals supported by technology targets within predefined
geographic areas for off-grid and on-grid electrification One way to do this
would be to introduce rural energy service concessions These would allow an
entity such as  private sector, NGO or community organisation to exclusively
serve one or more defined areas under  concessionary agreement National leaders
are exploring opportunities to develop the renewables sector in Djibouti Some of
the critical issues and observations relating to renewable energy development
and scale-up in Djibouti are described below East African Power Pool effect East
African regional power development work is progressing  number of transmission
and upgrade projects have already been completed, such as the Djibouti-Ethiopia
and Kenya-Ethiopia lines It is expected that in the short term Djibouti will
benefit from importing more power than it can produce domestically, and
gradually becoming an energy contributor to the power pool in the long run
Renewable energy technologies are likely to play  major role in developing an
integrated power pool as new hydropower, wind and geothermal power plants are
built This will increase the share of renewables in the overall balance This
could mean  reduction in the long-term marginal cost of power for smaller
countries like Djibouti This is already evident now that Djibouti has started to
import power from Ethiopia through the newly built interconnection EAPP promises
to usher in an era of cheaper and more secure power supply, and this should be
welcome However, Djibouti needs to actively explore ways to develop its own
resources to position itself better strategically in the region and improve its
energy security Ambition for energy investment in the region is such that
Djibouti can look beyond its regional role to become  transcontinental
transmission hub for clean and low emission electricity The Africa Clean Energy
Corridor initiative, launched by IRENA, offers an opportunity for Djibouti to
increase energy access It also offers an opportunity to reduce its dependence on
imported fuel and scale up the utilisation of renewable energy systems, hence
meeting the development and climate challenge Soft loan schemes or other credit
facilities needed for solar PV Due to their high transaction costs, investments
in decentralised renewable options are often not considered appropriate for
loans through commercial banks Rural communities with little disposable income
hardly feature as obvious clients to these entities Soft loans can be
attractive, allowing  smaller proportion to be placed as down payment of the
total price, and the rest can be spread over  number of years With the bank
interest rate in Djibouti running at 14% for short-term loans and 10% for long-
term loans, households and businesses are unlikely to borrow to meet renewable
energy costs The RRA has emphasised that there is room for private entrepreneurs
in installation and & in rural energy development However, the state will
continue to play an important role in providing support through direct financing
or microfinance schemes Djibouti has established the Economic Development Fund
(Fonds de Développement Économique de Djibouti),  dedicated source of credit
supporting small and medium enterprises at concessionary rates This could be an
important support mechanism for social entrepreneurs interested in engaging in
energy to support rural livelihoods However, grants from multilateral agencies
or donors could be ring-fenced to get soft loan schemes up and running for
household or community electrification purposes Opportunity to become
transcontinental transmission hub Djibouti is  gateway between Africa and the
Arabian Peninsula Its geographical location creates significant strategic
opportunities for the trade of goods and potentially energy Yemen and Ethiopia
have recently embarked on discussions concerning the potential Ethiopian export
of 100 MW per year This would be transferred through  26 km submarine
transmission line along the Red Sea via Djibouti This is  significant
development, and demonstrates the distance energy dialogues have reached as some
countries seek cheap electricity 32 and others new markets While Ethiopia sees
itself as the renewable energy hub of the region, Djibouti can become its
transcontinental transmission hub This brings  number of interesting
opportunities to Djibouti Firstly, it would open up  market for its own surplus
power, and provides  major incentive to move ahead with its plans to develop its
geothermal and wind energy potential Secondly, Djibouti can place itself at the
heart of the USD 22 billion project backed by the African Union to develop  pan-
continental electricity highway by Thirdly, it would help relieve Djibouti
anxiety about its own energy security as it becomes an important strategic
player in the region, strengthening its negotiating hand Finally, Djibouti can
become  visible player in global decarbonisation efforts as clean energy from
Africa helps emissions reduction and avoidance in the Arabian Peninsula Major
efforts are required to improve awareness among the banks and other players in
the financial sector of the potential business opportunities in the energy
market This would help on two fronts Firstly, these entities would have  better
appreciation of the commercial potential of energy, and this could change their
perception of risk with respect to energy investments Secondly, banks could play
significant role in advising their clients on emerging energy investments and
help prepare appropriate financial products Private sector role recognised
Djiboutian authorities acknowledge the important role the private sector can
play in financing and deploying renewable energy programmes Especially notable
is the expected role that private in developing geothermal investors will play
projects  great deal of effort is currently invested in creating the enabling
conditions for private sector participation large-scale renewable in energy
projects Some effort is also going into incentivising local private sector
players to participate in smaller-scale initiatives However, the formed by
policies, institutions, finance and regulations are only slowly conceptualised
and introduced For example, high interest rates and the lack of long-term loans
at favourable rates create major barriers to financing sustainable energy
projects Moreover, domestic financial institutions are unwilling to provide
loans for renewable energy in Djibouti as banks are unfamiliar with the
renewable energy market potential in Djibouti Energy efficiency needed on demand
side The Government of Djibouti is extremely concerned about the inefficient use
of energy, especially during the hot season when air conditioning is common
Limiting energy losses along the power system chain, , from generation to end-
use, is critical This should form part of Djibouti’ future energy strategy
sustainable energy economy requires major commitments to both energy efficiency
and renewable energy development End-user efficiency gains complement national
and regional energy initiatives on supply improvements To this end, investment
in end-use energy efficiency interventions, (whether demand response measures or
awareness building) should receive high priority It could provide energy savings
comparable to the electricity generated by power plants Due to the high capital
cost of renewable energy technologies, improvements in demand-side efficiency
benefit investments in renewables as they deliver  higher impact for each unit
investment Demand-side measures should be seen as part of Djibouti’ energy
strategy and given prominence in the energy master plan The role ADME will play
cannot be underestimated It should be given  greater mandate to ensure that the
mission to strengthen demand-side interventions is not subordinated to the
country’ effort to boost generation and transmission capacity incentive
structures through technology High risk perception combined with limited
technical and management capacity This major problem is not unique to Djibouti
Most private institutions continue to view Djibouti as risky Part of the problem
is that the country lacks the institutional, policy and governance conditions
that attract investors Moreover, Djibouti has limited technical and management
capacity It will need to build  programme of capacity building at district,
city, sectoral and national level to make the most of the enormous energy
investment opportunities it clearly possesses international finance The RRA
disclosed  large number of issues of key significance in effectively deploying
renewable energy resources in Djibouti While some of these are specific to the
priority resource-service pairs for scaling up renewables deployment in the
short to medium term, others are generic Section  summarises the key actions and
steps the RRA identified Awakening the financial sector Banks are sitting on
significant amounts of liquidity in Djibouti The energy investment market across
Africa is about to take off in  big way, but these resources should not come
from international players alone At present, banks are either unaware of these
opportunities or wary of the risks involved 33 Example of solar water heater in
Africa/Shutterstock 34  SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED ACTIONS The eight recommended
action points from the RRA process are explained below They apply to all
priority resource-service pairs These actions are not presented in any order of
priority, and the list from  rapid assessment is unlikely to be exhaustive The
detailed list of actions can be found in the Annex ON-GRID Action Steps •
Include multiple technology fronts and align range of options as part of the
country’ long term energy pathway within the electricity master plan under
preparation Implement long-term energy plan • Include measures for stimulating
private investment within the master plan • Strengthen the country’ case for
support from development partners • Make renewable energy  key component of
longer- term energy vision with systematic road map for delivery Develop
national renewable energy policy and action plan • Include the 100% renewables
vision in the national energy policy and support it with practical studies on
how to achieve this, as well as assessments of the cost implications • Develop
real policies and implementation mechanisms to deliver meaningful results •
Prepare an electricity law to establish  legal, economic and institutional basis
for renewable energy uptake Strengthen legal system and regulatory framework •
Develop supporting mechanisms such as FiTs, net- metering, competitive bidding
and standardised bankable PPAs • Build capacities of practitioners, researchers
and policy makers at CERD and University of Djibouti • Support the manufacture
of components through training, information sharing, technical seminars and
demonstration projects at CERD and University of Djibouti Strengthen research
and development institutions • Include supply-side data collection for solar and
wind in CERD portfolio thereby making it the data centre • Strengthen CERD human
and technical capacity to conduct detailed assessments of wind and solar
resources across the country Undertake regular energy demand surveys and build
robust database • Remove import duties on goods related to renewable energy in
order to encourage serious entrepreneurs to do business in the renewables market
Improve business environment • Conduct studies quantifying the benefits in terms
of local jobs in the energy sector under  range of energy expansion scenarios
Conduct econometric studies relating energy security to the broader economic
benefits for Djibouti 35 OFF-GRID Action Steps • Develop  solid rural
electrification strategy that lays bare the needs of rural communities and
provides clear guidance on how to achieve progress • Define short, medium and
long-term access targets supported by technology targets within predefined
geographic areas for off-grid and on-grid electrification within that strategy
Develop clear rural electrification strategy • Introduce rural energy service
concessions that would allow an entity (private sector, NGO, community
organisation, etc) to exclusively serve one or more defined areas under
concessionary agreement • Provide soft enterprises loans supporting small and
medium solar PV • Provide support through direct financing or microfinance
schemes for social entrepreneurs interested in engaging in energy to support
rural livelihoods Provide financial support for small and medium solar PV
enterprises • Explore the use of grants from multilateral agencies or donors to
get soft loan schemes up and running for household or community electrification
36 VI REFERENCES AEEP (Africa EU Energy Partnership) (2013), “Country Power
Market Brief: Djibouti”,  DATA/Documents/06_Publications/Market_intelligence/AEE
P_Djibouti_Country_market_brief_ENpdf AfDB (African Development Bank) (2012),
African Economic Outlook, Djibouti, AfDB, Tunis AfDB (2013), Projet: Projet
’Exploration Geothermique dans la Region du Lac Assal (Project: Geothermal
Exploration Project in the Region of Lake Assal), AfDB, Tunis Ahmed Aye,
(2009), Integration des Energies Renouvables pour Unie Politique Energetique
Durable: Djibouti (Integration of Renewable Energy for Sustainable Energetics
Unie Policy: Djibouti), Université de Corse (University of Corsica), France CERD
( Centre ’Etudes et de Recherches de Djibouti) (Center of Studies and Research
in Djibouti) (2006), Wind Energy Data, CERD, Djibouti EAPP (Eastern Africa Power
Pool) (2012), EAPP – Corporate Plan , EAPP, Addis Ababa Eberhard, , et al
(2011), Africa’ Power Infrastructure: Investment, Integration and Efficiency,
World Bank, Washington,  EIA (Energy Information Administration) (2013),
International Energy Annual, EIA, Washington,  EUEI-PDF (European Union Energy
Initiative – Partnership Dialogues Facility) (2013), “Development of  Legal
Framework and Strategy for the Electricity Sector in Djibouti”,  development-of
--legal-framework-and-strategy-for-the-electricity-sector-in-djibouti Gastli, ,
and  Charabi (2011), “Solar Water Heating Initiative in Oman Energy Saving and
Carbon Credits,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol 15, No , pp
1851-Government of Djibouti Société Internationale des Hydrocarbures (SIDH) data
(2014), La Seconde Communication Nationale sur le Changement Climatique
(Djibouti’ Second National Communication to the Conference of Parties under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), Ministère de ’Habitat,
de ’Urbanisme et de ’Environnement (Ministry of Housing, Urban Planning and
Environment), Djibouti IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2013), “Djibouti:
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper – Annual Progress Report”, IMF Country Report
No 12, IMF, Washington, ,  IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2012),
Concentrating Solar Power: Renewable Energy Technologies Cost Analysis Series,
IRENA, Abu Dhabi IRENA (2013), Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2012: An
Overview, IRENA, Abu Dhabi ISERST (Institut Supérieur ’Etudes et de Recherches
Scientifiques et Techniques) (Higher Institute for Studies and Scientific and
Technical Research) (1984), Initiatives Energetiques de Djibouti: Plan
Energétique National (Energy Initiatives Djibouti: National Energy Plan),
ISERST, Djibouti Pillot, , et al (2013), “The first disaggregated solar atlas of
Djibouti:  decision-making tool for solar systems integration in the energy
scheme”, Renewable Energy, Vol 57, Issue , pp 57-Rutovitz, , and Harris,
(2012), Calculating Global Energy Sector Jobs: 2012 Methodology, Institute for
Sustainable Futures, Sydney SNC-Lavalin and Parsons Brinckerhoff (2011),
Regional Power System Master Plan and Grid Code Study, SNC-Lavalin, Montreal
Tabors,  (2009), Interconnection in the GCC Grid: the Economics of Change, CRA
International, Boston 37 UNECA (UN Economic Commission for Africa) (2011),
Progress Report on the Implementation of the Outcomes of the Mid-Term Review
Meeting of the Almaty Programme of Action, UNECA, Addis Ababa UNECA (2013), ICE
Paper on Energy Access and Security, UNECA-EA, Kigali UNDP (United Nations
Development Programme) (2014), Human Development Report 2014, UNDP, New York
World Bank (2012), Republic of Djibouti: Geothermal Power Generation Program,
World Bank, Washington,  World Bank (2013), Project Appraisal Document –
Geothermal, Report No: 68254-DJ, World Bank, Washington,  World Bank (2014),
“Doing Business 2014: Economy Profile – Djibouti”, World Bank, Washington, ,
country/DJIpdf?ver= World Bank and Parsons Brinckerhoff (2009), Least Cost
Electricity Master Plan, Djibouti, Project no 69203, World Bank, Washington,
World Bank Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (2014), Djibouti:
Etude des Options ’Electrification de 19 Villages par Energie Solaire Rapport
Final (Djibouti: Electrification Options Study of 19 Villages Solar Energy Final
Report), Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility at the World Bank,
Washington,  38 ANNEX Detailed description of recommended action ON-GRID Action
Implement long-term energy plan All renewable energy resources Resource-service
pair() Djibouti’ energy need plans for the next 20 years support its Vision
master plan for power generation and transmission is under preparation The
ministry will ensure the master plan covers energy efficiency as an important
resource due to its cost-effectiveness Multiple technology fronts should also be
considered as well as  range of options aligned with the country’ long-term
energy pathway The ministry will ensure the master plan includes measures
stimulating private sector investment, and also strengthens the country’ case
for development partner support Description MERN, all relevant national
stakeholders and development partners Actors Mid-2016 Target date Broad
consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success Action
Develop  national renewable energy policy and action plan All renewable energy
resources Resource-service pair() Djibouti has no energy policy As its energy
situation becomes more pressing and opportunities become clearer, it is now
recognised that  policy addressing energy access, affordability, resources and
regional integration is an important step The electricity access rate is about
50% including % for rural areas Energy security and high electricity tariffs are
major concern for the population These multiple challenges have helped awaken
significant ambition among Djibouti’ leaders to harness the country’ abundant
renewable energy resources to help meet national development goals However there
are no specific guidelines or road map to realise this ambition Description To
this end, MERN will take the lead in developing an energy policy embedding
renewable energy within  systematic road map for delivery It will be supported
by specific practical studies and assessments on how to fulfil the 100%
renewable energy ambition, the likely cost implications and finance options This
needs to be complemented by real policies and implementation mechanisms to
deliver meaningful results MERN and all relevant stakeholders Actors End-2015
Target date Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys
to success 39 Action Strengthen legal system and regulatory framework All
renewable energy resources Resource-service pair() Djibouti does not have  solid
or clear legislative and regulatory framework governing electricity production
This lack of regulation and legal instruments is  major obstacle, especially
constraining the participation of non-state actors like IPPs and other self-
producers in power provision The Government of Djibouti is working alongside
development partners on  draft Electricity Law targeted at electricity
generation and imports It covers tariff setting, licensing, incentives
attracting private sector investment and the roles and responsibilities of
various stakeholders Description MERN will ensure the law includes legislative
elements to enable renewables deployment in the energy market in Djibouti  FiT
scheme is one of the best options for Djibouti given the high cost of fossil-
based generation An appropriate FiT would act as  major stimulus drawing IPPs to
Djibouti’ energy sector Appropriately designed and negotiated FiTs would go some
way to setting tariffs attractive to the private players as well as end-users
MERN, Ministry of Finance, private sector, EdD, all other relevant stakeholders
Actors End-2016 Target date Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant
stakeholders Keys to success 40 Action Strengthen research and development
institutions All renewable energy resources Resource-service pair() Djibouti
will depend on technologies and to  certain extent expertise from abroad in the
short term at least However it will need to work to strengthen and develop its
human capacity and upgrade its energy innovation systems to support domestic
technology adoption and development At the same time, data and information on
energy consumption in Djibouti are weak and inconsistent This makes it
notoriously difficult to plan, develop and implement energy efficiency measures
CERD and the University of Djibouti will play important roles in supporting
capacity development among practitioners, researchers and policy makers These
knowledge institutions will also support the manufacture of components through
training, information sharing, technical seminars and demonstration projects
This would both raise the confidence of development partners and private sector
actors in  position to provide grants for projects and invest in profit-making
energy ventures Description Moreover, an institution such as CERD will play
pivotal role serving as the data centre This also allows CERD to build the
required human and technical capacity to undertake regular energy demand surveys
and renewable energy assessments, both for the government and other clients
Development partners and organisations like IRENA could play  critical role in
providing technical support and training to CERD or  relevant institution that
can act as energy intelligence CERD, Université de Djibouti, MERN, private
sector, development partners and international organisations, all relevant
stakeholders Actors End-2016 Target date Broad consultation and engagement of
all relevant stakeholders Keys to success 41 Action Improve business environment
All renewable energy resources Resource-service pair() The Government of
Djibouti has made considerable efforts to improve the business environment and
reduce the high cost of production Despite the improvement recorded in doing
business in 2014 compared to 2013, the business environment in the country
remains weak in general and especially so for renewable energy Description MERN,
the Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Commerce will play  vital role
in encouraging private players, protecting the public interest and introducing
transparent processes They will do this by introducing adequate tax incentives
for investors (removal/reduction of duties on imported goods) and raising
awareness of the opportunities for direct and indirect employment creation MERN,
Ministry of Economy and Finance, private sector, all relevant stakeholders
Actors End-2017 Target date Broad consultation and engagement of all relevant
stakeholders Keys to success 42 OFF-GRID Action Develop clear rural
electrification strategy All renewable energy resources Resource-service pair()
As with most countries in the region, Djibouti electrification initiatives tend
to focus on grid-based delivery mechanisms Although almost 80% of the population
lives in urban areas, the grid-based options have limitations as they may not
reach remote or dispersed communities The recent ADDS village electrification
campaign in Djibouti is encouraging and should be scaled up MERN will work with
ADDS and relevant stakeholders to develop  robust rural electrification strategy
that lays bare the needs of rural communities This will provide clear guidance
on how to achieve progress in this sector since the broader energy policy can
easily marginalise these inhabitants The strategy would be aligned with local
provincial development plans to include short, medium and long- term access
goals supported by technology targets within predefined geographic areas for
off-grid and on-grid electrification Description MERN, ADDS, local communities,
all relevant stakeholders Actors End-2017 Target date Broad consultation and
engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success 43 Provide financial
support for small and medium solar PV Enterprises Action Off-grid PV Resource-
service pair() Due to high transaction costs, loans through commercial banks are
often not considered appropriate for investments in decentralised renewables
Rural communities with little disposable income hardly feature as clients to
these organisations Soft loans can be attractive, allowing  smaller proportion
to be placed as down payment for the total price and the rest to be spread over
number of years With bank interest rates for short and long-term loans at 14%
and 10% respectively, households and businesses are unlikely to borrow to meet
renewable energy costs Description The Government of Djibouti will continue to
play an important role in providing support through direct financing or
microfinance schemes supporting private solar PV entrepreneurs in rural energy
developments The Economic Development Fund,  dedicated source of credit for
small and medium enterprises, could to this at concessionary rates or grants
from multilateral agencies or donors Ministry of Economy and Finance, MERN,
partners and all other relevant stakeholders Actors End-2017 Target date Broad
consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success 44