Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………………: Page:  III Programme and risk management :
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/DJI/
Programme rationale  The Republic of Djibouti is  small multi-ethnic nation of
over 860,000 inhabitants1 The small country has experienced exceptional economic
growth in recent years; still, it has one of the lowest human development index
ratings (172nd of 188 countries), and the lowest among the Arab states2 Located
in the horn of Africa, where political and humanitarian instability prevail,
Djibouti hosts over 27,000 refugees from Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and Yemen,
representing  per cent of the population and one of the highest densities in the
world, and other migrants The country is affected by poverty, food insecurity,
malnutrition and limited access to services, and is vulnerable to climate
change-induced risks The pressure from the migrant and refugee populations
strains its limited resources and infrastructure  In ‘Djibouti Vision 2035’, the
Government identifies development priorities aimed at graduating to middle-
income country status and becoming  major commercial and logistic regional hub
Implementation has been set in the five-year accelerated growth strategy for the
promotion of employment, known as SCAPE (), which identifies four strategic
priorities: economic growth, human capital development, regional sustainable
development, and good governance The strategy commits to reducing absolute
poverty by more than one-third, decreasing unemployment, and ensuring universal
access to basic health, energy and clean water It also aims to prepare the
country for more inclusive growth and for climate change While the Government is
committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,  achieving sustainable
development goals and ‘leaving no one behind’, Djibouti requires scaled-up
action to tackle its significant vulnerabilities, inequalities, humanitarian and
development challenges  Benefiting from  unique geographical location, Djibouti
has experienced outstanding average economic growth of  per cent over the last
decade, driven mainly by investments from international shipping, construction
companies, military bases (China, France, Italy, Japan, and the United States)
and the China Silk Road Yet, its risk of debt distress has increased The private
sector remains nascent, and the number of small and medium enterprises limited
Economic growth has yet to translate into progress in job creation and poverty
reduction The state remains the major source of jobs, and the gap between
workforce skills and market demands, combined with significant gender and
geographic disparities, has hindered progress in youth employment and poverty
eradication  Basic and extreme poverty levels remain high (41 and 23 per cent,
respectively) Rural areas are more severely affected (63 per cent basic and 45
per cent extreme) than the capital (34 and 17 per cent, respectively) In rural
areas, poverty among female-headed households is 29 per cent, against 17 per
cent for male-headed ones Economic inequality is high and increasing Djibouti is
young nation, with more than 75 per cent of the population below 35 years of age
Yet unemployment affects almost 39 per cent of the workforce, and 72 per cent of
youth Women are less likely to be employed (49 per cent) than men (34 per cent),
as is rural population (59 per cent) compared to the urban (37 per cent)
Ministry of Economy and Finance, Human Development Report, 2016  Humanitarian
Needs Overview, United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Assistance/Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
Jan The President of the Republic of Djibouti stated to the General Assembly in
2015, “It is unquestionable that realization of the sustainable development
goals is intrinsically linked to national ownership of Agenda 2030”
International Monetary Fund (IMF) country report No 17 (2017): “Djibouti
continues to be at high-risk of debt distress; all debt sustainability
indicators are above the threshold; large-scale investments raised public
external debt from 50 to 85 per cent of gross domestic product in the last two
years”  Department of Statistics and Demographic Studies, 2013 Présentation de
nouveaux seuils de pauvreté calculés sur la base de ’enquête budget consommation
de Department of Statistics and Demographic Studies, Évolution des phénomènes de
la pauvreté et des inégalités en Djibouti,  : The Gini coefficient increased
from 39 (2002) to 44 (2013)  Department of Statistics and Demographic Studies,
Enquête sur ’emploi et le secteur informel  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/  Limited and unequal
healthcare services constrain access of vulnerable groups to the labour market
Stigma affects retroviral treatment and livelihoods opportunities for people
living with HIV (mostly youth and women), who make up 35 per cent of the ,000
people Climate change has contributed to malaria resurgence, with 16,000
confirmed cases in 2016 against only 24 in 10 Efforts to contain tuberculosis,
which affects mostly women,11 resulted in  reduction of cases,12 but the risk
remains high Limitations in drugs management, and in the health information and
surveillance systems, coupled with poor water and sanitation, further increase
the risk of diarrhoeal and tropical diseases outbreaks  The situation in rural
areas is compounded by fragile ecosystems, vulnerability to climate change and
water scarcity Poor soil, limited vegetation, low rainfall and rising
temperatures constrain agricultural development and aggravate dependency on
imports of basic goods They also threaten cattle production, and the livelihoods
of small-scale farmers and herders, especially women13 Surface water resources
are extremely limited, and underground water requires intensive extraction The
nomadic populations in Djibouti and the neighbouring countries must move over
increasing distances, often across borders, in search of pasture, disrupting
social cohesion and traditional mechanisms of dispute and conflict resolution
The use of firewood by rural communities without access to modern, clean energy
sources exacerbates the pressure on fragile ecosystems The coastal areas, where
88 per cent of the population live, host critical biological diversity and
marine ecosystems that are at risk in the absence of protection and sustainable
management  Climate change has eroded communities’ resilience14 and reduced
opportunities for sustainable development As noted by Djibouti’ Second National
Communication on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(2014), the country may see  ° Celsius temperature rise and up to  17 per cent
reduction in rainfall by In recognition of its climate vulnerability, the
country developed, with UNDP support, its national adaptation plan, and
submitted its nationally determined contributions to implement the Paris
Agreement, setting its vision for climate action and calling for approximately $
billion in new investments The priority is to address increased exposure to
droughts and floods to reduce social vulnerability and damage to physical assets
and sources of livelihoods It is estimated that more than 280,000 people
required humanitarian assistance in 2017, including Djiboutians living in
extreme poverty, refugees, asylum seekers, and migrants15  Djibouti has
demonstrated an overall improvement in governance over the last 10 years, and
ranks 34th out of 54 on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance (2016) Djibouti
faces challenges concerning rights, participation, accountability and public
management While public service delivery and decision power mechanisms remain
centralized, the establishment of the Ministry of Decentralization in 2016 and
the regional development plans (2017) are good opportunities to improve
coordination and delivery of basic services and sustainable development goals at
local level The public policy monitoring and evaluation system is nascent, and,
with support from UNDP, the Government recently launched  framework of dialogue
for aid coordination aligned with the four axes of its accelerated growth
strategy to facilitate cross-sectoral coordination within the Government and
with development partners Civil society, the private sector and academia will
gradually be integrated into the framework  Vision 2035 and the accelerated
growth strategy provide important frameworks for implementing the 2030 Agenda
and the sustainable development goals in Djibouti  2016 pilot, ‘mainstreaming,
acceleration and policy support’, supported by UNDP, reviewed overall policy and
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) report, 2016: Sero-
prevalence ( per cent) is high in the  age group and among women 10 National
Anti-Malaria Programme, annual report, 2016 11 National anti-tuberculosis
programme, midterm review report, 2017: On average, there are two women for each
man with tuberculosis 12 World Health Organization (WHO) World Report, 2016:
Tuberculosis incidence decreased from 619 to 378 cases per 100,000 inhabitants
in  International Monetary Fund country report No 17/Article IV consultation 14
Temperatures have increased by -° per decade since World Bank, 15 Djibouti
humanitarian response plan  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/ institutional readiness to implement
the goals The rapid integrated assessment findings suggest an 80 per cent
alignment of the growth strategy with sustainable development goals targets To
ensure inclusivity in development efforts to ‘leave no one behind’, the
Government emphasizes the importance of adopting evidence-based approaches to
policy and programme formulation However, the shortage of disaggregated data,
coupled with limited capacities and statistical systems, poses  major challenge
to monitoring progress of the sustainable development indicators and goals
Djibouti stands out as the Arab country with more ratified international human
rights instruments, yet structural challenges remain in their implementation The
Government has committed to strengthening the capacity of the National
Commission on Human Rights and ensuring its independence and compliance with the
Paris Principles The Government also agreed to implement several recommendations
from the universal periodic review, 2013,16 and is preparing  new one (May 2018)
Djibouti is among the few countries in the Arab region that have ratified the
Convention to End Discrimination Against Women without reservation However,
gender inequalities and harmful practices persist, while inadequate data erodes
its position on the gender inequality index Maternal mortality is high, and
health problems related to female genital mutilation17 are widespread Women
suffer higher rates of HIV/AIDS (59 per cent of the total) During the  cycle,
UNDP supported the Government in formulating key planning tools, including its
long-term Vision 2035and the accelerated growth strategy, , as well as policies
and strategic instruments covering employment, climate change, energy, mining
resources, social services, decentralization, and the rule of law Recognizing
the UNDP capacity to formulate and implement comprehensive initiatives for
sustainable development and resilience-building, the Government selected it as
implementing agency for the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green
Climate Fund Further, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
identified UNDP as its principal recipient ad interim, based on its convening
role and its experience in supporting large-scale health programmes The previous
country programme supported water resources management and agro-pastoral
livelihood interventions for rural communities; increased the access to water
for over ,000 vulnerable people; and developed family-scale agriculture for 600
persons, reducing their food insecurity It built government capacity to manage
complex adaptation projects and develop  national energy conservation action
plan to mitigate the effects of climate change and reduce the energy bill In
health, through its role as principal recipient for the Global Fund, UNDP
facilitated access to treatment to fight HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, and
contributed to scaling up, by 50 per cent, the number of HIV patients under
treatment, reaching 99 per cent coverage on HIV testing of pregnant women; and
strengthening health systems for monitoring, evaluation, procurement and supply
management The UNDP employment programme attained  65 per cent success rate
among young professionals, improving access to the job market The midterm review
of the country programme  highlighted the positive UNDP relationship and
constructive dialogue with the Government as major strengths that built on
technical support to the state in formulating and implementing national and
sectoral planning, monitoring and evaluation processes UNDP supported the
formulation of the accelerated growth strategy – the cornerstone of development
planning and budget allocation The review recognized that declining core
resources constrained strategic investments in emerging areas and acknowledged
the importance of expanding and diversifying financial partners The convening
role of UNDP was key to the launch of the Government-led ‘framework of dialogue
for aid coordination’, which will align monitoring and evaluation of national
policies and programmes with the goal of financing development The review
highlighted areas of improvement in United Nations coordination, flexibility of
implementation modalities, communications, and advocacy 16 Last review: May 2013
(/HRC) The next review is scheduled for May 17 Prevalence is 83 per cent in the
45 -49 age group, and 42 per cent in the15-19 age group  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/ The
ability of UNDP to leverage policymaking and build capacity, combined with being
trusted partner working across sectors with multiple stakeholders, has opened
opportunities and work-streams in key cross-cutting areas Those areas are: human
rights; statistical capacity development and analysis; mainstreaming sustainable
development goals into national policies and strategies; and monitoring progress
towards the goals, in line with other global and regional initiatives (such as
the ‘Arab Development Portal’ initiative) The UNDP country programme is designed
to ensure country office agility and ability to adapt to potential changes of
the situation in the region, including  possible sudden increase in humanitarian
needs Assistance is requested to reinforce human and coordination capacities;
improve the quality, quantity, regularity, dissemination and utilization of
data; promote  sustainable funding mechanism for statistics; and prioritize the
integration of sustainable development goals into national strategies As pointed
out by the ‘mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support’ mission, the review
of the accelerated growth strategy will be an opportunity to advance goals
mainstreaming efforts and strengthen commitments to ‘leave no one behind’,
including by better integrating gender equality, migration and displacement, and
resilience to climate change and ecosystem protection issues, across various
sectors The review will provide an opportunity to enhance potential synergies
between sectoral priorities, promote inter-sectoral coordination, and further
integrate the monitoring framework of the accelerated growth strategy with the
sustainable development goals The United Nations Development Assistance
Framework , promotes joint programming focused on ‘leaving no one behind’ and
creates opportunities for collaboration between development and humanitarian
partners It targets the most vulnerable, including poor climate-vulnerable agro-
pastoralists; people with disabilities; the unemployed; sick people; commercial
sex workers; prisoners, and others Rural areas, where poverty is concentrated,
will receive special attention The selection of Djibouti as  pilot country for
the comprehensive refugee response framework provides an opportunity for
improved response to refugee and population movements, development and
humanitarian challenges, in collaboration with national authorities, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and the World Bank
The country office will capitalize on the multi-ethnic nature of the Djibouti,
its relative stability, the presence of the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) headquarters, the China Silk Road initiative for
interregional collaboration initiatives between the Arab States and Africa
bureaus, South-South cooperation, and the engagement of civil society, the
private sector, and academia II Programme priorities and partnerships The
country programme , will support the Government in implementing the 2030 Agenda,
achieving Vision 2035 and the accelerated growth strategy, and contributing to
the outcomes of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework , and the
UNDP Strategic Plan , taking into account contextual challenges and
opportunities The country programme document is based on the common country
assessment; government and United Nations Development Assistance Framework
priorities; lessons learned from previous cycle; and UNDP comparative advantages
in the progress of Djibouti towards sustainable development The main goal of the
country programme is to accelerate achievement of the sustainable development
goals It tackles interconnected development, humanitarian and resilience
challenges and seeks to reduce poverty, gender and geographic inequalities and
exclusion It fosters environmental sustainability and resilience through
integrated strategies It supports the most vulnerable and enhances national and
subnational institutional capacities for inclusive growth, poverty reduction,
prevention of violent extremism, and enhancement of social cohesion The country
programme rotates around three interrelated programme pillars, which together
can generate more catalytic, transformative and systemic changes and help of
Djibouti attain its sustainable development goals The country programme
implementation framework is based on  strict set of gender, human rights, and
crisis prevention standards to ensure that the concept of ‘leaving no one
behind’ can be translated into effective actions UNDP will strive to bridge gaps
in  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/ access to basic services and improve the livelihoods of
youth, people living with HIV, women, and the ‘mobile’ population (migrants,
displaced persons and refugees), in collaboration with other stakeholders UNDP
will build on its experience in health system strengthening and Global Fund
management to scale up its contribution to fighting HIV, tuberculosis and
malaria The country programme will support the participation of Djibouti in
global and regional initiatives through South-South and triangular cooperation,
to address other cross-cutting challenges, such as preventing and countering
violent extremism, anti-corruption, refugees, migration and displacement, youth
participation, women empowerment, and well-being Strengthened livelihoods and
access to basic health services This outcome will especially contribute to the
achievement of goals , , , , , , 10 and UNDP will support the Ministry of Labour
in formulating the national employment policy action plan, , focusing on youth,
women, and rural and mobile populations UNDP will support the Government and
other partners in promoting green, inclusive, climate-resilient livelihood
opportunities In coordination with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and other partners, UNDP will assist authorities in
reviewing the educational curriculum and optimizing the match between job supply
and demand UNDP will work with the Chamber of Commerce and the private sector in
facilitating youth scholarships to improve employability UNDP will continue to
work with Ministry of Women to promote economic empowerment of rural women In
collaboration with the Secretariat of State for Youth and Sports and other
partners, UNDP will promote youth entrepreneurship and professional skills in
community development centres All activities will be conducted in collaboration
with the State Secretariat for Social Affairs To strengthen human capital in
Djibouti, UNDP will reinforce institutional capacities of the civil society,
including those representing people living with AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
UNDP will support the scaling-up of prevention and treatment to reach the most
vulnerable, namely pastoralists, refugees, migrants, commercial sex workers,
pregnant women and children under age five In addition, UNDP will continue
strengthening the capacity of the procurement, supply management and information
system of the Ministry of Health as part of implementing the collective outcome
on health, in collaboration with other United Nations organizations and with the
UNDP-Global Fund partnership, within the ‘new way of working’ framework
Environmental sustainability and climate resilience This outcome will contribute
especially to the achievement of goals , , , 13, 14 and Recognizing the far-
reaching effects of climate change on the achievement of development goals in
Djibouti, the UNDP contribution will focus on technical and policy advice,
operational support, partnership building and resources mobilization from the
Least Developed Country Fund for Climate Adaptation and the Green Climate Fund
to achieve the priorities of the national adaptation plan and nationally
determined contributions This will include building resilience of urban areas
for integrated water resource management and reducing the risk of impacts from
climatic disasters, such as floods It also includes technical assistance to
build food and water security in rural areas, making them resilient to
increasing droughts, and building climate-resilient livelihoods Decision-making
capacity will be enhanced across ministries to implement numerous multilateral
environmental agreements in an integrated manner, with  focus on mainstreaming
global obligations into sectoral and decentralized decision-making Cooperation
will continue with the Ministries of Housing and Environment; Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries; Energy and Natural Resources; and Infrastructure and
Transport, as well as with United Nations partners, civil society and industry
stakeholders, to enhance the sustainable use of land, ecosystems and natural
resources With support from the Global Environment Facility and other donors,
priority focus will be fragile marine ecosystems and coastal biodiversity,
helping Djibouti develop capacities of marine protected area systems and
mainstream biodiversity protection into industry sectors Cooperation will build
on past successes in ecosystem-based adaptation to climate change through agro-
pastoral gardens in rural areas  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/ Enabling and inclusive
governance framework for sustainable development This outcome will contribute to
achievement of all sustainable development goals, the national development
framework and country programme outcomes, by expanding inclusive governance,
human rights monitoring, and gender responsive programming UNDP will support
national and subnational capacities for inclusive, evidence-based governance,
development planning, programming, and aid coordination UNDP will partner with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, the Ministry of
Economy and Finance, United Nations organizations and the World Bank to
facilitate the harmonization and acceleration of the sustainable development
goals and national development frameworks UNDP will support national and local
capacities in implementing regional development plans, and will strengthen the
functionality of the Ministry of Decentralization and regional councils It will
support implementation of the national strategy for statistics development in
enhancing the availability and quality of gender- and geographically
disaggregated data to support goals monitoring and reporting UNDP will support
line ministry capacities for data utilization in planning, programming,
monitoring and evaluation of sectoral policies and strategies In line with the
comprehensive refugee response framework, UNDP will work with UNHCR and other
partners to include refugee and migrant responses into national development
planning and to promote legal stay for those seeking and in need of
international protection, and to foster their self-reliance UNDP will provide
technical support to enhance the functionality of the government framework for
aid coordination, to ensure incorporation of the new way of working principles
as  collective action for producing results and increasing efficiency With other
partners, UNDP will support the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Planning, and South-South
cooperation on aid management, development finance and humanitarian-nexus best
practices UNDP will support the National Commission on Human Rights in
developing and implementing an action plan to build its technical and financial
capacities, become independent, and comply with the ‘Paris principles’ Specific
support will be provided during the preparation and follow-up of the universal
periodic review These initiatives will be implemented in collaboration with the
Ministry of Justice, the parliament, civil society organizations, the Global,
African and Arab networks for national human rights institutions, and United
Nations partners, including the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) III Programme and risk management This country programme document
outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary tool
of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and the
internal control framework UNDP will support national capacities in achieving
successful national implementation of the country programme Exceptionally,
national implementation may be replaced by direct implementation for part or all
of the programme in situations of force majeure, or delivery exigencies
compelled by counterpart capacity limitations or donor requirements Pursuant to
Executive Board decision 2013/, all direct costs associated with project
implementation will be charged to the concerned projects The country office will
apply UNDP social and environmental standards and accountability mechanisms as
normal risk management practice, using multiple mechanisms The harmonized
approach to cash transfers will be applied to manage additional risks The
country office manages risks related to national implementation capacities Given
the complex and expanding country programme portfolio, limited capacities may
delay programme delivery and results UNDP will strengthen country office
capacities to upgrade the quality of sustainable development policy advisory
services to national counterparts, practical application of the humanitarian-
development nexus, disaster risk management, and gender equality Project  /15
DP/DCP/DJI/ management capabilities will be strengthened through  project
dedicated to improving national execution and provision of support services The
country office manages risks related to challenges in resource mobilization for
development, which is constrained by the aggravation of crises in the region
UNDP core resources will focus on strategic and innovative investments to
leverage and scale up funding from non- traditional partners, the private
sector, South-South and triangular cooperation, international financial
institutions and vertical funds (Green Climate Fund, GEF, and Global Fund)
Exposure to climate crises and scale-up of regional tensions may result in an
increased influx of population from neighbouring countries, and result in
additional pressure on the limited basic services and livelihood opportunities
in Djibouti UNDP will mainstream climate resilience and social cohesion between
the mobile population and host communities UNDP will build on and support the
existing coordination platforms with government, humanitarian, military forces
and other partners, and the integration of the humanitarian-development nexus at
the resident coordinator’ office level UNDP will establish  mechanism for media
monitoring and information-sharing with UNDP offices in neighbouring countries
for the early identification of risks that may affect human, programmatic and
financial resources The programme will remain flexible to respond to possible
climate- and geopolitical-related shocks in line with the humanitarian-
development nexus, the upcoming United Nations reform, and UNDP Strategic Plan
priorities In line with the new Strategic Plan, the country programme will
continue to offer an operational platform for the wider United Nations system
and lead development of the business operations strategy  /15 DP/DCP/DJI/ IV
Monitoring and evaluation As part of the effectiveness of cooperation
development, project steering committees, monitoring missions and sectoral aid
coordination meetings will be organized to review progress and adjust the
programme as required Two to five per cent of project budgets will be allocated
for monitoring and evaluation, and one per cent for communication Innovative
tools for crowd sourcing, and real-time data to facilitate inclusive monitoring
and evaluation, will be explored and tested The engagement of the UNDP Arab
States and Africa regional bureaus, as well as IGAD, will be instrumental in
monitoring programme implementation against regional development trends In
response to  Government request, UNDP will build the technical and financial
capacities of the Direction of Statistics to collect, analyse and share
disaggregated data in  timely fashion UNDP will facilitate national
prioritization of the sustainable development goals, their alignment with the
national development strategy, and their overall monitoring and reporting The
UNDP ‘gender marker’ will be used to monitor country programme expenditures and
improve gender-responsive programming (50 per cent), implementation and
monitoring To ensure continued thought leadership and programme effectiveness,
UNDP will conduct several studies regarding critical issues affecting Djibouti,
which may include multi-dimensional poverty assessments, adaptation of the
educational curriculum to job demand, measures to design or adapt climate-proof
assets, and data collection, analysis and use for evidence-based policy and
programme planning These studies will be carried out in collaboration with the
Government, the national university, the UNDP Regional Bureau, United Nations
partners, the World Bank and, where possible, through South-South cooperation
/15         /    /   Annex Results and resources framework for Djibouti () /
National priority: Economic growth, competitiveness and leading role of the
private sector (SCAPE axis ), and development of human capital (SCAPE AXIS )
UNDAF outcome: The most vulnerable populations have fair access to employment
opportunities Secondary outcome: Access to basic social services is improved, in
particular for the most vulnerable populations and groups \ Strategic Plan
outcome: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating
productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and
excluded / Indicative resources by outcome (in $ thousands) Major partners /
partnerships frameworks UNDAF outcome indicators, baselines, targets Data source
and frequency of collection Indicative country programme outputs (including
indicators, baselines and targets) 18 Unemployment rate [IRRF , sustainable
development goal (SDG) ] Baseline (2015): - Women 49% - Men 34% - Rural 59% -
Youth: 72% Target: - Women 45% - Men 31% - Rural 55% - Youth: 67% Data sources:
- Statistical yearbooks - Direction of Statistics (DISED) surveys - Demographic
Health Survey (DHS) - Global AIDS response progress report (GARP) - National
AIDS programme report (PLSS) - National tuberculosis programme report - National
malaria programme report Output  Enhanced institutional and individual
capacities for inclusive access to sustainable livelihoods, inclusive finance
and job opportunities - Ministry of Labour - National Employment, Training and
Job Placement Agency (ANEFIP) - Chamber of Commerce - Agriculture Ministry -
Environment Ministry - Health Ministry - State Secretariat for Social Affairs -
Country coordinating mechanism - Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
- Other United Nations organizations (WHO, UNAIDS, UNFPA, WFP, UNICEF and UNHCR)
- World Bank, and other technical and financial development partners - Civil
society groups : National employment action plan (NEAP) [linked to IRRF ]
Baseline: NEAP is outdated Target: NEAP () formulated II: Operational registry
of jobs and employment (ROME) [linked to IRRF ] Baseline: Non-existent Target:
Developed and published Regular: ,000 Other: 10,700 Number of new HIV infections
per ,000 sero-negative people [SDG ] Baseline:  Target:  III: Number of
livelihoods/decent jobs created and strengthened [IRRF ] Baseline: 700 Target:
Improved livelihood for ,000 people, including at least ,000 women, ,000 in
rural communities, ,000 youth ( years old) and 500 floating persons (nomads,
migrants or refugees) Frequency: At the end of cycle (2022); also monitored
annually or when updated national data are available Estimated mother-to-child
HIV transmission rate [UNDAF] Baseline: 19% Target: % Data sources: Reports from
ANEFIP, UNDP-supported projects and community development centres, published
action plan and ROME   -      18 Baselines and targets in line with the country
programme cycle (January 2018 and December 2022)   -      Incidence of
tuberculosis per 100,000 people per year [SDG ] Baseline: 378 Target: 181 Output
: Capacities and systems for access to prevention and care services of HIV,
tuberculosis and malaria strengthened Proportion of health centres providing
mother-to-child transmission services Baseline: 40% Target: 88% Incidence of
malaria per ,000 people per year [SDG ] Baseline: 63 Target: 53 Proportion of
pregnant seropositive women on antiretroviral treatment [linked IRRF ] Baseline:
85% Target: 90% Level of loss of medical products due to damage and/or expiry
Baseline:% Target: % Percentage of timely reports from Health management
information system and/or routine reporting units Baseline: 57% Target: 80%
Proportion of malaria cases properly treated Baseline: 87% Target: 95% Data
sources: DHS, GARP, PLSS, Health Statistical Yearbook, National tuberculosis
programme report and national malaria programme report National priority:
Regional development centres and sustainable development (SCAPE axis ) UNDAF
outcome: The livelihoods of poor rural and peri-urban communities are being
enhanced to strengthen their resilience to climate risks, shocks and food
insecurity Secondary outcome: Improved management and protection of natural
resources and ecosystems enhance the living conditions of the poorest
populations Strategic Plan outcome: Countries are able to reduce the likelihood
of conflict and lower the risk of natural disasters, including from climate
chang  Rural population in phases  and  according to the integrated food
security phase classification (IPC) [UNDAF] Data sources: - Surveys from WFP and
DISED - Annual IPC report Output  Strengthened institutional and policy
frameworks for mainstreaming of gender-responsive climate change and disaster
risk management across sectors - Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock & Fisheries
- Ministry of Regular: 550 Other: 34,600         /  / /   /           /    /
Baseline: 130,830 Target: 110,000 - Official journals - Reports from Ministry of
Environment with area dimensions and evaluation of management performance
Environment - Ministry of Infrastructure & Transport - Regional councils - Green
Climate Fund - GEF Small Grants Programme - Private sector - financial and
technical development partners, including World Bank - Other agencies, mainly
FAO, WFP, UNOPS and UNICEF Number of new national/subnational development and
key sectoral plans with some disaster and/or climate risk management components
[IRRF ] Baseline:  Target:  / / Number of hectares of coastal and marine
habitats that are managed sustainably under an in-situ conservation regime
[contributing to IRRF ] Baseline: 51,880 Target: 60,880 Extent to which climate
finance is being accessed [IRRF ] Baseline: Not adequately19 Target: Partially
Frequency: At end of cycle (2022); also monitored annually Data sources: Reports
from projects and Ministry of Environment (technical focal point for climate
change finance) Output  Enhanced national and subnational capacities for
integrated gender-responsive water resources management, land conservation and
ecosystem protection Capacities to implement national or subnational plans for
gender-responsive integrated water resource management [IRRF ] Baseline: Not
adequately Target: Partially Restored and protected transhumance routes
Baseline:  Target:  Extension of erosion-protected land Baseline:  km2 Target:
km2 Data sources: Reports from projects (including capacity assessment and
monitoring), the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture   -
19 Scale:  - Not adequately,  - Very partially,  - Partially, and  - Largely   -
National priority: Public governance and capacity building (SCAPE axis ) UNDAF
outcome: National and local government institutions and actors ensure the
effective, efficient and transparent management of public re sources for
inclusive and equitable development Strategic Plan outcome: Citizen expectations
for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger
systems ability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance Rank in the
‘Participation and Human Rights’ category of the Ibrahim Index of African
Governance [UNDAF] Baseline: 41 Target: 40 Output : National capacities for
inclusive and evidence- based governance and development planning, programming
and aid coordination are strengthened for sustainable development National
development strategy (SCAPE) Baseline: Current strategy due in 2019 Target: Next
strategy formulated Data sources: - Mo Ibrahim Foundation annual report -
Official journal (law adopted and decree of application in force) - Reports of
the regional councils - Ministry of Economy, Finance and Planning - Secretariat
of the Framework of Dialogue for Aid Coordination - Ministry of Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation - Commissariat of Planning - DISED - Delegated
Ministry of Decentralization - National Commission on Human Rights (NCHR) -
Ministry of Justice - Other line ministries - Prison authorities - Parliament -
Global Alliance of National Commissions on Human Rights - Arab Network for
National Human Rights Institutions - Network of African National Human Rights
Institutions - Civil society - OHCHR - UNHCR, - World Bank - Regional councils
Legislative and regulatory framework for transparency and dissemination of
information [UNDAF] Baseline: Non-existent Target: Available National
statistical capacity index Baseline: (2016) Target: 56 Frequency: At end of
cycle (2022); also monitored annually SDG mainstreaming and acceleration in the
national development framework Baseline: Rapid integrated assessment Target:
Harmonized sustainable development policy framework Number of regions
implementing their regional development plans [UNDAF] Baseline:  Target:
Regular: ,520 Other: ,800 National capacity to use updated and disaggregated
data to monitor and report progress on national development goals aligned with
2030 Agenda [IRRF ] Baseline: Not Adequate Target: Partial Operational
effectiveness of the mechanism for aid coordinati on [IRRF ] Baseline: Not
adequate Target: Partial Annual reports on development cooperation Baseline:
Target:          /  / / Capacity of the regional councils for planning,
budgeting and/or monitoring basic services delivery [IRRF ]   /           /    /
- European Union - Financial and technical development partners and other United
Nations organizations Baseline: No capacity Target: Partial capacity / /
National development plans include refugee and migrant responses Baseline:
Target: Data sources: Reports from projects and ministries (Finance, Foreign
Affairs and Decentralization), official journal, budget of the national
statistical plan, report on the evaluation of national statistical legislation,
annual reports of the World Bank statistical capacity index, and satisfaction
surveys on aid coordination framework Output  The national mechanism and
institutional capacities for monitoring and reporting on the status of human
rights and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women are strengthened Accreditation of the National Commission on Human
Rights (NCHR) by the Global Alliance of National Commissions on Human Rights
[linked to IRRF ] Baseline: Non-accredited Target: Accredited Number of training
sessions organized for departmental and civil society representatives on the
universal periodic review for the production of information and its follow-up
Baseline:  Target:  per year Mechanism to follow up on the implementation of the
recommendations of the international human rights conventions and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, including
female genital mutilation [linked to IRRF ] Baseline: Non-operational Target:
Operational   -        -      Data sources: Reports from the National Human
Rights Commission, Mo Ibrahim Foundation, and projects (including information on
treaty bodies and conventions, and implementation of recommendations from
international human rights instruments)         /  / /   /