Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page: 10
DP/DCP/CUB/  Programme rationale  National context and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development  Cuba makes important efforts to achieve sustainable
development that benefits Cuban women and men Its high human development index
score of 777 (placing it 73rd on  global scale) is the result of achievements in
education, health and life expectancy Among the indicators showing better
performance than expected given its level of income are: women’ representation
in parliament, life expectancy, child malnutrition, average schooling, and
pupil-teacher ratio in primary education  Very positive social indicators are
maintained, including an infant mortality rate of  per ,000 live births and
mortality rate in children under five of  per ,The average educational level of
the population over 25 years of age stands at years, and school-life expectancy
at 14 years  However, there are difficulties in maintaining the levels achieved
and promoting sustainable development Despite current levels of equity, there
are differences between and within territories and among population groups In
connection with the provincial human development index, there are differences
between the provinces and the capital city, with the eastern region facing the
most unfavourable situation The country recognizes the need to cover, in
specific and differentiated manner, population groups under vulnerability
conditions  in selected territories There is  need to reduce gender gaps in
productive chains, priority sectors and decision -making bodies at the local
level; contribute to modifying stereotypes that limit the empowerment of women
and lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual and intersex people; further apply the
gender approach to territorial planning and development processes; and
strengthen gender statistics and analysis in all sustainable development
dimensions The strengthening of spaces and mechanisms for the full exercise of
the rights of people who suffer stigma and discrimination on the grounds of
gender identity, sexual diversity or serological status remains  priority
Externally, the global economic and financial context and the intensification of
the economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America substantially affect the country and limit its access to international
financial sources and markets Cuba considers that the blockade policy poses
major obstacle to the implementation of the National Economic and Social
Development Plan and of the 2030 Agenda – including the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals – by   principal task is to achieve  prosperous and efficient
economy, but the economic growth rate remains below the  per cent level, with
gross domestic product growth averaging  per cent between 2016 and Despite the
efforts made, technological gaps in the production system and mechanisms limit
the development of efficient chains Key economic sectors, such as agriculture,
have not achieved sustained growth Considering the high dependence on fossil
fuel imports (,millitons in 2017) and low efficiency in the use of energy
carriers, improved efficiency and increased use of renewable energy sources by
up to 24 per cent in the energy matrix by 2030 remains  priority The pressure on
the balance of trade has been maintained, and the country spends over one
billion dollars every year on food imports Fuel imports add to the pressure
UNDP, Human Development Report, 2018  UNDP, Human Development Report for Latin
America and the Caribbean, 2016  UNDP, Human Development Report, 2017  Including
pregnant women, girls, boys and older people  DP/DCP/CUB/  As the country lacks
access to international financial institutions, it has to make significant
efforts not to increase debt levels and to honour payment commitments Foreign
investment, which is strategic for development, remains insufficient There is
recognized need for mechanisms that may contribute to its revitalization  The
high housing deficit, estimated at 929,000 dwellings,  is aggravated by
recurrent high-intensity hurricanes Despite in comprehensive disaster risk
management, the losses caused by the last two hurricanes (Matthew in 2016 and
Irma in 2017) amounted to over $billion,  with most damage inflicted on the
housing and agricultural sectors There has been an increase in drought periods,
coastal flooding due to rising sea levels, and extreme hydro- meteorological
events, causing damage to the population and the economy The earthquake hazard
is latent, mainly in the eastern region of the country, which demands resilient
housing the country’ preparedness  The population age structure shows  high
level of aging (per cent of the people are 60 years old or above), while the
gross reproduction rate has remained below the replacement level for four
decades This has had an impact on growth patterns and economic contributions
Economic limitations have negatively affected the dynamics of social
development, requiring optimization in the use of resources for social services
They have also put pressure on health, social protection and care services,
particularly with respect to quality and sustainability, and ensuring the care
of specific population groups and those in vulnerability situations  To address
those challenges, the Cuban government continues to update its economic and
social models The preservation of social achievements and the full development
of human beings – leaving nobody unprotected – are ratified as priorities Key
programmatic documents for national strategic planning conceptualize the
development model, setting priorities and lines of action They are the
Conceptualization of the Cuban Economic and Social Development Model, the update
of the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines, , and the bases for the National
Economic and Social Development Plan (known as PNDES) until The plan, adopted in
2017, identifies six strategic areas: socialist, effective, efficient and
socially transformation and international integration; infrastructure; human
potential, science, technology and innovation; natural resources and
environment; and human developmen  and social equity and justice, as well as six
major economic sectors (without neglecting others) in  first stage between 2019
and They are: tourism, biotechnological and renewables; pharmaceutical
construction; and professional services At the sectoral level, priorities focus
on stimulating food production, housing, sustainable tourism, and
computerization All this goes hand in hand with protection and rational use of
natural resources, conservation of ecosystems, environmental quality, and
reduction of vulnerabilities to the impact of climate change and extreme hydro-
meteorological events under the State plan to confront climate change (‘Task-
Life’) Efforts will be made to address issues such as demographic dynamics,
population aging, and care services The development model is being updated and,
after  broad process of consultation, the new Constitution was approved in 2019
to legitimize citizen ’ rights, promote recognition of and respect for family
diversity, and improve ways of coping with integrated government; productive
sector, food production; energy, particularly  Ministry of Construction, Cuban
Housing Policy  National Office of Statistics and Information, Environmental
Outlook, 2017  Error! Hyperlink reference not valid  DP/DCP/CUB/ gender violence
situations The environmental sustainability approach will be incorporated and
the right to  healthy environment protected The plan grants municipal
governments greater powers to promote local development; redefines the functions
of provincial governments; and redesigns the structure and functions of the
Government In 2019, Cuba presented its first progress report on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, reaffirming that “the
adoption of the 2030 Agenda is  State commitment,  national priority that
receives  practical response in the alignment of the 17 Goals with the strategic
areas contained in the National Plan”  national group was established by
ministerial resolution under the leadership of the Ministry of Economy It is
composed of national entities and representatives of civil society organizations
in charge of Goals implementation, and territorial groups were established to
follow up on the 2030 Agenda Efforts are being made to strengthen information
and statistical systems in support of decision-making under  process that seeks
to update the economic model and monitor the 2030 Agenda  Lessons learned Two
performance evaluations, one evaluation of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, one evaluation of the cooperation programme and 11 project
evaluations were conducted between 2014 and The evalua tion of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework highlighted the interagency initiatives
that mobilized additional resources and achieved greater articulation with
national institutions UNDP was involved in six joint initiatives, including five
as the lead agency The report stressed that several cooperation partners had
praised UNDP delivery capacity and inter-agency complementarities in disaster
response and recovery, which maximized impact UNDP participated in three inter-
agency action plans The evaluation report highlighted that the logic of
establishing platforms, especially the articulated platform for integrated
territorial development (known as PADIT) was valued by the country and by the
agencies concerned The independent country programme evaluation in Cuba
recognized that “UNDP’ long-standing presence, territorial coverage and
partnership with national and local governments have strategically positioned it
as  trusted and respected development partner that has efficiently implemented
innovative projects and added value to the development and implementation of
national policies and strategies in key and at times sensitive and new areas
through technical advice of the highly skilled local staff and partners and
UNDP’ global network” The report also recognized that “UNDP is perceived as
strategic partner The continuity of its programme in specific thematic areas and
geographic locations, and the close partnership with the government, at the
national and local levels, have helped position UNDP as  ‘go-to agency’ By
supporting South-South cooperation mechanisms, UNDP has facilitated timely
access to knowledge and experiences, and has generated and promoted better
articulation between national and local actors” UNDP contributed to the
development and implementation of the energy policy and community access to
electricity based on renewable sources of energy, and to the development of
policies, standards, and methodologies on biodiversity, climate change and
environmental sustainability, as well as the implementation of those policies in
territories and economic sectors The development of the value-chain management
Ministry of Economy, National Assembly of People’ Power  Error! Hyperlink
reference not valid  DP/DCP/CUB/ approach for food products was also key,
leading to  reported increase in productivity and  reduction in imports UNDP
support for decentralization facilitated the institutionalization of work
methodologies and local planning and positioned UNDP to continue supporting
local development Its response to and support of early hurricane recovery
reaffirmed important lessons in risk prevention and resilience building UNDP
collaboration with the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the Pan-American
Health Organization (PAHO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) contributed
to Cuba becoming, in 2015, the first country to eliminate mother-to-child
transmission of HIV UNDP supported the national HIV response programme by
strengthening national health networks and strategic planning, monitoring and
response capa cities UNDP helped to promote gender equality and women’
empowerment – and to integrate that perspective into local development plans –
and supported the design and implementation of institutional gender strategies
Its work was recognized with the Gender Equality Gold Seal in 2013, 2014 and
Recognition of the need to strengthen cooperation in energy and seismic risk
prevention, and to apply the population and gender approach in greater depth,
contributed to transformational changes in equity Those lessons are incorporated
into the present programme II Programme priorities and partnerships This
programme contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework that was agreed between Cuba and the United Nations system, and
addresses the strategic priorities of the country expressed in the 2030 National
Economic and Social Development Plan and the progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals Expected results are based on an extensive involving national
and territorial actors, consultation and exchange process representatives of
ministries, territorial governments, institutions, academ ia, civil society, and
cooperation partners Each expected result will prioritize  multi- dimensional
development approach combining economic improvement, people’ well-being and
empowerment, sustainable management of natural resources, climate change
adaptation and mitigation, and comprehensive risk management UNDP will promote
articulation between state, non-state, civil-society and community-based
organizations whose actions contribute to change The gender approach, the
empowerment of women, generational issues, and the territorial approach will all
be considered cross-cutting issues Innovation, technology and knowledge
transfer, and South-South cooperation will be key areas under the programme The
expected results under the programme will inform the UNDP Strategic Plan,
2018-United Nations organizations will become important partners, contributing
experience and know-how Special follow-up will be provided to the common chapter
Building on the vision of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals,
partnerships will be promoted and strengthened UNDP will continue facilitating
access to instruments and tools  hat support national efforts for articulation
of and follow-up to the Goals, and for capacity-building  National and local
governments and institutions implement comprehensive, sustainable, equitable and
inclusive territorial development strategies within the framework of the
decentralization process  DP/DCP/CUB/ UNDP will support the implementation of
the new Constitution through capacity-building territorial governments;
application of planning and management tools with  cross-sectoral vision that
takes into account the sustainable management of natural resources and climate
change adaptation and mitigation ; diversification and complementarity of
financial sources; and the strengthening of relationships between development
actors under  renewed public-private vision, incorporating cooperatives and
self-employed women and men into development strategies Local development
support centres will be expanded, as an innovative information management,
experience communication and computerization, citizen participation, and the
integration of the population, gender- and rights-based approaches into
development strategies In the framework of the third upgrade of the national
education system, UNDP will contribute to strengthening technical and
professional training as part of the local development processes promoted by
municipal governments for for government-university articulation, The
articulated platform for integrated territorial development will enable the
establishment of new partnerships, exchanges and methodologies aligned with the
2030 National Plan and the Sustainable Development Goals National and
territorial Goals laboratories will include tools for information management,
the identification of strengths and challenges, and decision-making The
laboratories will be made available to the United Nations system to better
articulate Goals-related cooperation The methodologies developed by the
articulated platform for integrated territorial development will be implemented
by all the municipalities and provinces in the country, in partnership with the
Ministry of Economy In support of multisectoral decision-making, UNDP, in
alliance with the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC) will contribute to enhancing the capacities of the national statistical
system and to the developing more robust information and statistics, following
international, disaggregated, gender-sensitive standards The National Statistics
Office and UNDP will promote the introduction of multidimensional indexes,
unprecedented in the country, applying the methodology of the global
Multidimensional Poverty Index Support will be provided to designing  national
index and territorial human development measurements in support of welfare
policies The Ministry of Environment and UNDP will promote the establishment of
an environmental information system, and the reinforcement of environmental
statistics with methodological tools for the valuation of ecosystem goods and
services and the implementation of targeted scenario analyses to better apply
the sustainability approach to economic decision-making The new country
programme will promote partnerships with ECLAC, UNFPA, UNICEF, the World Food
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to meet the above priorities  Nationally prioritized strategic
sectors achieve higher levels of economic productivity and the rational use of
human potential UNDP, in alliance with FAO, UNIDO and UNFPA, will support the
strategic sectors and areas identified in the National Plan, 2030, using the
production and value chain approach, increased efficiency and production
volumes, new organizational and cross-sectoral governance processes, technology
transfer, promotion of renewable energy sources and energy efficiency,
introduction of climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, and adoption
of sustainable practices The agri-food sector will be prioritized, particularly
at the territorial level, through municipal supply plans UNDP will encourage
gender equality and the implementation of affirmative measures for the
empowerment of rural women; and the creation of jobs for women  DP/DCP/CUB/ and
men will be stimulated under equity conditions The population approach to
economic development plans will be promoted UNDP will support strengthening the
capacities of actors and institutions to manage various financial sources,
expanding development options at the national and territorial levels and
mechanisms to encourage financial flows to the country The capacities of the
Central Bank of Cuba and commercial banks will be strengthened, providing
knowledge and tools on macroeconomic and monetary policy issues, and promoting
greater financial education and inclusion, as well as microcredit, in support of
business plans and house and building refurbishing plans In the new country
programme, innovative financial solutions for the sustainable management of
natural resources and environmentally sustainable production practices will be
implemented In connection with the above issues, the new country programme will
catalyse partnerships with UNFPA, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
WFP, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization ( UNIDO) and ECLAC
Institutions, production and service sectors, territorial governments and
communities improve the protection and rational use of natural resources and
ecosystems, resilience to climate change, and comprehensive disaster risk
reduction management The conservation and sustainable use of natural resources,
and the response to climate change, will continue to be  priority UNDP will
promote the application of natural solutions for climate change adaptation,
mainly in coastal areas They will improve the quality of life for people,
preserve the infrastructure, and protect underground water-supply sources and
arable land from saline intrusion The application of production practices that
promote sustainability and climate change adaptation, and the consolidation of
sustainable land management will be stimulated by UNDP in  cross-cutting manner
to provide for landscape connectivity (between natural and agricultural, mainly
agro-pastoral and agroforestry ecosystems) UNDP will also promote an integrated
approach to water management, financial solutions in support of biodiversity
conservation, and sustainable use and ecosystem services UNDP will strengthen
the capacities of national and local governments and actors to plan, invest and
make decisions through the provision of tools for managing natural resources at
the local level The tools will incorporate climate change adaptation and
comprehensive disaster risk management to benefit people and promote more
resilient communities UNDP will promote the systematization of methodological
and management solutions for early warning systems at the national and
territorial levels, and the mainstreaming of gender perspective into disaster
risk management and climate change adaptation measures Considering the damage
caused by hurricanes and other extreme weather events, UNDP will support the
early recovery approach The promotion of resilient housing, the restoration of
livelihoods, and the production of building materials that involve the use of
local resources and generate jobs for young people will continue to be  priority
UNDP will articulate its activities with the action plans agreed upon with the
country UNDP will promote the use of renewable energy sources in economic and
social activities and rural housing, and will encourage less carbon-intensive
development models at the municipal level They will favour greater use of
renewable energy sources and higher energy efficiency  DP/DCP/CUB/ UNDP will
encourage partnerships with WFP, UNICEF, UNIDO, FAO, UN- Habitat, the
International Organization for Migration to meet the above priorities the United
Nations Environment Programme and Improved accessibility and quality of public
services and social protection and  care systems, considering demographic
dynamics, with an emphasis on vulnerable groups and applying  gender and human-
rights approach In support of the ‘leaving nobody unprotected’ national
priority, UNDP will strengthen the capacities of national, territorial and
community-based actors to provide accessible, high-quality public services,
including care, for the benefit of people To that end, UNDP will encourage
innovation, participation in association- based schemes and multisectoral care
services that benefit vulnerable groups (with an emphasis on older and disabled
people) and help bridge gender gaps and promote women’ empowerment will be
encouraged UNDP and UNFPA will promote the incorporation of demographic dynamics
analysis in economic and social decision - making UNDP will encourage gender
equality and women’ empowerment in  cross- cutting manner UNDP will actively
continue to support the sustainability of the national HIV response, health care
system programmes that provide people living with HIV with equitable access to
diagnosis, care, treatment, follow-up and support services, and comprehensive
prevention programmes for key population groups (men who have sex with men,
persons practicing transactional sex, and transgender) as an integral part of
the process of empowering civil-society networks The social determinants that
limit access of lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual and intersex people to
services will be further addressed in the new country programme UNDP will
promote the creation of jobs for young people, particularly through higher-
quality technical and professional training, designing specialties and curricula
in line with territorial development strategies and job demand, also meeting the
expectations of youth UNDP, in coordination with the Ministry of Education, will
incentivize the scaling up of this experience UNDP will foster partnerships with
UNFPA, UNICEF, WFP, PAHO, WHO, UN- Women, the International Labour Organization
and other United Nations system organizations to meet the above priorities III
Programme and risk management The programme will be implemented under the
coordination of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Investment (MINCEX), which is
the lead agency for international cooperation, using the national execution
modality Projects will be implemented by the national and local institutions
that will be primarily responsible for delivering results UNDP will contribute
to this effort  wider range of actors will be encouraged to participate in the
entire process At the request of the Government, other implementation modalities
may be used, including direct implementation of the programme, either partially
or completely, by UNDP and the provision of support services for the national
implementation of specific projects or activities To manage financial risks, the
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with other
United Nations organizations Pursuant to decision 2013/, all direct costs
associated with project implementation should be charged to the projects
concerned  DP/DCP/CUB/ This country programme document outlines UNDP
contributions to national development results and priorities, and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources allocation to the programme at the country level Accountability by
managers at headquarters, regional and country levels with respect to country
programmes is prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies and
procedures and the internal control framework UNDP will work in coordination
with other United Nations organizations, including ECLAC In particular, UNDP
will promote joint projects and actions with UNFPA and UNICEF in response to the
common chapter of the Strategic Plan Existing and new cooperation partnerships
will continue to be encouraged UNDP will provide its capabilities for the
multidimensional approach to development at the national and territorial levels
and for the articulation of actors under common platforms, as well as its
operational service capability for the implementation of projects and actions
agreed upon It will also provide technical advisory services with the support of
global and regional expert networks and will further promote access to
multilateral funds UNDP will continue to offer operational support services,
mainly for the coordination of the United Nations system in financial,
procurement, human- resources and information technology issues The UNDP office
in Cuba has adopted the measures needed to meet the requirements of the new
cooperation programme and has the human and technical capacity to deal with
substantive and operational issues It will promote greater efficiency in
operations and build on its global and regional capacity and systematized
experiences in other countries Priority will be given to the risks that could
have an adverse effect on programme implementation, such as damage caused by
extreme weather events Likewise, priority will be assigned to the various phases
of programme implementation in coordination with key counterparts, devising
practical solutions for smoother implementation All risk management actions will
be monitored and appropriately updated using institutional and UNDP platforms
UNDP will continue to support existing partnerships with multilateral and
bilateral partners, promote access to global vertical funds, expand links with
non - traditional partners, and supply regular resources that will be used, upon
mutual agreement between UNDP and the Government, as  catalyst for strategic
initiatives in support of the priorities established in this programme For the
period, the goal is to contribute $ million in regular resources (TRAC ) and
generate an additional $million At the time of writing, 76 per cent is already
available or in the process of final approval, and 24 per cent is being
negotiated The Government of Cuba has expressed and ratified its interest in
strengthening its partnership with UNDP, considering the added value of its
programmes and projects IV Monitoring and evaluation monitoring and evaluation
plan will be implemented to assess UNDP contributions to sustainable development
in Cuba The programme monitoring and evaluation will be coordinated with the
Government, as well as with the national implementing entities UNDP will
collaborate with the Ministry of Economy and Planning and with the National
Office of Statistics and Information to support and build upon data collection
and information systems in place to measure progress towards sustainable
development The gender marker will provide  key tool for designing programmes
and projects that promote gender equity and contribute to the  DP/DCP/CUB/
elimination of structural barriers and stereotypes that hinder equality between
women, men and people discriminated against because of their gender identities
Through its joint results groups, UNDP will help gather information on
indicators, in accordance with the monitoring and evaluation plan of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework Official sources of
information, databases and reports of various projects and ministries will be
used where appropriate and necessary 10 DP/DCP/CUB/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Cuba () National priority: An effective, efficient, socially
integrated government United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: National and
local governments and institutions implement comprehensive, sustainable,
equitable and inclusive territorial development strategies within the framework
of the decentralization process Strategic Plan, , outcome: Eradicate poverty in
all its forms and dimensions Outcome indicators, baselines and targets of the
United Nations Cooperation Framework Check source, frequency of data collection
and responsibilities Indicative UNDP country programme outputs Major partners /
partnerships and frameworks Resources Output  Strengthened capacities of
national and local government and institutions to plan, manage and implement
decentralization processes based on citizen participation MEP Ministry of
Justice Ministry of Finance and Prices (MFP) Ministry of Labour and Social
Security (MTSS) Ministry of Tourism (MINTUR) Central Bank of Cuba Territorial
governments Academia – Research centres Non-governmental organizations Regular
$456,000 Integrated results and resources framework (IRRF)   Number of inclusive
local economic development strategies and plans in place: () With institutional
frameworks for implementation in local and regional governments Project reports:
Reports of the National Office of Statistics and Information (ONEI) Other
$,942,226 Indicator  Number of local governments with territorially designed
comprehensive, inclusive development strategies/plans Baseline: 10 at the
provincial level and 32 at the municipal level Target: 15 and 100, respectively
Progress reports on sustainable development goals Annual frequency Indicator
Number of initiatives created in support of the decentralization process
Baseline: 20 Target: 70 Responsible agencies: UNDP Indicator  Number of
territories and institutions implementing new mechanisms for citizen
participation and/or gender equity Baseline: 10 territories and 15 institutions
Target: 15 and 35 Baseline: ()  Target: ()  Project offices ONEI IRRF   Number
of data collection/ analysis mechanisms Ministry of Economy and Planning (MEP)
Output  Strengthened capacities of the national and territorial statistical and
information system, applying an innovative, gender-sensitive approach
disaggregated by ONEI 11 DP/DCP/CUB/ DP/DCP/ DP/DCP/ providing disaggregated
data to monitor progress towards the SDGs: () Conventional data collection
methods (, surveys) () Administrative reporting systems, new data sources (, big
data) () New data source (, big data) sex, age and geographical location in
support of the update of the economic and social model and the monitoring of
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) MEP Institute of Physical Planning (IPF)
Ministries Territorial governments Academia – Research centres Federation of
Cuban Women Indicator  Number of new indexes and methodologies, with  population
and gender approach, under implementation Baseline:  Target:  () Baseline:
Target:  () Baseline:  Target:  () Baseline:  Target:  National priority:
Productive transformation United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome:
Nationally prioritized strategic sectors achieve higher levels of economic
productivity and rational use of human potential Strategic Plan, , outcome:
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development IRFF   Number
of public-private partnerships at national level to improve the enabling
framework for economic diversification and green growth Baseline: 13 Target: 33
Local governments Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) Ministry of Food Industry
(MINAL) Ministry of Domestic Trade MEP Ministry of Science, Technology and
Environment (CITMA) Ministry of Construction (MICONS) MINTUR Ministry of Higher
Education (MES) ONEI IPF Output  Strengthened local sustainable value chains in
priority sectors, with emphasis on agri-food sectors for self- sufficiency, and
mechanisms in place for cross-sectoral integration, sustainable energy use and
improved job quality, with gender and generational equity Regular $436,000
Project reports: Reports of the National Office of Statistics and Information
Other $20,230,015 Reports of ministries and other institutions Indicator  Number
of local productive chains strengthened: Baseline:  Target: 15 Annual frequency
Responsible agencies: 12 DP/DCP/CUB/ Non-governmental organizations Indicator
Number of municipalities increasing the production volumes of local foodstuffs
and other priority products Baseline:  Target:13 UNDP Project offices ONEI
Indicator  Number of people (disaggregated by age and sex) benefitting from new,
better jobs and strengthened services Baseline: 800 Target: 100 Ministries
Indicator  Number of initiatives using renewable sources of energy and
implementing actions to improve energy efficiency Baseline: 76 Target: 146
Output  Strengthened capacities of key institutions and actors to manage
financing in support of the development of priority sectors, including foreign
direct investment Ministry of Foreign Trade and Investment Central Bank of Cuba
MFP MEP CITMA MINAG Azcuba Business Group BioCubaFarma Business Group Indicator
Number of new financial methodologies, tools and solutions adapted or
implemented Baseline:  Target: 10 Indicator  Volume of financial resources
mobilized in partnership with key actors Baseline: $110 million Target: $210
million 13 DP/DCP/CUB/ DP/DCP/ DP/DCP/ National priority: Natural resources and
environment United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: Institutions,
production and service sectors, territorial governments and communities improve
the protection and rational use of natural resources and ecosystems, resilience
to climate change, and comprehensive disaster risk reduction management
Strategic Plan, , outcome: Build resilience to stress and crises IRRF - Natural
resources that are managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access and
benefit-sharing regime () Area of land and marine habitat under protection (in
hectares - ha) () Area of existing protected area under improved management (ha)
() Area under sustainable forest management (ha) Project reports Output
Strengthened capacities of key actors for sustainable management of natural
resources and ecosystems and improved environmental quality CITMA MINAG MINAL
National Institute of Hydraulic Resources MEP MFP MINTUR Azcuba Business Group
Regular $396,000 Reports of the National Office of Statistics and Information
Other $65,893,147 Indicator  Number of territories implementing environmentally
sustainable production practices Baseline: 213 Target: 237 Reports of the
National Civil Defence General Staff Indicator  Number of financing solutions
developed and implemented Baseline:  Target:  Reports of local governments
Indicator  Number of methodologies and tools Baseline:  Target:  Annual
frequency Responsible agencies: UNDP Output  Strengthened capacities of key
actors for comprehensive management at national and territorial levels for
disaster risk reduction and adaptation to climate change, incorporating gender
and population perspective National Civil Defence General Staff CITMA
Environment Agency MINAG National Institute of Hydraulic Resources Institute of
Meteorology MICONS MINTUR Local governments Baseline: () ,916,990 ha () ,916,990
ha ()  Ha Target: () ,240,935 ha () ,240,935 ha () 329,34 ha Project offices
ONEI Indicator  Number of tools, procedures and methodologies, including gender-
and generation-sensitive early warning systems, implemented and transferred
under South-South cooperation Baseline: 67 implemented and  for South-South
cooperation Target: 107 and 12, respectively National Civil Defence General
Staff Local governments IRRF - Number of data- informed development and
investment plans that incorporate integrated solutions to reduce disaster risks
Indicator  Number of people, disaggregated by sex and age, who increase their
knowledge of climate change adaptation and comprehensive disaster risk
management at all levels Baseline: 608,200 (304,100 women) Target: ,316,959
(,354,379 women) 14 DP/DCP/CUB/ and enable climate change adaptation and
mitigation Indicator  Number of key territories, hectares, ecosystems and actors
implementing climate change adaptation and disaster risk prevention measures and
plans Baseline: 11 municipalities, ,659 Ha ecosystems, 17 actors Target: 60,
22,318 and 30, respectively Baseline: 12 Target: 25 Output  Energy efficiency
increased and development of renewable sources of energy promoted to help
mitigate climate change, ensuring inclusive economic and social development IRRF
- Number of households benefiting from access to clean, affordable and
sustainable energy () in rural areas Ministry of Energy and Mines CITMA MINAG
MES MEP ONEI Azcuba Business Group Local governments Indicator  Number of
communities increasing the use of renewable sources of energy and improving
energy efficiency Baseline:  Target: 31 Baseline: ,233 Target: ,060 Indicator
Number of sectors and territories, including human settlements, implementing
less carbon-intensive development initiatives Baseline:  sectors and
municipalities Target:  and 15, respectively IRRF - Number of recovery plans and
systems in place utilizing sex-, age- and disability- disaggregated data and
gender analysis Indicator  Number of initiatives developed to support national
capacity to honour Paris Agreement commitments Baseline:  Target:  Baseline:
Target:  Output  Strengthened capacities of key actors for disaster response and
early recovery Indicator  Number of people benefitting from livelihoods,
securing basic habitability in houses and shelters, services, vital production
and indispensable infrastructure in population settlements, disaggregated by
sex, age and vulnerable groups Baseline: 273,927 (136,963 women) Target: 378,617
(189,308 women) National Civil Defence General Staff CITMA MINAG IPF MICONS
Local governments 15 DP/DCP/CUB/ DP/DCP/ DP/DCP/ Indicator  Number of strategic
sectors in the territory strengthening their production capacities through
technology transfer and technical training to ensure early recovery and further
development Baseline:  Target: 14 National priority: Human development and
social equity and justice United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: Improved
accessibility and quality of public services and social protection and care
systems, considering population dynamics, with emphasis on vulnerable groups,
applying  gender and human-rights approach Strategic Plan, , outcome: Eradicate
poverty in all its forms and dimensions IRFF   Number of subnational governments
improving capacities to plan, budget, manage and monitor basic services Project
reports Output  Strengthened capacities of national, territorial and community-
based actors to provide accessible, high-quality public and care services,
considering demographic dynamics, applying  gender and human rights approach
MTSS Ministry of Public Health Territorial governments Ministry of Education
Civil society networks connected with STI/HIV national response Federation of
Cuban Women National Institute of Hydraulic Resources Regular $694,000 Annual
frequency Other $,600,003 Responsible entities: UNDP Indicator  Number of
national, territorial and community-based actors strengthening their capacities
to provide public and care services applying  gender and human rights approach
Baseline:  Target:  at national level,  at territorial level and 10 at community
level Project offices Baseline: 17 Target: 56 Indicator  Number of alternative
public and care services established/strengthened to help close gender gaps
Baseline:  Target:  Indicator  Number of women, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transsexual and intersex (LGBTI) people, people living with HIV and people with
disabilities (disaggregated by sex and age) improving their living and working
conditions by benefitting from care services Baseline:  Target: 200 (women,
LGBTI people and people with disabilities) 16