Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/COD/  Programme rationale  The Democratic Republic of the Congo,  country
in transition that is undergoing  peacebuilding process with  United Nations
mission in place since 1999, experienced its first peaceful transfer of power
following the 30 December 2018 elections, despite the contestations Since the
Global and Inclusive Agreement of 2002, the country has undergone political
developments that have contributed to strengthening its political and
administrative governance and enabled it to achieve socioeconomic progress
Recent analyses1 show that the average growth of gross domestic product (GDP)
over the period 2002–2018 reached  per cent, peaking at  per cent in The
inflation rate dropped from its highest level in 2009, , per cent, to  per cent
in This had enabled the country to achieve  commendable performance with per
capita income almost doubling between 2005 and 2017, from $52 to $853 at
purchasing power parity  However, this growth has been non-inclusive and the
country is still characterized by significant poverty, high inequality and
extreme vulnerability Nearly 64 per cent of the population live below the
poverty line, with large disparities between urban (per cent) and rural (per
cent) areas Although its Human Development Index (HDI) improved significantly
from 333 in 2010 to 457 in 2017, the country ranked 176 of 189 countries in
2017, with an overall loss of per cent in the inequality-adjusted HDI and  Gini
coefficient of  Despite  fairly high Gender Development Index of 852 in 2017,
women’ involvement in politics and decision-making remains marginal due to
cultural, structural and institutional barriers In 2018, only 10 per cent of
those elected to the National Assembly were women, while the proportion of women
in the national Government is 17 per cent in  Poverty is reflected in the lack
of employment opportunities The unemployment rate is linked to weak
diversification of the essentially agriculture-based economy and weak
development of the secondary and tertiary sectors Unemployment particularly
affects young people at per cent compared to the national rate of per cent The
unemployment rate for women is per cent compared to per cent for men The
agricultural sector employs around 62 per cent of the working-age population In
2017, 12 per cent of men and almost 87 per cent of women were employed in the
agricultural sector, mainly food, and over 56 per cent of the population lived
in rural areas However, there is  gradual decline in the agricultural sector
contribution to GDP (nearly 32 per cent in 2000 against per cent in 2016) due to
insecurity, climate change and opportunities in the mining sector This drop
poses crucial challenge for the survival and improvement of people' living
conditions, particularly for rural women, youth and indigenous peoples In
addition, the mining sector, which is  major source of the country' economic
growth, plays an insignificant role in job creation and income distribution, in
particular because of its weak integration with the rest of the economy,
inadequate governance and lack of transparency in terms of revenue flows10
Around 80 per cent of mining is artisanal and uses rudimentary manual techniques
The workforce, almost half women, suffers  variety of labour and social
problems11 This method of mining leads to conflict and environmental degradation
and exacerbates gender inequalities and poverty  Common Country Assessment,
Annual report 2017 of the Congo Central Bank    UNDP Democratic Republic of the
Congo, National Human Development Report, UNDP Democratic Republic of the Congo,
« Inégalités politiques, socio-économiques et édification de la Nation/État en
RDC »,     World Bank, Democratic Republic of Congo Systematic Country
Diagnostic, March  10 World Bank, Systematic Country Diagnostic, March 11 Pact,
Promines Study: Artisanal Mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo, June
DP/DCP/COD/  In terms of overall governance, the country is among the 18 lowest-
scoring countries with increasing deterioration over the past 10 years, ranking
47 of 54 African countries on the 2018 Ibrahim Index of African Governance This
poor performance can be explained partially by structural causes, especially
weakened rule of law; inadequate accountability and transparency;  lack of
technical and human capacities for efficient institutions that provide services
to citizens; and the poor business environment12 Regarding the rule of law, it
ranked 47 of 54 countries on the Ibrahim Index, with  score of /100 compared to
the African average of /The country ranked 161 of 180 countries on the 2018
Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index, with  score of
Security and humanitarian challenges increased in the period 2016–2018,
particularly with the conflicts that have inflamed the Grand Kasai and Ituri13
The conflicts have exacerbated socioeconomic vulnerability, with an estimated
million people, more than 15 per cent of the population, needing humanitarian
assistance and protection in 14 These vulnerable populations face human rights
violations, including sexual and gender-based violence, as well as chronic
malnutrition and epidemics, including cholera, measles and Ebola Additionally,
there are an estimated  million internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the
country, including  million in The refugee situation further complicates the
humanitarian and security context; Democratic Republic of the Congo hosts more
than 533,000 refugees from neighbouring countries, while 781,000 Congolese
refugees are hosted in the region, notably in Burundi, Uganda and Zambia15  The
Democratic Republic of the Congo was ranked the fifth most vulnerable country to
climate change in 16 This high vulnerability as well as the low level of
preparedness and recovery processes calls for investment and innovation to
improve planning and response to major emergencies such as droughts and floods
Between 1990 and 2010, the country lost 37 per cent of its forest area annually
and 27 per cent per year between 2010 and This loss is the main contributing
factor to greenhouse gas emissions, considering that the country’ industrial
sector accounts for only  per cent of emissions In addition to deforestation,
slash-and-burn agriculture and land-use change contribute to greenhouse gas
emissions, hindering achievement of the nationally determined contributions to
reduce emissions and adapt to climate change Because only 14 per cent of the
population have access to electricity, there is heavy reliance on wood and
charcoal17  The evaluation of the country programme , which was subsequently
extended to 2019, recognized the role of UNDP as the leader on mainstreaming the
Sustainable Development Goals and contributor to key development outcomes that
have benefited the most fragile communities The support of UNDP, with the
collaboration of technical and financial partners, enabled the Government to: ()
contextualize the Goals and integrate them into its National Development Plan ;
() initiate the desired statistical revolution in monitoring and evaluation of
progress towards the Goals; () improve the population’ satisfaction rate with
public services (justice system, police, armed forces) by  per cent;18 ()
improve financial inclusion by enabling more than 68 million rural and peri-
urban poor (56 per cent women), to have access to microfinance institutions; ()
have  natural disaster risk reduction platform; () contribute to reducing the
sexual violence prevalence rate by 63 per cent between 2013 and 2018; and ()
have  legal framework that is more gender-sensitive, aimed at promoting gender
equity and equality of rights, opportunities and gender in all sectors of
national life, notably the equitable participation of women and men in the
management of state affairs19  Lessons learned from the evaluation of the
previous country programme revealed that: () the impact, relevance and
efficiency of the programme were limited by its weak integration and 12 The
country ranked 182 of 190 countries on the World Bank’ 2018 Ease of Doing
Business Index 13 Provinces of Kasai/Kasai-Central/Kasai-Oriental and Lomami 14
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Aperçu des besoins humanitaires: République Démocratique du Congo, 15 Idem 16
ND-GAIN Country Index, 17  18 Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, 2018 19 Law No15
of  August DP/DCP/COD/ approaches of using projects and micro-projects; () poor
performances were recorded in terms of capacity-building, mainly due to
institutional instability and regular staff turnover, which hinder the
sustainability of outcomes; () the focus on traditional partners as primary
funding sources limited the expansion of the programmatic portfolio and the
mobilization of innovative resources; and () the lack of reliable statistics
hampered accurate planning and measurement of development interventions  The
country office has been recognized for its achievements by 80 per cent of its
partners, including the Government, and as  reliable, valuable partner that
plays an important role in the country' development In addition, 70 per cent of
its partners recognized the professionalism of UNDP and the high quality of its
services  2015 partnership review highlighted the need for UNDP to strengthen
its Sustainable Development Goal coordination role and operational efficiency II
Programme priorities and partnerships This programme’ theory of change assumes
that extreme poverty, inequalities and vulnerability can be reduced through
improvement in the rule of law, the structural transformation of the economy and
strengthened resilience of the population The rule of law ensures that the
Government operates in line with constitutional provisions, is accountable to
the law, guarantees due process and provides remedies for rights violations This
is particularly important for people living in extreme poverty, who face
discrimination and exclusion that negatively impact their access to quality and
equitable justice Strengthened rule of law contributes to effective resolution
of disputes, curbing corruption and reducing impunity, and to creating an
enabling environment for investment, business and structural transformation of
the economy This will boost the productivity of the agricultural sector, which
is the main provider of jobs, through technological innovations, the development
of agribusiness and agricultural value chains, and will ensure economic
diversification Another vehicle for the expected structural transformation is
the management of natural resources (mines, forests, land and water) according
to the equity-based sustainable development standards and in  manner that
reduces inequalities, mitigates the impact of conflicts, fosters social
cohesion, strengthens community resilience and provides economic opportunities
The programme, designed in consultation with key stakeholders, will adopt an
integrated approach structured around the following three priorities: ()
governance for sustainable development; () economic transformation and
sustainable management of natural resources; and () support to stabilization and
strengthening of the resilience of affected populations This is in line with the
National Development Plan, the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)  and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-To uphold the
principle of leaving no one behind, it will target the disadvantaged (poor,
youth, women, displaced and/or returned populations, indigenous people and
people with disabilities) in the most fragile and conflict-affected regions,
especially the Grand Kasai, north-eastern and south-eastern regions, as well as
the provinces affected by the Ebola outbreak Using data from recent household
surveys and based on vulnerability criteria, the programme will identify the
most relevant target populations and areas UNDP will implement its interventions
at the central and local levels and focus on strengthening the resilience of
individuals and communities in areas where it has  comparative advantage,
specifically: access to justice; access to public services, local governance,
livelihoods and socioeconomic reintegration, environmental protection,
sustainable solutions, adaptation to climate change and disaster management This
will be achieved by: () Sustainable Development Goal localization and
implementation; () anchoring of interventions in the most fragile and instable
areas, with  focus on vulnerable groups; and () essential strategic support at
the central level The programme will be implemented in partnership with national
counterparts at the central, provincial and local levels, civil society
organizations (CSOs) and the private sector, as well as with the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
DP/DCP/COD/ (MONUSCO), United Nations agencies (International Labour
Organization, United Nations Capital Development Fund, United Nations Children’
Fund, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA), World Food Programme), the World Bank, Green Climate Fund, Central
African Forest Initiative and other technical and financial partners
(Governments of Belgium, Canada, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Sweden,
European Union delegation, Korea International Cooperation Agency, United
Kingdom Department for International Development, United States Agency for
International Development, France Cooperation Agency) The programme will build
on good practices through South-South and triangular cooperation focusing on: ()
collaboration with Senegal and Togo on emergency community development
programmes after their successful launch in those two countries; () sharing the
experience of Democratic Republic of the Congo on mini-hydroelectric plants with
Burundi, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe, which have
expressed interest; and () collaboration with Zimbabwe to share experiences
regarding the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria The country
office will work with relevant partners and the respective UNDP offices to
define mechanisms for collaboration and strategic objectives to be achieved
through the cooperation The programme will also facilitate the establishment of
national policy dialogue framework to ensure transparency and effectiveness in
aid coordination and management including those related to south- south and
triangular cooperation Priority  Governance for sustainable development This
priority is aligned with signature solutions ,  and  of the Strategic Plan It
will contribute to improving the legal and institutional environment needed to
strengthen the inclusion of targeted populations in decision-making and to
promote their well-being National ownership of the electoral process will be
enhanced by strengthening the capacities of the Electoral Commission and other
stakeholders in conducting post-electoral reviews of the 2018 general election
and reforms, and in organizing inclusive and peaceful elections UNDP will
enhance parliamentary strengthening, citizen engagement and women’
representation in decision- making through capacity-building and advocacy UNDP
will support decentralization and local development by strengthening the
equitable participation of men and women in decision-making and related
processes, as well as the capacity of decentralized territorial entities to
respond to the needs of the population Emphasis will be placed on the
formulation and implementation of integrated development plans at all levels in
compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals, and on modernizing the
statistical tool for development planning, control of public finances and
institutional accountability UNDP interventions will aim to improve governance
of natural resources and the management of territories UNDP will support
capacity-building of women, youth, and civil society to enable them to lead,
participate meaningfully and influence decision-making processes UNDP will
assist in the improvement of the strategic, legal and institutional anti-
corruption frameworks, as well as in the design and implementation of an
effective national action plan The programme will facilitate the establishment
of  national policy dialogue framework to ensure transparency and effectiveness
in aid coordination and management UNDP will support the newly created
Presidential Strategic Cell,  think tank to advise the Office of the President
on key strategic priorities The new country programme will contribute to
strengthening the rule of law by increasing the effectiveness of the supply and
demand for justice, particularly the criminal justice system This in turn will
contribute to improving the security of the population (including refugees and
IDPs)20 and ensure protection of human rights and fight against impunity for
international crimes This will be done through improving access to justice,
particularly for the most vulnerable, the coordination of justice and security
actors including community leaders, and supporting the reform of the justice and
security sectors, including by improving coordination and information management
over the 20 Those interventions are included in the joint initiative with UNHCR
under the humanitarian-development-peace nexus  DP/DCP/COD/ whole penal chain
Under the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law arrangement,  joint justice
programme will build synergies with related interventions of MONUSCO and other
United Nations agencies, and bring coherence to all UNDP contributions in the
areas of transitional justice, the implementation of the national policy for the
reform of justice, the police reform action plan, the strategy to fight sexual
and gender-based violence, and coordination between justice, peace, the
restoration of human dignity and reconciliation Priority  Economic
transformation and sustainable management of natural resources In line with
signature solutions , ,  and  of the Strategic Plan, this programme will support
the Government in achieving structural transformation towards  sustainable and
inclusive green economy using  human development approach It will focus on
actions that are conducive to the reduction of poverty and inequalities, the
rationalization of the sustainable use of natural resources and the fight
against climate change UNDP will contribute to the structural transformation of
the economy and the reduction of poverty and inequality through supporting
diversification, social inclusion and the creation of decent jobs for women and
youth UNDP will support the transition of economic actors from the informal to
the formal sector, with emphasis on: () increasing opportunities to small-scale
farmers including women and youth by linking them to value chains, and the
development of inclusive models associated with agribusiness and technological
innovation; () supporting greater economic and social inclusion of small-scale
producers including women and youth engaged in mining, based on in-depth
sectoral analyses; () promoting and catalysing start-ups and innovative
initiatives by women and youth and supporting the development of youth
entrepreneurship and small and medium-sized enterprises/industries (SMEs/SMIs);
and () ensuring financial inclusion and supporting the development of basic
economic infrastructures such as renewable energies and modern energy services,
new information and communication technologies and rural roads To the extent
possible, the programme will support the development of integrated, gender-
responsive, climate-adaptive social protection systems and social safety nets As
part of the sustainable management of natural resources and the fight against
climate change, the programme will assist the Government in the implementation
of multilateral environmental agreements that it has signed and ratified,
specifically the nationally determined contribution and  REDD+ investment plan
Priority will be given to the transfer of innovative and environmentally sound
technologies and practices in the energy, agriculture, forestry, protected
areas, water and basic infrastructure development sectors To mobilize climate
funding and deliver on these priorities, UNDP will provide technical support to
the relevant government institutions including the ministries in charge of the
environment, agriculture and livestock, rural development, energy and land
management Priority  Support to stabilization and strengthening the resilience
of the populations In alignment with signature solutions  and  of the Strategic
Plan, the programme will provide support to fragile and conflict-affected
regions through  comprehensive and integrated support package This will include
downstream support for the promotion and protection of the rights of vulnerable
and affected populations, and the restoration and strengthening of state
authority at the local and community levels to deliver services and promote
peacebuilding, rule of law, security and good governance UNDP support will
target returning refugees, focusing on improving their access to livelihood
opportunities UNDP will contribute to preventing and managing conflicts through
stabilization and conflict transformation strategy, taking into consideration
the needs of the target populations Specifically, UNDP will achieve this
through: () the durable solutions approach for IDPs and returnees; () the
holistic approach to tackle sexual and gender-based violence; () the social
cohesion approach based on community dialogue; () inclusive socioeconomic
revitalization of local economies by restoring destroyed livelihoods; and ()
skills development to support sustainable livelihoods Strengthening of community
resilience in areas affected by natural and climate disasters will be achieved
across the humanitarian-development-peace nexus through  response that
integrates  DP/DCP/COD/ holistic management of the causes of conflict The
approach will consist of: () identifying the different threats that disrupt
social and community life in order to prevent them; () developing and
implementing appropriate emergency plans to mitigate the impact of conflict and
provide support for victims; () developing policies and mechanisms for
anticipating and managing these risks and threats; and () implementing  holistic
strategy to address the social determinants of HIV and Ebola III Programme and
risk management The programme will be executed under the coordination of the
Ministry of International Cooperation, Regional Integration and Francophonie
Joint steering committees comprising technical and financial partners, UNDP and
relevant sectoral ministries will ensure quality control The projects will use
the most appropriate implementation modality to ensure the sustainability of
outcomes Barring exceptional cases, the national implementation modality will be
applied National ownership and mutual accountability for development results
will be strengthened through annual workplans aligned with national and
programme priorities In coordination with other United Nations agencies, the
harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used to manage fiduciary
risks and build the capacity of implementing partners The country office will
involve United Nations Volunteers to strengthen project implementation capacity,
especially for activities at the community level The search for opportunities
for voluntary participation and the engagement of citizens will also be one of
the strategies for achieving development and peacebuilding outcomes This country
programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level
Accountabilities of managers at the national, regional and headquarters levels
with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization' programme
and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework As per
Executive Board decision 2013/, cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects Through steering and technical committees, UNDP will continue to work
with national and local government partners, the private sector, civil society,
women' organizations, universities and research centres at each stage of project
management to ensure government leadership and mutual accountability The
participation of these partners will follow the UNDP guiding principles and the
other modalities mentioned above The implementation of the programme may be
subject to certain risks, specifically: () low levels of resource mobilization;
() persistent impacts of climate change on livelihoods; () high turnover of
implementing partner staff; () lack of improvement in the socioeconomic
situation; () resurgence of conflicts in the programme target areas; ()
fiduciary risks; () weak institutional capacities; () implications and needs
deriving from the political and MONUSCO transitions; and () resurgence of the
Ebola outbreak To mitigate these risks, UNDP will: () focus on major integrated
and transformational projects (emergency community development programme) for
greater impact and efficiency, and to facilitate scaling up; () rely on its
local representatives to improve synergy and the efficiency of interventions;
and () strengthen its resource mobilization strategy to diversify its resource
and funding base by extending the support of the private sector, emerging
countries, foundations, international financial institutions and vertical funds
including the Green Climate Fund This will be achieved by leveraging the
Sustainable Development Goal platforms, which will make it possible to
strengthen the significant relevance of the programme to  large coalition of
actors that can play  financing role; () apply the UNDP social and environmental
standards to monitor environmental and natural risks and fully mainstream gender
from the design phase to the execution and evaluation of all projects; ()
advocate for the timely sharing of information and the designation of programme
coordinating assistants in the event of implementing partner staff turnover; ()
systematically analyse these risks through the steering committees; () undertake
an analysis of  DP/DCP/COD/ risks in scenario planning in order to better adjust
the programme; () undertake HACT spot checks to ensure full programme and
financial compliance; and () establish  roster of partners and integrate
institutional capacity-building into the implementation of the programme
mechanism for systematically identifying and leveraging opportunities for
innovation, particularly within  network of accelerator laboratories to fast
track the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals will be established
to benefit from innovative capacities at all levels IV Monitoring and evaluation
In cooperation with the United Nations development system and multilateral and
bilateral partners, UNDP will collect disaggregated data and qualitative
information to produce the evidence and analysis to monitor national and local
efforts towards the achievement of programme outcomes and prioritized
Sustainable Development Goal targets UNDP gender markers will be used to track
gender-based investments and improve planning and decision-making to promote
gender equality UNDP will promote responsibility and accountability throughout
the programme management cycle through aligning the country programme monitoring
and evaluation framework with those of the UNSDCF and National Development Plan
The programme results and resources framework is fully aligned with the
integrated results and resources framework of the Strategic Plan UNDP will work
with the government coordinating ministry, implementing partners and
representatives of beneficiaries to hold annual, midterm and final reviews of
the programme to aid learning and timely decision-making UNDP, in collaboration
with United Nations agencies and the regional organization on statistics
AFRISTAT, will strengthen the capacity of the National Institute of Statistics
focusing on: () modernizing the statistical tool for development planning,
control of public finances and institutional accountability; and () production
of data disaggregated by gender, region, and other socioeconomic attributes This
will help to assess progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals at
national and local levels At least  per cent of the programme budget will be
allocated to data collection and monitoring and evaluation of the programme UNDP
will develop  multi-year study plan and research programme to guide its work
with strategic research and think-tank institutions on thematic studies to test
certain hypotheses of the theory of change underlying the programme UNDP will
establish partnerships for the costed evaluation plan to ensure the
effectiveness and efficiency of the programme and to develop and generate
knowledge Midterm evaluations of the three outcomes will be carried out at the
end of the third year of the programme cycle (2022) to highlight the progress
made and identify the challenges, mitigation solutions and strategic
orientations to be adopted UNDP will partner with UNFPA, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Government and CSOs to
conduct thematic evaluation to assess the outcome of the fight against sexual
and gender-based violence As per the evaluation policy, all mandatory project
evaluations will be conducted to serve accountability and learning and inform
new project designs  DP/DCP/COD/ Annex Results and resources framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLAR  OF THE
NATIONAL STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT – Strengthen economic governance and
peacebuilding UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Peace consolidation, human rights,
civil protection, social cohesion and democracy RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development Data source
and frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Major partners /
partnerships frameworks UNSDCF outcome indicator(), baselines, target()
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines targets)
Indicative resources by outcome ($) Regular: 18,000,000 Output  Constitution-
making, electoral and parliamentary processes and institutions strengthened to
promote inclusion, transparency and accountability especially for women and
youth • National Government • Provincial - Mo Ibrahim Indicator_1 : The Country’
Ibrahim Index of African Governance Baseline: ; Target: Other: 62,500,000
Foundation report governments - Freq: Annually • National assembly • Independent
National Indicator  Number of constitution-making bodies with mechanisms for
civic engagement, including the participation of women and other marginalized
groups Baseline: 47; Target: 52 Indicator  Number of polls held according to
democratic standards Baseline: ; Target:  Indicator  Number of women in the
decision-making bodies (Parliament, government) Baseline: 144; Target: 300
Indicator  Number of decentralized territorial entities providing essential
quality services to the populations Baseline: , Target:  Electoral Commission •
Women’ and youth - National organizations Indicator_1: Voter turnout (national,
provincial and local) Baseline: 56%; Target: 60% Independent Electoral
Commission report • CSOs - Freq: Annually Output : Institutions and systems
enabled to address awareness, prevention and enforcement of anti-corruption
measures to promote citizens’ participation, inclusion, accountability and the
well-being of populations, notably women and youth • National Government •
Provincial governments • Provincial assemblies • NGOs Indicator  Existence of
effective measures adopted to mitigate and remedy corruption risks at national
and subnational levels Baseline: No; Target: yes Indicator  Number of
CSOs/networks involved in citizen oversight, accountability and transparency in
the management of natural resources Baseline: ; Target:   DP/DCP/COD/ Output :
Capacities, functions and financing of rule of law and national human rights
institutions and systems strengthened to expand access to justice and security,
with  focus on women and other marginalized groups • National and provincial
governments • Ministry of Justice • Auditorat militaire Indicator : % of trials
that have fully respected the five fundamental principles of fair trial
Baseline: %; Target: 50% (Military Prosecutor’ Office) • High Judicial Council •
Bar Associations and Indicator : Existence of governance and oversight of rule
of law institutions with strengthened capacities Baseline: No; Target: yes CSOs
Output : Planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation chain at
national, provincial and local levels, Institute of Statistics, have including,
strengthened capacities for Sustainable Development Goal delivery, monitoring
and evaluation • National and provincial governments the National • Ministries
of Justice • Auditorat militaire (Military Prosecutor’ Office) Indicator_1 No of
provincial and local development plans that integrate the Sustainable
Development Goals Baseline: ; Target: 21 • National and provincial planning •
Provincial Planning Indicator_1 Existence of data collection/analysis mechanisms
providing disaggregated data to monitor progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals: () Conventional data collection methods (, surveys) Baseline:
No; Target: yes () Administrative reporting systems Baseline: No; Target: yes ()
New data sources (, big data) Baseline: No; Target: yes Divisions and Branches •
Civil society NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLARS II and  OF THE NATIONAL
STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT: Diversification and transformation of the
economy – The environment, sustainable and balanced development UNSDCF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP: Inclusive economic growth, agricultural development, demographic
dividend capture, social protection and sustainable management of natural
resources RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its
forms and dimensions - National Statistics Report National Institute of
Statistics Indicator_2: Employment rate of youth and women Baseline: 71%;
Target: 76% Output : Solutions developed for sustainable management of natural
resources, including sustainable commodities and green and inclusive value
chains with access for women and youth Regular: 49,500,000 • Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development Other: - Freq: Annually 10 DP/DCP/COD/
268,000,000 • Centre for Agricultural Indicator_2: Multi- dimensional poverty
rate Baseline: 74%; Target:<50% Indicator_2: Number of micro, small and medium-
sized enterprises utilizing supplier development platforms for inclusive and
sustainable value chains Baseline: ; Target:,000 and Technologic Research -
Human Development Report - UNDP - Freq: Annually • Agence Nationale de Promotion
des investissements Indicator_2: % of local agricultural producers linked to
local markets in targeted areas, disaggregated by sex and age Baseline: %;
Target 50% (50% women and youth) • Private sector • CSOs Indicator_2
Reforestation rate Baseline:15%; Target: 50% - Report of Ministry of Indicator_2
Number of people involved in non-agricultural income-generating activities (as
result of technological development) in targeted rural areas, disaggregated by
sex and age Baseline: ; Target: ,000 (,000 women and youth)) Environment -
Ministry of Environment - Freq: Annually Indicator : Number of localities with
required infrastructure for improved rural development in the targeted areas
(rural roads, storage facilities, warehouses, renewable energy capacity,
information technology infrastructure, etc) Baseline: ; Target:  Output : Women
and youth are enabled to access and engage in decent employment and livelihood
schemes in the mining sectors • Ministry of Mining • CSOs (bringing together
small-scale mining producers) • Private sector Indicator_2 Existence of  gender-
responsive operational legal and regulatory framework for artisanal mining
Baseline: No; Target: Yes Indicator_2 No of structured and operational
cooperatives/associations of artisanal miners (men and women) Baseline: ;
Target:  Indicator_2 No of livelihood options created to increase
‘vulnerable/disadvantaged’ women’ and youth’ empowerment in the mining sector
Baseline: ; Target:  Output : Marginalized and vulnerable groups, particularly,
poor, women, youth and people with disabilities are empowered to gain access to
financial services to build sustainable productive capacities • Ministry of
Planning (Agence Nationale pour la Promotion des Investissements) 11 DP/DCP/COD/
Indicator_2 No and type of financial products placed on the market,
disaggregated by financial products aimed at poor, women, youth and people with
disabilities Baseline: ; Target:  • Ministries of Finance, of the Economy, and
of SMEs/SMIs • Civil society • Private sector Indicator  No of people accessing
financial services disaggregated by sex Baseline: ,083,642 [92% women]; Target:
,583,000 [45% women] Output : Solution adopted to improve access to clean
affordable and sustainable energy • Ministry of Energy • Provincial governments
• Women’ and youth Indicator_2: No of micro-hydro power plants
constructed/rehabilitated Baseline: ; Target:  organisations • NGOs/CSOs
Indicator_2: No of households that have adopted sustainable cooking ovens and
fuel Baseline: ; Target: 10,500 Indicator_2: No of households that have access
to renewable energy in the target areas Baseline: 95,744; Target: 140,800 Output
: National and local institutions including civil society and the private sector
have strengthened technical and operational capacities to drive inclusive and
sustainable management of the natural resources (water, forests, land, minerals,
etc) and climate change mitigation and adaptation actions stated in the
nationally determined contribution • Ministry of the Environment • Civil society
• Private sector Indicator_2 No of agricultural models that combine yield
performance with environmental sustainability implemented Baseline: ; Target:
(maize-rice-beans-cocoa-coffee) Indjcator_2: Existence of an operational
national greenhouse gas inventory system that is linked directly to relevant
sectors ( energy, agriculture, forestry, transport, etc) Baseline: No; Target:
Yes 12 DP/DCP/COD/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PILLAR II OF THE NATIONAL
STRATEGIC PLAN FOR DEVELOPMENT: Strengthening of governance and peacebuilding
UNSDCF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Access to basic social services
and humanitarian assistance RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Strengthen
resilience to shocks and crises - Human Rights and Indicator_3: Number of local
conflicts that ended with sustainable solutions Baseline: ; Target:  Output :
Local communities and institutions have strengthened technical capacities for
prevention and, management of conflicts Regular: 11,896,000 • Provincial
governments • Provincial assemblies • Local leaders and civil International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy: Poll reports – peacebuilding Other:
38,000,000 societies Indicator_3 Data-informed development policies, plans and
institutions to strengthen social cohesion and prevent risk of conflict in place
Baseline: No; Target: Yes • Religious groups • Women’ and Youth -
MONUSCO/Stabilization Support Unit (SSU) organizations - Freq: Annually
Indicator_3 Number of dialogue and conflict management mechanisms set up and
functional Baseline: ; Target:  - Human Rights and Indicator_3: Number of
pacified and reconciled towns in the east of the country Baseline: ; Target:
International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy: Poll reports –
Peacebuilding - MONUSCO/SSU - Freq: Annually Indicator_3 Number of temporary
jobs created in the communities in the target areas Baseline: ,000; Target:
20,000 Indicator_3: Number of at-risk youth with capacities for potential
employment in the target areas Baseline: ,000; Target: 20,000 Output :
Government institutions and communities at the local and central levels, are
enabled to effectively promote gender equality and prevent and fight gender-
based violence • Ministry of Gender and Family - Mo Ibrahim Foundation
Indicator_3: The Country’ Ibrahim Index of gender-based violence Baseline: ;
Target: 65 • Ministry of Justice • Provincial governments • Provincial
assemblies • Civil society • Hospitals and health report - Freq: Annually
Indicator : Percent reduction in reported gender-based violence cases Baseline:
63%; Target: 60% centres Indicator_3: No of cases of gender-based violence
treated at the community level Baseline: ,242; Target: ,347 Output : The
communities and institutions have strengthened technical capacities to cope with
crises and natural and climate disasters • Ministry for Humanitarian Affairs •
Provincial governments • Civil society Indicator_3: Existence of mapping and an
action plan on risks and threats at the provincial level 13 DP/DCP/COD/ Baseline
(2019): No; Target: Yes [ provinces] Indicator_3: Existence of  national policy
on crisis prevention and management Baseline: No; Target: Yes Indicator_3:
Number of households that have benefited from actions mitigating risks and
threats from natural and climate disasters Baseline: ,100; Target: ,000 Regular:
79,396,000 TOTAL Other: 368,500,000 14