National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy National Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Policy LIST OF ACRONYMS Association of Bhutanese Industries Bhutan
Chamber of Commerce & Industry Bhutan Electricity Authority Bhutan Standards
Bureau Conference of Parties Department of Engineering Services Department of
Industry Department of Trade Department of Revenue and Customs Department of
Renewable Energy Department of Cottage and Small Industries Economic Development
Policy Energy Efficiency Energy Efficiency and Conservation Gross Domestic
Product Greenhouse Gas Gross National Happiness Gross National Happiness
Commission High Voltage Low Emission Development Strategy Low Voltage ABI BCCI
BEA BSB COP DES DoI DoT DRC DRE DCSI EDP EE EE& GDP GHG GNH GNHC HV LEDS LV MEPS
Minimum Energy Performance Standards MoEA Ministry of Economic Affairs Ministry
of Finance MoF MoIC Ministry of Information and Communications MoWHS Ministry of
Works and Human Settlements MV NDC Medium Voltage Nationally Determined
Contributions National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy National
Environment Commission Nodal Agency Particulate Matter NEC NA PM REDTF Renewable
Energy Development Trust Fund RGoB RSTA RTIO UNFCCC United Nations Framework
Convention for Climate Royal Government of Bhutan Road Safety and Transport
Authority Regional Trade & Industry Office Change LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS CO2
Carbon dioxide NOx Nitrogen oxides SOx Sulfur oxides LIST OF UNITS ‘000 Thousand
GWh Gigawatt hour kW Kilowatt kWh Kilowatt hour MW Nu TOE Megawatt Ngultrum
Tonnes of Oil Equivalent National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy TABLE
OF CONTENTS  INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………  RATIONALE……………………………………………………………
TITLE, OPERATIVE PERIOD AND ENFORCEMENT……………  OBJECTIVES……………………………………………………………
BUILDING SECTOR……………………………………………………  APPLIANCE SECTOR…………………………………………………
INDUSTRY SECTOR……………………………………………………  TRANSPORT SECTOR………………………………………………10
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT………………………………11 ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION ACTION
PLAN……18 MONITORING ANDEVALUATION…………………………………19
AMENDMENTS…………………………………………………………19 INTERPRETATION OF THE POLICY………………………………19
DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………………19 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation
Policy  INTRODUCTION  The Royal Government of Bhutan (hereinafter, “the
Government”) has implemented national development plans with consideration not
only for economic or physical prosperity, but also for preservation of cultural
heritage and environment, guided by the development philosophy of Gross National
Happiness (GNH) At institutional level, the government broadly follows two
national policies viz Bhutan 2020- Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness
and the Economic Development Policy (EDP)  The Country’ GDP growth has been
impressive over the last ten years Despite the landlocked and mountainous
terrain, the GDP growth rate in constant (2000) price has averaged around 36%
between 2005 and 2017 and the annual growth of GDP per capita has averaged
around 043% from 2006 to Economic development has brought increased urbanization
in Bhutan and poverty rate has also dropped significantly with the national
poverty rate at % in 20172 as compared to 23% in  The EDP 2016 emphasizes that
the Energy Efficiency and Conservation (EE&) measures shall be promoted for
sustainable use of energy across all sections of the consumers through the
adoption of  National Energy Efficiency and Conservation Policy by The Royal
Government shall encourage general improvements in the energy performance
standards of four major sectors namely building, appliance, industry and
transport  The EDP 2016 also emphasizes  green and self-reliant economy of
Bhutan by 2020 through promotion of  National Accounts Statistics 2017, National
Statistics Bureau  Bhutan Poverty Analysis 2017, National Statistics Bureau
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy optimized usage of ecological
and natural resource richness of the Country and pursuit of energy efficient
productive activities The sustained pursuit of green growth entails  systematic
focus on energy efficient productive activities across different sectors of the
economy such as building, appliance, industry and transport The overall economy
of the country will be improved by EE& measures through reduced energy
intensity, avoided GHG emissions and higher revenue earning due to additional
export of electricity  In the 15th Conference of Parties (COP), UNFCCC (2009),
the Country committed to remain carbon neutral where emissions of GHG will not
exceed carbon sequestration capacity of the Country’ forests, which is estimated
at  million tons of CO2 In the COP21 (2015), the Country re- emphasized this
commitment  The Country’ Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) further
pledges to promote energy demand side management through efficiency in
buildings, appliances and industrial processes and technologies3  The potential
of EE& measures in the Country is based on the findings of technical studies and
energy audits conducted across the economy in energy consuming sectors such as
building, appliance, industry and transport These studies have revealed
realizable and implementable interventions that may be pursued in  systematic
way to achieve not only the EE& goals but also further the economic development
of the Country  Nationally Determined Contribution of the Kingdom, 2015,
National Environment Commission  National Energy Efficiency & Conservation
Policy  RATIONALE  EE& measures also contribute to the country’ global
commitment on the climate change front to UNFCCC, LEDS and other international
forums Increasing economic prosperity is expected to drive up the country’
demand for energy, including fossil fuels like petroleum products EE& measures
are likely to lower the intensity of energy use through improved efficiency in
the usage of all forms of energy, thereby decoupling economic growth from
consumption of energy resources and carbon emissions  In addition, the pursuit
of EE& measures will also align the Country with United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals Reduced energy intensity will contribute to climate action
through reduction in GHG emissions, while promoting sustainable environment
through lesser environmental pollution Poverty will also be positively affected;
as reduced energy intensity will increase the economic security  In 2017, the
Country exported around ,994 million kWh of surplus electricity; the
contribution was around Nu 12,15 million at Nu 17 per kWh of average electricity
tariff In the same year, the Country imported Nu ,835 million worth of petroleum
products Clearly, EE& measures can directly benefit the economy by freeing up
energy resources, generating additional revenue through export of saved
electricity and reduced imports of petroleum products This can also relieve
government’ fiscal burden on energy subsidies and reallocate resources  National
Accounts Statistics 2017, National Statistics Bureau  POL Section, DoT, MoEA
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy for other developmental
activities  The annual savings potential in electricity consumption, averaged
over the 15 years projected period, in the building, appliances and industry
sectors is about 155 million kWh annually, which at the present average export
tariff of electricity of Nu 17 per kWh, amounts to an additional government
revenue of about Nu 00 million per annum Moreover, it also has potential to
reduce cross- border GHG emission  In the transport sector, there is
significant increase in vehicular traffic due to economic development in the
Country Consequently, the import of petroleum products has increased from Nu
billion in 2002 to Nu 97 billion in 20176 and is projected to rise further
Sustainable transportation that focuses on efficient fuel usage and promotion of
public modes of travel presents significant energy saving potential for the
Country Energy efficient transportation systems, like fuel efficient vehicles,
electric/ transportation hybrid vehicles mechanisms, can lead to savings in fuel
consumption in the transport sector This can significantly reduce the petroleum
import bill, reduce traffic congestion and mitigate vehicular pollution (SOx,
NOx, total hydrocarbon and PM emissions) It is estimated that use of clean and
fuel-efficient transportation can lead to an annual savings of import bill to
the tune of Nu 00 million and non-motorized  Additionally, as significant
fuelwood is being used for space heating and cooking purposes in the building
sector, the EE& measures in the building sector will reduce fuelwood
consumption, which will reduce the pressure on forest resources and the use of
cleaner and efficient  POL Section, DoT, MoEA  National Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Policy cooking technologies will contribute to better human health
Lower dependence on fuel wood will contribute to to climate change carbon
sequestration Adherence commitments will also help the Country to access
international/multilateral/bilateral funds and technical assistances from
development partners in the future  Energy savings in any form will also enhance
disposable income for households This will in turn positively affect gender
equity, as most households are operated by women The increased disposable income
will contribute to employment creation in energy and other sectors, making the
EE& measures as an important contribution to the Government’ green growth
strategy  Adopting energy efficient production processes and technologies will
improve productivity, profitability and competitiveness of industries by
lowering operating costs, and disseminating knowledge and best practices EE&
measures in industries will help in enhancing national economy, transferring
technologies from abroad and establishing value chains for energy-efficient
goods and services  National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy  TITLE,
OPERATIVE PERIOD AND ENFORCEMENT  This Policy shall be known as “National Energy
Efficiency & Conservation Policy of Bhutan 2019”  This Policy shall come into
effect from November 2019 and will remain in force until superseded or modified
All EE& measures in the Country shall be governed by this Policy  OBJECTIVES The
objectives of the Policy are to:  Improve energy security by reducing energy
intensity in the country through adoption of EE& measures  Create enabling
environment for adoption of EE& measures by various actors in the economy for
building, appliance, industry and transport sectors  Reduce energy consumption
from fossil fuels through efficient utilization and contribute towards achieving
the Country’ global commitment to remain carbon neutral  Provide long-term
direction for  systematic approach to implementation of EE& action plan by
soliciting coordination among relevant stakeholders  Create enabling environment
for the private sector participation in adopting EE& measures in the Country
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy  BUILDING SECTOR The building
sector in the Country contributed to 42% of the total energy consumption in
Energy performance of buildings can be improved through  systematic effort
focusing on retrofits of existing buildings and promoting/mandating energy
efficient design for new building construction To improve the energy performance
of the building sectors, among others, the following actions shall be pursued:
The MoWHS shall develop and implement energy efficiency building codes of
practice for both new building constructions and retrofits in existing buildings
These codes shall be aligned with the existing legal framework of building
construction sector in Bhutan The MoWHS shall develop the codes of practice in
coordination with the NA and carry out research on the applicability in the
Country, specify energy efficient construction materials, facilitate market
mechanism, and explore fiscal incentives in consultation with MoF  The Energy
Audit and Reporting Guidelines shall mandate periodic energy audits and
reporting of energy performance of energy intensive buildings, as defined in the
energy efficiency building codes of practice  The Government shall actively
encourage hotel industry to adopt EE& measures and retrofits through
sensitization, awareness creation and recognizing good performers The NA shall
assist the MoWHS to explore options for identifying and publicly recognizing the
good performers  National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy  The MoWHS, in
coordination with the NA and other relevant agencies, shall develop the capacity
of relevant stakeholders of the building sector (architects, engineers,
planners, retailers, manufacturers, etc) on the implementation of the energy
efficiency building codes of practice through trainings, workshops and seminars
artisans, masons, developers,  APPLIANCE SECTOR Energy performance of appliances
can be improved through  systematic effort of lowering the average wattage of
appliances by replacing the current stock of appliances with more energy
efficient products To optimize the energy performance of the appliances, among
others, the following actions shall be pursued:  The NA shall develop the
Technical Specifications (MEPS) for select set of appliances and the BSB shall
develop and adopt the Standards and Certification Scheme to promote consumer
access to energy efficient appliances The NA shall conduct periodic review of
such standards where appropriate  Under the Standards and Certification Scheme,
the Bhutan Trade Classifications will the protocol for monitoring of appliances,
which will be carried out by Regional Trade and Industry Office (RTIO), or any
successor designated under the MoEA include  The Ministry of Finance (MoF) shall
incorporate the EE& aspects into the Public Procurement system  National Energy
Efficiency & Conservation Policy  The Government shall provide fiscal
incentives, based on viability, shall be explored to offset the higher prices of
the labeled appliances and accelerate penetration of energy- efficient
appliances in the market The NA in consultation with MoF shall explore such
incentives and seek approval from the Parliament  INDUSTRY SECTOR The Industry
sector of Bhutan contributed to 37% of the total energy consumption in Various
studies revealed that majority of the EE& interventions in the industry sector
have  negative abatement cost and can be achieved in short term At the unit
level, around 10% of an industry’ energy consumption may be avoided To optimize
the productivity in the industry sector, among others, the following actions
shall be pursued:  Energy efficiency up-gradation measures shall be retrofit,
through in promoted refurbishment, transfer and/or process modifications The NA
shall coordinate and work with the relevant stakeholder agencies (DoI, DCSI,
ABI, BCCI, etc) to implement the Policy through public-private partnerships,
knowledge sharing through energy efficiency quality circle and development of
energy efficiency codes of practice for industry industrial processes technology
The NA shall develop and implement the Energy Audit and Reporting Guidelines
within three to five years from the date of adoption of this Policy The Energy
Audit and Reporting Guidelines shall encourage periodic energy  National Energy
Efficiency & Conservation Policy to identify energy conservation potential
audits in industries The template for reporting of such energy performance shall
be developed by the NA  The NA will carry out capacity building activities to
promote the uptake of EE& measures in the Industry sector, which will include
trainings; pilot/demonstration projects/ programs; workshops or campaigns to
improve energy efficiency and conserve energy in industries The NA shall build/
facilitate appropriate institutional linkages to achieve this  TRANSPORT SECTOR
The Transport sector of Bhutan contributed to 19% of the total energy
consumption in Energy performance of the transport sector can be improved
through systematic adoption of sustainable transportation modalities including
use of electric vehicles, use of public transportation, promotion of non-
motorized transportation, efficient urban planning, etc To improve energy
performance of the transport sector, among others, the following actions shall
be pursued:  The MoIC in collaboration with relevant agencies shall be
responsible for promotion of energy efficient transport systems in the Country
Promotion of energy efficient transportation shall include mass transportation
systems, electric and non-motorized transportation like walking and cycling and
hybrid vehicles 10 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy  The NA in
collaboration with relevant agencies shall periodically commission technical
studies and research activities for applicability of alternative fuels in
vehicles, including hybrid and electric, and other emerging energy efficient
vehicle technologies in the Country  The Government in collaboration with MoF
and relevant agencies shall adopt appropriate measures to promote the
penetration of fuel-efficient vehicles in the Country based on the proposals
submitted by NA  The MoWHS in collaboration with the Thromdes, and in
consultation with MoIC shall give due consideration to EE& aspects in city/town
planning to enable user- friendly non-motorized transportation such as cycling
and walking, shorten traffic congestion The NA shall provide technical
assistance, where necessary travel distances and avoid  INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENT institutional The and arrangement outlines responsibilities of
relevant agencies in the promotion of EE& for organizational measures and
emphasizes strengthening in implementing the EE& and related activities roles
the the need Department of Renewable Energy (DRE) MoEA  The Department of
Renewable Energy (DRE) under the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MoEA) shall be
the “Nodal Agency” (NA) for implementation of this Policy The NA shall promote,
facilitate and coordinate EE& measures in 11 National Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Policy the Country  Review and update the Policy at least once
every five years, if deemed appropriate  Draw up  comprehensive time bound
Policy Action Plan for every five years to realize the objectives of the Policy
Restructure the Research and Development Division within the Department to
spearhead implementation of EE& measures in the Country  Take role lead in
developing/updating national targets/goals/action plans and implementing/
facilitating the EE& measures in collaboration with relevant stakeholders
Advise the Ministry of Finance to develop appropriate fiscal and non-fiscal
instruments for implementation of EE& measures  Advice relevant agencies to
develop appropriate guidelines and standards related for implementation of the
Policy  Carry out nation-wide public awareness campaigns to propagate the
benefits of EE& measures through multiple communication instruments including
television, mass media and schools  Develop an interactive web-based platform,
knowledge hub, which shall act as  one-stop shop regarding EE& measures The NA
shall disseminate best practices and other information The webpage shall further
provide 12 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy readily accessible
materials on latest EE& measures, best practices, findings of the latest
research and projects, case- studies, ready-to-use tools for energy management,
list of approved vendors/suppliers of EE technologies/equipment and information
on pilot projects implemented, among others Advice the relevant institutions to
incorporate EE& measures in academic curricula to equip the students with state-
of-the-art, tools and techniques related to practical application of EE&
measures ready concepts, industry Develop technical specifications for energy
efficiency standards for appliances and equipment in collaboration with relevant
institutes and/or agencies Facilitate and encourage private sector participation
in implementation of EE& measures Department of Trade (DoT), MoEA The DoT in
collaboration with the Department of Revenue & Customs (DRC), MoF and other
relevant agencies, shall monitor the import and sale of energy efficient
appliances and equipment including sub-standard energy efficient appliances and
equipment in the Country Ministry of Finance (MoF) The MoF shall give due
consideration to the proposals for EE& financing instruments recommended by the
NA and seek approvals for fiscal incentives from the Parliament 13 National
Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy The MoF shall incorporate EE& aspects in
the Public Procurement system The DRC in collaboration with the DoT, MoEA and
other relevant agencies, shall strive to monitor the import and sale of energy
efficient appliances and equipment including sub-standard energy efficient
appliances and equipment in the Country Gross National Happiness Commission
(GNHC) The GNHC shall periodically review the implementation status and
effectiveness of this policy at  national level to ensure its alignment with the
overall national development objectives based on the progress report of action
plan submitted by NA Ministry of Information and Communication (MoIC) As the
lead agency for sustainable transport systems in the Country, facilitate the
MoIC shall design and/or implementation of EE& measures in transport systems in
coordination with the NA The RSTA shall collaborate with the NA to organize
nation-wide education campaigns to positively influence the adoption of energy
efficiency measures in the road transport sector eco-driving awareness and
Ministry of Works and Human Settlement (MoWHS) The DES under the MoWHS shall
develop the energy 14 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy
efficiency building codes of practice in close coordination with NA for both new
building constructions and retrofits in existing buildings The DES, under the
MoWHS, shall coordinate with the NA to conduct targeted outreach and awareness
on EE& measures for building sectors to promote uptake of energy efficient
construction technologies and practices The DoHS, under the MoWHS, shall use the
provision of this Policy as an input for integrated and green urban planning The
DES along with Thromdes and Dzongkhag Administrations shall implement and
enforce the energy efficiency building codes of practice developed under the
Policy Bhutan Standards Bureau The BSB shall certify the energy performance of
energy efficient appliances as well as other sectors included in this policy
wherever appropriate as per relevant national standards or such other directives
issued by  competent authority Thromdes The Thromdes, in collaboration with
MoWHS and other relevant agencies, shall implement and enforce the energy
efficiency building codes of practice developed under the Policy 15 National
Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy Dzongkhag Administration The Dzongkhag
Engineering sector in collaboration with MoWHS and other relevant agencies shall
implement and enforce the energy efficiency building codes of practice developed
under the Policy Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA) The BEA shall explore to re-
categorize HV, MV and LV industries, from time to time, based on actual power
consumption/connected load BEA in consultation with NA may design  price signal,
as appropriate, for facilitating EE& measures in industries The BEA will study
in consultation with the NA and other stakeholders, applicable tariff
instruments, which can incentivize EE&, demand response or demand side
management, as and when appropriate This policy shall be used as an input for
design and/or amendment of the Domestic Electricity Tariff Policy The BEA, in
collaboration with the Bhutan Power Corporation Limited, shall ensure that the
transformer sizing and distribution system design is optimum for consumers for
energy efficient operation National Environment Commission (NEC) The NEC shall
collaborate with NA for consolidating all relevant information to prepare the
Country’ position on climate change mitigation related to EE& measures and
facilitate the flow of climate finance through NAMA, 16 National Energy
Efficiency & Conservation Policy NDCs, and emerging international mechanisms
Department of Industry (DoI), MoEA The DoI shall work in close coordination with
the NA, Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industries (BCCI) and Association of
Bhutanese Industries (ABI) to promote and implement EE& measures in the industry
sector Department of Cottage and Small Industries (DCSI), MoEA The DCSI shall
work in close coordination with the NA, BCCI and ABI to promote and implement
EE& measures in the small and cottage industries Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and
Industries (BCCI) and Association of Bhutanese Industries (ABI) The BCCI and ABI
will provide periodic inputs and industry insights to the Government on
industrial EE& measures Private Sector The private sector will adopt EE&
measures as prescribed by the competent authority 17 National Energy Efficiency
& Conservation Policy ENERGY EFFICIENCY & CONSERVATION ACTIONPLAN  The major
energy consuming sectors in the country are building and appliances sector with
270,356 TOE, industry sector with 241,972 TOE and transport sector with 121,218
TOE of energy consumption reported in the year The detailed energy audits and
technical studies carried out in 2014 by the NA showed substantial techno-
commercially achievable energy savings potential that will be carried out
through implementation of EE& action plan  For the promotion of EE& measures,
the NA shall utilize the Renewable Energy Development Trust Fund (REDTF)
established under the Alternative Renewable Energy Policy (AREP) 2013 and
amendment thereof or any other innovative the Government funding mechanism
established by  The RMA shall classify bank lending for EE& projects, which lead
to increased energy efficiency in production processes or in technologies, as
“Priority Sector Lending” Concessional interest rates shall be applicable for
priority sector lending The NA shall collaborate with RMA in identifying the
category of EE& projects eligible for priority sector lending  The GNHC and the
MoF shall explore access to international funds, in the form of climate finance
and/or other development finance assistance Based on the proposal submitted by
the NA, the MoF and GNHC shall review EE& proposals and provide funding support
to EE& measures wherever deemed necessary 18 National Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Policy  The NA shall coordinate with relevant agencies for
international identification of funding options from development partners to
support EE& projects MONITORING ANDEVALUATION  The NA shall develop  monitoring,
reporting and verification mechanism the effectiveness and relevance of EE&
programs The NA will update concerned stakeholders regarding policy formulation
and implementation status to periodically assess AMENDMENTS  The Government may
amend this Policy, as and when required, with at least one update in every five
years However, the terms and conditions of agreements, which are in effect for
the existing projects, shall not be subjected to these amendments INTERPRETATION
OF THE POLICY  In the event of conflict of interpretation, the Ministry of
Economic Affairs shall on behalf of the Government, be the authority to
interpret various provisions of this Policy, which shall be final and binding
DEFINITIONS  Abatement cost: It is defined as the difference between the cost of
implementing the measure and the savings generated from it over the lifetime of
the project over per 19 National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy unit of
savings  ‘Appliance’ is an electrical/mechanical machine that consumes energy
Major appliances include: air conditioners, refrigerators, printer, water
heaters, washing machines, copier machines, projectors, microwave ovens,
convection heaters, mobile phone, motor, laptops, tube-lights, bulbs,
television, fans, room heaters, halogen heaters, vacuum cleaner, electric
cookers, boilers, juicers, electric mixers, etc scanners,  Bhutan Schedule of
Rates: It is published by the Department of Engineering Services under the
Ministry of Works and Human Settlement and prescribes rates for works by
individual component, quality and quantity Its scope is governed by the
Specifications for Building and Road Works (SBRW) It is designed primarily as
tool for estimation of construction project costs  Bhutan Trade Classification:
It is  national government publication which classifies types of goods It is
used to assess the annual exports and imports of the Country with other
Countries overtime  Energy Audit means verification, monitoring and analysis of
machinery, appliances and the processes of utilization of energy entity and
determination of its efficiency  Energy Audit and Reporting Guidelines: It
refers to the guidelines to carry out energy audits for Buildings and Industries
in Bhutan  Energy Conservation means reducing energy consumption through using
less energy services Energy conservation 20 National Energy Efficiency &
Conservation Policy differs from efficient energy use, which refers to using
less energy for  constant service  Energy Efficiency is  way of managing and
restraining the growth in energy consumption such that less energy can be used
to provide the same service /output  Energy Efficiency Building Code of Practice
is minimum criteria and minimum standards for Energy Efficiency in design and/or
retrofits in energy intensive buildings It provides criteria for determining
compliance Energy Intensive Buildings are buildings or industries that consume
huge amount of energy, the magnitude of which will be determined by the Energy
Efficiency Codes of Practice Equipment: The set of articles or physical
resources that consume energy to serve or equip  person or thing Hybrid Vehicle:
hybrid vehicle uses two or more distinct types of power, such as internal
combustion engine and electric motor HV and MV Industries: Industries that are
connected to high voltage and medium voltage power supply respectively Industry:
Industry is the production of goods or services within an economy The major
source of revenue of  group or company is the indicator of its relevant industry
Minimum Energy Performance Standards (MEPS): MEPS is  specification containing
levels of performance that requirements for an energy-using device, and 21
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy effectively limits the maximum
amount of energy that be consumed by  product in performing  specified task
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action NAMA: NAMA refers to  set of policies
and actions that Countries undertake as part of  commitment to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions Nodal Agency (NA): Nodal Agency has the overall responsibility for
implementation in the State/project The Nodal agency coordinates the overall
execution of the project Priority Sector Lending: Priority Sector Lending is an
important role given by the RMA to the national banks for providing  specified
portion of the bank lending to few specific sectors with some incentive Public
transport: Public transport is  shared passenger transport service which is
available for use by the general public Public transport modes include buses,
trolleybuses, trams transit light (metro/subways/underground etc) and taxis
rapid rail, (or REDTF: Renewable Energy Development Trust Fund is  funding
mechanism established under AREP 2013 to support RE and Energy Efficiency
initiatives Thromde:  thromde means  large urban area or  municipality with
minimum population of ,000 people in which more than 50% of the population is
dependent on non - primary activities and having the potential to sustain its
services through its revenue such as taxes and fees 22 National Energy
Efficiency & Conservation Policy Tonnes of Oil Equivalent: It is  unit of energy
defined as the amount of energy released by burning one tonnes of crude oil 23
National Energy Efficiency & Conservation Policy Page | 24