AlternAtive renewAble energy Policy 2013 royAl government of bhutAn  AlternAtive
renewAble energy Policy 2013 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ROYAL
GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN  ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013   ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  ii
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY
2013 ABBREVIATIONS AD Accelerated Depreciation BEA Bhutan Electricity Authority
BOO Build-Own-Operate BOOT Build-Own-Operate-Transfer BPC Bhutan Power
Corporation CA Concession Agreement CDM Clean Development Mechanism CER
Certified Emission Reduction COD Commercial Operation Date CSI Cottage and Small
Industries DDG Decentralised Distributed Generation DGPC Druk Green Power
Corporation DRE Department of Renewable Energy DPP Detailed Project Proposal DPR
Detailed Project Report EDP Economic Development Policy EIA Environmental Impact
Assessment EMP Environment Management Plan EoI Expression of Interest FDI
Foreign Direct Investment GBI Generation Based Incentive GHG Green House Gas
iii ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY
2013 GHG Green House Gas GNHC Gross National Happiness Commission ICS Improved
Cook Stoves kW Kilo Watt LoI Letter of Intent MoAF Ministry of Agriculture &
Forest MoEA Ministry of Economic Affairs MoF Ministry of Finance MoIC Ministry
of Information and Communication MoU Memorandum of Understanding MW Mega Watt
NEC National Environment Commission PDA Project Development Agreement PPA Power
Purchase Agreement RE Renewable Energy REDF Renewable Energy Development Fund
REO Renewable Energy Obligation RfP Request for Proposal RGoB Royal Government
of Bhutan RoC Registrar of Companies RPO Renewable Purchase Obligation SHP Small
Hydropower Projects SPV Special Purpose Vehicle WTE Waste to Energy  iv
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY
2013 Table of Contents:  Introduction : Page:   Target : Page:   Implementation
mechanism: Page: 11  Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) Projects : Page:
16  Stand-alone RE Projects : Page: 17  Fossil Fuel Substitution by Green Energy
Sources : Page: 18 Project Clearance : Page: 19 Investment Model : Page: 19
Table of Contents: Project Ownership : Page: 20 Lock-in-period : Page: 21 Water
use charges : Page: 21 Recycling and Management of waste: Page: 21 Foriegn
Direct Investment (FDI): Page: 22 Land Acquisition and Compensation : Page: 22
Financial Resource Management : Page: 22 Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF
: Page: 23 Utilization of REDF : Page: 23 Promotional Measures : Page: 24 Carbon
Market Mechanism : Page: 26 Delivery Mechanism : Page: 27 Monitoring and
Evaluation : Page: 30 Amendments : Page: 30 Deviation from the Policy Provisions
: Page: 30 Interpretation of the Policy : Page: 31 Definition : Page: 31
INTRODUCTION  The unique concept of Gross National Happiness (GNH) is being
pursued by the Royal Government of Bhutan as its development philosophy,
reflecting its sensitivity towards preservation of its rich cultural heritage
and pristine environment while ensuring economic growth and overall well-being
of its people GNH is conceptually based on promotion of sustainable development,
preservation of cultural values, conservation of the natural environment, and
establishment of good governance as its main pillars  Article  of the
Constitution entrusts every Bhutanese as  trustee of the Kingdom’ natural
resources and environment for the benefit of the present and future generations
It is the fundamental duty of every citizen to contribute to the protection of
the natural environment, conservation of the rich biodiversity of Bhutan and
prevention of all forms of ecological degradation  The Royal Government of
Bhutan has committed to keep absorbing more carbon than it emits - and to
maintain its status as  net sink for Green House Gases (GHG) through the
Declaration of the Kingdom of Bhutan dated 11 December  Bhutan is endowed with
significant natural resources, including hydropower, solar, and wind potential,
vast forest cover, and mineral resources These resources are not only part of
Bhutan’ rich ecology, but  balanced approach between conservation and
sustainable resource development has helped contribute to the country’ progress
In 2011, hydropower sales accounted for the largest share of GDP, and met almost
all of the country’ electricity needs  ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013
The development of untapped hydropower potential is an integral part of Bhutan’
strategy as outlined in the 10th Five Year Plan Hydropower provides the country
with  strong advantage, including economic benefits through export revenues,
environmental benefits given the clean nature of electricity production, and an
electricity security advantage given important domestic resource availability
At the same time, when considering Bhutan’ energy system as  whole, rising
energy demand in the transport and industry sectors, rapidly growing imports of
fossil fuels, the risk of reliance on  single electricity source, and the
threats of climate change give cause to consider the advantages of  more
diversified and independent energy system that meets national energy needs while
balancing energy security, environmental preservation, and economic development
potential  In particular, the Bhutan Transport Vision 2040 projects  drop in
rural population from 400,000 today to 250,000 by 2040 as individuals migrate
from rural to urban centres in pursuit of better livelihoods The redistribution
of the population is expected to increase travel demands within and between
urban areas, resulting in enhanced congestion and environmental degradation The
adoption of green transport technology solutions can help minimize carbon
emissions and growing fuel consumption  The Country has also witnessed
significant increase in vehicular traffic due to economic development
Consequently, imports of petroleum products have also increased from Nu  billion
in 2004 to Nu  billion in 2011 and are projected to rise further This has
diverted Government resources from pursuing developmental programmes, and
enhances vulnerability to rising fuels costs, and availability of supply
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  With some of these trends and
challenges in mind, the Bhutan Sustainable Hydropower Development Policy 2008
and the Economic Development Policy (EDP) 2010 recognise the need for  Renewable
Energy (RE) Policy to promote the use of available RE sources to strengthen
national energy security Promotion of RE in the country presents  unique
challenge as Bhutan enjoys availability of adequate low-cost hydropower that is
green and clean The cost of RE generation is not competitive with hydropower
generation if only cost of generation is considered However, if the benefits of
more diversified energy system are considered, the rationale for supporting RE
generation is clear To realise diversified RE potential, it is however necessary
to develop targeted policies, supported by shifting existing subsidies away from
other sources of energy such as fossil fuels and current grid electricity,
toward other RE technologies 10 In pursuit of this objective, this Alternative
Renewable Energy Policy, built by taking cues from the Integrated Energy
Management Master Plan 2010 and efforts of the Rural Electrification Master Plan
2005, intends to provide the necessary direction for the promotion and
development of RE that not only contribute to meeting the current energy
requirements but also shaping future energy options for the Country This
Alternative RE Policy aims to contribute to sustainable development, climate
change mitigation, energy and economic security, and conservation of environment
in the Kingdom Management of energy demand shall be addressed in the Energy
Efficiency Policy to be developed separately  ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY
POLICY 2013 11 This Alternative Renewable Energy Policy aims to promote the
following clean RE technologies: solar (both PV and thermal), wind, bio-energy,
geo-thermal, pico/micro/mini/small hydro and waste to energy (WTE) This Policy
shall cover, inter alia, the following areas of RE interventions: ) Stand-alone
systems, ) Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) systems, ) Grid-connected
RE systems, ) Fossil fuel substitution through green energy sources like bio-
fuels, electric and hybrid vehicles 12 Renewable Energy Technology in this
Policy shall cover solar (both PV and thermal), wind, bio-energy, geo-thermal,
pico/micro/mini/ small hydro up to 25 MW and waste to energy (WTE) While large
hydropower (above 25 MW) is considered as renewable energy, it is not under the
scope of this Policy 13 The Alternative Renewable Energy Policy strives to
ensure adequate provision and extensive use of modern energy services in rural
areas, which have been largely dependent on firewood and kerosene for cooking,
heating and lighting purposes 14 The Alternative Renewable Energy Policy also
strives to optimise and conserve the usage of grid-based power through promotion
of dispersed energy generation options such as solar thermal, solar photovoltaic
and other stand-alone systems In remote locations/ rural areas, community-based
initiatives in the form of Decentralised Distributed Generation (DDG) or any
other initiatives leading to promotion of RE sources shall be dealt on  priority
basis RE applications such as solar photovoltaic and thermal application in
government buildings, institutions, hotels, and the residential sector shall
also be promoted under this Policy  ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013
OBJECTIVE OF THE POLICY  In view of rising energy demand, the reliance on
single electricity source, increasing fossil fuel imports, and low hydropower
production in winter months, it is critical to diversify the energy mix by
harnessing other domestic sources of clean renewable energy to ensure energy
security, economic development, and protection of the environment  Recognizing
the above premise, the long-term and short-term objectives of the RE Policy have
been stipulated as follows: ) Long-term objectives: ) Contribute to energy
security and broaden the energy portfolio through utilization of available
renewable energy potential; ) Reduce GHG emissions and contribute to climate
change mitigation; ) Promote green growth and enhance sustainable socio-economic
development; ) Develop productive manufacturing capacity in the RE Sector; and )
Develop  framework for Carbon Trading Mechanisms ) Short-term objectives: )
Harness the potential of RE resources and adoption of RE technologies in the
Country; ) Develop RE Master Plan for each of the RE technologies by mapping
capacity, generation potential and cost of generation by location across the
Kingdom; ) Design appropriate tariffs for various RE technologies to offer
secure and stable market to investors and project developers with transparent,
guaranteed and time-bound incentives provided by the Government;  ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ) Enable, encourage and facilitate both public and
private sector participation in the development of RE; ) Set realistic target
for RE in the energy-mix; ) Support and promote Research & Development in RE
technologies with long term potentials as viable energy resources; )
Institutionalize the development of national and local capacities and
capabilities for enhanced and optimum utilization of RE systems; ) Establish the
necessary administrative processes, basic physical infrastructure and
institutional mechanisms to implement the provisions of this Policy; and )
Strengthen regulatory functions in the RE sector  TARGET This Policy sets out
preliminary minimum target of 20 MW by 2025 through mix of renewable energy
technologies This minimum target may be increased following more detailed
evaluations of resource potentials Specific targets include:  Electricity
Generation ) Solar –  MW ) Wind –  MW ) Biomass –  MW  Energy Generation )
Biomass Energy System -  MW equivalent ) Solar Thermal System -  MW equivalent
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  Fossil Fuel Energy substitution in
Transport Sector ) 1000 kilolitres of oil equivalent 111,000MWh =˜ ) 20% of the
state owned and 10% of the private vehicle fleet shall be encouraged to run on
clean and green fuels by 2025 The above target does not include micro/mini/small
hydro, which shall be developed separately on need basis  TITLE, OPERATIVE
PERIOD AND ENFORCEMENT  This Policy shall be known as “Alternative Renewable
Energy Policy 2013”  This Policy shall come into effect from 8th April 2013 and
will remain in force until superseded or modified by another Policy  All RE
projects shall be governed by this Policy  INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT  The
institutional arrangement outlines the roles and responsibilities of relevant
organizations in the promotion of RE Department of Renewable Energy (DRE)  The
Department of Renewable Energy (DRE) under the Ministry of Economic Affairs
(MoEA) shall be the “Nodal Agency” or “NA” for implementation of the RE Policy
The NA shall be the focal point for sustainable energy development and promotion
of RE sources  ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  The NA shall undertake
the following functions: () Promote  ‘Centre of Excellence’ at the Royal
University of Bhutan and in association with the prominent in stitutions of the
Kingdom This Centre would carry out advanced courses, applied &, work on
different renewable energy technologies (RETs) and provide training to the
manpower employed in the RE sector; (ii) Administer and manage the newly created
Renewable Energy Development Fund; (iii) Serve as the central coordination and
implementation body for the development of  RE Master Plan by mapping resource
potential and cost of generation for different RE technologies, and, locations
across the Kingdom in collaboration with relevant agencies and the private
sector; (iv) Coordinate action plans and link together the activities of
different agencies or organizations, to ensure sustainable energy planning; ()
Facilitate project developers in securing required clearances from various
government agencies; (vi) Facilitate PPA with the concerned distribution
utilities including appointment of trader() as consolidator for purchases and
sales of RE generation, subject to fulfillment of Licensing requirement under
the Electricity Act; (vii) Issue policy directives for adoption of Renewable
Energy Obligations or other policy measures as deemed appropri ate;  ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 (viii) Promote awareness of RE and other clean and
green energy technologies, and integrate their development within overall
national energy policy and development; (ix) Create market opportunities and
appropriate start-up business models like energy services providers/companies to
provide renewable energy services in  sustainable manner through process
innovations; () Facilitate allotment of land, access to water and approval of
power evacuation plan; (xi) Assist in obtaining various clearances related to
energy plantation for use as supplementary fuel in case of biomass power plant
and Waste-to-Energy Schemes; (xii) Develop appropriate subsidy and support
mechanisms to make RE  viable energy source, including the introduction of
Renewable Purchase Obligations, amongst other policy tools; and (xiii) Carry out
inventory of renewable energy technologies on an annual basis Bhutan Electricity
Authority (BEA)  BEA shall create  regulatory framework for the RE Sector as per
the provisions of the Electricity Act to encourage electricity generation from
RE sources  Besides these functions, the BEA shall design and develop the
following: () Feed-in-tariff as per the principles contained in this Policy; and
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 (ii) Norms related to grid
connectivity/interfacing and load dispatch, etc Ministry of Agriculture &
Forests (MoAF)  MoAF shall collaborate with DRE to generate energy from the pico
and micro hydropower/biomass/bio-fuels/biogas resources in the country  MoAF
shall collaborate with DRE in & for development of sustainable bio-energy
technologies  MoAF shall be responsible for providing sustainable source of
biomass as  source of renewable energy fuel National Environment Commission
(NEC)  NEC shall provide support for the promotion and development of renewable
energy projects 10 NEC shall have the overall coordination responsibility with
regard to water issues in its capacity as the custodian of Water Act 11 NEC
shall ensure expedient, efficient, and priority processing and issuance of
clearances/permits to help promote the development of renewable energy projects
Ministry of Information and Communication (MoIC) 12 MoIC shall collaborate with
NA/MoEA and provide policy and other support towards substitution of fossil fuel
by green energy sources in the transport sector 10 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY
POLICY 2013 Thromdes 13 Thromdes shall collaborate with NA/MoEA and provide
policy and other support towards substitution of fossil fuel by green energy
sources in urban transport, street lighting and district heating systems 14
Thromdes shall provide policy and other support towards conversion of waste to
energy and for promotion of green buildings  IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM  The
implementation mechanism will include the mapping of RE resources,
identification of potential project sites, preparation of techno-economic
feasibility studies, allocation and development of RE projects ) Government
Identified RE Projects  The NA will develop the RE Master Plan within three
years after the adoption of the Policy  The RE Master Plan will include resource
analysis, potential project sites, and estimated project scale for different
Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs)  The NA shall then undertake preparatory
studies for identified projects up to at least the pre-feasibility stage to
ascertain their viability These studies shall cover the technical, financial,
economic and environmental aspects of RE projects 11 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013  The NA shall make Pre-feasibility Reports available to the
general public through the website of the NA Interested parties may be permitted
to bid for these projects as per guidelines issued by the NA The prospective
developer will have the right, at his own cost, to examine, evaluate and to
carry out additional studies to make his own assessment about viability of the
project, as part of his due diligence process ) Allotment process for Projects
Identified by NA Grid-Connected Small Hydropower Projects  The small hydropower
projects under the RE Master Plan shall be allocated on the basis of open
competitive bidding to the project developer following the bidding guidelines,
rules and regulations prescribed by the NA  For domestic off-take projects, the
bidding shall be based on lowest tariff offered by the bidder while for export
oriented projects, the bidding shall be based on the highest royalty energy
being offered, provided the winning bidder possess the required technical
capacity to develop and maintain the project  If the allocation of the project
is not achieved through the bidding process, the Government may direct the
State-owned agencies for development  The Government may also direct the State-
owned utilities/agencies for development of Small Hydropower Projects for
strategic reasons 10 Physical construction of small hydropower projects shall
prioritize the employment of national labour However, if necessary, technical
support may be outsourced to foreign nationals or firms 12 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 Grid-connected Other RE Projects 11 The NA shall release
public Request for Proposal (RfP) inviting prospective developers to submit
project proposals These documents shall comprise the requisite details about the
proposed project to facilitate proposal development by project developers 12 The
RfP will have pre-qualification criteria to evaluate the technical and financial
capacities of the prospective developers in line with the requirements of the
project Weightage and scores of technical and financial criteria shall be
specified in the RfP The NA shall establish minimum qualifying score for
developers at the pre-qualification stage The applicants shall be short-listed
based on the evaluation, subject to scoring the minimum qualifying marks at the
pre- qualification stage Only short-listed applicants shall be invited to
participate in the price bidding process 13 The price bid will contain the
offered price of electricity to the grid The developer with least cost bid
within the range acceptable to the NA defined in the bidding document will be
invited to negotiate for the allocation of the project 14 If there are two or
more identical bids with same scores at this stage, allotment shall be based on
the higher score obtained during the pre- qualification stage If the scores are
same even at this stage, the two bidders shall be requested to bid again based
on additional criteria as specified by the NA, till one emerges as the winning
bidder 15 In the case of Biomass Power and Waste to Energy, the NA shall
determine the maximum use of fossil fuel for biomass power plants during the
lean period in  year and shall facilitate the process of clearance for
procurement of such fuels on  priority basis for the Biomass Power Producers 13
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 16 If specified in the RfP, the
selected developer shall reimburse the expenditure incurred, if any by the
Government, for infrastructure work of the project at the time of signing the
Project Development Agreement (PDA) 17 The selected developer shall sign  PDA
with the NA The PDA shall outline the commitments and obligations of the parties
and will provide  timeline for the selected Developer to prepare  Detail Project
Report/Detail Project Proposal (DPR/DPP) 18 The quality of DPR/DPP,
Construction, and Operation & Maintenance practices shall conform to
International Standards and Specifications, and BEA norms and shall be enforced
by the Government 19 After the DPR/DPP is approved by the NA, the selected
developer shall be awarded the Project through an Allocation Agreement (AA) with
the NA This AA shall be the key legal instrument, specifying the rights and
obligations of the parties This AA shall also include time schedules for
obtaining necessary legal/administrative/technical approvals, financial closure,
construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance of the project ) Self-
identified RE Projects 20 Private agencies or individual shall be allowed and
encouraged to identify and prepare studies up to DPR for Micro, Mini and Small
hydropower projects to  maximum of  MW and DPP for other RE projects, following
the guidelines prescribed by the NA 21 The project developer undertaking pre-
feasibility study/DPR/DPP and survey activities shall obtain the permit as per
the provisions of Electricity Act 14 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 22
All costs related to self identification of projects shall be the liability of
the developer and the Government shall not be responsible for this 23 The
Guideline for the preparation of DPRs/DPPs shall specify detailed element() to
be studied and/or considered, processing fees, conditions of acceptance of
DPRs/DPPs for review, criteria for examination and allocation ) Broad guidelines
for Preparation of DPR/DPP under self-identified RE Projects 24 The detailed
guidelines for the Preparation of DPR/DPP will be issued by the NA which shall,
among others, include an overview of the project, justification of the project
from an energy supply side, basin development plan, survey and investigation of
hydrology and reservoirs in the case of hydropower projects, inter-district and
inter- national aspects, power potential and planned capacity, design of civil,
electrical and mechanical structures, transmission of power and communication
facilities, construction programme and planning, project organization,
infrastructure facilities, environmental and ecological aspects, cost estimates,
allocation of costs, economic evaluation, future utilization of buildings, and
other benefits and clearances/inputs from relevant agencies as prescribed by the
NA ) Submission of DPRs/DPPs under self-identified RE Projects 25 The Developer
intending to set up  renewable energy project shall submit the DPR/DPP to the NA
for its concurrence ) Allocation process for self-identified RE projects 26
After the DPRs/DPPs have been endorsed by the NA, the developer may submit the
endorsed DPRs/DPPs to the NA for allocation of the project 15 ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 27 The Pico Hydropower Project() and Micro
Hydropower Project() shall be allocated for the individual consumption or use by
the communities/firms provided it meets the allocation criteria prescribed by
the NA Any surplus energy shall be allowed to sell to third parties 28 For all
Hydropower Projects, the developer will be required to pay the Application
Processing fee and Security Deposit as specified by the NA 29 Evaluation
criteria for identification and approval of suitable and competent project
developer() shall be specified by the NA, both for the self-identified
hydropower and other RE projects 30 If allocation of project is done for
domestic supply, the purchase of energy generated from such RE Projects, except
hydropower projects, shall be guaranteed by the Government under Renewable
Purchase Obligation and at the tariff approved by BEA 31 If the allocation of
projects is done for export purpose, such RE projects shall require keeping
provisions for domestic supply up to 20% of the production if required by the
Government at the price determined by BEA for the purpose of enhancing domestic
energy supply security  DECENTRALIZED DISTRIBUTED GENERATION (DDG) PROJECTS  DDG
RE projects shall be developed for provision of energy-based services to remote
and dispersed villages, which are not electrified or not connected to the grid
The allocation of such projects shall be based on guidelines, rules and
regulations prescribed by the NA 16 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013
All RE projects constructed under the Government funding as distributed power
generation source shall remain as the property of the Government and management
of the plant shall be transferred to communities, wherever feasible  For the RE
projects which are constructed under Government funding and managed by the
community, the tariff shall be set to meet the operation and maintenance costs
only  The Government shall provide back up support for RE projects developed
under Government funding if there is  major breakdown and requires substantial
funds for restoring the plant  STAND-ALONE RE PROJECTS  Standalone RE
systems/scheme/programme based on RE technologies (solar PV, solar thermal, pico
hydro, micro hydro, wind, solar home lighting system, solar lanterns, biogas
plants, passive cooling systems, biomass, cook-stoves etc for processing
appliances) or  hybrid of RE technologies for the provision of decentralized
energy for households/communities shall be undertaken and/or supported by the NA
Civil Societies, NGOs, Communities, Companies and Individuals based in Bhutan
may initiate and undertake the stand-alone projects based on the renewable
energy technologies or combination of such technologies depending upon the
available resources and demand of the particular location following the
Guidelines prescribed by the NA  For the accelerated deployment of solar thermal
system in order to diversify the energy sources and to reduce the consumption of
conventional energy, other policy support mechanisms, including financial
support, capacity building and promotional incentives will be developed 17
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  The NA shall explore innovative
processes and technologies to make the stand-alone RET and its related services
accessible  Process of allotment shall follow the guidelines, rules and
regulations prescribed by the NA  The minimum capacity of RET shall be
prescribed by the NA for which no specific clearances shall be required from the
Government  FOSSIL FUEL SUBSTITUTION BY GREEN ENERGY SOURCES  Research and
development activities shall be undertaken to explore substitution of fossil
fuels by green energy transport fuel sources such as electricity and bio-fuels,
and technologies such as electric, hybrid electric vehicles, and other emerging
technologies  In coordination with relevant Ministries and Departments,
necessary infrastructure to support the use of electricity as  source of fuel
supply in the transport sector will be examined This will aim to promote the use
of electric and hybrid electric vehicles to meet public sector, commercial and
private sector, and individual transport needs  Policies that promote the
purchase and use of electric and hybrid electric vehicles will be explored,
including but not limited to vehicle purchase incentives, dedicated priority
parking, and other priority access policies  Research and Development shall be
carried out to introduce  more comprehensive and reliable mass transport system,
where feasible, including electric tram networks, electric and hybrid electric
buses and other clean mass transport options 18 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY
POLICY 2013  Bike-lanes shall be introduced in cities and towns, where feasible,
to encourage biking/cycling and walking  Research and Development Activities to
explore the potential for domestic production and use of bio-fuels ( bio-ethanol
and bio- diesel) using organic matter will be undertaken, ensuring that such
actions do not affect the food security of the Country  The use of waste as
energy source for other processes and conversion of waste to energy will be
evaluated  The Government shall gradually phase out subsidy on fossil fuels to
encourage conservation and switch to alternative fuel sources 10 PROJECT
CLEARANCE NA shall facilitate necessary clearances for RE projects 11 INVESTMENT
MODEL Life of the Project All RE projects except micro/mini/small hydro All RE
projects for electricity generation (except for mini, micro and small hydro)
shall be developed under BOO (Build, Own, Operate) model The projects shall be
allocated for the following period for the purpose of determining the economic
life: wind - 20 years, biomass - 20 years and solar power project (PV and
thermal) -25 years, excluding the construction period 19 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 The NA shall recommend for renewal of license for operation
of the plant beyond the economic life of the project on the request of project
developer, based on such terms and conditions as determined by the NA
Micro/Mini/Small Hydro Projects The micro, mini and small hydro projects shall
be developed under Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT) model The project shall be
allotted to  developer for  concession period up to 30 years, excluding the
construction period Based on the performance of the incumbent operator and the
terms and conditions to be agreed upon, the concession period can be extended
for  maximum of 15 years At the end of the concession period, the ownership of
the project including all existing installations, property and rights needed for
power generation in working conditions shall be transferred to the Government
without any compensation to the developer Other than export oriented small
hydropower projects, the developers of RE Projects shall not be required to
provide royalty energy 12 PROJECT OWNERSHIP Grid connected, DDG and Stand-alone
RE projects Investments in RE projects are open for investments from the private
sector including FDI FDI shall be allowed only as minority shareholding for
development of small hydropower projects FDI shall not be permitted in micro and
mini hydropower projects 20 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 13 LOCK-IN-
PERIOD The developer developing the project shall provide information on the
promoters and their shareholding in the company to the NA indicating the
controlling shareholding before signing of the PDA with the NA The “Developer”
identified as the “Principal Developer” in the application for allotment of RE
projects, having  lead role and possessing sufficient financial strength, is
required to hold the controlling shareholding in the Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) developing the project The “lock-in-period” shall be applicable for the
first “Three Years” of the project life from the Commercial Operation Date (COD)
No change in the shareholding in the SPV Company developing the project shall be
permitted from the date of signing the PDA till the end of the third year from
the date of commissioning of commercial operation After successful completion of
three years of plant operation, the project developer may divest the equity
share 14 WATER USE CHARGES There shall be no water user charges other than the
Royalty energy 15 RECYCLING AND MANAGEMENT OF WASTE All the waste generated from
the promotion of RE shall be managed under the provision of the prevailing Waste
Management Acts, Policies and Regulations in the Kingdom 21 ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 16 FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI) RE Projects
eligible for FDI shall be dealt as per the prevailing FDI Policy, rules and
regulations of the country and provisions of this Policy 17 LAND ACQUISITION AND
COMPENSATION For all RE Projects, land acquisition and compensation shall be as
per the Land Act For projects that are to be transferred to Government after the
concession period, all land required for the project shall be facilitated by the
NA and the cost will be charged to the project through an annual lease rent
during the concession period For all other projects, the NA shall facilitate the
project developer in acquiring the identified government land For private land,
the project developers will deal directly with the private land-owners with
necessary support from NA 18 FINANCIAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT To render the
services required to promote the RE sector, the NA shall utilize funds from two
sources – budgetary support from the Government and the Renewable Energy
Development Fund (REDF), stipulated under the Bhutan Sustainable Hydropower
Development Policy and established under this Policy For the activities mandated
by the Government as per Five Year Plans, the NA shall utilize the budgetary
support from the Government 22 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 19
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT FUND (REDF) The Renewable Energy Development Fund
(REDF) is herby established The primary objective of the REDF shall be to
provide financial assistance for creating  favorable investment climate for RE
in the Country Funds for REDF shall come from the following sources: )  part of
up-front premiums received from the large hydro project developers; )  part of
the revenue earned from sale of royalty energy from the generating companies and
RE Projects as per the provisions of the Economic Development Policy and RE
Policy as may be applicable; ) Grants from International Development Agencies
and other donors; ) Electricity and CDM revenue earned from RE projects
developed by the NA; ) Any voluntary contribution from individuals or corporate
agencies; ) Any cess on import of fossil fuel; ) Application processing fees
collected under self-identified RE Projects under this Policy; ) Other sources
of fund that the Government may propose through additional mechanism/arrangement
as deemed appropriate 20 UTILIZATION OF REDF The REDF shall support all
activities which are considered appropriate by the NA for the development of the
RE sector and creation of  facilitating investment climate 23 ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 The REDF shall provide support to sustain RE
programmes and projects where deemed necessary REDF shall provide support to
carry out Research and Development activities to promote Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency The NA shall administer and manage the funds in the REDF The
donations made to REDF and income earned from investment of REDF shall be
exempted from taxes The NA shall prepare REDF management guidelines, rules and
regulations within one year from the issuance of the RE Policy in consultation
with identified financial institutions 21 PROMOTIONAL MEASURES General The
Government shall provide technical and budgetary supports to organize publicity
and awareness campaigns, seminars, workshops, symposia, business meetings,
training programmes, studies, survey, etc as deem appropriate by the NA The NA
shall provide capital subsidy and/or grants to finance small scale individual
and community investments in RE Projects as deemed necessary and appropriate by
the NA that contribute to the following objectives: ) Renders RET and RET
services accessible and affordable to the rural poor and marginalized sections
of the society ) Accelerate up-take and adoption of RE technologies through
reduction of up-front investment cost or shift capital expenditure costs from
the end-users 24 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 ) Benefits exceed the
cost of support ) Promotes sustainability of the RE Projects and societal
benefits Any RET systems promoted under this Policy shall not be allowed to be
re-sold or transferred by the beneficiaries unless approved by the NA For
Project Developers, Manufacturers and System Integrators The project developers,
manufacturers and systems integrators of RE Projects, except small hydropower
projects, shall be exempt from payment of corporate or business income tax for
period of ten years from the date of commercial operation of the RE project An
additional five years income tax holiday shall be given to Project developers,
manufactures and system integrators of RE projects established in the remote
areas of the Kingdom as notified by the NA based on poverty levels and other
strategic reasons The NA shall, wherever required and feasible, facilitate
allocation of space required for manufacturing or fabricating solar water
heating systems, accessories for biogas plants, improved cook stoves, and other
RE technologies approved and/or supported by the NA Fiscal Incentives for RE
Projects The Project Developer, manufacturers and system integrators of RE shall
be exempt from payment of all import duties and Bhutan sales tax on import of
plants and equipment as direct inputs to the project during the construction
period, applicable till such time as determined by the Government 25 ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 Sales tax and customs duty exemption shall be
granted for purchase of spare parts for RE projects promoted under  and and
recommended by the NA Reinvestment by companies shall be allowed as tax
deductable expenses up to  maximum of 25% of the total reinvestment Reinvestment
allowance shall be given only once for every new investment is undertaken 10
Expenditure incurred in RE-based & including those by patrons shall be allowed
as tax-deductible expenditure in whole 11 RE projects/schemes/investment
provided with incentive or other forms of benefits as per this Policy shall not
be eligible for additional incentives under the Cottage and Small Industries
(CSI) 22 CARBON MARKET MECHANISM All RE projects shall be encouraged to avail
benefits from Clean Development Mechanism or any future international carbon
market mechanisms to reduce GHG emissions The NA shall facilitate requisite
approvals from various Government agencies to enable the developers to register
the projects under such mechanisms The NA shall facilitate bundling of smaller
RE projects to avail benefits from such mechanisms All benefits from such
mechanisms shall be accrued to the project developers 26 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 23 DELIVERY MECHANISM DDG projects Tariff determination BEA
shall determine the tariff for various RE technologies The existing DDG
projects, owned by the NA (including ones that are handed over to community for
&) or community or private developers shall have the option to sell electricity
to the distribution utility once the national grid reaches the area The
distribution utility shall be obligated to purchase power from such plants as
may be directed by the Government Once the national grid reaches to the area,
for the project developed by the NA, BPC may be directed to takeover such
projects for & against  fee to be paid by the NA The subsidy shall be determined
for such projects taking into consideration the project cost at the beginning of
the project, subsidy availed by the projects, returns accrued by the project so
far, remaining life term of the project, and  normative return as per the tariff
determination guidelines, rules and regulations Payments against the sale of
electricity from the projects owned by NA shall be deposited into the REDF
Licensing requirement The RE project developers shall apply for license as per
the provision under the Electricity Act The Government may facilitate provision
of Composite License (electricity, water, trade, bulk supply etc) 27 ALTERNATIVE
RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 Grid-connected RE projects Off-take of electricity
The Project Developer may contract the electricity generated after complying
with licensing regulations, fulfillment of technical and safety parameters in
accordance with the existing grid code and applicable regulations as amended
from time to time In the case of an Independent Power Producer (IPP), the entire
power may be sold to any consumer or willing distribution company Subject to
approval of the Government, the power may also be exported through designated
agencies or as per directives of the Government However, the distribution
utility, in whose jurisdiction the domestic off-take power plant is located,
shall have the first right to purchase of power 10 If feasible, the sale of
energy to  third party or switching from one third party consumer to other third
party consumer shall also be permitted by the NA, subject to approval of BEA
Tariff determination 11 BEA shall determine tariffs for grid-connected projects
as per the provision of the Electricity Act 12 For tariff determination
purposes, any capital subsidy and subsidy on tariff provided to RE projects
shall be factored 13 Other forms of electricity purchase from RE projects such
as export of power or third party sale shall be based on mutually agreed rates
between the buyer and the seller through  Power Purchase Agreement 14 The NA may
consider the appointment of  consolidated off-taker() for export or domestic
purposes 28 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 Power Purchase Agreement
(PPA) 15 The NA shall develop model PPAs for different RE technologies to
facilitate signing PPAs at lower transaction cost Load dispatch 16 All RE
projects approved by the NA in the Country shall be considered as “must
dispatch” power projects and shall enjoy the benefit of priority dispatch The
priority dispatch status of the RE projects shall be subject to system
reliability, safety and grid capacity 17 RE projects shall not be subject to
scheduling and dispatch except for 10 MW and above biomass and RE-based
cogeneration projects Transmission 18 The transmission utility shall provide
transmission access to the Project Developer 19 The developer shall be
responsible for laying transmission lines and connect to the nearest grid sub-
station of the utility beyond which the utility company will provide the
transmission facilities for wheeling the electricity within the Country 20 The
developer shall enter into an agreement with the utility company for the
transmission service and shall not be required to pay transmission and wheeling
charges except for export oriented projects where such charges as determined by
the BEA from time to time for usage of the utility’ transmission system shall
apply 21 The Developer shall be liable for penalty, if they do not utilize the
allocated transmission network capacity as prescribed by the regulation in force
29 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 Other Regulatory Provisions 22 The
RE projects shall be required to comply with all regulations, codes, and
standards pertaining to construction, operation and maintenance of the plant as
per the applicable laws 23 The NA shall determine the Renewable Energy
Obligation (REO) for the obligated agencies in order to ascertain  long-term and
real market for grid-interactive RE projects 24 MONITORING AND EVALUATION The NA
shall devise  comprehensive monitoring & evaluation framework for RE programmes
It shall also undertake impact studies at regular intervals and make arrangement
to monitor and evaluate the RE programmes 25 AMENDMENTS The Government may amend
this Policy as and when required However, the terms and conditions of
agreements, which are in effect for the existing projects, shall not be
subjected to these amendments 26 DEVIATION FROM THE POLICY PROVISIONS Deviation
from the policy guidelines shall be treated as default and in such cases, the
projects shall be taken over by the Government following appropriate legal
procedures applicable in the Country 30 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013
27 INTERPRETATION OF THE POLICY In the event of conflict of interpretation, the
Ministry of Economic Affairs shall on behalf of the Government, be the authority
to interpret various provisions of this Policy, which shall be final and binding
28 DEFINITION  “Agreement” outlines the implementation agreement signed between
the Royal Government of Bhutan and the Developer and broadly consists of the
following: • Project Commissioning Schedule and Construction Period Requirements
from the parties as per the approved DPR and/or relevant document; and • Terms
and Conditions for the project during the operation period,  from the Commercial
Operation Date of the Project  “Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA)” or
“Authority” means the authority of that name established pursuant to Part  of
the Electricity Act of Bhutan,  “Bid” means an offer to participate in the
project, made in accordance with the terms and conditions set out in  document
inviting such offers  “Bid Security” means the deposit of an unconditional bank
guarantee; or an irrevocable letter of credit; or  cashier‟ or certified check,
submitted with  bid and serving as guarantee to the Government that the bidder,
if awarded the project, will execute the project in accordance with the bidding
requirements and the contract documents 31 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY
2013  “Bike-lane” is  general term denoting any trail, path, part of  highway,
surfaced or smooth shoulder or any other travel way specifically signed, marked,
or otherwise designated for bicycle travel  “Bio-fuel transesterification” means
the process used to convert extracted oil to bio diesel  “Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM)” is an arrangement under the Kyoto Protocol allowing
industrialised countries (called Annex  countries) with  greenhouse gas
reduction commitment to invest in projects that reduce emissions in developing
countries as an alternative to more expensive emission reductions in their own
countries  “Command Area” shall mean the area allocated to  biomass project
developer for procurement of biomass The Nodal Agency shall allow only one
biomass project developer to set up project in the assigned command area to
avoid fuel risks The size of the command area shall depend on the size of the
biomass plant  “Commercial Operation Date (COD)” means the commercial operation
date reckoned as the date on which each unit of the generating plant and
equipment is jointly declared as commissioned by the Government and the Project
Developer “Decentralised Distributed Generation (DDG)” means generation of
electricity from various RE energy sources for local consumption, largely used
for meeting electricity requirement in remote areas using its own dedicated
distribution system “Distribution” means the conveyance of electricity through
distribution network system at voltages below 66 kilovolt or as is deemed by the
Authority to be  part of the distribution network 32 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 “Distribution system” means  network, together with the
connection assets associated with the network, which is connected to another
transmission or distribution system “Domestic off-take projects” means the
projects wherein the power generated is consumed within the Country “Detailed
Project Report (DPR)” is further step in firming up  developer‟ bid for the
techno-economic costs as well as the various other project facilities The DPR
shall include, inter alia, details of location, site description, plant
design/layout, integration with grid (for grid-interactive plant), local
distribution network layout (for DDG), annual output of the plant/scheme,
estimates of cost, phasing of expenditure, cost of generation and tariff (for
grid-interactive and DDG plants), implementation of work, bill of material,
construction schedule etc “Detailed Project Proposal (DPP)” shall be applicable
to stand- alone projects under this Policy The DPP shall include, inter alia,
the following: site description, annual output of the project, estimates of
cost, phasing of expenditure, cost of implementation of the project,
implementation of work, bill of material, installation schedule, arrangement for
after-sales services, availability of spare parts etc “Developer” means  person
or body of persons, company, firm and such other private or government
undertaking, who/that finances, designs, processes, constructs, commissions,
operates and maintains the project facilities and, at the end of the concession
term, transfers them to the Government where applicable “Feed-in-tariff” means
minimum guaranteed price per unit of electricity paid to the generator
“Government” means the Royal Government of Bhutan 33 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 “Green Energy based technology substitution” refers to the
greener technologies that replace the existing polluting technologies or sources
of energy and includes bio fuel, electric/hybrid vehicles, and future
substitution technologies as recognized or approved by the Nodal Agency “Grid-
Connected RE projects” means the projects connected to 11 kV and above grid
network of the utilities to sell electricity to the grid “Hybrid system” refers
to the solution of combining two or more RE technologies with the aim to
decrease the intermittent nature of generation of such technologies “Local”
means  person who is  citizen of Bhutan or an entity, which is
incorporated/registered within Bhutan “Nodal Agency” means the agency
responsible for promotion and development of renewable energy in the Country
“Pre-Feasibility Report (PFR)” is the report that delineates the project
location specifics, generation potential, access and power evacuation
arrangement (in case of grid-interactive plants), and details of site
investigation programmes “Principal Developer” is the “Developer” identified as
the “Principal Developer” in the application for pre-qualification and holding
at least fifty one percent (51%) of the Developer‟ share of the equity in the
investment “Project Development Agreement (PDA)” means  legal document
expressing  convergence of will between the parties, outlining the terms and
details of the agreement between the Government and the Project Company till
signing of the Concession Agreement/Allocation Agreement, including each party‟
requirements and responsibilities 34 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013
The PDA serves as  basis for  future formal contract in the form of the
Concession Agreement (CA)/Allocation Agreement (AA), and lays out the time
periods in which crucial milestones must be reached prior to further progression
with the deal “Promoter” means the person who undertakes stand-alone RE projects
“Private participant” means any person from the private sector in energy
business either for bulk supply or retail sale under certain conditions
“Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs)” means different renewable energy
technologies like solar, wind, biomass, small hydro etc “Renewable Energy
Development Fund (REDF)” means  Fund proposed under the Bhutan Sustainable
Hydropower Development Policy, 2008 and established under this Policy The Fund
will be created allocating  part of the up-front premium received from larger
hydro developers and other sources prescribed under this Policy “Renewable
Energy Obligation (REO)” is an obligation on licensed suppliers to supply
specified proportion of their electricity supplies to their customers from
renewable sources of energy “Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO)” is the minimum
amount of energy required to be purchased by the obligated entities (companies)
in order to meet their mandatory requirement “Renewable energy sources” means
renewable sources such as small hydro, wind, solar including its integration
with combined cycle, biomass, bio-fuel cogeneration, urban or municipal waste
and such other sources as recognized or approved by the Nodal Agency 35
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013 “Request for Proposal (RfP)” means the
document an organisation posts to elicit proposals from potential developers of
project Ideally, RfPs stipulate the requesting organization’ requirements and
delineates the deliverables associated with the project and establishes
framework for project execution so as to minimize the possibility of
misunderstandings and errors “Royalty Energy” means the free Energy that would
be made available to the Government under  project during the concession period
the period starting from the commercial operation date of the project “Sale”
means the sale of electricity to  customer or for resale to third parties
“Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)” means  body corporate created to fulfil narrow,
specific or temporary objectives, primarily to isolate financial risk “Stand-
alone renewable energy systems” means the systems installed at an individual‟
household, community, institutions, and commercial entities for self-consumption
These systems do not have their dedicated distribution network unlike DDG, nor
are they connected to grid, except for rooftop-based Solar PV systems or other
technologies developed under net-metering arrangement “Transmission” means an
activity pertaining to  transmission system including the conveyance of
electricity at voltages of 66 kilovolt and above or as is deemed by the
Authority to be  part of the transmission network 36 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE
ENERGY POLICY 2013 “Waste to Energy (WTE)” means energy generated out of waste
that includes municipal solid waste or any other form of organic or inorganic
wastes Hydropower projects under this Policy are classified as follows: Category
Capacity (kW) Pico  to 10 Micro Above 10 to 100 Mini Above 100 to 1000 Small
Above 1000 to 25000 37 ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY 2013  AlternAtive
renewAble energy Policy 2013