Integrated Energy Management Master Plan for Bhutan           Prepared for
Department of Energy Ministry of Economic Affairs Royal Government of Bhutan
The Energy and Resources Institute                    Integrated Energy
Management Master Plan for Bhutan Prepared for Department of Energy Ministry of
Economic Affairs Royal Government of Bhutan Department of Energy Ministry of
Economic Affairs Thimphu, Bhutan The Energy and Resources Institute © Department
of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Thimphu, Bhutan, 2010 All rights
reserved No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any
means without the prior permission of the Department of Energy, Ministry of
Economic Affairs, Thimphu, Bhutan Published by TERI Press The Energy and
Resources Institute Darbari Seth Block, Habitat Place Lodhi Road, New Delhi –
110 003 Tel +91 11 2468 2100 or 4150 4900 Fax +91 11 2468 2144 or 2468 2145
-mail teripress@teriresin Web  For Department of Energy Ministry of Economic
Affairs Thimphu, Bhutan Tel +975--322505 Tel/fax +975--335122  Web Printed in
India Contents ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS XI PROJECT TEAM XIII LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND
ACRONYMS  XV CONVERSION FACTORS  XIX CHAPTER  INTRODUCTION   CHAPTER  ENERGY
SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW   CHAPTER  ENERGY SCENARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020  15 CHAPTER
ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN  39 CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT
OR ENERGY DEMAND MANAGEMENT  57 CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY,
DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT  79 CHAPTER  RECOMMENDATIONS  93 ANNEXURE
PROJECTED SOCIO-ECONOMIC VARIABLES 99 ANNEXURE  LIST OF UPCOMING INDUSTRIES 101
ANNEXURE  PROJECTED ENERGY DEMAND IN BHUTAN, BY FUEL  103 ANNEXURE  TARIFF
DESIGN  107 ANNEXURE  TECHNO-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS DETAILS OF  -MW BIOMASS-BASED
POWER PLANT  120 ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES  123 ANNEXURE
BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY
OPTIONS  131 ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND SYSTEMS  147 ANNEXURE  GEOTHERMAL ENERGY  155
ANNEXURE  ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN THE BUILDINGS  157 ANNEXURE
INSTITUTIONS IN THE ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS  161 REFERENCES  167
BIBLIOGRAPHY  167 III INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
List of tables CHAPTER  TABLE  GROWTH RATE OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (GDP)
TABLE  FUELWOOD CONSUMPTION (TONNES), BY DZONGKHAG   TABLE  THERMAL EFFICIENCY
OF SELECT COOKING DEVICES THAT USE DIFFERENT FUELS  10 TABLE  USEFUL ENERGY
DELIVERED USING DIFFERENT FUELS  10 TABLE  GROWTH RATE OF VALUE ADDED IN THE
INDUSTRY  11 TABLE  SECTORAL SHARE OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (% PER YEAR)  11
TABLE  NUMBER OF FARM MACHINERY SUPPLIED TO VARIOUS DZONGKHAGS (FROM 1983 TO
MARCH 2005)  13 TABLE  COMPARISON OF PER CAPITA ENERGY AND ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
13 CHAPTER  TABLE  PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLDS USING DIFFERENT FUELS (2004)  16
TABLE  ASSUMPTIONS FOR SECTORAL VARIABLES FOR ESTIMATING ENERGY DEMAND IN
RESIDENTIAL SECTOR  17 TABLE  FUEL USE PATTERN, BY RURAL AND URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
(%)  18 TABLE  ENERGY INTENSITIES BY END USE AND FUEL TYPE  19 TABLE  GROWTH IN
INDUSTRIES UNDER THREE CATEGORIES  21 TABLE  GROWTH IN THE NUMBER OF PRODUCTION
AND MANUFACTURING UNITS  21 TABLE  INDUSTRIES UNDER ENERGY-INTENSIVE CATEGORY
22 TABLE  SALES OF PRODUCTS OF POWER-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES 23 TABLE  PRODUCTION
OF EXISTING AND UPCOMING ENERGY-INTENSIVE UNITS  24 TABLE 10 SPECIFIC
ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION  25 TABLE 11 ASSUMPTIONS FOR ENERGY DEMAND ESTIMATION
FOR NON-ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  26 TABLE 12 GROWTH IN TOURIST AND ENERGY
INTENSITIES  28 TABLE 13 GROWTH RATE IN THE COMMERCIAL SECTOR (%)  29 TABLE 14
GROWTH IN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND ENERGY INTENSITIES  29 TABLE 15 NUMBER
OF REGISTERED VEHICLES, BY TYPE AND REGION (2000–04)  32 TABLE 16 PARAMETER
ESTIMATES  33 TABLE 17 FUEL EFFICIENCY FOR DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF VEHICLES  33
CHAPTER  TABLE  CAPACITIES AND GENERATION OF MAJOR HYDROPOWER PLANTS IN BHUTAN
40 TABLE  DETAILS OF SELECTED POTENTIAL MAJOR HYDROPOWER PROJECTS  41 TABLE
FINANCIAL CHARACTERISTICS, BY PLANT  42 TABLE  MEDIUM-CAPACITY POWER PLANTS
IDENTIFIED IN THE POWER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN  44 TABLE  COST OF GENERATION AT
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SUBSIDY  46 IV INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN LIS  OF TABLES CHAPTER  TABLE  IMPORTS OF DIFFERENT CATEGORIES OF
MOTOR VEHICLES (IN NUMBER)  69 TABLE  FUEL ECONOMY BASED ON TYPICAL VEHICLES
LIKELY TO BE OPERATED IN INDIA  72 TABLE  PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE FOR
DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) MEASURES  75 TABLE  IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF PROPOSED
STRATEGIES  76 TABLE  BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFERENT
STRATEGIES FOR DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT (IN MILLION NU)  77 CHAPTER  TABLE  SECTOR
OF EMPLOYMENT, BY POVERTY STATUS  83 TABLE  ADAPTATION OPTIONS ACCORDING TO
HAZARD TYPE  88 ANNEXURE  TABLE  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (NU BILLION @ 2000
PRICES)  99 TABLE  POPULATION STATISTICS (IN THOUSAND)  99 TABLE  GROSS DOMESTIC
PRODUCT PER CAPITA (THOUSAND NU @ 2000 PRICES)  100 TABLE  TOURIST INFLUX (IN
THOUSAND)  100 TABLE  NUMBER OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS (SHOPS AND
RESTAURANTS)  100 ANNEXURE  TABLE  LIST OF UPCOMING INDUSTRIES IN BHUTAN  101
ANNEXURE  TABLE  PROJECTED ELECTRICITY DEMAND (MILLION UNITS)  103 TABLE
PROJECTED FIREWOOD DEMAND (THOUSAND TONNES)  103 TABLE  PROJECTED LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) DEMAND (THOUSAND TONNES)  104 TABLE  PROJECTED KEROSENE
DEMAND (THOUSAND KILOLITRES)  104 TABLE  PROJECTED COAL DEMAND (THOUSAND TONNES)
104 TABLE  PROJECTED DIESEL DEMAND (KILOLITRES)  104 TABLE  PROJECTED PETROL
DEMAND (KILOLITRES)  105 TABLE  PROJECTED AVIATION TURBINE FUEL (ATF) DEMAND
(KILOLITRES)  105 ANNEXURE  INDICATIVE TARIFF FOR MEDIUM SIZE HYDRO PLANT
(CAPTIVE POWER GENERATION)  110 INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATION FOR MEDIUM SIZE
HYDRO PLANT FOR INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION (IPP)  112 INDICATIVE TARIFF
CALCULATIONS FOR CHAMKAR HYDROPOWER PLANT - LARGE HYDRO POWER PLANT WITHOUT
GRANT  114 INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR DAGACHU HYDROPOWER PLANT WITHOUT
GRANT  116 INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR CHAMKAR HYDROPOWER PLANT - LARGE
HYDRO POWER PLANT WITHOUT GRANT  118  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN LIS  OF TABLES ANNEXURE  INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR
BIOMASS BASED POWER PLANT  120 ANNEXURE  TABLE  BULK DENSITY OF SELECTED LOOSE
BIOMASS  123 TABLE  CONTRIBUTION OF INPUT COST IN UNIT COST OF BRIQUETTE FOR
COARSE GRANULAR WET MATERIALS  126 TABLE  POWER REQUIREMENT FOR BRIQUETTING
UNITS  126 TABLE  COMPARISON OF  PISTON PRESS AND  SCREW EXTRUDER  127 ANNEXURE
TABLE  QUALITATIVE EFFECTS OF VARIOUS FACTORS ON STOVE DESIGN  134 TABLE
TYPICAL OPERATIONAL DATA FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF GASIFIERS  139 TABLE  PRODUCER
GAS CHARACTERISTICS FROM DIFFERENT GASIFIERS 139 TABLE  COMPARISON OF HEATING
VALUE, STOICHIOMETRIC COMBUSTION VOLUMES, AND FLAME TEMPERATURE  140 ANNEXURE
TABLE  CLASSES OF WIND POWER DENSITY AT 10  AND 50  ELEVATION  152 TABLE
CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS SMALL WIND TURBINES  153 ANNEXURE  TABLE  MDG GOALS
AND THEIR TARGETS  165 VI INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
List of figures CHAPTER  FIGURE  ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN 2005, BY DZONGKHAG
FIGURE  TRENDS IN IMPORTS OF DIESEL, PETROL, AND KEROSENE   FIGURE  TRENDS IN
THE IMPORT OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS   FIGURE  SANKY DIAGRAM FOR BHUTAN ENERGY
SECTOR (2005)   FIGURE  DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION IN BHUTAN (2005)   FIGURE
ENERGY CONSUMPTION PATTERN IN THE RESIDENTIAL SECTOR, BY DZONGKHAG   FIGURE
ANNUAL ARRIVALS IN BHUTAN  12 CHAPTER  FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND  20 FIGURE
FUELWOOD DEMAND  20 FIGURE  LPG DEMAND  20 FIGURE  KEROSENE DEMAND  20 FIGURE
INDUSTRIAL GDP AS  PERCENTAGE SHARE TO TOTAL GDP  22 FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND
IN ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  25 FIGURE  DEMAND FOR COAL IN INDUSTRIES  26
FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND IN NON-ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  27 FIGURE  DEMAND
FOR WOOD IN NON-ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  27 FIGURE 10 INFLOW OF FOREIGN
(PAID TOURISTS) IN BHUTAN  28 FIGURE 11 ELECTRICITY DEMAND  30 FIGURE 12 LPG
DEMAND  30 FIGURE 13 FUELWOOD DEMAND  30 FIGURE 14 TRANSPORT, STORAGE, AND
COMMUNICATION, PERCENTAGE SHARE AND GROWTH RATE  31 FIGURE 15 IMPORT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES  31 FIGURE 16 VEHICLE CATEGORY, BY FUEL TYPE  31 FIGURE 17 TRENDS IN
THE QUANTITY OF IMPORTED FUELS CONSUMED IN THE TRANSPORT SECTOR  33 FIGURE 18
DEMAND FOR DIESEL  34 FIGURE 19 DEMAND FOR PETROL  34 FIGURE 20 DEMAND FOR
AVIATION TURBINE FUEL 34 FIGURE 21 PROJECTED TOTAL ENERGY DEMAND IN THOUSAND
TOE, UP TO 2020  34 FIGURE 22 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN BAU
SCENARIO, BY FUEL  35 FIGURE 23 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2015 IN BAU
SCENARIO, BY FUEL  35 FIGURE 24 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN BAU
SCENARIO, BY FUEL  35 FIGURE 25 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN EE
SCENARIO, BY FUEL  35 FIGURE 26 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2015 IN EE
SCENARIO, BY FUEL  36 VII INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
LIS  OF FIGURES FIGURE 27 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN EE SCENARIO,
BY FUEL  36 FIGURE 28 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN HIG SCENARIO, BY
FUEL  36 FIGURE 29 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2015 IN HIG SCENARIO, BY FUEL
36 FIGURE 30 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN HIG SCENARIO, BY FUEL  36
FIGURE 31 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN HIGEE SCENARIO, BY FUEL  36
FIGURE 32 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2015 IN HIGEE SCENARIO, BY FUEL  37
FIGURE 33 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN HIGEE SCENARIO, BY FUEL  37
CHAPTER  FIGURE   WOMAN CARRYING LPG CYLINDER  59 FIGURE  SOURCES OF LIGHTING IN
HOUSEHOLDS (CENSUS 2005)  60 FIGURE  HYDROGEN COOK STOVE DEVELOPED BY BANARAS
HINDU UNIVERSITY, VARANASI  62 FIGURE  ENERGY INPUTS IN THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR
IN BHUTAN  73 CHAPTER  FIGURE  ENERGY SERVICES CONTRIBUTE TO BREAKING THE
DEPRIVATION TRAP  81 FIGURE  DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRY, BY SIZE (%)  83 CHAPTER
FIGURE  EXISTING INSTITUTIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE IN ENERGY SECTOR  94 FIGURE
SUGGESTED INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP  96 FIGURE  COST PER PERSON PER KILOMETER FOR
PETROL VEHICLE AND ELECTRIC VEHICLE AT DIFFERENT OCCUPANCIES  97 ANNEXURE
FIGURE  VARIATION IN BRIQUETTE DENSITY WITH PRESSURE AT DIFFERENT BIOMASS FEED
TEMPERATURE: () MUSTARD STALK, () GROUNDNUT SHELL  125 FIGURE  RAM PISTON TYPE
BRIQUETTING PRESS  126 FIGURE  SCHEMATIC OF SCREW BRIQUETTING MACHINE WITH
BIOMASS STOVE DIE HEATER  127 FIGURE  SCHEMATIC OF PELLETIZING MACHINE  128
FIGURE  LOW-DENSITY SCREW EXTRUDING BRIQUETTING MACHINE  128 FIGURE  LOW-DENSITY
BEEHIVE BRIQUETTING MOULD  129 ANNEXURE  FIGURE  FIRE TRIANGLE  131 FIGURE
REPRESENTATIVE MODEL OF BIOMASS COMBUSTION MECHANISM  132 FIGURE  DESIGN
CONSIDERATIONS FOR  STOVE  133 FIGURE 4A UPDRAFT GASIFIER  137 FIGURE 4B
DOWNDRAFT GASIFIER  138 FIGURE 4C CROSS-DRAFT GASIFIER  138 VIII INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN LIS  OF FIGURES FIGURE  NATURAL
DRAFT GASIFIER STOVE OPERATING ON INVERSE DOWNDRAFT PRINCIPLE  141 FIGURE
GASIFIER TURBO-STOVE  141 FIGURE  KVIC FLOATING DOME BIOGAS PLANT  143 FIGURE
TEAM REACTOR  144 FIGURE  TERI’ ENHANCED ACIDIFICATION AND METHANATION PROCESS
144 ANNEXURE  FIGURE  WIND FARM USING SMALL WIND MACHINES  147 FIGURE
GENERATION OF WIND ENERGY AND ITS DISTRIBUTION  148 FIGURE  HORIZONTAL AND
VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINES  149 FIGURE  INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF HORIZONTAL AXIS
WIND TURBINE  149 FIGURE  BASIC PART OF SMALL WIND TURBINE  149 FIGURE  SMALL
WIND TURBINE FOR HOME LIGHTING 150 FIGURE  WIND TURBINE CONNECTED TO GRID  150
FIGURE  LEVELS OF FLAGGING CAUSED BY THE PREVAILING WIND DIRECTION  152 ANNEXURE
FIGURE  GETANA MODEL  164 IX INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN List of boxes CHAPTER  BOX  BUILD, OPERATE, OWN, AND TRANSFER MODEL  43
BOX  BIOENERGY-RELATED ISSUES  49 BOX  100-KW SENGOR MICRO HYDROPOWER
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT 53 CHAPTER  BOX   COMPARISON OF  60- INCANDESCENT LAMP
WITH AN 11- COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMP (CFL)  64 BOX  NEPAL’ EXPERIENCE WITH
ELECTRIC VEHICLE  72 CHAPTER  BOX  CONSTRAINTS IN FOOD GRAIN PRODUCTION  82 BOX
RURAL–URBAN MIGRATION: DRIVERS AND FALLOUT  82 BOX  CHRONOLOGY OF CONSERVATION
LEGISLATION AND INITIATIVES IN BHUTAN  85 BOX  DETAILS SOUGHT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
CLEARANCE OF HYDROPOWER PROJECTS  86 BOX  NOTABLE CLIMATE EXTREME EVENTS IN
BHUTAN  87 BOX  VIABILITY OF POWER INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  91  INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN Acknowledgements This support without which
this project would not have been possible We also thank the ofﬁ cials of the
various ministries of the Royal Government of Bhutan, private and public sector
corporations, directors of various hydropower projects of the NHPC Ltd and North
Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd Our special thanks are due to Mr Sameer
Maithal, ex Director, EET Division, TERI, who led this exercise till 2006; Mr
Ajoy Acharya, presently Special Secretary (Defence Production), Ministry of
Defence, Government of India; Ms Benita Gurung, Ex project Manager, Department
of Energy, Royal Government of Bhutan, as well as our ex-colleagues and team
members Mr Mahesh Vipradas, Ms Kusum Lata Jain, and Mr Arabinda Laskar We are
also grateful to Dr   Pachauri, Director-General, TERI, and Dr Leena Srivastava,
Executive Director, TERI, for their constant support and guidance, along with
other colleagues from TERI and the Department of Energy, Bhutan We also thank Ms
Rita Grover and Ms Nirmal Gupta, TERI, for their efﬁ cient secretarial support
and TERI Press for giving this report   nal shape Integrated Energy Management
Master Plan draws its inspiration from the visionary leadership of His
Majesties, the fourth and  fth Kings of Bhutan We are grateful to His Majesties
for their inspiration throughout Our special thanks go to Dasho Sonam Tshering,
Secretary, Ministry of Economic Affairs; Mr Yeshi Wangdi, Director General,
Department of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs; Mr Bharat Tamang, Managing
Director, Bhutan Power Corporation Ltd; Dr   Dhital, Joint Director, Forest
Resources Development Division, Department of Forest, Ministry of Agriculture;
Mr Dasho Chhewang Rinzin, Managing Director, Druk Green Power Corporation Ltd;
Mr    Ramana Rao, Senior Consultant, Bhutan Power Corporation; and heads of
various divisions of the Department of Energy for their encouragement and expert
guidance during the preparation of this Master Plan We are grateful to HE Mr
Sudhir Vyas, ex- Ambassador; HE Mr Pawan  Verma, Ambassador of India to Bhutan;
Dr   Nagendra Prasad, ex Deputy Chief of the Mission; and Mr Thanglura Darlong,
Deputy Chief of the Mission, Embassy of India, Bhutan, for their guidance at
every stage of this project We specially acknowledge the Ministry of External
Affairs, Government of India, for its XI INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN Project team ADVISERS Mr Karma Tshering, Head, Planning and
Coordination Division (PCD), Department of Energy Mr Bharat Tamang, Managing
Director, Bhutan Power Corporation Ltd Mr Amit Kumar, Director, Energy
Environment Technology Development Division, TERI DOE TEAM Former ofﬁ cials who
were involved in the project management Dasho Sonam Tshering, Director General
(till July 2007), Department of Energy (DOE) Dasho Bharat Tamang, Head, PCD
(till January 2008), DOE Ms Benita  Gurung, National Project Manager (from
January 2005 to May 2007), IEMMP Project, PCD, DOE Current project ofﬁ cials
Project management ofﬁ cials in the DOE Mr Yeshi Wangdi, Director General, DOE,
Ministry of Economic Affairs (MoEA) Mr Karma Tshering, Chief Engineer/Head, PCD,
DOE (was also the National Project Manager for IEMMP Project from June 2007 to
January 2008) Mr Karma Tshewang, National Project Manager (February 2008 –
Current), IEMMP Project, PCD, DOE Mr Jigme Rinzin, Junior Engineer, PCD, PCD Mr
Younten Lhendup, Project Assistant, IEMMP Project, PCD, DOE Project  eld ofﬁ
cials from the DOE Mr Gem Dorji, Principal Engineer, Data Section, PCD, DOE Mr
Phuntsho Namgyal, Dy Executive Engineer (Civil), HMSD, DOE Mr Sonam Tshering,
Engineer (Electrical), HMSD, DOE Mr Karma  Dorji, RE Project Manager, PCD, DOE
Ms Wangmo, Assistant Engineer, PCD, DOE Ms Dechen Wangmo, Assistant Engineer,
PCD, DOE Mr Sonam Chedup, Sr ICT Ofﬁ cer, DOE/MoEA Mr Kinzang Sonam, Head,
Meteorology Section (MS), HMSD, DOE Mr Norbu Wangdi, Meteorology Technician, MS,
HMSD, DOE XIII INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN PROJECT
TEAM TERI TEAM Mr Shirish Garud, Fellow Ms Divya Datt, Fellow Ms Shilpa Nischal,
Associate fellow Mr Souvik Bhattacharjya, Research Associate Mr Alok Kumar
Jindal, Research Associate Ms Priya Dagar, Research Associate EDITORIAL AND
PRODUCTION TEAM Ms Madhu Singh Sirohi Dr Richa Sharma Mr Mahfooz Alam Mr   Joshi
Mr  Radhakrishnan List of abbreviations and acronyms DHI Druk Holding and
Investments ° degree Celsius Ltd ADB Asian Development Bank DISL Druk Iron and
Steel Plant AMC Agriculture Machinery Centre DoE Department of Energy ASTRA
Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas DPRs detailed project
reports DPT Druk Phuensum Tshogpa ATF aviation transport fuel DRI direct reduced
iron BAU business-as-usual scenario DSM demand side management BCCL Bhutan
Calcium Carbide Ltd DST Department of Science and BDFC Bhutan Development
Finance Technology Corporation DYT Dzongkhag Yargay Tshochung BEA Bhutan
Electricity Authority EAF electric arc furnace BEE Bureau of Energy Efﬁ ciency
ECBC Energy Conservation Building BFAL Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd Code BIMSTEC Bay
of Bengal Initiative for Multi- sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation ECOs
energy conservation opportunities EdL Electricite du Laos Bioenergy biomass
energy EE energy efﬁ cient BOOT build, operate, own, and transfer ER equivalence
ratio BPC Bhutan Power Corporation ESCO energy service company BSL Bhutan Steels
Ltd ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme BTF Bhutan Trust Fund
FAO Food and Agriculture BTU British thermal unit Organisation CaO/BaO calcium
oxide/barium oxide FDCL Forest Development Corporation CBD Convention on
Biological Ltd Diversity FDI foreign direct investment CDM Clean Development
Mechanism FNCA Forest and Nature Conservation CFLs compact  uorescent lamp CH4
methane CHP combined heat and power Act FO furnace oil FYP Five-year Plan CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species GDP gross domestic
product GEF Global Environment Facility CLACC climate change GHG greenhouse gas
CNG compressed natural gas GI galvanized iron CO carbon monoxide GJ/m2 Gigajoule
per hour per metre DCCL Druk Cement Company Ltd square DGPC Druk Green Power
Corporation XV INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN LIS  OF
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS LBNL Lawrence Berkeley National GLCs government-
linked companies Laboratory GLOF glacier lake outburst  ood LDCs least developed
countries GNH Gross National Happiness LDO light diesel oil GoI Government of
India LEAP long-range energy alternatives GoL Government of Laos planning GWh
gigawatt-hours LED light-emitting diodes GWP Global Warming Potential LHV low
heating value GYT Gewog Yargay Tshochung LNG liqueﬁ ed natural gas HBI hot
briquetted iron LPG liqueﬁ ed petroleum gas HDR hot dry rock MCA multiple
criteria analysis HHV high heating value MDGs Millennium Development Goals HIG
high growth MHV medium heating value HIGEE high growth coupled with energy MJ
megajoule efﬁ ciency MJ/Nm3 megajoule per Newton cubic HMSD Hydro-Met Service
Division metre HSD high speed diesel MnO manganese oxide IC internal combustion
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable ICIMOD International Center for Energy
Integrated Mountain Development MoA Ministry of Agriculture MoEA Ministry of
Economic Affairs IDC Industrial Development Centre MoEF Ministry of Environment
and IDD inverted downdraft Forests IEA International Energy Agency MoIC Ministry
of Information and IEMMP Integrated Energy Management Communications Master Plan
msl mean sea level IIED International Institute for MT million tonnes
Environment and Development MU million unit IISc Indian Institute of Science MW
megawatt IIT Delhi Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi NAPA National
Adaptation Programme of Action IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
NATCOM National Communication IPP independent power producer NBP National Biogas
Programme KEVA Kathmandu Electric Vehicle NCCBM National Council for Cement and
Alliance Building Materials kJ kilojoules NEC National Environment Commission kl
kilolitre NGOs non-governmental organizations kV kilovolt NHB National Housing
Board KVIC Khadi and Village Industries Commission NHPC National Hydro Power
Corporation kW kilowatt kWh kiowatt-hour XVI INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN LIS  OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS SED Sustainable Energy
Department NRDC Natural Resources Development Corporation SPV solar photovoltaic
NSB National Statistical Bureau SQCA Standards and Quality Control Authority Nu
Ngultrum SVO straight vegetable oils & operation and maintenance SWERA Solar and
Wind Energy Resource OoCC Ofﬁ ce of the Census Commissioner Assessment tCO2 TERI
The Energy and Resources PAH polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons tonnes carbon
dioxide PCAL Penden Cement Authority Ltd Institute PCD Planning and Coordination
Division TOE tonnes of oil equivalent PIC products of incomplete TSP total
suspended particulates combustion TV television PLF plant load factor UN United
Nations PMT per metric tonne UNCCD UN Convention on Combating PV photovoltaic
Desertiﬁ cation & research and development UNDP United Nations Development
Programme RED Renewable Energy Department UNEP United Nations Environment REMP
Rural Electriﬁ cation Master Plan Programme REs renewable energies UNFCCC United
Nations Framework RESCOM Rural Energy Service Concession Convention on Climate
Change Model US United States RET renewable energy technology USD United States
dollar RGoB Royal Government of Bhutan VOC volatile organic compound RNR
renewable natural resource WB World Bank RPM revolution per minute WEF World
Economic Forum Rs rupees WRMP Water Resource Management RSPN Royal Society for
Protection of Plan Nature WWF World Wildlife Fund RSTA Road Safety and Transport
Authority SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation XVII INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN Conversion factors Electricity:  MU
= *106 kWh  MWh = 1000 kWh Fuels energy conversion factors  kl ATF = 836 TOE
tonnes of briquette = 32 TOE  tonnes of coal = 282 TOE  kl of diesel = 899 TOE
kWh = 0000857 TOE  kl of furnace oil = 989 TOE  tonnes of fuelwood = 32 TOE  kl
of kerosene = 882 TOE  kl of light diesel oil = 911 TOE  tonnes of LPG = 13 TOE
kl of petrol = 815 TOE Energy:  calorie = 003968321 BTU  calorie = 1868 joules
calorie = 000001163 kWh  kilocalorie = 1000 calories  kilocalorie = 001163 kWh
kilojoule = 0002777778 kWh  TOE = 868 GJ  TOE = 630 MWh  TOE = giga-calories
TOE = 308 gallons  kWh = 142 BTU Technical terms used in the report TOE = tonnes
of oil equivalent kWh = kilowatt-hour MU = million units kcal = kilocalorie m2 =
square metre MT = million tonnes kl = kilolitre TOE/capita/year = tonnes of oil
equivalent per capita per year kWh/capita/year = kilowatt hour per capita per
year kWh/hh/annum = kilowatt hour per household per annum kg/hh/annum = kilogram
per household per annum lit/hh/annum = litre per household per annum kV =
kilovolts MW = Megawatt GWh = Gigawatt-hour Nu/unit = Ngultrum per unit Nm3/ m2
= Newton metre cube per hour per metre square XIX INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN         Introduction BACKGROUND Under the Ninth Five-
year Plan (2002–08), the Department of Energy (DoE), Ministry of Economic
Affairs (formerly Ministry of Trade and Industry), undertook  study to prepare
an Integrated Energy Management Master Plan (IEMMP) for Bhutan This was
Government of India assisted study for which The Energy and Resources Institute
(TERI), New Delhi, was appointed as  consultant both at the rural and levels
This urban approach integrated provides various policy options, in line with the
current policies and Vision 2020, for future development of the kingdom The
overall objective of the ‘Gross National Happiness’ is based on four widely
accepted sustainable development principles, as listed below  Equitable socio-
economic development  Conservation of the natural environment  Promotion of
cultural heritage  Establishment of good governance ‘Gross National Happiness is
more important than Gross National Product’ His Majesty King Jigme Singye
Wangchuck, 1972 In the  rst phase of the study, Bhutan Energy Data Directory
2005 was published, which covered, for the  rst time, the energy demand and
supply balance for 2005 and potential of energy resources It also reviewed the
status of the energy sector, including the institutional arrangements The Data
Directory included the survey of the residential sector and energy audits of
major industries This report, second in the series, analyses  wide range of
issues, which mainly relate to the energy sector of Bhutan This report presents
the objectives of the study, approach and methodology, future outlook of the
energy sector till 2020, demand and supply analyses, impacts of energy on
economy, and interdependence of development and energy Various laws/regulations
have also been analysed, along with assessment of social impacts of supplying
energy to rural areas PROJECT PLANNING The project began on  January 2005 and
was carried out in three phases  Phase  (January 2005 to May 2006)  Phase II
(June 2006 to December 2006)  Phase III (January 2007 to December 2009) Phase
The objective of Phase  was to prepare an energy database and energy balance for
the country Activities undertaken under this phase included the following #
PROJECT OBJECTIVE AND METHODOLOGY The objective of the IEMMP is to develop an
all-encompassing framework, which would give  holistic overview of the demand
and supply scenarios, along with recommending strategies (up to 2020) for the
sustainable supply of energy for the socio-economic development of the kingdom,
Sectoral energy consumption studies, which covered the following sectors
Domestic $ Commercial establishments and institutions $ Industry $ Agriculture $
Transport $  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
INTRODUCTION Phase III The objective of Phase III was recommending policies and
strategies that would steer the energy sector and the economy, at large, towards
optimal use of energy resources linked to appropriate energy technologies Energy
resources and supply assessment, covering the following Fossil fuels $
Renewables $ biomass) Electricity $ Energy conservation studies for industries
and buildings Design and setting up of energy efﬁ ciency laboratory Technology
assessment of appliances and gadgets Preparation of energy balance Stakeholder
consultations and conducting workshops # (hydro, solar, wind, and # Activities
undertaken included the following # # Preparing IEMMP Submitting  draft report
Conducting stakeholders’ workshop Preparing   nal report # # # # # # The
deliverables were as follows # Perspective planning for the energy sector
Preparing an energy management information system # Phase  also covered the
following major initiatives and activities # STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT The report
is structured in such  way that it presents the comprehensive analysis of all
the sectors, both from supply as well as demand sides Chapter  covers the
overall energy scenario Demand and supply projection scenarios and their
analyses are covered in Chapter  Chapter  discusses the strategies recommended
for energy efﬁ ciency and energy resource demand management Chapter  gives
detailed analysis of the energy resources and supply side options, especially
for the promotion of hydropower and utilization of renewable energy, including
supply side issues and strategies for augmenting energy supply for energy
security Chapter  discusses the overall approach to IEMMP and practices and also
presents policy recommendations and discussions on overarching issues in the
context of development process Household energy survey of 5496 households Energy
audits of three major industries and buildings Assessment of solar and wind
resources by using secondary data Extensive consultations with stakeholders # #
# Deliverables included the following # Energy database and energy balance
Energy laboratory and resource centre # Phase II The objective of Phase II was
to develop an energy proﬁ le for the country in terms of supply options (present
and future) and demand forecast Activities under this phase included energy
modelling, preparing energy proﬁ le, and conducting stakeholder workshops
Deliverables included the following # Preparing an energy atlas Preparing an
energy accounting model for the kingdom, along with various energy scenarios for
the period 2007–#  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
Energy sector – an overview BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON BHUTAN Bhutan is
landlocked country situated between India and China in the fragile eastern
Himalayas Its population as per Census 2005 is 634 Bhutan covers an area of 38
394 km2, roughly spread 140 km north to south and 275 km east to west The
altitude varies from 100  above the mean sea level (msl) in the southern
tropical region to 7550 above the msl in the northern alpine region The country
is blessed with natural forests and is one of the 10 biodiversity hotspots notiﬁ
ed by the United Nations (UN) The country receives fair amount of rainfall,
varying from 500 mm in the north to 5000 mm in the south Situated in high
altitude Himalayas, Bhutan has 667 glaciers and 2674 glacier lakes, which feed
four major rivers and their tributaries, making the country rich in hydropower
resources These geographical features, landlocked condition, and unique
environment pose unique challenges and opportunities for Bhutan as it pursues
the development of its economy sector After centuries of isolation, Bhutan
opened its economy in 1950s and started following  path of sustainable and
cautious development, popularly known as ‘middle path’ of development So far, it
has followed the path of development sustainably, the causing minimum damage
environment and ecology Planned development started in 1961 when the  rst Five-
year Plan was implemented with the help of the Government of India Right from
the  rst Five-year Plan (1961–66) till the Ninth Five-year Plan (2002–08), the
country has seen planned and steady economic development and has gone through
substantial transformation Indo-Bhutan bilateral relationship plays an important
role in the development of Bhutanese economy India and Bhutan have had trade
relations for centuries, and the ties grew stronger after the Independence of
India in The historic India–Bhutan Treaty of 1949 laid the foundation for Indo-
Bhutan relations The power sector, along with the health and education sectors,
is among the major sectors in which India has made signiﬁ cant contributions in
terms of investment, capacity building, and technology transfer BHUTAN’ GROSS
DOMESTIC PRODUCT The growth rate of the gross domestic product (GDP, % per year)
of the country, from 2003 to 2008, is presented in Table  Table  GROWTH RATE OF
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (GDP) Contributions to growth (supply) (%) the GDP
Agriculture Electricity and water Construction Other Services industries 2003
to 2004       2005       2006    -   2007  -   2008       Details available at <
+0302p48_glacial_lakes_ﬂ ood_threathtml>, last accessed on 10 May The Ninth Plan
period was extended to 2008 by the Royal Government of Bhutan  INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW
DEVELOPMENT AND CHARACTERISTICS OF BHUTAN’ ENERGY SECTOR Power sector
development Electricity was introduced for the  rst time in Bhutan in 1964 when
the  rst diesel generator sets were installed at Pheuntsholing and Samtse This
was followed by the development of hydropower, and the  rst hydropower plant
with  capacity of 360 kW was commissioned in 1967 to supply electricity to the
capital town of Thimphu The power sector got  boost in 1988 when Chukha
Hydropower Plant with  capacity of 336 MW was commissioned With the
commissioning of Chukha Hydropower Plant, Bhutan started exporting electricity
to India, earnings of which started funding its socio-economic development
Today, about 45% of its export earnings are through the export of electricity,
and this earning has also been instrumental in the development of infrastructure
like roads, hospitals, and school, besides providing impetus to industrial
development Another major milestone in hydropower development was achieved in
2007 when Tala Hydropower Plant with  capacity of 1020 MW was fully commissioned
Bhutan’ economic growth is closely related to the development of its power
sector The phased commissioning of the Tala Power Project in 2006 boosted the
GDP growth sharply in The growth was slightly less in 2008, which was due to
high base effect Industries are the largest consumer of electricity in the
country In 2005, the sector consumed 419 MU (65% of the total consumption) of
electricity Institutional and commercial sectors consumed 88 MU (76 % of the
total consumption) of electricity The residential sector consumed 89 MU of
electricity total consumption) The agriculture and transport sectors consume
negligible amount of electricity # # # (% of in 2005 # Electricity constituted %
of the total energy supply in the country during Figure  shows the electricity
consumption in different Dzongkhags in Fuelwood The main source of primary
energy in Bhutan is fuelwood obtained from forests The country consumed 724 597
tonnes of fuelwood during 2005, which accounted for % of the total primary
energy supply In addition to fuelwood, other biomass fuels, which are being used
in small quantities, include briquettes made from saw dust and agriculture
residue Petroleum fuels About 19% of the total energy is met from imported
petroleum fuels like diesel, petrol, kerosene, liqueﬁ ed petroleum gas (LPG),
furnace oil, aviation turbine fuel, light diesel oil (LDO), and so on Diesel and
petrol feature amongst the top imports in the country on import value basis In
2005, 51 460 kilolitres of diesel was imported against the import of 13 879
kilolitres of petrol In addition, during the same year, 12 545 kilolitres of
kerosene and 4472 million tonnes (MT) of LPG were imported Figures  and  show
trends in the import of petroleum fuels Electricity supply and consumption
trends Some salient features of Bhutan’ electricity sector are summarized below
# Power generation in the country in 2005 was 25 MU, while 39 MU of electricity
was imported Of the total electricity generated, 76 MU of electricity was
exported and 88 MU was consumed in the country Of the total electricity consumed
in the country, 619 MU of power was sold and 43 MU of the electricity was lost
within the system The balance met the auxiliary power requirement in the power
plants Peak demand in 2005 was 120 MW # Coal Coal meets % of the energy demand
in the country It is mostly used in the industrial sector The total coal
consumption in the country during 2005 was 97 509 tonnes The total coal mined #
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR –
AN OVERVIEW FIGURE  ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION IN 2005, BY DZONGKHAG from local
coal mines was 85 279 tonnes, while 60 607 tonnes of coal was imported in the
same year Bhutan also exported 48 377 tonnes of coal in FIGURE  TRENDS IN THE
IMPORT OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS SECTORAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION The sectoral
energy consumption for 2005 is shown in Figure  FIGURE  TRENDS IN IMPORTS OF
DIESEL, PETROL, AND KEROSENE  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW FIGURE  SANKY DIAGRAM FOR BHUTAN
ENERGY SECTOR (2005)  Residential sector Population distribution Bhutan’
population of 634 982 (Census 2005) is distributed in 20 Dzongkhags About 69% of
this population lives in rural areas and 31% lives in urban areas Seventy- ve
per cent of this population is concentrated in nine Dzongkhags, of which six are
in the western region, two in the central region, and only one in the eastern
region Figure  shows the distribution of population, by Dzongkhag The
residential sector accounts for % of the total energy consumption, making it
highest energy consumer The sector’ 91% demand is met by biomass, and the
remaining % is accounted for by fuels like LPG, electricity, and kerosene In the
residential sector, energy is mainly used for cooking (66% of the total
residential energy share), which is followed by fodder cooking (26%) There is
signiﬁ cant difference in the energy consumption patterns between the rural and
urban areas While rural households primarily depend on  rewood, the urban
households rely more on electricity and petroleum fuels Figure  shows energy
consumption in the residential sector, by Dzongkhag Electrification status As
per the 2005 statistics, the country has 126 115 households, of which 38 311
households are urban households and the remaining 87 804 households are rural
households Of these, 36 923 urban households (%) and 35 140 rural households
(40%) were electriﬁ ed, as of The Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) is pursuing
rural electriﬁ cation, with one of the objectives being reducing fuelwood
consumption These rural households consumed 89 MU of electricity in 2005, which
was % of the total electricity consumption during the same period  All units are
in TOE  It should be noted here that in  large number of households, same device
is used for both cooking and space heating, making it difﬁ cult to apportion
fuel use between the two end uses; in such  case, fuel use is apportioned to
cooking  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY
SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW FIGURE  DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION IN BHUTAN (2005) Fodder
cooking is treated separately at the end of this section Energy consumption for
2005, by fuel and end use, as estimated by the survey of 5450 households,
carried out in Bhutan under the IEMMP project, is discussed subsequently In the
Ninth Five-year Plan, as of June 2007, 15 148 households have been electriﬁ ed
In the Tenth Five-year Plan (2008–13),  total of 43 951 rural unelectriﬁ ed
households will be electriﬁ ed, thereby resulting in 100% rural electriﬁ cation
Fuels and energy resources used in the residential sector The residential sector
uses fuelwood, LPG, electricity, and kerosene as major fuels The energy
consumption in the residential sector in Bhutan is dominated by high consumption
of fuelwood and relatively low use of modern fuels like LPG Additionally,
briquettes for space heating are being increasingly used in urban areas On the
other hand, solar photovoltaic (PV) systems have been set up in remote areas for
lighting purpose Major fuel-consuming activities in the residential sector are
as follows # Consumption analysis, by fuel Fuelwood While the choice of the fuel
depends on the availability of fuels and their costs, fuelwood is the most
commonly used fuel in Bhutan and constitutes about 90% of the energy used in the
residential sector Rural areas have higher percentage of population (69%), which
is allowed to collect fuelwood free of royalty, as per the policy of the RGoB
Rural areas are also the largest consumers of fuelwood  total of 69 013
households use fuelwood as the main source of cooking fuel (Census 2005)
Fuelwood is collected mostly by women, and survey indicates that on an average,
one person month per year is spent in collecting fuelwood  survey of household
energy consumption carried Cooking Lighting Space heating (many times this is
done with the device that is used for cooking) Fodder cooking in rural areas # #
#  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR
– AN OVERVIEW FIGURE  ENERGY CONSUMPTION PATTERN IN THE RESIDENTIAL SECTOR, BY
DZONGKHAG households and 25 105 rural households (%) use electricity as the main
fuel for lighting and cooking (Census 2005) This shows that one of the
objectives of rural electriﬁ cation – to reduce fuelwood consumption – has been
achieved successfully Studies have also shown that there is about 25% reduction
in fuelwood consumption in electriﬁ ed households in rural areas Cookers and
water boilers (or electric kettles) are the major cooking equipment used for
cooking in these households Besides, these electriﬁ ed households use electric
heaters, refrigerators, washing machines, and infotainment gadgets like TV,
music players, and computers The IEMMP survey has come up with the fact that
electricity is mainly consumed for cooking, space heating, and water heating
applications in the colder areas Electric heaters used for space heating vary in
type and quality out by TERI under the IEMMP project has found that the per
capita fuelwood consumption in the residential sector is about 78 tonne per
annum, accounting for 68% of the total fuelwood consumption in the country
Cooking and space heating are many times carried out by using same device, which
is commonly called bukhari It uses fuelwood as fuel In urban areas, special
types of bukharis are used for space heating and water heating Fuelwood
consumption, by Dzongkhag, presented in Table  The like Trashigang, Mongar,
’Jongkhar, Wangdue and Dagana, Samtse, and Chukha together account for about 50%
of the fuelwood consumed in the residential sector These areas can be targeted
for implementing special programmes meant to reduce fuelwood consumption is that
Dzongkhags shows table Kerosene Kerosene is the third most preferred fuel in the
residential sector in Bhutan, after fuelwood and electricity In 2005, the
residential sector consumed 12 545 kilolitres of kerosene (50% of the total
kerosene used in the country) Electricity In electriﬁ ed areas, electricity is
the preferred fuel for cooking, lighting, and space heating applications It is
interesting to note that of the 72 063 electriﬁ ed households in Bhutan, 31 510
urban  INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY
SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW
, )       (
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR –
AN OVERVIEW According to Census 2005, about 45 068 rural households (36% of the
total households and % of rural households) and 996 urban households (% of the
urban households) still use kerosene as the main fuel for lighting The total
number of households that use kerosene as the main fuel for cooking is 11 Use of
kerosene for space heating is not very common, although in urban areas of
Thimphu, space heaters based on kerosene are available Because of the adverse
health impacts of using kerosene for lighting, low-cost wick lamps that are
commonly used for lighting need to be discouraged Accordingly, measures are
proposed to reduce the use of kerosene for lighting Table  THERMAL EFFICIENCY OF
SELECT COOKING DEVICES THAT USE DIFFERENT FUELS Device Efficiency (%) Fuel/stove
Electricity Rice cooker 78–94 Biogas Biogas stove 55 Liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) LPG stove 60 Kerosene Wick stove Pressure stove 36 40 Biomass Traditional
stove –18 Biomass Improved stove 20–35 Source: Bhutan Energy Data Directory,
2005 Table  USEFUL ENERGY DELIVERED USING DIFFERENT FUELS Liqueﬁ ed petroleum
gas LPG is mostly used for cooking in the urban areas of the country In 2005,
total LPG consumption in the residential sector was 3522 tonnes, of which 2613
tonnes (74%) was consumed in the urban sector LPG is supplied to Bhutan at
concessional rates However, the selling price is dependent on transport costs,
and hence, landed costs are substantially higher in rural areas Moreover, often
users have to carry LPG cylinders manually due to the non-connectivity by
road/lack of road infrastructure, and this is one of the reasons for the less
penetration of LPG in rural areas It was found that LPG is the least preferred
fuel in rural houses that are not accessible by motorable roads Use of LPG for
applications other than cooking was not noticed during the survey LPG cook
stoves used in the country vary widely in make and quality Useful energy
delivered (kcal) End-use device efficiency (%) Calorific value (kcal/kg) Fuel
Fuelwood 3500 12 420 Electricity 860 85 731 Liquefied petroleum gas 11 000 55
6050 of fuelwood, whereas  kg of LPG replaces kg of fuelwood Industrial sector
The development path followed by Bhutan has led to  spurt in industrial
activities in the past few decades Though the industrial sector in Bhutan has
many small- and medium-scale industries, energy consumption in the industrial
sector is dominated by few large energy-intensive industries The industrial
sector is driven by the fact that Bhutan has lowest electricity tariffs in the
region, thus, making electricity-intensive industries proﬁ table Most industries
are located in the southern Dzongkhag of Chukha, Samtse, Sarpang, and Thimphu,
which are closer to the Indian border and also to Chukha Hydropower Plant Three
large industries, namely, Bhutan Calcium and Carbide Ltd, Penden Cement
Authority Ltd, and Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd, are the major consumers of energy in
Bhutan These industries End-use devices efficiencies Efﬁ ciencies of the end-use
devices used as cooking appliances vary signiﬁ cantly, as shown in Table  These
impact the amount of fuel used for getting similar amount of useful energy As
shown in Table , useful energy delivered using different fuels, after
considering the end-use device efﬁ ciency, also varies considerably It can be
seen that to get the same amount of useful energy,  kWh of electricity replaces
74 kg 10 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY
SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW are also the major consumers of electricity in the country
In 2005, they together consumed 334 MU of electricity, which is 81% of the total
electricity consumed in the industrial sector The industrial sector consumes %
of the total energy and is the largest consumer of electricity in the country In
2005, the sector consumed 410 MU of electricity (about % of the total
electricity consumed in the country) Other fuels that are used in the sector
include coal, furnace oil, kerosene, LDO, and fuelwood Growth rate of value
added in the industry (% per year) from 1994 to 2004 is given in Table  Sectoral
share of GDP (% per year) in various sectors is given in Table  Table  SECTORAL
SHARE OF GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (% PER YEAR) Agriculture Industry Services Year
1980 2000 2001  2002 2003 Source Asian Development Outlook, 2005 of diesel and
13 879 kilolitres of petrol About 1145 kilolitres of the aviation turbine fuel
was consumed during the same period The country is fully dependent on transport
fuel imports, and the imports are showing  rapid upward trend The import of
petrol has gone up more than three times over the period 1995–2005, while that
of diesel has risen  times during the same period Besides the rising cost of
petrol and diesel, complete dependence of the transport sector on these imported
fuels is an area of concern for future, from the energy security perspective
Transport sector The transport sector in Bhutan is characterized by the
dominance of road and air transport Being  hilly country, rivers generally do
not run very deep, and hence, the use of waterways for transport is negligible
In some places, ropeways are being used for the transportation of logs and other
materials Motorization trends in Bhutan Bhutan has experienced high levels of
motorization in the recent years The motor vehicle  eet has more than doubled in
the last decade (1997–2007), with the number of registered motor vehicles rising
from 13 584 at the end of 1997 to 30 733 vehicles by the end of March Thus, the
number of registered motor vehicles has exhibited an average annual growth rate
of % during this period Energy consumption in the transport sector accounts for
% of the total energy consumption The energy is used in the transport sector for
mainly road transport, which uses diesel and petrol In 2005, the sector used
about 48 703 kilolitres Commercial and institutional sector Energy consumption
by the commercial and institutional sector, consisting of commercial
establishments, such as shops and hotels, and institutional establishments, such
as monasteries, government ofﬁ ces, schools, hospitals, and so on, accounts for
% of the total energy consumption The sector is also an important electricity
consuming sector, consuming 119 MU in 2005, which is about 75% of the total
electricity consumption in the country Besides electricity, fuelwood, along with
LPG and kerosene, is also widely used Table  GROWTH RATE OF VALUE ADDED IN THE
INDUSTRY 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Year Growth rate
(% per year)       Source Asian Development Outlook, 2005 11 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW
Tourism industry Tourism is Bhutan’ third largest contributor to economy, after
electricity and industry This sector is showing rapid growth, with substantial
increase in the number of tourists in the past few years Arrival of tourists in
Bhutan, by year, is shown in Figure  them Export of fruits and potatoes has
shown an increasing trend in the recent years Energy use in the agriculture
sector The agriculture sector is mainly dependent on human and animal power
However, with recent developments, the sector is increasingly using state-of-
the-art energy resources Electricity in the agriculture sector is mainly used
for pumping The sector consumed about  MU of electricity in 2005, which is about
13% of the total electricity consumption of the country in Other fuels used in
the sector include diesel (about 544 kilolitres) for power tillers, which are
multipurpose devices for farmers Subsidized power tillers are supplied by the
Ministry of Agriculture However, power tillers are predominantly used in few
Dzongkhags only (Table ) Cardamom drying, oil extraction, and rice milling are
some of the other activities that use energy resources for post-harvest
processing Overall, commercial and modern energy resources do not  nd much use
in the agriculture sector compared to other sectors Their use is likely to
remain low in future too, as agriculture is constrained by natural factors such
as mountainous terrain With only % of the land under cultivation and rising
demand for land for other uses such as industries and urban settlements,
agriculture is likely to continue to be at the same level as today FIGURE
ANNUAL ARRIVALS IN BHUTAN Source DoT (2005) Agriculture sector Traditionally,
Bhutanese agriculture comprised subsistence farming, and rural households were
self-sufﬁ cient food production Bhutan’ agricultural sector, which employs about
79% of the population but has only about % of the land under cultivation, is
driven substantially by the non-commercial energy in the form of human labour
and animal power Agriculture activities are constrained in the region, which is
mostly mountainous Because of the mountainous terrain, it is difﬁ cult to have
large farmlands and mechanized farming Besides, large tracts of land are under
forests and reserved parks Lack of access to market, absence of approach roads
from farms to marketplace, and lack of storage and post-harvest processing
facilities are also some of the constraints faced by the agriculture sector
Recent years have seen improvement in these facilities, and agriculture is
slowly shifting towards growing horticulture crops and cultivating cash crops
like potato, rice, and so on Cold storage facilities have been created at Paro
(close to airport) and Phuentsholing for storing apples and oranges before
exporting in Energy situation in Bhutan in the regional context The per capita
energy and electricity supply are still way below the world average (Table )
However, in  regional context, Bhutan emerges as the leading country in South
Asia, both in terms of total primary energy supply as well as electricity supply
per capita per year SUMMARY OF MAJOR ISSUES FOR INTEGRATED ENERGY PLANNING Heavy
dependence of the residential sector on fuelwood would be  cause of concern in
the years to come Experience shows that because of electriﬁ cation, fuelwood
consumption reduces by about 30%–35% # 12 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SECTOR – AN OVERVIEW Table  NUMBER OF FARM
MACHINERY SUPPLIED TO VARIOUS DZONGKHAGS (FROM 1983 TO MARCH 2005) Tractor Power
tillers Power chain saw Water pump Power sprayers Paddy transplanter Power
thresher Total Dzongkhag Thimphu 49 201 41 54 57  26 430 Paro 66 436 28 83 32 34
82 761 Haa  58      68 Chukha  23 45     79 Samtse  24      37 Punakha  226  33
29 303 Gasa  24      24 Wangdue 14 209 23 27   17 299 Tsirang  37      48 Dagana
22      24 Bumthang 21 134 12    11 181 Trongsa  95      104 Zhemgang  30
31 Sarpang  88      103 Lhuntse  10      16 Mongar  23      38 Trashigang 12 29
13     62 Yangtse  10      16 Peragatshel  31      38 /Jongkhar        23 Total
213 1717 195 216 102 53 189 2685 The pattern of energy consumption by the
industrial sector would play  major role in energy management Rapidly growing
transport sector is entirely dependent on imported fossil fuels, and fuel
consumption in this sector is  cause for concern mainly due to its impact on
balance of trade and likely increase in pollution in the urban area The
commercial sector is showing substantial growth potential and largest consumer
of energy The agriculture sector consumes relatively less commercial energy #
Table  COMPARISON OF PER CAPITA ENERGY AND ELECTRICITY SUPPLY # Per capita
electricity supply (kWh/capita/ year) Per capita energy supply (TOE/capita/
year) Bangladesh 16 140 Bhutan 63 1174 # India 53 457 is the third Myanmar 28
104 # Nepal 34 69 Pakistan 49 425 Sri Lanka 49 345 World 77 2516 Source IEA
(2006) 13 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN         Energy
scenarios for Bhutan 2020 MODELLING DEMAND–SUPPLY SCENARIOS Energy is one of the
major drivers of economic growth Bhutan, one of the smallest economies based on
agriculture and forestry, is expected to experience rapid economic growth and
development in future, and the country’ requirements for energy and supporting
infrastructure would increase as well In view of this, an integrated assessment
of energy demand was carried out, along with determining the possible energy
pathways and their impacts on infrastructure requirements to policy analysis,
without having to resort to more complex models LEAP model projections have been
made under four different scenarios for electricity, biomass, coal, liqueﬁ ed
petroleum gas (LPG), petrol, diesel, kerosene, and aviation turbine fuel (ATF)
DEFINING SCENARIOS Energy scenarios are frameworks for analysing including
various future energy perspectives, combinations of and interventions Scenarios
help to visualize how the future is going to unfold under different assumptions
They are particularly helpful in investigating alternative future developments
and their implications Scenarios can be based on assumptions that are compatible
with sustainable development goals like improved efﬁ ciencies, adoption of
advanced energy supply technologies with low environmental impacts, and efﬁ
cient use of natural resources To have  look at the relative position of an
economy, scenarios can also be based on different economic growth trajectories
In the context of building scenarios for projecting energy demand for Bhutan,
the following four scenarios have been considered # technology options DEMAND
ANALYSIS USING LEAP The energy demand projections have been carried out for
period up to 2020 for the residential, industrial, commercial and institutional,
and sectors The Long-range Energy transport Alternatives Planning model, or
LEAP, is  scenario-based energy–environment modelling tool Its scenarios are
based on comprehensive accounting of how energy is consumed, converted, and
produced in  given region or economy under  range of alternative assumptions on
population, economic development, technology, and price, among other factors
LEAP is useful in projecting energy supply and demand situations in order to
provide  glimpse of future patterns, identifying potential problems, and
assessing the likely impacts of energy policies LEAP can assist in examining
wide variety of projects, programmes, technologies, and other energy
initiatives, and arriving at strategies that best address environmental and
energy problems The main advantages of LEAP are its  exibility and ease-of-use,
which allow decision-makers to move rapidly from policy ideas Business-as-usual
scenario, or BAU Energy-efﬁ cient scenario, or EE High growth scenario, or HIG
High growth coupled with energy efﬁ ciency, or HIGEE # # # The subsequent
sections brieﬂ  deﬁ ne the broad characteristics of the four scenarios Detailed
explanation of the assumptions for different sectors is outlined in the later
part of the analysis 15 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Business-as-usual scenario In the
absence of any technological or policy is termed as the intervention, this
scenario most likely path of development This scenario incorporates existing
government plans and policies In the BAU scenario, an average real gross
domestic product (GDP) growth rate of % (uniform over the entire modelling
frame, that is, between 2005 and 2020) has been considered Sectoral variables
grow with historical trends, and the speciﬁ  energy consumption of different
sectoral activities remains at its current levels (2005) ENERGY DEMAND
PROJECTIONS, BY SECTOR Residential sector The energy demand projections for the
residential sector under different scenarios have been made for urban and rural
households that use four different categories of fuel: () electricity, () LPG,
() fuelwood, and () kerosene While Bhutan is aiming at 100% rural electriﬁ
cation by 2013, till electricity extends to all rural areas, lighting, cooking,
and heating will continue to be primarily dependent on fuelwood The distribution
of households by fuel type is presented in Table  Energy-efficient scenario This
scenario takes into account the speciﬁ  energy efﬁ ciency measures spanning
across all sectors These measures are expected to be adopted uniformly across
all sectors from 2008/Efﬁ ciency improvements in existing devices and shifts to
modern efﬁ cient technologies are the basic characteristics of this scenario The
sectoral variables are assumed to grow as per the BAU rates Table  PERCENTAGE OF
HOUSEHOLDS USING DIFFERENT FUELS (2004) Percentage to total households
Percentage of rural households Percentage of urban households Electricity
Cooking 89 High growth scenario This scenario assumes  high GDP growth rate of
10% (uniform over the modelling time frame, 2005–20) compared to the GDP growth
rate of % assumed in the BAU scenario The HIG scenario is characterized by
shift of the economy towards the growth led by the industrial and service
sector, with the latter dominating in terms of its contribution to GDP Speciﬁ
energy consumption  gures for different sectors remain at the BAU levels,
wherein the total energy consumption for different fuels under different sectors
is much higher due to higher growth of the sectoral variables Lighting Liquefied
petroleum gas Cooking 56 Fuelwood Cooking + space heating 90 28 72 Kerosene
Cooking 54 75 90 Lighting  52 The pattern of using fuels is not same in rural
and urban areas Urban households depend less on kerosene and fuelwood due to
relatively high usage of electricity and LPG In rural areas,  considerable
proportion of the households still depends on traditional fuels due to non/less
availability of modern cleaner fuels The total consumption of these fuels, by
and large, depends on the growth rate of the sectoral variables, the intensity
of their use, the future penetration rate of devices/modern fuels, and their
usage pattern among different categories of households Table  gives the
assumptions under High growth coupled with energy efficiency scenario Finally,
the HIGEE scenario combines  high GDP growth rate of 10% with high energy efﬁ
ciency measures This scenario is representative of the most optimistic scenario
in terms of both economic growth and technological interventions, steering the
economy towards the most energy- efﬁ cient path 16 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 projected
population up to 2020, based on the above details, is given in Annexure  Rural
electriﬁ cation, which at present stands at 40%, is assumed to take place
uniformly across all the scenarios, according to the plans laid down in the
Rural Electriﬁ cation Master Plan (REMP); urban and rural electriﬁ cation is
expected to reach the 100% level by the end of the Tenth Five-year Plan (the
current target is also to achieve 100% rural electriﬁ cation by the end of the
Tenth Five-year Plan) As far as the distribution of households in rural and
urban areas is concerned, Census 2005 reports that % of the total population
lives in urban areas and the rest % lives in rural areas Given the historical
trend of urban migration (prior to 2000), Vision 2020 predicts that urban
population will equal rural population by the end of 2020, which also holds true
for the BAU and EE scenarios However, in the other two scenarios various
scenarios for determining the major sectoral variables The energy demand
projection for the domestic sector is conﬁ ned to regular households only,
although the census divides the households into regular, institutional, and
transient This is due to the fact that the household break-up by activities and
fuel type is available only for regular households According to Population and
Housing Census of Bhutan 2005,  total of 126 115 regular households have been
recorded in Bhutan They account for 91% of the total resident population (634
982) and % of the total population (resident plus  oating) of Bhutan The average
weighted household size is estimated to be  One year before the census, the
natural growth rate of population was found to be % This data is assumed to
remain constant over the modelling time frame under all scenarios The Table
ASSUMPTIONS FOR SECTORAL VARIABLES FOR ESTIMATING ENERGY DEMAND IN RESIDENTIAL
SECTOR BAU scenario EE scenario HIG scenario HIGEE scenario Variables Yes Yes
Yes Yes Analysis based on regular resident households % (Census 2005) % (Census
2005) % (Census 2005) % (census 2005) Annual population growth rate for regular
resident households Household size Rural     Urban     Urban population = 65% of
total regular resident population (based on recent migration trends during
2000–05) Urban population = 65% of total regular resident population (based on
recent migration trends during 2000–05) Urban population = rural population by
2020 (Vision 2020) Urban population = rural population by 2020 (Vision 2020)
Urban–rural population ratio According to Accelerated Rural Electrification
Programme – end of the Tenth Five-year Plan According to Accelerated Rural
Electrification Programme – end of the Tenth Five-year Plan According to
Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme – end of the Tenth Five-year Plan
Rural electrification According to Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme –
end of the Tenth Five-year Plan Urban electrification End of the Tenth Five-year
Plan End of the Tenth Five-year Plan End of the Tenth Five-year Plan End of the
Tenth Five-year Plan BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-efficient; HIG – high
growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with energy efficiency 17
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN
ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 fuels could well lead to  100% penetration of LPG in rural
and urban households in the HIG scenario However, in the baseline and EE
scenarios, it is assumed that by 2020, penetration would reach  maximum of %,
based on  simple average of the existing and the HIG percentages Kerosene
consumption in the HIG and HIGEE scenarios is assumed to come down to % because
of faster switching to cleaner fuels, with 65% being the ‘end-of-model’ period
value under the BAU and EE scenarios (simple average) As evident from Table ,
fuelwood is being used by 10% of the urban households With access to modern
fuels, this dependence is assumed to come down to % by 2020 under the BAU and EE
scenarios and to % in the extreme scenarios Fuelwood and kerosene, which at
present are consumed by more than 50% of the regular households, are later to be
replaced by electricity and LPG Kerosene usage will experience  steep fall in
the HIG scenario, where the percentage usage will come down to 10% by 2020 as
against 51% in Fuelwood usage will drop to 30% in the HIG scenario as against
40% in the BAU and EE scenarios The use of LPG, which is at present used by only
% of the households, is assumed to reach 35% in the BAU and EE scenarios and 50%
in the HIG and HIGEE scenarios The energy (HIG and HIGEE), the recent migration
pattern has been taken into account (2000–05 and then annualized), which shows
that by 2020, about 65% of the total population will live in urban areas The
pattern and type of fuel usage are not uniform across different categories of
households and are found to vary signiﬁ cantly The usage is largely governed by
the availability and paying capacities of the households With economic growth
and access to cleaner fuels, the usage pattern is assumed to change signiﬁ
cantly, especially in the HIG scenario Table  shows how the usage pattern is
expected to change across households and scenarios With complete electriﬁ cation
envisaged for rural and urban areas by 2013, almost all the households will be
using electricity According to TERI survey, electricity in urban areas is used
for lighting, cooking, space heating, washing, refrigeration, and for other
infotainment devices like TV and radio On the other hand, in rural households,
the usage is conﬁ ned to lighting, cooking, and for running television and
radios The usages of these devices across economies by the rural and urban
households have been obtained from the Bhutan Census Report Improvement in road
conditions, increased per capita income, and the need to switch to cleaner Table
FUEL USE PATTERN, BY RURAL AND URBAN HOUSEHOLDS (%) BAU EE HIG HIGEE 2005 2020
2005 2020 2005 2020 2005 2020 Urban Electricity 100 100 100 100 55 100 100
Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) Fuelwood 10  10  10  10  Kerosene  65  65
Rural Electricity 100 100 100 100 LPG 35 35 50 50 Fuelwood 75 40 75 40 75 30 75
30 Kerosene 51 51 51 10 51 10 BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-efficient;
HIG – high growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with energy efficiency
18 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN
ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Energy demand for the residential sector The residential
sector consumes about 49% of the total energy consumed in the economy, the
largest amongst all sectoral shares The relatively high energy consumption is on
account of the intensities (consumption of fuels per household) for the above-
mentioned fuels by end-use devices and scenarios are presented in Table  Table
ENERGY INTENSITIES BY END USE AND FUEL TYPE BAU EEa Percentage improvement
Source Urban households Electricity Lighting (kWh/hh/ annum) 324 73 < htm>
Cooking and heating (kWh/hh/annum) 1256 07  <
php?country=China&product=Rice%20Cooker> Washing machine (kWh/ hh/annum) 150
150 Refrigerators (kWh/hh/ annum) 416  416 TV (kWh/hh/annum) 152  152 66  66
VCD/DVD/tapes (kWh/ hh/annum) Cooking (kg/hh/annum) LPG  09 < Cooking + space
heating (kg/hh/annum) 4336 Fuelwood 32 2955 < shastripdf> Cooking (litre/hh/
annum) 22 Kerosene  22 Lighting (litre/hh/ annum) 119  119 Rural households
Lighting (kWh/hh/ annum) 341 Electricity 33 74  htm Cooking and others
(kWh/hh/annum) 533  34  php?country=China&product=Rice%20Cooker TV
(kWh/hh/annum) 152  152 VCD/DVD/tapes (kWh/ hh/annum) 66  66 LPG Cooking
(kg/hh/annum) 41 39   41  9359 6720 by 2008 and 5519 by 2020 Fuelwood Cooking +
space heating + fodder cooking (kg/hh/ annum) Kerosene Cooking (/hh/annum) 146
146 Lighting (/hh/annum) 30  30  Efficiency applicable from 2008,  DoE, Bhutan;
LPG – liquefied petroleum gas Source TERI primary survey (IEMMP project) 19
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN
ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 signiﬁ cant dependence of the sector on fuelwood Fuelwood
share in the total energy basket in 2005 was 92% The share of electricity was %,
while that for LPG and kerosene, it was close to % and %, respectively The
demand for different types of fuels under four scenarios is given in Figures –
The focus of the proposed sustainable development strategy would be on reducing
fuelwood share in the residential sector This can be achieved by the ()
introduction of high efﬁ ciency cook stoves and () switching to modern fuels
like LPG, electricity, and renewable energy like solar cooking, biogas-based
cooking, and home heating systems Thousand tonne 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150
100 50  490 294 208 150 106 2005 2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE
FUELWOOD DEMAND Thousand tonne 10 Energy demand in the residential sector, by
fuel Electricity Demand for electricity during 2005 in the residential sector
was million kWh and is expected to reach 175 million kWh by 2020, under the BAU
scenario, whereas in the HIG scenario, the demand can be as high as 253 million
kWh Energy-saving measures can help reduce electricity consumption by 27%
2005 2010 2015 2020 Year EE BAU HIG HIGEE Fuelwood The present demand for
fuelwood is 490 000 tonnes, which is highly skewed towards rural households that
account for 95% of the total residential usage Fuel switching is expected, and
as  result, fuelwood usage will come down to 294 000 tonnes in the BAU scenario
FIGURE  LPG DEMAND Thousand kilolitre 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 40 89 64 2005 2010
2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE  KEROSENE DEMAND In the HIG scenario, due
to the faster switching to cleaner fuels like LPG and electricity, the
consumption could come down to 150 000 tonnes Demand side management,
particularly in household cooking, can help achieve an efﬁ ciency level of 30%
FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND 20 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Liquefied petroleum gas The
consumption of LPG is found to be on the lower side compared to other fuels but
is expected to increase by  times the present consumption of 2900 tonnes Recent
data shows an increasing trend for private sector industries Private sector
industries grew from 15 489 in 2004 to 24 417 in 2006, an increase of 57% in two
years Notably, the large-scale industries grew from 47 in 2004 to 72 in
Substantial growth can be noticed in small-scale industries, which ranged from
628 in 2004 to 1660 in 2006, logging more than 160% growth in two years In the
HIG scenario, consumption could reach 9000 tonnes Achievable efﬁ ciency
improvement is %, as the devices in use do not have  scope for improvement,
which can lead to the reduction in the consumption, with the  gures in the EE
and HIGEE scenarios being 6200 and 8800 tonnes, respectively Table  GROWTH IN
INDUSTRIES UNDER THREE CATEGORIES Private Joint ventures Public Year 1999  678
33 Kerosene Kerosene consumption is dominant in rural households vis--vis urban
households, with the total kerosene consumption in 2005 being 6400 kilolitres
With rural electriﬁ cation, kerosene consumption is expected to come down to
3890 kiloliters in the BAU and EE scenarios and to 640 kilolitres in the HIG and
HIGEE scenarios 2000  959 23 43 2001 12 807 24 47 2002 13 833 24 47 2003 14 627
15 50 2004 15 489 15 50 2005 17 181 15 61 2006 24 417 11 77 Source Bhutan
Statistical Yearbook, 2007 Industrial sector in Bhutan Till 1998, the played
limited role in the country’ economic development The sectoral (secondary
sector) GDP to country’ total GDP was close to 30% (between 1990 and 1998)
Thereafter, the sectoral contribution improved, and between 1999 and 2002, the
sectoral share increased from % to 38% However, after 2002, it experienced
declining trend, reaching as low as 35% in In Bhutan, industries are broadly
classiﬁ ed under three categories: () private, () joint ventures, and () public
The number of private sector units has grown considerably between 2000 and From
5678 in 1999, the private sector units increased to 15 489 by The joint and
public sectors did not experience much of  change in the number of
establishments during the said period Joint sectors increased from  to 15 units,
with closing down of some of the existing ones, while the public sector grew
marginally at 17 units between 1999 and Table  shows the trend in the number of
industries under the three categories Within the industrial sector, the
manufacturing and mining industries play  crucial role in determining the
present and future energy demand According to the MoEA (Ministry of Economic
Affairs) estimates for 2004,  total of 874 units existed under the mining and
manufacturing industries, of which 858 were completely under the private sector
The rest 16 were under joint and public sector undertakings Table  shows the
growth in the number of units under the production and manufacturing category
(between 2002 and 2004) industrial sector Table  GROWTH IN THE NUMBER OF
PRODUCTION AND MANUFACTURING UNITS Private Joint Public Year 2002 570  10 2003
712  12 2004 858  11 2005 967  13 2006 1113  15 Source Statistical Yearbook of
Bhutan, 2007 21 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 by 22 medium voltage industries consuming %,
and 122 low voltage industries consuming roughly about % of the total
electricity As far as the energy projection for the sector is concerned,
analysis has been done separately for both energy- intensive and non-energy-
intensive industries Given the above complexities, the criterion used to
identify energy-intensive industries is the share of fuel cost to total cost of
production Based on the  gures published in the Census of Manufacturing
Industries 2001, the average share of energy expenditure to total was estimated
at the sectoral level The relative position of the industries (whether energy
intensive or not) is classiﬁ ed based on the fact whether the share of the cost
of fuel to total cost of production exceeds the economy’ average Data related to
fuel and total costs was not available for the iron and steel plant As  result,
the data for the same has been assumed to be similar to that of the Indian
industry for The value obtained for the industry was found to be 17, which is
above the average value calculated for Bhutan (055) Table  shows the list of
industries, which can be categorized as energy intensive Within the industrial
sector, the construction activities have been the major contributor to growth
and contributed between 13% and 18% of the GDP The manufacturing sector has
accounted for around %–% of the GDP, while the electricity, water, and gas
sectors have been close to 10% of the GDP (Figure ) FIGURE  INDUSTRIAL GDP AS
PERCENTAGE SHARE TO TOTAL GDP Source Statistical yearbook of Bhutan (2005),
National Statistics Bureau, RGoB, Bhutan Table  Categorization of industries for
energy projections In Bhutan, the Bhutan Power Corporation (BPC) categorizes
electricity consumers under the three following heads  Low voltage consumers
(230 volts and INDUSTRIES UNDER ENERGY-INTENSIVE CATEGORY Ratio of fuel
purchased/total cost of production Industries Cement 2828 Dolomite crushing 2682
Gypsum mining 2568 415 volts) Marble mining 2127  Medium voltage consumers ( kV,
11 kV, Rice mill 2084 and 33 kV) Stone crushing 1841  High voltage consumers (66
kV and above) Ferro alloys 1102 The low voltage consumers are mostly from the
residential and commercial sectors and  number of small-scale industries Medium-
scale and some small-scale industries come under the medium voltage category
Finally, heavy, power-intensive industries come under the high voltage category
As per the records of the BPC (2005), altogether there are three high voltage
industries, which consume 56% of the total electricity, followed Salt iodization
1059 Candle factory 0988 Nursery plantation 0892 Plaster of Paris 0890 Oil mill
0868 Dolomite powder 0793 Rosin and turpentine 0702 22 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 the
potential for energy conservation are discussed in detail However, the detailed
plant-level data could only be obtained for the following six major operating
units  Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd, or BFAL  Bhutan Calcium Carbide Ltd, or BCCL
Penden Cement Authority Ltd, or PCAL  Druk Cement Company Ltd, or DCCL  Druk
Iron and Steel Ltd, or DISL  Bhutan Steels Ltd, or BSL Energy-intensive
industries Of the six industries listed above, the  rst three are listed under
the high voltage category consumers, while the rest are under the medium voltage
category In 2005, these six industries consumed electricity equivalent to 377
million kWh (close to 90% of the total sectoral electricity consumption of 420
million kWh and 62% of the country’ electricity consumption of 615 million kWh)
The energy-intensive industries indicated above are export oriented, with India
as their major international market The geographical pattern of the sales of
four energy-intensive industries is presented in Table  The rest are classiﬁ ed
under the category of non- energy-intensive industries These industries are
further classiﬁ ed as: () existing and () upcoming units In the following
sections, the existing energy consumption patterns (energy intensities),
technologies used in energy-intensive units, and Table  SALES OF PRODUCTS OF
POWER-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES 1993 (million Nu) 1996 (million Nu) 1999 (million Nu)
2002 (million Nu) 2004 (million Nu) Industry BFAL Exports to India 14 73 16 85
Exports to other countries    19 Sales within Bhutan    15 Total sales 14 73 16
19 PCAL Exports to India 92 67 15 14 Exports to other countries  27    Sales
within Bhutan 73 06 78 12 69 Total sales 75 53 45 27 83 BCCL Exports to India 58
59 76 73 67 Exports to other countries 55     Sales within Bhutan 69 62 56 78 92
Total sales 82 21 32 51 59 DISL Exports to India 26 802 Exports to other
countries  Sales within Bhutan  Total sales 26 802 BFAL – Bhutan Ferro Alloys
Ltd; BCCL – Bhutan Calcium Carbide Ltd; PCAL– Penden Cement Authority Ltd; DISL
– Druk Iron and Steel Ltd Source UNDP (2005); Bhutan Trade Statistics (2005) 23
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN
ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 come on stream between 2008 and Of these 55 industries,
nine industries fall under ferro-alloy category, two under steel rolling, four
under steel ingots, and one each is categorized under cement and magnesium metal
The production capacities of the existing energy-intensive industries and the
upcoming ones are indicated in Table  These industries mostly consume
electricity as fuel in production Signiﬁ cant coal usage is found in cement
plants As far as the consumption of petroleum products is concerned, industries
are found to consume high speed diesel (HSD), furnace oil (FO), and light diesel
oil (LDO) Of the total industrial consumption of HSD (10 120 kilolitres) in
2004, energy-intensive industries consumed 1000 kilolitres, approximately 10% of
the total industrial usage  considerable amount of FO (93% of the total
industrial use) is also used However, the usage of LDO is low compared to total
industrial usage, which is approximately % Compared to these fuels, electricity
is industries used extensively PCAL, the largest cement plant in Bhutan, caters
to Bhutan, with 70% of its sales in the domestic market due to the demand from
under construction hydropower project This domestic demand is likely to taper
off in the coming years with the completion of the Tala Hydel Power Project This
can, to some extent, affect the business of the plant, and if no substantial
demand is generated, the plant has to depend on the market of neighbouring
countries, especially Nepal, Bangladesh, and India Notwithstanding increasing
liberalization of these economies, there is  possibility of having to cope with
greater competition For example, there were concerns that calcium carbide
exports from China were driving down the price of calcium carbide in India,
thereby posing  threat to Bhutan’ calcium carbide exports This implies that the
cement and other industries have to improve their production efﬁ ciency to
remain competitive internationally According to the list provided by the BPC,
total of 55 industries (Annexure ) have been given license to operate in Bhutan
and are expected to these very in Table  PRODUCTION OF EXISTING AND UPCOMING
ENERGY-INTENSIVE UNITS BAU EE HIG HIGEE Comments Industries 2005 2020 2005 2020
2005 2020 2005 2020 27 600 45 300 27 600 45 300 27 600 45 300 27 600 45 300
Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd Increased production from 2006, as reported 22 000 39
280 22 000 39 280 22 000 39 280 22 000 39 280 Bhutan Calcium Carbide Ltd
Increased production from 2007, as reported in energy audit Penden Cement 272
075 285 600 285 600 272 075 285 600 272 075 272 075 285 600 Increased production
from 2008, as reported Druk Cement 23 725 23 725 23 725 23 725 23 725 23 725 23
725 23 725 Bhutan Steels 17 200 27 500 17 200 27 500 17 200 27 500 17 200 27 500
Increased production from 2006, as reported 29 200 36 000 29 200 36 000 29 200
36 000 29 200 36 000 Increased production from 2006, as reported Druk Iron and
Steel Plant Upcoming ferro- alloys  87 200  87 200  87 200  87 200 Increased
production from 2008, as reported Upcoming steel plants  300 000  300 000  300
000  300 000 Increased production from 2008, as reported Cement   000 000   000
000   000 000   000 000 Increased production from 2009, as reported Upcoming
other metal industries  69 500  69 500  69 500  69 500 Increased production from
2008, as reported 24 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Energy equivalent of petroleum
products use is 9000 tonnes of oil equivalent (TOE), while that of electricity
is 33 000 TOE The speciﬁ  electricity consumption (electricity per tonne of
nished output) for these industries is presented in Table Million kWh 3000 2500
2000 1500 1000 Energy demand for different fuels by energy- intensive industries
As mentioned earlier, these energy-intensive industries mostly consume
electricity and coal The demand for these inputs by energy-intensive industries
is presented in Figures  and  500  2005 2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE
FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND IN ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES Electricity The
present total electricity consumption by energy-intensive industries is 377
million kWh and is expected to reach 2192 million kWh by 2020 under the BAU
scenario Electricity saving potential is close to 10%, which can lead to reduced
consumption to the tune of 1994 million kWh Going by the present export tariff,
exports of saved electricity (@ 200 million kWh) can fetch foreign revenue close
to Nu 400 million approximately (Figure ) Total electricity consumption by
energy-intensive industries will go up to 2782 million kWh by 2020 under the HIG
scenario This estimate is mainly based on the assumption that all types of new
industries will be allowed The saving potential under this scenario is about 210
million kWh Table 10 SPECIFIC ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION Electricity consumption
(kWh/tonne) HIG HIGEEa BAU EEa Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd 6824 6500 6824 6500
Efficiency value based on best application of Norwegian technology in Indian
market Bhutan Calcium Carbide Ltd 4500 4375 4500 4375 Efficiency value based on
energy audit of TERI Penden Cement 88 88 Five-stage pre-heater pre-calcinator
(National Council for Cement and Building Materials [NCCBM]) Druk Cement 116 88
116 88 Five-stage pre-heater pre-calcinator (NCCBM) Bhutan Steels 735 662 735
662 Based on 10% motor efficiency (Energy Handbook of TERI) Druk Iron and Steel
Plant 800 650 800 650 Based on efficiency improvement measures for electric arc
furnace (EAF)-based steel plants (LBNL) Upcoming ferro-alloys 9000b Efficiency
value based on best application of Norwegian technology in Indian market 8500b
9000b 8500b Based on efficiency improvement measures for EAF-based steel plants
(LBNL) Upcoming steel plants 728b 650b 728b 650b Cement 157b 88b 157b 88b Five-
stage pre-heater pre-calcinator (NCCBM) 4659b 4659b 4659b Upcoming other metal
industries 4659b BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-efficient; HIG – high
growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with energy efficiency  Energy
saving from 2008,  Weighted average 25 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Energy demand for
different fuels by non- energy-intensive industries In 2004,  total of 864 non-
energy-intensive industries existed in Bhutan Because of the unavailability of
data for 2005, the annual average growth rate (between 2000 and 2004) was used
to arrive at the 2005  gure on the number of non- energy-intensive industries,
the number of which was pegged at Under the baseline scenario, the total number
of industries is expected to reach the 3500 mark, on the assumption that the
average annual growth rate remains at %, the annual growth rate for these
industries between 1990 and In the HIG scenario, the number of operating
industry is expected to reach 6300 by 2020, on the assumption that the average
annual growth rate is 14%, which the industry experienced between 2000 and Table
11 presents the assumptions for estimating the number of industries and the
energy intensities (energy consumption per establishment) under four different
scenarios Thousand tonne 600 586 500 457 400 300 200 124 100  2005 2010 2015
2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE  DEMAND FOR COAL IN INDUSTRIES Coal Bhutan’
coal import in 2005 was estimated at 124 000 tonnes Cement industry was the
largest consumer, with consumption close to 58 000 tonnes With the expansion in
existing plant capacities and setting up of new industries, the demand is
estimated to rise to 586 000 tonnes by the end of 2020 (Figure ) Demand side
management can help reduce total coal consumption by 21%, that is, to 450 000
tonnes approximately (Figure ) Coal consumption under the HIG and HIGEE
scenarios is assumed to be same as that under the BAU and EE scenarios, since
most of the additional proposed industries assumed to be established under the
HIG scenario are not likely to use coal In addition to normal growth of the
existing industries, 38 new licenses have also been awarded Majority of these
industries are into agro-based food products, silk fabric, and marble slabs
Approximately, 26 MW power has been allocated, and these units are expected to
consume 65 million kWh per annum Based on these  gures, the average electricity
consumption per unit is calculated to be  million kWh However, with proper efﬁ
ciency measures, the consumption per unit can come Table 11 ASSUMPTIONS FOR
ENERGY DEMAND ESTIMATION FOR NON-ENERGY-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES BAU EE HIG HIGEE
Grows annually @ % till 2007 and @ 14% from 2009 Grows annually @ % till 2007
and @ 14% from 2008 Grows annually @ %, based on annual average growth rate
between 1990 and 2005 Growth in establishments Grows annually @ of %, based on
annual average growth rate between 1990 and 2004 Electricity consumption per
unit (kWh/establishment) 43 877 39 489 (operational from 2008, with 10%
efficiency in motors) 43 877 39 489 (from 2008 with 10% efficiency in motors) 38
189 30 551 (operational from 2008, assuming 20% improvement in the efficiency)
Wood consumption (kg/ establishment) 38 189 30 551 (operational from 2008
assuming improvement in efficiency of 20%) BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-
efficient; HIG – high growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with energy
efficiency 26 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Wood At present, the total consumption of wood
in non-energy-intensive industries stands at 50 000 tonnes Under the BAU
scenario, total demand is expected to reach 175 000 tonnes Demand side
management can help achieve an efﬁ ciency of 20% over baseline estimates,
reducing consumption to 140 000 tonnes and 250 000 tonnes in the EE and HIGEE
scenarios, respectively down to  million kWh The projected electricity and wood
demand is presented in Figures  and  Million kWh 350       300    250    200 150
Commercial and institutional sector The commercial and institutional sector has
been divided into four sub-sectors These are as follows  Tourism  Commercial 100
50  2005 2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE (complexes, establishments
including shops and restaurants) FIGURE  ELECTRICITY DEMAND IN NON-ENERGY-
INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES  Institutions  Bulk energy consumers like defence In the
subsequent sections, each sector, its growth, the present and future energy
intensities, and the energy saving potential are discussed in detail Finally,
energy demand for the sector, by fuel, is presented Thousand tonne 350
300  250       200       150 Tourism impact on Tourism can have  substantial
Bhutan’ economic sector Furthermore, tourism is the second largest foreign
currency earner and the most important contributor in terms of free convertible
currency (Strategy Document, Department of Tourism, 2005) There has been
considerable growth in the inﬂ ow of international tourists in the recent past
The total international arrival at the end of 1996 was estimated to be 5137, and
by 2006, the total inﬂ ow reached an all time high of 17 Figure 10 presents the
tourist inﬂ ow in Bhutan between 1996 and As per the latest records, Bhutan has
more than 175 hotels with more than 4000 beds Average duration of stay per
tourist in Bhutan has been estimated to be approximately 10 days As far as the
consumption of energy by these international tourists is concerned, the typical
energy basket includes electricity, LPG, and petroleum products 100 15 50  2005
2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE  DEMAND FOR WOOD IN NON-ENERGY-
INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES Electricity The total electricity demand in 2005 was found
to be 43 million kWh, which is slated to rise sharply to 132 million kWh by 2010
and 223 MU by 2020 under the BAU scenario, while in the HIG scenario, the demand
will be 346 MU by Energy saving potential for this sector is close to 10%, which
can help reduce consumption by 20 MU and 34 MU for the EE and HIGEE scenarios,
respectively 27 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 approximately 15% Based on this estimate, the
total number of tourists visiting Bhutan by 2020 under the two scenarios is
expected to be 110 However, the inﬂ ux rate has changed signiﬁ cantly over the
past  ve years In 2001, the number of foreign tourists visiting Bhutan was 6395,
which increased to 13 626 by 2005, marking an annual average growth rate of 21%
Based on this growth rate, the  nal  gure for 2020 is 237 Each tourist is
estimated to consume about 261 kWh of electricity and 21 kg of LPG Use of
energy- efﬁ cient lighting and heating can reduce electricity consumption by 30%
As  result, the electricity intensity (electricity usage per tourist) can come
down to 183 kWh As far as LPG consumption is concerned, there may not be  far-
reaching improvement, as even the existing LPG cook stoves are highly energy efﬁ
cient However, some research studies suggest that efﬁ ciency can be improved
further by regular cleaning of stoves, using materials that have high heat
conductivity for cooking, and so on The efﬁ ciency attainable is % of the
existing stoves, thus resulting in the reduction of the per capita consumption
to  kg of LPG FIGURE 10 INFLOW OF FOREIGN (PAID TOURISTS) IN BHUTAN Source
Department of Tourism, RGoB (2005); Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan (2007) While
the consumption of electricity and LPG is discussed in this section, petroleum
consumption is dealt with separately in the section on the transport sector
Based on  rapid appraisal survey in three hotels in Thimphu, the electricity and
LPG consumption per capita was estimated Table 12 describes in detail the
assumptions made in regard to the number of tourists expected to visit Bhutan,
their energy consumption under different scenarios, and the saving potential The
estimation of the number of tourists between 2005 and 2020 under the BAU and EE
scenarios is based on the annual average inﬂ ux of foreign tourists in Bhutan
between 1991 and The average inﬂ ux rate obtained was Commercial complexes,
including hotels and restaurants With increasing per capita disposable income
and the government’ policy to promote tourism in Bhutan, the commercial sector
as  whole has experienced  healthy growth rate between 2000 and 2005, which is
pegged at 16% The growth in retail and hotel/restaurant industry is presented in
Table Table 12 GROWTH IN TOURIST AND ENERGY INTENSITIES BAU EE HIG HIGEE 2005
2020 2005 2020 2005 2020 2005 2020 Number of tourists 13 626 110 900 13 626 110
900 13 626 237 800 13 626 237 800 Per capita electricity consumption (kWh) 261
261 261 183 261 261 261 183 21 21 21  21 21 21  Per capita liquefied petroleum
gas consumption (kg) BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-efficient; HIG – high
growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with energy efficiency 28
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN
ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 and wood have been derived from energy balance  gures
Consumption of LPG has been calculated to be 141 kg per unit and that of
fuelwood 1384 kg Energy intensities under the EE and HIGEE scenarios for these
two fuels are 1107 kg and 1384 kg, respectively Table 13 GROWTH RATE IN THE
COMMERCIAL SECTOR (%) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 63 62 94 68 51 15 Wholesale
and retail trade 41 53 23 84 91 53 Hotels and restaurants Institutions
Institutions government buildings, monasteries, educational buildings, and
hospitals Institutional constructions did not experience  major surge between
1999 and In 1998, the total number of institutions (based on BPC estimates) was
1578, which reached 2539 by Since  gures for 2005 were not available, the base
year number was estimated using the growth rate of 12%, which the sub-sector
experienced between 1999 and For this sub-sector, the growth in the number of
institutions between 2005 and 2020 has been kept at 12% for all the scenarios
Based on the BPC supply  gures, the electricity consumption per institution was
found to be 8033 kWh per annum Moreover, energy balance  gures suggest that the
wood consumption per institution was 20 282 kg per establishment In the EE
scenario, the consumption of electricity and  rewood reduces to 5623 kWh and 16
266 kg, respectively include Source National Accounts Statistics Report 2000–05
The commercial sector contributed about % to the total GDP in With sustained
high growth, the sector’ total contribution has almost doubled in  span of  ve
years The number of establishments, too, has grown during the same period As per
the records of the BPC, 5431 establishments existed in Based on the available
data, the average growth rate of % (growth between 2000 and 2005) has been used
to arrive at the 2005  gure, which is pegged at 6090 (Table 14) Based on this
rate, the total number of such establishments can reach 16 460 by On the other
hand,  high growth rate of 10% can raise the number to 24 The data on the total
electricity supplied to the commercial sector has been obtained from the BPC The
average annual electricity consumption was estimated at 3645 kWh Given the
energy saving potential of 30% by switching to efﬁ cient lighting and space
heating, the speciﬁ  electricity consumption can come down to 2551 kWh The
gures pertaining to the consumption of LPG Bulk The growth in the bulk consumers
has also been pretty moderate between 1998 and 2003, for which  gures have been
made available by the BPC Table 14 GROWTH IN COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND
ENERGY INTENSITIES BAU EE HIG HIGEE 2005 2020 2005 2020 2005 2020 2005 2020 6090
16 463 6090 16 463 6090 24 900 6090 24 900 Number of shops/restaurants/
commercial outlets 3645  645 3645  551 3645  645 3645  551 Electricity
consumption per establishment (kWh) 141 141 141 134 141 141 141 134 LPG
consumption per establishment (kg) 1384  384 1384  107 1384  384 1384  107
Fuelwood consumption per establishment (kg) BAU – business-as-usual; EE –
energy-efficient; HIG – high growth scenario; HIGEE – high growth coupled with
energy efficiency 29 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 The total number of consumers has
increased from 250 to 364 during the same period, with an average annual growth
rate of % This gives us   gure of 439 consumers by Between 2005 and 2020, the
growth was constant at % across all scenarios The electricity consumption per
consumer was 138 246 kWh In the scenarios that incorporate demand side
management, the consumption is expected to come down to 96 772 kWh Thousand
tonne 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50              84 2005 2010 2015 2020
Year Energy demand by commercial sector, by fuel Energy demand for the
commercial and institutional sector, by fuel, is presented in Figures 11–BAU EE
HIG HIGEE FIGURE 13 FUELWOOD DEMAND Electricity The electricity demand is
expected to rise to 477 million kWh under the BAU scenario, while in the HIG
scenario, it can be as high as 539 million kWh Energy efﬁ ciency can lead to 30%
savings, with the consumption coming down to 332 million kWh and 378 million kWh
under the EE and HIGEE scenarios, respectively LPG Estimate shows that LPG
consumption was 926 tonnes in 2005, and it is expected to reach 3010 tonnes and
5000 tonnes under the BAU and HIG scenarios, respectively, by FIGURE 11
ELECTRICITY DEMAND Fuelwood Fuelwood consumption is likely to increase from 140
000 tonnes to 534 000 tonnes and 584 000 tonnes by 2020, under the BAU and HIG
scenarios, respectively     Metric tonne 5000 4500 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500
1000 500              Transport sector Bhutan’ transport sector comprises road
and air transport According to the Bhutan Statistical Yearbook, till June 2005,
the total length of roads was 4392 km, which served  total land area of 38 394
km2 and catered to  total population of 672 425 (Bhutan Census 2005) This gives
road density of 114 km/km2 and 53 km inhabitants 926 2005 2010 2015 2020 Year
BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE 12 LPG DEMAND 30 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Bhutan is
characterized by the heterogeneity of motor vehicles in terms of the fuel
consumed and the end-use purpose served by each category of motor vehicles The
import of various categories of vehicles, along with their fuel type, is
presented in Figures 15 and Surface transport (road transport) is the dominant
mode of passenger and freight movement for both inter- and intra-city movement
in Bhutan Furthermore, the absence of domestic air network linking different
cities/towns and the lack of alternative/competing transportation modes have
made the road-based transportation modes the preferred modes for transportation
With the growth in the construction sector, transport, storage, and
communication have contributed signiﬁ cantly to the GDP In 2000, the share of
the sector to total GDP was %, which increased to % at the end of The sectoral
growth rate in 2000 was found to be 10%, which signiﬁ cantly increased to % in
The growth rate of the transport sector and its contribution to GDP, by year,
are presented in Figure FIGURE 15 IMPORT OF MOTOR VEHICLES Numbers 3000 2500
2000 1500 1000 500 FIGURE 14 TRANSPORT, STORAGE, AND COMMUNICATION, PERCENTAGE
SHARE AND GROWTH RATE Source National Accounts Statistics 2000–05  2000 2001
2002 Year 2003 2004 Diesel vehicle Petrol vehicle Vehicular growth in Bhutan
There has been  signiﬁ cant increase in the number of vehicles registered in
Bhutan since The trend in the registered motor vehicles during the period
2000–04 is presented in Table As shown in Table 15, the number of registered
motor vehicles has shown  consistently upward trend between 2000 and The number
of motor vehicles increased by  times, that is, from 19 463 vehicles in 2000 to
26 760 in 2004, an average annual growth rate of % The rate of increase in
vehicle registration has been % This gives  total of 40 vehicles registered per
1000 population The road transport system in FIGURE 16 VEHICLE CATEGORY, BY FUEL
TYPE Source Various issues of Trade Statistics, Ministry of Finance, Royal
Government of Bhutan Energy consumption in the transport sector Diesel,
gasoline, and ATF are the main fuels consumed in the transport sector
Alternative fuels like compressed natural gas (CNG) and LPG are not used for
transportation in Bhutan The economy meets its entire energy demand through
imports from India Figure 17 gives the trends in the quantity of imported fuels
consumed in the transport sector 31 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Table 15 NUMBER OF
REGISTERED VEHICLES, BY TYPE AND REGION (2000–04) Region Heavy vehicles Medium
vehicles Light vehicles Two- wheeler Taxi Earth movers Others Total Year 2000
Total 2062 NA  438 7793 770 NA 1400 19 463 Thimphu 410 NA  865 4599 548 NA 537
10 959 Gelephu 102 NA 274 604 11 NA 108  099 Phuentsholing 1348 NA  971 1894 210
NA 633  056 Samdrup Jongkhar 202 NA 328 696  NA 122  349 2001 Total 2853 697
905 8165 1188 408 268 22 484 Thimphu 472 389  821 4789 810 109 145 12 535
Gelephu 100 33 359 631 17 14 70  224 Phuentsholing 2068 241  399 2003 356 244 -
311 Samdrup Jongkhar 213 24 326 742  41 53  404 2002 Total 2747 770 10 071 8371
1423 464 614 24 460 Thimphu 553 411  691 5160 1013 135 427 14 390 Gelephu 96 46
383 627 18 14 89  273 Phuentsholing 1923 261  653 1837 379 267 17  337 Samdrup
Jongkhar 175 52 344 747 13 48 81  460 2003 Total 4841 308 11 428 7507 1560 321
388 26 353 Thimphu 2654   586 4540 1079  134 15 993 Gelephu 85 49 332 628 441 10
138  683 Phuentsholing 1915 230  144 1608 21 272 17  207 Samdrup Jongkhar 187 29
366 731 39 39 99  490 2004 Total 4345 NA 12 638 7707 1682 NA 388 26 760 Thimphu
1386 NA  424 4660 1171 NA 134 15 641 Gelephu 149 NA 380 639 24 NA 138  192
Phuentsholing 2524 NA  438 1657 468 NA 17  087 Samdrup Jongkhar 286 NA 396 751
19 NA 99  452 Source Bhutan Statistical yearbook (2004) Of the three major
transportation fuels imported in Bhutan, diesel has the largest share—in 2005,
it was close to 78% (51 440 kilolitres), followed by petrol at 20% (13 755
kilolitres) and ATF close to % (1200 kilolitres) The average annual growth rate
of the demand for petrol has been greater than that of diesel Between 1996 and
2005, the annual growth rate of petrol was % and that of diesel, 12% The
sustained growth in demand for diesel has been because of the construction
sector Construction of three major hydel power projects, that is, Kurichu,
Basochhu, and Tala, between 1996 and 2005, has contributed to the increased
diesel consumption (increased transportation of materials) in  major way Again,
the growing economy, with increased per capita income and stable inﬂ ation, has
led to the growth in private transport vehicles, thus leading to increased
petrol consumption As far as the ATF import is concerned, till 2004, the demand
grew at  very low rate Increase in international tourists, coupled with the
opening of new routes, has led to  sudden spurt in the demand for ATF The growth
rate for 2005 was % as against an average of % 32 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Table 16
PARAMETER ESTIMATES Unstd coefficient  Sigma Diesel -17 -182 002 _const 490 143
000 GDP Petrol -327 -484 000 _const 711 239 000 GDP ATF FIGURE 17 TRENDS IN THE
QUANTITY OF IMPORTED FUELS CONSUMED IN THE TRANSPORT SECTOR -090 -021 984 _const
043 397 000 GDP Source Various issues of Trade Statistics, Ministry of Finance,
Royal Government of Bhutan is concerned, light motor vehicles can achieve an efﬁ
ciency of % over the existing levels, and heavy vehicles can achieve an efﬁ
ciency up to % Fuel efﬁ ciencies for different categories of vehicles are
presented in Table Demand projections for different categories of transport
fuels (diesel, petrol, and ATF) have been made based on the bivariate regression
analysis of fuel imports and GDP The regression forms used are as follows #
Diesel import (litres) = α1 + β1GDPconstant 2000 (Ngultrum) + e1 Petrol import
(litres) = α2 + β2GDPconstant 2000 (Ngultrum) + e2 ATF import (litres) = α3 +
β3GDPconstant 2000 (Ngultrum) + e3 Table 17 FUEL EFFICIENCY FOR DIFFERENT
CATEGORIES OF VEHICLES # Percentage improvement Projected efficiency (km/)
Existing efficiency (km/) Vehicle type # Gasoline car 12 72 27 where e1, e2, and
e3 are the random error components of the above regression equations Based on
the least square method, some parameters were estimated, which are presented in
Table Diesel car 11 13 21 Diesel big bus  83 36 Diesel light- duty truck  52 12
It is observed from Table 16 that when the GDP increases by Nu  million, the
consumption of diesel, petrol, and ATF increases by 49, 711, and 043 kilolitres,
respectively Using this estimate, the future demand for these petroleum products
is estimated based on the assumption that the average annual real GDP growth
rate is %, the average growth rate obtained from 2000–05 estimate (National
Statistics Bureau 2005) In the HIG scenario, the average growth rate considered
is 10%, which the economy achieved in 2002 (99%) Based on recent research, there
is  signiﬁ cant scope for improving fuel efﬁ ciencies, especially for the
vehicles running on petrol and diesel As far as the vehicle category Diesel
heavy truck   12 Source Bose (2005) Diesel car has the highest scope for efﬁ
ciency improvement (21%), while heavy diesel buses have the least scope (36%)
Based on these assumptions of growth and efﬁ ciencies, the demand for petroleum
products for Bhutan has been estimated till 2020 under four different scenarios
Figures 18–20 present the projected demand for different transport fuels under
four scenarios 33 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 Diesel # Aviation turbine fuel # Diesel
consumption in 2005 has been reported to be 51 440 kilolitres and is expected to
reach 191 100 kilolitres in the BAU scenario as against 284 000 kilolitres in
the HIG scenario Energy-efﬁ cient diesel engines can reduce the consumption of
diesel to 171 694 kilolitres and 256 178 kilolitres under the EE and HIGEE
scenarios, respectively In the BAU scenario, it is predicted that  total import
of 3495 kilolitres of ATF will be required, while in the HIG, the import demand
can reach as high as 5074 kilolitres by # Kilolitres 6000 5074 5000 4000 3495
3000 2000 1201 1000  2005 2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE FIGURE 20 DEMAND
FOR AVIATION TURBINE FUEL TOTAL ENERGY DEMAND PROJECTIONS The above analysis
shows projected demand, by sector, under various growth scenarios The total
energy demand in thousand TOE for 2010, 2015, and 2020 is shown in Figure The
energy demand projections, by fuel, from 2005 to 2020 in different scenarios are
given in Annexure  Energy consumption in TOE, by fuel, for the same time period,
under various scenarios, is shown in Figures 22 to It is clear from the  gures
that if proper strategies are devised and implemented, Bhutan can develop
sustainably in FIGURE 18 DEMAND FOR DIESEL Petrol # Like diesel, petrol is also
imported from India, with the volume of imports estimated at 13 775 kilolitres
in Projections from LEAP peg the total import demand at 51 673 kilolitres in the
BAU scenario in 2020, while in the HIG scenario, the total demand is expected to
be 78 402 kilolitres Efﬁ ciency improvement of 14% for petrol-driven engines can
reduce the consumption to 44 439 kilolitres and 67 426 kilolitres, respectively,
in the EE and HIGEE scenarios, respectively # Energy demand (thousand TOE) 1200
1100 1000 900 800 700 600 500 400 300 200 100  2005 2010 2015 2020 Year BAU EE
HIG HIGEE FIGURE 21 PROJECTED TOTAL ENERGY DEMAND IN THOUSAND TOE, UP TO 2020
FIGURE 19 DEMAND FOR PETROL 34 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 of view (pollution-related
health hazards) This problem, if tackled properly, can reduce kerosene
consumption in these two sectors substantially The following chapter suggests
various strategies for the implementation of suitable schemes in the country
future Dependence of the residential sector on fuelwood is alarming, but with
strategic planning, this dependency can be reduced to minimum by Similarly,
kerosene consumption in the residential and commercial sectors is another major
problem from sustainability and safety points FIGURE 22 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
BHUTAN BY 2010 IN BAU SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 24 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN
BY 2020 IN BAU SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 23 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2015
IN BAU SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 25 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN EE
SCENARIO, BY FUEL 35 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 FIGURE 26 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
BHUTAN BY 2015 IN EE SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 29 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY
2015 IN HIG SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 27 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN
EE SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 30 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2020 IN HIG
SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 28 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN HIG
SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 31 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN BY 2010 IN HIGEE
SCENARIO, BY FUEL 36 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  ENERGY SCEN ARIOS FOR BHUTAN 2020 FIGURE 32 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN
BHUTAN BY 2015 IN HIGEE SCENARIO, BY FUEL FIGURE 33 ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN BHUTAN
BY 2020 IN HIGEE SCENARIO, BY FUEL 37 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN         Energy supply options for Bhutan INTRODUCTION The role of
energy is crucial for any country that is traversing the rapid development path
It is an established fact that with the provision of energy, the quality of life
improves considerably—education standards improve, along with health and
hygiene, particularly that of women and children who otherwise spend
considerable time in collecting fuels An Asian Development Bank (ADB) study
(2003) revealed that increased access to electricity raised the incomes of the
Bhutanese people, lessened the extent of health burden, and positively
contributed to improved education levels The Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB)
recognizes the importance of energy and has been taking several measures to
accomplish its ambitious goal of ‘electricity for all by 2020’, now revised to
2013 with the Druk Phuensum Tshogpa (DPT) Government in power Bhutan is endowed
with rich water resources, along with abundant biomass reserves, both being key
energy sources for fulﬁ lling the country’ energy needs Both these resources are
being exploited in  sustainable manner to fulﬁ  the energy needs of the people
The government has formulated Rural Electriﬁ cation Master Plan (REMP) 2005,
which provides  road map to achieve 100% electriﬁ cation in the country within
the stipulated time frame As explained earlier, the energy needs of the
Bhutanese economy can be categorized in the following manner # Fuels to meet
heat and mechanical energy demand of the industrial, commercial, and residential
sectors (excluding electricity) # This chapter covers the supply side options to
meet the demand, including various renewable energy options for sustainable
supply of energy THE POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR THE POWER SECTOR The
policy for the power sector is in the draft stage; however, the policy and
planning of the power sector in Bhutan have two major objectives  Emphasis on
power exports to strengthen the economy  Supply of reliable, environment-
friendly, and affordable power for all citizens The overall policy and
regulatory interventions are guided by these two broad objectives The
accelerated hydropower development has been identiﬁ ed as an option for
achieving these objectives The Ninth and the Tenth Five-year Plans indicate the
policy direction for this sector To ensure reliable and affordable supply of
electricity, the policy measures include allocating 15% of annual energy
generated from all large hydropower plants for domestic consumption at  nominal
rate of  Nu/unit This is applicable for the power plants owned by the government
or its entities For the supply of safe and reliable power, the Bhutan
Electricity Authority (BEA) has put in process  transparent methodology for
determining tariffs for power generation and consumption for different user
categories The policy is working Resources for electricity generation Fuels and
resources for the transport sector, which is currently completely dependent on
fossil fuels (petrol and diesel) # 39 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN towards gradually
removing subsidy being provided to high voltage and medium voltage consumers by
As for others, primarily the residential sector, the power would be supplied at
subsidized rates as  social obligation so as to ensure socio- economic
development Given dispersed population and the complex terrain, the electricity
supply to all would require major  nancial resources for grid extension Thus,
the critical policy issues in the power sector are () accelerating development
of the hydropower sector by attracting investments and assuring reliable supply,
considering the seasonal variations in supply; and () extending the grid to
supply affordable power to all, without affecting economic viability in the
power sector  range of options to address these issues is as follows # present,
the sector accounts for about 22% of gross domestic product (GDP), with 40%
contribution towards the total national revenue generation The latter  gure
would have been reached 60% with the commissioning of Tala Hydropower Plant in
2007, but it is still about 40% because of the rapid growth in other sectors The
hydropower potential of the techno- economically feasible sites is estimated to
be about 23 760 MW, of which thus far only % has been developed (Table ) With
the commissioning of Tala Hydropower Project (1020 MW), the total installed
capacity has risen to 1488 MW, and the mean annual generation is now about 7412
gigawatt-hours (GWh) Table  Accelerated development of large hydropower plants
Development of medium in hydropower plants independent power producer (IPP) mode
medium Promotion hydropower plants for captive use in industries Enhancement of
power capacity of   rm by diversifying the electricity supply options, mainly
through renewable than hydropower) CAPACITIES AND GENERATION OF MAJOR HYDROPOWER
PLANTS IN BHUTAN Chukha Kurichu Basochhu  Basochhu II Tala # Installed capacity
(MW) 336 60 24 40 1020 Firm capacity (MW) 67 24  10 168 Mean annual generation
(GWh) 1860 400 105 186 4865 of # • Firm energy (GWh) • Seasonal energy (GWh) 587
1263 210 190 44 62 88 98 1472 3393 # Source WRMP (2004) While the hydropower
sector is the propeller of the Bhutan’ economy, to ensure that hydropower
development does not take place in  haphazard manner but proceeds on the basis
of careful identiﬁ cation of most promising sites, the RGoB updated the Power
System Master Plan (PSMP) of 1993 for the period 1990–2010 to cover partially
the period 2003–22 in its Water Resource Management Plan (WRMP) The WRMP 2004
screened hydropower projects on the basis of technical and economic criteria to
select most promising projects, which were then subjected to Multiple Criteria
Analysis (MCA) for the eventual adoption in the WRMP sources energy (other These
would be dealt with in detail subsequently POWER SECTOR DEVELOPMENT The power
sector in Bhutan is synonymous with the hydropower sector, with more than 99% of
electricity being generated by the hydropower sector The hydropower sector has
been the main driver of the Bhutanese economy, and through revenue earnings from
the sale of electricity, it has spurred country’ socio-economic development At
MCA facilitates comparison of projects that may have different types of impacts
of highly varying magnitude The variables are grouped under four key criteria,
representing important objectives of the Government of Bhutan: technical,
economic, social, and environmental 40 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN Seasonal variation in
electricity production Bhutan has been exploiting its vast hydropower potential
in  sustainable manner, with the existing plants being run-of-the-river schemes
as opposed to storage-based plants While the run- of-the-river schemes ensure
relatively benign use of environmental resources, the biggest challenge posed by
them is their inability to operate at full capacity in the lean season when the
river  ow remains low This is particularly true in winter months when the demand
is at the peak without secure sources of energy supply With the commissioning of
Tala Hydropower Plant, 288 MW of  rm power (power available in the lean season)
is available Currently, the peak demand is about 211 MW, and as per the demand
projections, it would rise to about 500 MW in near future (2012), if all the
sanctioned industries become operational The Department of Energy (DoE) plans to
tackle this shortage in the following ways # The WRMP 2004 identiﬁ ed 78
potential run- of-the-river projects in Bhutan for hydropower development, with
capacity above 10 MW, and estimated that if 25 of the 78 sites were developed,
the installed capacity would be around 16 435 MW Based on the screening of the
projects, six potential projects were selected for implementation during the
Power Master Plan period of 2003–The details of these are provided in Table
Table  DETAILS OF SELECTED POTENTIAL MAJOR HYDROPOWER PROJECTS Estimated
investment (million US dollars) Installed capacity (MW) Construction period
Project Punatsangchhu  1002 861 2007–11 Mangdechhu 670 588 2009–13 Punatsangchhu
II 992 875 2011–15 Chamkharchhu  671 547 2014–19 Licenses to new ferro alloy
industries will be given only after taking  long-term and holistic view of ()
the peak power demand in the country and ()  rm power availability In case of
shortage of power, priority will be given to the residential and institutional
sectors The Bhutan Power Corporation will regulate the allotment of power to
industries Power plant output will be augmented using better water management
techniques to boost production during peak hours Efﬁ cient management of
hydropower plants will be undertaken Chamkharchhu II 568 407 2018–22 Kholongchhu
486 383 2020–23 4389 3661 # a2003 prices, inclusive of the cost of transmission
to India, exclusive of interest during construction Source WRMP (2004) # While
there exists considerable hydropower potential in Bhutan, there are several
constraints in fully exploiting this potential, encompassing technical,
nancial, environmental, and market limitations One unique characteristic of the
Bhutanese power sector is its complete dependence on hydropower and run-of-the-
river type plants Also, there is an issue of energy security due to
overdependence on hydropower are run-of-the-river-type The environmentally
benign and have lower cost of power generation compared to the other renewable
energy resources; however, this has rendered the development of power plants in
any other sector – renewable or conventional – commercially unviable and
unattractive # # Financing of hydropower projects The issue of raising capital
to invest in the additional power generation is  big challenge for Bhutan, which
does not have an international credit rating As seen in Table , for the six
potential power plants, determined by the WRMP (2004), an investment of about
$3660 million is required, which translates into capital expenditure of $183
million per year Mobilization of the resources of this magnitude, however,
remains  critical issue, given the limited plants 41 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN Given
that the investment in large hydropower projects is not readily forthcoming, it
remains important from the energy security perspective that plants of small or
medium capacities, typically about 100 MW capacity each, are planned and
established These plants should be promoted in eastern Dzongkhags, which are
underdeveloped and where power outages are very common To accelerate the
development of the hydropower sector in Bhutan, Hydropower Policy, 2008, has
been  nalized, although it is yet to be notiﬁ ed Besides,  holding company
called the Druk Green Power Corporation (DGPC) has been established to allow for
optimal utilization of resources and enhance capacity building It would also
serve as an investment arm of the government, which would invest in future
hydropower projects the For an accelerated development of hydropower sector,
case studies have been evaluated to assess various proposed/feasible power
plants under different  nancing options under IPP and captive power plant mode
These case studies are discussed in subsequent sections domestic resources and
the current problems in attracting private sector to invest in the hydropower
sector Though the Government of India has been expressing interest in  nancing
the hydropower sector in Bhutan and has also committed to purchase extra power,
the question is to what extent can Bhutan expect such  nancing options from
India (Table ) According to the WRMP,  number of factors would eventually
determine the availability of international  nancing for hydropower development
in Bhutan The major challenge for hydropower funding is devising packages with
debt servicing and maturities Often, the potential imbalance between revenue and
debt service, along with the level of risk involved in the project, prevents
investors from  nancing large hydropower projects The most important factor with
respect to the above is the size of the schemes—given the large size of
hydropower schemes,  nancing is difﬁ cult It is suggested that to overcome this
problem,  public–private model, together with the backing of an international
lending agency, could be considered Besides the size, securing  nance rests on
the prospects of achieving  return on the capital, which should be sufﬁ cient to
cover the level of risk involved One such type of model that can be considered
is the build, operate, own, and transfer (BOOT) model, which could be backed by
the international lending agencies (Box ) Development of large hydropower plants
Till now, the development of large power plants in Bhutan was  nanced through
mix of loans and grants For accelerated development, other means of developing
large hydropower plants would be required Hydropower plants on IPP mode can also
be developed with the help of public and Table  FINANCIAL CHARACTERISTICS, BY
PLANT Year of commissioning Financial support option Source of finance Plant
Chukha 1988 60% of grant and 40% loan financing model, with an interest rate of
% per annum and  repayment term of 24 years India Kurichu 2002 60% of grant and
40% loan financing model, with an interest rate of 75% and repayment period of
12 years India Basochhu  2001 The loan amount was to be repaid in equal
instalments over 30 years Austria Austria Basochhu II 2005 The loan amount was
to be repaid at an interest rate of 78%, with repayment period of 15 years,
along with  commitment fee of 15% and  management fee of 25% of the total loan
payable in four instalments Tala 2007 40% of grant and 60% loan financing model,
with an interest rate of % per annum and 12 years of repayment India 42
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY
OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN     BUILD, OPERATE, OWN, AND TRANSFER MODEL  build, own,
operate, and transfer, or BOOT, model is  funding model that involves  single
organization or period of time and then transferring this ownership across to an
agreed party The BOOT schemes are increasingly becoming  popular means of fi
nancing large-scale infrastructure development such as roads, bridges, and hydro
dams in Australia and developing countries An example in this respect is the 210
MW Theun-Hinboun Hydropower Project in Lao PDR, which developed in joint venture
between the Government of Laos (GoL) and the private sector The Laos government’
state-owned electricity utility, Electricité du Laos (EdL), owns 60% of the
project and the investment in the project is largely fi nanced by  loan of $60
million from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) The ownership of the remaining 40%
share of the project is split equally between the Thai company MDX Lao and
Nordic Hydropower,  partnership organization owned by the Swedish government
public utility The total cost of the project is $240 million It is being fi
nanced and developed as  BOOT venture that would see the project transferred
back to the government in 30 years The Theun-Hinboun Power Company, or THPC, is
running this joint venture project Source < mekong_ brief3pdf>, last accessed on
21 April 2007 private partnerships or foreign direct investment (FDI) The
private investment as well as FDI would depend on the viability of the projects
as well as policies and regulations in the power sector The viability of these
plants will, in turn, depend on their cost of generation   nancial analysis to
estimate the generation cost for such power plant was carried out using
lifecycle cost approach, as explained subsequently Since the revenue of these
IPP would be in Ngultrum or in Indian rupees, an arrangement could be worked out
for the import of the required equipment from India Large hydropower projects
are developed primarily for exporting power to India, with certain percentage of
power reserved for domestic consumption Capacity 670 MW Capital cost Nu 37 520
million based on hydropower projects proposed under Government of India
nancing/collaboration Loan 70% @ % interest rate Equity 30% Return on equity 15%
Construction period  years Life 30 years Net annual generation 3207 GWh % of
capital cost Operation and maintenance cost Case study : Cost–benefit analysis
for Chamkarchu Power Plant as independent power producer An analysis was carried
out for the Chamkarchu Hydropower Plant, one of the seven identiﬁ ed hydropower
plants in the master plan, to check the  nancial viability of large power plants
as IPP with the present policy The analysis is summarized as follows Export of
power 85% Export price 00 Nu/unit 125 Nu/unit Wheeling charges for export 15%
domestic power supply at 30 Nu/unit The analysis was carried out by estimating
the cost of generation as per the ‘tariff estimation 43 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN
methodology’ issued by the BEA The details of the analysis are given in Annexure
The analysis shows that the cost of generation is Nu 73/kWh The implementation
of the present policy of reserving 15% generation for domestic consumption at Nu
/kWh and export of rest of power at Nu /kWh shows that the generation is
nancially viable, with return on equity more than 15% Thus, the present policy
of promoting large hydropower plants that export power and also provide power
for domestic consumption at subsidized rate can be continued If there are major
changes in the  nancing terms, then the strategy may have to be reworked, that
is, the rate at which power is sold for domestic use would have to be adjusted
to make the projects viable The analysis carried out was on completely
commercial basis, that is, without any grant With economic viability of the
large hydropower plants, that is, they continue exporting power to India, these
power plants can also be developed on IPP or FDI mode Another option is
developing these plants on BOOT mode As explained earlier, equipment imports
could be facilitated from India to take care of hard currency issue Table
MEDIUM-CAPACITY POWER PLANTS IDENTIFIED IN THE POWER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN
Identified capacity (MW) River Pachhu 77 Samchhu 71 Churchhu/Chechhu 45
Thimphuchhu 57 Chari/Thimphuchhu 76 Parochhu 85 Haachhu 17 Bemengchhu 14 Piping
55 Sichhu 78 Tang/Pechhu 85 Tang/Pechhu 78 Cherchhu 25 Dagachhu 79 Samachhu 16
Rimjigangchhu 24 Krissa 32 Burgongchhu 69 Development of medium-capacity
hydropower plants In addition to large-capacity plants, there exists large
potential for medium-capacity (up to 100 MW) hydropower plants The Power Systems
Master Plan has identiﬁ ed about 36 plants of capacity up to 100 MW, as shown in
Table  An analysis of the small- and medium-sized hydropower plants was carried
out to examine the viability of promoting such plants in IPP mode with private
sector investments and as captive hydropower plant for energy-intensive
industries Burgongchhu 70 Ghijam/Lirigang 53 Chamkharchhu 97 Shergarchhu 27
Rimjigangchhu 46 Thampochhu 95 Bambuchhu 22 Nayurgangchhu 24 Gobarichhu 43
Sherichhu 36 Gamrichhu 64 Case study II: Medium-sized hydropower plant
development as independent power producer This analysis is based on typical
design parameters for the feasible sites and costs, which are estimated based on
Indian experience for similar capacity plants in similar Himalayan region The
detailed calculations are given Annexure  Gamrichhu 79 Gamrichhu 80
Gamrichhu/Yemkhari 81 Kholongchhu 94 Jaldhaka 19 Mao/Aie 83 in Dhansiri 73 Total
2069 44 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY
SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN These power plants can be studied, primarily, for the
expected capital cost and annual generation, and can be offered to the private
sector developers with private investment (domestic or foreign), since the total
investments (about Nu 60 million per MW) are not very large, and the private
sector can look at the option of establishing such plant The major assumptions
are as follows Capacity 100 MW Capital cost Nu 60 million/MW Loan 70% @ %
interest rate Equity 30% Return on equity 14% Case study III: Development of
medium- capacity hydropower plants in captive mode The medium-capacity
hydropower plants could also be used for captive generation by industries
Private sector companies interested in setting up energy-intensive industry
would look at these medium-sized plants as captive power generation units to
ensure enough power supply round the year This scenario was analysed for medium-
capacity hydropower plants The assumptions are same as in the case of the
analysis of medium- capacity power plants The analysis shows that the cost of
generation is higher for medium-capacity hydropower plants in full commercial
mode, that is, without any capital grants The cost of generation is about Nu
88/kWh, which is higher than the present tariff paid by the industry Thus, it
would not be viable for industries to invest in medium- capacity hydropower
plants for captive generation However, as the cost of generation is lower than
the export price, the medium-capacity hydropower plants should be promoted as
captive power plants by providing capital grant or subsidy The capital subsidy
would make the generation cost comparable to the present high voltage tariff In
such  scenario, if the industries invest in captive generation, then equivalent
power would be available for exports  sensitivity analysis shows that the
capital grant of 40% of project cost brings the generation cost down to Nu /kWh,
which is the present tariff for industry Thus, with generation costs comparable
with present high voltage tariff, the industries could become interested in
setting up captive small hydropower units Further, as the cost of generation
includes 14% return on equity, making additional investment in captive
generation by the industry is also  viable option Table  shows the cost of
generation at different levels of subsidy Detailed calculations are given in
Annexure  Construction period  years Life 30 years Net annual generation 482 GWh
Operation and maintenance cost % of capital cost @ % annual escalation Export
price Nu 00/unit Wheeling charges for export Nu 12/unit The cost of generation,
estimated as per the BEA methodology for tariff estimation, for medium- capacity
hydropower power projects works out to be about Nu 68/kWh, since the capital as
well as operation and maintenance (&) costs per megawatt of installed capacity
for these plants are higher than the large hydropower plants With the present
domestic tariff, it will not be viable for the IPP to sell 15% power for
domestic use at Nu / kWh In that case, the sale price for the rest 85% becomes
higher than the export price to get 14% return on equity The IPPs can sell up to
10% of power at  Nu/kWh for domestic consumption and sell/export the rest of
power at export rate to get 14% return on equity Thus, the IPPs would be viable
with this model, that is, domestic sale of 10% generation at Nu /kWh and rest
exported/sold at export price This analysis assumes % interest rate Any upward
change in the interest rate would affect the viability of the medium-capacity
power plants For example, the analysis with 12% interest rate shows that the
generation cost reaches about Nu With this generation cost, it would not be
viable for the IPP to sell any power at subsidized rate of Nu  /kWh 45
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY
OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN export to Bhutan will be another issue, as India itself is
power-deﬁ cit country To address this issue, the Bhutan Power Corporation, along
with the Department of Energy (DoE), is regulating the allotment of power to
industries The licensing to the industries has been done considering the
availability of  rm power This policy deals with the demand side management On
the supply side, the options for augmenting power generation, more importantly,
the  rm power availability, are accelerated development of large as well as
small hydropower plants As large power plants have longer time of construction,
development of small- and medium-capacity hydropower plants may be undertaken
The private/foreign participation may be encouraged, as discussed in the earlier
section Since the run-of-the-river hydropower plants will have seasonal
variations, there would be limited improvement in the availability of  rm power
The options for improving the  rm power, therefore, could include the following
# Table  COST OF GENERATION AT DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SUBSIDY Cost of generation
(with 15% return on equity) (Nu/kWh) Rate of return on capital grant Capital
grant (%)  78 10 69 55 15 60 36 25 41 21 35 22 15 40 17 13 From the government’
perspective, by providing, say, 35% grant, the beneﬁ  would be in terms of
having surplus energy, which could be exported at  price of Nu 85–/kWh Thus,
against the expenditure of 35% grant, there is additional income through higher
exports  conservative estimate shows about 40% rate of return through export of
power against 35% expenditure as subsidy for captive plants Here the assumption
is that any amount of energy can be exported at any point of time at  xed export
rate This is possible since the Government of India has agreed to buy power up
to 10 000-MW capacity under the umbrella agreement Development of storage-based
hydropower plants Development of power generation renewable energy sources from
# Case study IV: Development of reservoir hydropower plants Given high
hydropower potential, there is  possibility of developing reservoir-based
hydropower plant in Bhutan The DoE is considering developing the Sankosh
Hydropower Project in reservoir mode capital However, for investment reservoir
hydropower plants is higher than the run-of-the-river plants, and thus, the cost
of generation is also higher An analysis was carried out to study the economic
viability of the Sankosh Hydropower Plant under present policies and export
price The results of the analysis are as follows Seasonal variation, energy
security, and power plant development As all hydropower plants in Bhutan are
‘run- of-the-river’ type, the power generation has  very high seasonal variation
In winter season, hydropower generation drops to almost 20% of its installed
capacity Thus, there is  critical issue of availability of  rm power After
commissioning of Tala Hydropower Plant, the available  rm power has reached
about 253 MW Based on the projected energy demand by the WRMP (2004), it must be
noted that in case no new hydropower plants are developed soon after Tala, the
peak supply capacity in winter months will fall short of projected peak power
requirements In such  situation, Bhutan would have to resort to power cuts or
power imports from India, which would impact the country’ export earnings from
electricity sale Further, whether India has surplus power to Medium-sized (@100-
MW capacity) plants can be promoted through IPP or captive power plant This will
not only help increase power exports but also reduce fi rm power availability
problem and improve speed of industrialization the required 46 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN
of off-peak electricity demand This would help in addressing the issue of lean
periods when in normal course, hydropower generation is quite low storage plant,
Typically, approximately 75%–85% of the electrical energy used to pump water in
the elevated reservoir is regained This system can respond very fast to load
uctuations Capital cost Nu 139 197 million (based on the hydropower projects
proposed under Government of India  nancing/collaboration) in  pumped Loan 70% @
% interest rate Equity 30% Return on equity 14% In the context of Bhutan, which
generates almost all electricity as hydropower, pumped storage schemes or
storage dam schemes would be ideal schemes for grid energy storage Barring
industrial loads, the demand for electricity  uctuates  great deal during the
24-hour cycle, and effectively designed pumped storage system can help in
conserving energy Construction period  years Life 25 years Net annual generation
6918 MWh & cost % of capital cost Export price 00 Nu/unit POWER GENERATION USING
RENEWABLE ENERGY In Bhutan, renewable and non-conventional energy sources like
solar, wind, biomass, and municipal solid waste can be harnessed for power
generation The power generation through these sources would provide diversity in
the power portfolio, which presently consists mainly of the hydro resources The
power generation from biomass could be  viable option, given high forest cover
in Bhutan Sources like sun and wind could also supplement power generation These
technologies could also be used for decentralized power generation Given the
resource availability, the option for generating power from biomass in
centralized mode and using wind and solar photovoltaics in off-grid mode could
be explored Similarly, utilizing municipal solid waste for energy generation can
also help in addressing issues related to viable disposal and management of
ever-increasing solid waste in Bhutan’ urban centres  detailed analysis of
renewable energy options for power generation is provided in the subsequent
sections Wheeling charges for export  Nu/unit The cost of generation, estimated
as per the BEA methodology for tariff estimation, for reservoir hydropower
projects works out to be about 56 Nu/kWh, since the capital and & costs are
higher than those of large hydropower plants As  result, the generation cost is
higher With the higher generation cost and the policy of reserving 15% of
generation for domestic consumption at 30 Nu/unit, the storage hydropower plants
may not be economically viable To make them viable, the limit for the sale of
power at Nu /units may have to be reduced This is desirable, as such power
plants would provide much needed  rm power in winter months The analysis is done
without any grant component; if any grant is made available, the generation cost
would reduce accordingly At this stage, it is appropriate to look at the other
renewable energy options for power generation to reduce dependence on hydropower
Development of pump storage schemes Pumped storage hydroelectricity is  type of
hydroelectric power generation used for load balancing In  pumped storage plant,
the energy is stored in the form of water, pumped from  lower elevation
reservoir to higher elevation This is an effective way of storing energy during
the periods Alternatives to hydropower It is advisable to enhance the diversity
of resources for electricity generation, and since the next major hydropower
plant of the country, Punatsangchu , would be operational only in 2015, it is
essential to look at the options to augment the current power generation
capacity by promoting and exploring 47 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN other renewables such as
biomass, solar, and wind Under the proposed strategy to develop other energy
resources for both electrical power and thermal energy generation, an analysis
of other renewable, non-conventional, and fuel resources has been carried out
This analysis aims at giving  holistic view of the energy resources and supply
position The overall objectives are as follows # In recent times, biomass fuels
are increasingly used after their conversion into more efﬁ cient energy carriers
with higher caloriﬁ  value (such as pellets, briquettes, bio-diesel, and biogas)
and/ or are used in the efﬁ cient equipment (such as improved cook stoves and
gasiﬁ ers) This usage is collectively termed as ‘modern’ bioenergy The modern
bioenergy has been playing small but increasingly signiﬁ cant role in recent
times It assumes greater signiﬁ cance in several countries and economic sectors,
especially in well-forested countries with large forestry-based industries and/
or the countries with cold winters and large space heating demands (ESMAP 2005)
For example, in Finland and Sweden, modern bioenergy accounts for 33%–36% of
total energy used by the industry sector, of which 11%–12% of energy is used for
electricity generation, combined heat and power (CHP) generation, and district
heating (IEA 2002, 2003a) Interest in modern bioenergy has been increasing
worldwide It is increasingly occupying centrestage in renewable energy plans and
policies, especially in the developing countries, because of myriad practical,
social, and economic advantages that it offers Modern bioenergy offers  ve major
advantages over renewable energy resources  It is  widely available resource
Bioenergy is essentially stored energy and is fossil To reduce heavy dependence
on hydropower (more than 99% of the electricity produced in the country is
hydropower) To augment electricity supply or reduce demand during winter season
so as to meet the challenge of low hydroelectricity production due to lower
water  ows in rivers To reduce the use of fossil fuels in the transport sector
To introduce environment-friendly and locally available fuels/energy resources
to meet demand for energy, especially in remote and dispersed locations # # #
BIOENERGY Bioenergy (biomass energy) refers to the use of plant and other
organic materials to provide desired forms of energy and energy services such as
heat, light/electricity, and motive power Bioenergy has been  primary source of
energy since human civilizations discovered  re Even today, bioenergy accounts
for about 11% of the world’ total primary energy supply of 420 exajoules (EJ)
year (ESMAP 2005) Forest-based biomass has been the main source of energy in
Bhutan for many centuries Abundantly and freely available biomass has become the
natural choice for fuel for the rural population of Bhutan Bioenergy has been
reviewed brieﬂ  in the following sections so as to develop  deeper understanding
of this form of energy Some bioenergy-related issues are also highlighted (Box )
Biomass largely consists of unreﬁ ned fuels that are used in  traditional way,
such as solid biomass used in traditional cook stoves for cooking, water
heating, and space heating fossil and/or other available all the times
Bioenergy can be converted to all major energy forms like electricity, liquid
fuels or gaseous fuels for use in stationary as well as transport applications
It does not contribute to greenhouse gas ‘carbon concentrations Apart neutral’,
to habitat preservation, watershed protection, and soil conservation from being
it also contributes  Modern bioenergy is widely thought to play  key role in
promoting rural development (UNDP 1995) In developing countries like Bhutan,
bioenergy can form  basis for rural employment and income generation, thus
helping curb migration from rural to urban areas 48 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN
BIOENERGY-RELATED ISSUES Bioenergy has its own limitations Bioenegry activities
are labour-, land-, and resource-intensive Bioenergy activities directly aff ect
communities Most importantly, supply side activities set bioenergy apart from
other renewable energy resources that are freely available In contrast,
bioenergy resources must be grown, harvested, gathered, and transported to the
energy conversion plant, sometimes from large number of dispersed suppliers
These must be stored, dried, and/or processed – chopped or pelletized – for
using them as biofuel (Energy Sector Management Assistance Program [ESMAP] 2005)
While supply chain activities can bring substantial benefi ts in the form of
local employment and income, they may also raise serous problems like
competitive land use and labour system, which form the backbone of rural
economies This necessitates the need for evaluating the impacts of bioenergy
project on rural employment and the environment The risk to existing biomass-
dependent social groups or activities should also be taken into account The
ESMAP study has identifi ed seven main areas of particular importance to
bioenergy project development, as listed below  Resource competition Most
biofuels have other uses as well So, biofuels may face price competition
Competition with nonmonetized traditional biomass supplies that provide
essential ‘survival’ energy is common and must be dealt with at early stages of
project planning  Land competition Energy plantation may compete for land with
other plantations or other uses  Land intensity Bioenergy plants are highly land
intensive For example, they typically require roughly 100 times more land than
solar photovoltaics to produce same amount of electricity This physically limits
the feasibility of bioenergy systems  Labour intensity  Handling requirements
Bioenergy fuels are relatively bulky and need infrastructure to handle
Environmental concerns Biomass systems, if not well designed, can have adverse
impacts on soil quality, water resources, biodiversity, and landscape  Supply
uncertainty and risks Use of liquid biofuels Liquid biofuels such as straight
vegetable oils (SVO) and bio-diesel are currently being explored as alternatives
to petroleum fuels, especially for the transport sector However, in case of
Bhutan, these fuels will have limited role to play due to limited land available
for cultivation In Bhutan, only about % of the land is under cultivation The
rest of the land has forest cover Wasteland constitutes  very small area, and
hence, bio-oil-bearing plantation for bio-diesel production will have direct
conﬂ ict with food security and agriculture production Biomass fuels, primarily
sourced from forests, play  vital role in the economy of Bhutan, as they are the
main energy source for  large number of rural enterprises, apart from majority
of households in the rural and urban areas of the country The country consumed
about 724 000 tonnes of  rewood during 2005, which accounted for almost 57% of
the total primary energy supply With the sustainable yield for timber and
fuelwood estimated at  565 540 tonnes/year, biomass would continue to remain an
important source of energy for Bhutan Biomass-based power generation Biomass-
based power generation – either through direct combustion or through gasiﬁ
cation route – is an established technology worldwide Further, with the
hydropower generation being seasonal in Bhutan, biomass-based power generation
can provide an option to increase the power generation capacity for continuous
power generation Besides, biomass used for power generation can contribute  The
term biomass generally refers to the renewable organic matter that originates
from living organisms, for example, wood, agricultural residues, animal manure,
so on 49 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY
SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN for larger thermal applications like institutional
cooking, while the biomass/saw dust briquettes can be used with efﬁ cient
heating devices  description of the biomass densiﬁ cation technology is given in
Annexure , and biomass gasiﬁ cation technologies and their thermal applications
are brieﬂ  discussed in Annexure  The success of the sawdust briquetting plant
operated by the Forest Development Corporation Ltd (FDCL) indicates the
potential for the use for thermal of biomass/saw dust briquettes applications In
this regard, the DoE can develop  programme for sawdust and biomass briquetting
in the Tenth Plan The small-sized sawdust briquetting in combination with
individual sawmills could immediately go onstream This programme can include the
promotion of efﬁ cient cooking/heating appliances to fuel diversity Therefore,
it is suggested that  -MW biomass-based power plant be installed as
demonstration plant Based on the operation of this demonstration plant, the DoE
can further plan for additional biomass-based power generation The proposed -MW
biomass-based power plant can be supported by energy plantation to ensure
sustainable fuel supply  detailed techno- economic analysis of such  plant is
presented in Annexure  Salient features of -MW biomass- based power plant are as
follows Capital cost Nu 225 million Fuel consumption  kg/kWh Biomass required 15
000 tonnes/year Electricity production 66 MU/year Off-grid power generation
using biomass The small-scale biomass gasiﬁ er is an established technology,
wherein the producer gas produced in the gasiﬁ er can be used for various
applications, including power generation The locally available biomass can be
used for decentralized power generation using biomass gasiﬁ ers These biomass-
gasiﬁ er-based power plants can be deployed in remote off-grid locations It is
suggested that  ve biomass-gasiﬁ er-based decentralized power plants for rural
electriﬁ cation be established as demonstration projects on priority Typically,
these plants have capacities ranging from  kW to 100 kW and can be established
for supplying grid- quality power for  village or groups of villages
Pelletization Pelletization is now  well-established technology in Europe
Pellets are produced from various raw materials like agro-waste, sawdust, and
pine needles Pellets are easy to handle and transport, and advanced automatic
pellet stoves and space heaters have made pellets simple and efﬁ cient to use
The Renewable Energy Division of the DoE can take up  feasibility study on
adopting pellet technology in Bhutan With vast areas under pine and other
forests, pellet manufacturing from forest waste can substantially reduce the
demand for fuelwood for space heating in both urban and rural areas Similarly,
demonstration of biomass gasiﬁ er for thermal application like institutional
cooking, cardamom drying, and lemon grass oil extraction can be taken up in the
Tenth Plan Gasiﬁ er-based grid power generation (–100 kW) Capital cost Nu
million/kW Fuel consumption  kg/kWh Wind energy Wind-based electricity
generation is now  well- developed commercialized technology Worldwide, wind
energy is increasingly being utilized Bhutan does have good wind potential;
however, the development of wind farms is still constrained by various issues,
as discussed subsequently Thermal applications of biomass Biomass is currently
used for heating and cooking institutional purposes sectors The present biomass
appliance/technology can be changed to modern efﬁ cient biomass technologies
like gasiﬁ er and briquetting for thermal applications Biomass gasiﬁ ers can be
used in the residential and 50 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN Infrastructure development Road
and power evacuation infrastructure is yet to be developed Typically, wind
machines of large capacities are installed on 50–80--high tower, and wind
generator blades are typically 20–30  long Current road infrastructure may not
be adequate to transport these blades and heavy machinery Solar PV wafer and
cell production unit Solar PV wafers, which are used to produce solar cells, are
produced from raw silica/sand using energy- intensive process mostly using
electricity Since Bhutan has cheap and renewable hydro energy in abundance, use
of hydro energy for manufacturing solar PV wafers/ cells can be an interesting
application to produce ‘green solar cells’ Some solar cell manufacturers have
shown interest in this concept Installation of such  plant in this region can
bring down the cost of solar PV cells and systems substantially, making them
cost-eff ective Public opinion about wind machines During the discussions with
ofﬁ cials and policy- makers, it was found that there were certain reservations
on the installation of large wind machines due to the concerns about natural
beauty for which Bhutan is famous  Solar systems, which include solar thermal
systems such as water heating systems and solar photovoltaic systems Small wind
machines and water pumping wind mills Bhutan, thus, can explore small wind
machines of capacity less than 100 kW and mechanical wind pumps to generate
electricity in isolated locations for scattered households and can use water
pumping mills for providing water for irrigation and drinking  detailed
technology write-up on small wind machines is presented in Annexure  Small wind
machines can also be coupled with solar photovoltaic power plants in hybrid mode
to generate electricity for small villages These isolated and distributed power
generation technologies can play an important role in reducing time and cost of
extending infrastructure to supply electricity to far- ung areas These minigrids
can be connected to main grid, once the grid is established  Solar passive
systems for building heating Various solar technologies are being developed
worldwide, and various products are available in the market Few systems such as
solar home lighting systems and solar water heating systems are useful for
distributed applications in the residential sector These are discussed in detail
in the next chapter Solar photovoltaic for power generation Solar photovoltaic
technologies are expensive but can be considered as an alternative for
electricity production Grid-connected solar photovoltaic plants of few hundred
kilowatt capacities are generally cheaper Currently, solar photovoltaic power
generation costs are in the range Nu 15–30/ kWh, depending on the site,
technology, and size of the plant These costs are, thus, very high compared to
hydropower generation costs unless the cost of grid extension as well as low
capacity utilization of this infrastructure are also taken into account However,
solar photovoltaic is an excellent option for distributed generation, since
solar resource is freely available; systems are modular, stationary, and easy to
install; there are no moving parts, and & is cheaper Hence, the technology can
be considered on demonstration basis by installing plants of, say, 100-kW
capacity Currently, under the Integrated Energy Management Master Plan (IEMMP)
project, the DoE has planned to install Solar energy Bhutan has solar energy
reasonably good potential Although detailed time series ground measurement data
is not yet available, the solar energy resources quantiﬁ ed at various places
and solar energy resource map developed for the region under Solar and Wind
Energy Resource Assessment (SWERA) project of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) have shown  resource potential of – kWh/m2 in various locations
Solar energy can be exploited in various ways, but two major ways to use solar
energy in Bhutan are as follows 51 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN for small-scale distributed
power generation using hydrogen The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
Government of India, has recently announced an ambitious project that envisages
introducing 10 million two- and three-wheelers running on hydrogen in India The
Government of India and the RGoB can take up  joint project to explore hydrogen
production using hydropower and/or wind energy This would be  major step in
enhancing energy security for Bhutan Recently, Young and others have published
paper, which considers the use of hydrogen as storage media for hydropower
plants in Bhutan The paper discusses the feasibility of generating hydrogen
using excess electricity available from Sengor Hydropower Plant The paper
estimates the total cost of system (including 100-kW hydropower plant at  cost
of $190 000) to be $1424 Besides Sengor project, the paper also discusses
various options for unelectriﬁ ed Thanza Hamlet Sengor Power Plant is now
operational, and it has  potential to generate 876 000 kWh per annum The plant
has connected load of capacity 20 kW Currently, only about 100 000 kWh is likely
to be used in  year (Box ) It would be interesting to consider hydrogen
technology options in near future The Renewable Energy Division of the DoE can
look at this option as futuristic technology development, and  donor-assisted
project can be initiated to study the hydrogen production and storage option for
future, in conjunction with hydropower plants  rst gird-connected solar
photovoltaic plant of  kWp capacity as demonstration project HYDROGEN AS
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY CARRIER CUM STORAGE Hydrogen is emerging as  clean energy
carrier in recent times Though hydrogen technologies are still in development
and testing phase, considering the thrust and importance given to the research
and development for developing hydrogen technologies, it is expected that
hydrogen can become  major energy carrier and energy storage option in coming
years If generated from renewable energy resources such as sun, wind, and water,
hydrogen generation is pollution free Hydrogen is also being considered as
viable fuel for the transport sector, which so far is heavily dependent on
petroleum fuels such as diesel, petrol, liqueﬁ ed petroleum gas (LPG), and
natural gas Hydrogen can be used directly as  fuel in modiﬁ ed internal
combustion engines or turbines, either in mixed fuel mode or as  single fuel
Another technology being developed is hydrogen fuel cell technology Fuel cells
are electrochemical devices that produce electricity from externally supplied
fuel (hydrogen) and oxidant (oxygen) Wind and hydropower technologies are
currently being evaluated in the US, European countries, Japan, and other
countries as electricity sources that could enable the production of large
quantities of low-cost renewable hydrogen for use in distributed generation and
transportation This will facilitate the use of hydrogen storage for off-peak
storage of hydropower In the context of Bhutan, where hydropower is abundantly
available but suffers from seasonal variations, hydrogen can be considered as
storage medium to store hydroelectricity, which is environment-friendly Although
wind power is not being utilized for the commercial production of electricity,
in near future, wind energy resources can also be exploited for decentralized
electricity and hydrogen production By 2020, smaller- scale stand-alone and/or
grid-connected systems serving local transportation  eets and distributed power
generation schemes can be envisaged Indian research organizations have developed
hydrogen-powered motorcycles and generator sets It is recommended that  project,
which would evaluate  realistic path for hydrogen production and storage from
these two renewable energy resources – water and hydrogen – be taken up as   rst
step This project could also examine how to integrate this technology in nation’
energy infrastructure, if found feasible Geothermal energy Geothermal energy is
the heat energy available in the core of the earth The exploitation of
geothermal energy to meet heat requirements and/or produce electricity is common
in certain countries like Iceland, USA, and the Philippines 52 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN
100-KW SENGOR MICRO HYDROPOWER DEMONSTRATION PROJECT Location • Sengor, Saling
Gewong, Mongar Dzongkhag Funding • United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
Global Environment Facility (GEF), and Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB)
Implementing agency • Department of Energy, Ministry of Trade and Industry
(presently Ministry of Economic Aff airs) Goals • Adequate and reliable supply
of electricity for the next 20 years for the Sengor Community • Reduction of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by using hydropower energy instead of burning
fossil fuels, which emits GHGs Objective • To enhance livelihoods • To alleviate
poverty • To stimulate socio-economic development • To encourage community-based
rural enterprises Project features • Sengor is located in the Thrumshingla
National Park area and the extension from the available nearest grid is not
environment-friendly Therefore, there is  need for  stand-alone 100-kW micro
hydro system • Duration of the project: August 2005–June • The total cost for
Sengor Micro Hydropower Demonstration Project is $ 065 • Community-based micro
hydropower project in which the community will take the full responsibility for
operation, maintenance, electricity pricing, and bill collection, along with
ensuring the sustainability of the micro hydro plant in the long run This will
enhance their livelihoods and create  sense of ownership • The project will
benefi  about 57 households, which include the community, social institutions,
and national workforce Moreover, the project is also expected to benefi  daily
highway commuters The study included analysing soil and water sample, studying
geology around the area, and collecting information on medicinal properties of
the thermal springs, besides registering medicinal plants en route The study
report mentions that the temperature of the spring water ranges between 40 ° and
50 ° Highest temperature of 50 ° was recorded at Chubu Tsachhu, which is located
in North East Tsachuphu village and is approachable by motorable road up to
Samdinkha from Wangdi Phodrang Details on the geothermal energy technologies are
given in Annexure  Geothermal potential and its exploitation in Bhutan Several
hot springs (tsachhus) are known to exist in Bhutan These occur in two
regions—in northern Bhutan at Gasa, Punakha, upper Trongsa, Bumthang, and
Lhunetse dzongkhags and in southern Bhutan at Rongkhola and Bhurkhola These are
traditionally used for bathing, as the water is believed to have medicinal and
healing properties In 1996,  reconnaissance study of thermal springs and
medicinal water springs (menchhus) in Gasa and Punakha Dzongkahg was carried out
by the Geology and Mines Division, Ministry of Trade and Industries (Gyenden
1996) In short term, it is possible to use hot water springs for space heating
in the houses in the vicinity and also in guest houses for tourists, as
demonstration project Drying facilities for agricultural products and medicinal
herb can also be established in the areas around the hot 53 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN
Typically, about 10% of the conventional petroleum-based diesel is envisaged to
be replaced with bio-diesel Considering the scale of use of diesel in the
country, Bhutan can directly import bio-diesel blended diesel from India, once
the Indian oil companies start supplying the blended diesel in sufﬁ cient
quantities springs These facilities would offer income and employment generation
opportunities for local youths Moreover, these projects by themselves would
become  tourist attraction The Renewable Energy Division can conduct  detailed
feasibility study in the Tenth Plan In medium and long term, detailed
exploration and plotting of thermal proﬁ les of the underground sources, along
with the study of geological structures, are required to establish the potential
and feasibility for the large-scale use of geothermal energy in the region for
applications like electricity generation These studies could be undertaken by
the Department of Geology and Mines, along with the Renewable Energy Division of
the DoE Further, geological study and exploration of thermal potential for
direct use of geothermal energy can be taken up in future Natural gas based
combined cycle power plant As evident from the analysis of the peak demand in
Bhutan and the  rm power produced from the hydropower plant, there will be  gap
of about 250 MW in power supply during lean season till 2015 when Punasangtchu
and Mangdechu power plants will get commissioned To plug the gap between the
peak demand and power supply during the lean season of hydropower generation,
natural gas based combined cycle power plant of an approximate capacity of 300
MW in Assam/ West Bengal is recommended This plant may supply power to India
during the summer, and during winter, Bhutan government can utilize all the
power generated from it Salient features of the plant are as follows WASTE-TO-
ENERGY Waste generation is increasingly being associated with human settlement
and rapid urbanization, with the problem of proper management of solid waste so
generated also showing an upward trend Thimphu and Phuentsholing alone generate
about 37 tonnes and 25 tonnes of solid waste, respectively, daily, containing
lot of organic matter (Bhutan Energy Data Directory 2005) It has been estimated
that in Bhutan, about 81 119 tonnes of solid waste is generated annually If this
waste can be used for the generation of energy (either for electricity
generation or for supplying thermal energy), besides augmenting the energy
supply per se, it would take care of waste management as well Bhutan has,
therefore, potential to sustain over  MW of power generation capacity To start
with,  biomethanation system of capacity  tonne/day may be set up in Thimphu as
demonstration plant, treating its organic waste, including that generated from
hotels and vegetable market Plant capacity 300 MW Plant efﬁ ciency 50%–52% Plant
load factor (PLF) 85%–90% Capital cost Rs 10 500 million 447 million m3 per year
Natural gas fuel required for power generation Cost of fuel $- per million BTU
(that is, Rs –/m3) Cost of generation Rs -/kWh This project, which can be
installed on the Indian side as  joint venture will offer the following
advantages # FOSSIL FUELS In the absence of petroleum reserves in the country,
Bhutan meets its requirement of the petroleum fuels – diesel, petrol, kerosene,
and LPG – through imports from India Lean power shortage is eliminated Bhutan’
energy security issue is addressed due to the diversity in fuel for power
generation Since currently, the majority of electricity is generated by two
hydropower plants, which # 54 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  ENERGY SUPPLY OPTIONS FOR BHUTAN incidentally, are on same river
and are run-of- the-river type with limited storage Industries can pay higher
charges during winter for assured power supply Gas power plant can respond
faster to change in demand Natural gas being  relatively cleaner fuel, the
pollution impact is negligible The gestation period is small (about two years);
hence, it is  quicker and ideal solution the main source of power in Bhutan for
long time to come However, for faster development of hydropower plants,
involvement of the private sector as equity partner or IPP or captive power
producer is essential It is essential to develop small- and medium-sized
hydropower plants on fast track mode so as to avoid power shortages, especially
in winter, with appropriate incentives and  nancial packages for IPPs Other
renewables can play an important but limited role in electricity generation
However, the establishment of demonstration plants using biomass, small wind,
solar photovoltaic, and municipal solid waste should be considered to develop
diverse resources, distributed generation, and energy security Energy-intensive
industries could be encouraged to set up captive power plants to achieve twin
goal of employment generation and industrial development without hampering the
export of electricity or supply of electricity to the citizens of the country
The DoE could take up  study to prepare detailed feasibility report for setting
up  solar photovoltaic silicon cell and wafer manufacturing industry in near
future Hydrogen and geothermal energy can be explored as futuristic options The
potential of biomass for thermal applications in small-scale industries and for
processing agro products can also be explored Cheap and renewable
hydroelectricity can be effectively used in the transport sector, which is an
environment-friendly option # # # # Only barrier for this project could be the
availability of natural gas Coal Coal is primarily used in industries The
overall contribution of coal in the energy supply mix is only about % Efﬁ cient
technologies for coal utilization can be promoted Locally produced coal is
mainly used for reduction processes in the industries Coal-based power plants
are not envisaged for following reasons # Locally available coal is of poor
quality and is available in limited quantity Large hydropower potential is
available  coal plant may be useful for improving  rm power, but it is not
essential if medium hydropower plants are installed in next four to  ve years #
# CONCLUSION The above analysis clearly shows that being cheapest and pollution
free, hydropower will remain 55 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN         Demand side efficiency enhancement or energy demand management
Energy demand management or demand can be achieved by adopting one of the
following strategies  Improving the overall efﬁ ciency  Using modern or
renewable energy sources  Developing energy-efﬁ cient housings/buildings side
efﬁ ciency enhancement strategies fundamentally aim at optimizing the use of
energy delivered through end-use efﬁ ciency enhancement, demand side management
practices, and reduction in waste and unnecessary use, thus substantially
increasing the ‘net’ energy available to end-users Taking clue the projected
energy from consumption and predicted fuel mix for each sector, an attempt has
been made to carry out an analysis, by sector, and prioritize various strategies
for demand side efﬁ ciency enhancement, along with the promotion of eco-friendly
fuels and renewable energy resources so as to evolve  long- term strategy
Improvement in the overall efficiency In the residential sector, the improvement
in the overall efﬁ ciency of the appliances used for cooking, space heating, and
lighting will reduce the fuel consumption The strategies for the improvement in
the overall efﬁ ciency in the fuel and energy consumption are as follows
Strategy : Promotion of improved cook stove Goal The main aim of this strategy
is to reduce fuelwood consumption for cooking and space heating in rural
households RESIDENTIAL SECTOR The residential sector mainly consumes fuelwood,
kerosene, liqueﬁ ed petroleum gas (LPG), and electricity As discussed earlier,
fuelwood accounts for more than 90% of the sector’ energy demand, and at the
same time, fuelwood devices are hardly 10%–15% efﬁ cient Fuelwood is mainly used
for cooking, space heating, and lighting Similarly, kerosene is the most widely
used fuel for lighting purpose in the residential sector According to Census
2005 of Bhutan, about 46 064 households use kerosene for lighting, while about
4502 households use fuelwood, candle or other resources for lighting Hence,
there is  need to put in place strategies for cutting down fuelwood as well as
kerosene consumption in this sector Reduction in the consumption of fuelwood and
kerosene as well as in the total residential energy consumption Approach
Reduction in fuelwood consumption can be effected through awareness campaign and
promoting fuel-efﬁ cient cook stoves and bukharis Eleven Dzongkhags – Dagana,
Wangdue, Mongar, Tsirang, Haa, Trashiyangyse, Trashigang, Pemagatshel, and
Sandrup Jongkhar – that have highest per capita fuelwood consumption and house
more than 48% of the rural population can be targeted in the Tenth Plan Giving
subsidized electric cook stoves can also be considered  strategy in these
Dzongkhags Most of in these Dzongkhags are central and eastern regions, which
are mostly underdeveloped located 57 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN
AGEMENT Recommendations  programme for supplying about 500–1000 cook stoves on
demonstration basis can be initiated in the Tenth Plan These cook stoves can be
distributed through subsidy programmes by renewable and natural resource centres
The Agriculture Machinery Centre (AMC) can be the focal agency for manufacturing
and distribution of these stoves However, given the fact that about 69 000
households (37%) still use fuelwood for cooking and space heating, it is
important to have an ambitious programme on the distribution of efﬁ cient cook
stoves in Bhutan The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) ofﬁ ce in
Bhutan had earlier supported improved cook stove programme, but such activities
were not supported on  long-term basis It is important to carry out this
programme on  sustainable basis and for  longer period Strategy : Promotion of
CFLs, LED lamps, and other energy-efficient lighting fixtures in electrified
areas Compact  uorescent lamps (CFLs) are efﬁ cient and effective in saving
electricity used for lighting Bhutanese households commonly use electric bulbs
for lighting Replacement of these bulbs with CFLs can save as much as 80% of
electricity used for lighting Apart from CFLs, new types of efﬁ cient tube
lights and lighting systems based on light-emitting diodes (LED) are also
available in the market Recommendations It is recommended that  target of about
20 000 improved cook stove installations in households can be set under the
programme  nationwide awareness campaign can also be undertaken The Department
of Energy (DoE) can implement the programme with the help of NGOs such as
Tarayana Foundation and Royal Society for Protection of Nature (RSPN) in
Monitoring of selected villages before and after implementation can indicate the
impact of the programme fuelwood consumption Goal The main goal is to reduce the
energy consumption in the electriﬁ ed areas by introducing energy- efﬁ cient
lighting systems Strategy : Use of improved cook stoves for fodder cooking The
Integrated Energy Management Master Plan (IEMMP) survey has estimated that about
26% of the energy consumed in the residential sector is used for fodder cooking
in rural areas Most of the fodder cooking is being done using conventional
three-stone cook stoves Since fuelwood is available free of cost, alternative
fuels such as LPG or electricity were not used for fodder cooking activities
Approach One approach is the promotion of CFLs and energy- efﬁ cient lighting
through awareness campaign For areas having off-grid hydropower plants, supply
of CFLs through subsidy/cost sharing scheme can also be considered Similar
experimental scheme implemented by the DoE and the Bhutan Power Corporation
(BPC) in Ura Micro Hydro Power Project area in 2005 has shown good success Goal
Reduce fuelwood consumption for fodder cooking by improving efﬁ ciency
Recommendations In Thimphu/Phuentsholing and other urban areas, introduction of
the CFL under promotional scheme for replacing bulb can be undertaken by the BPC
Certain number of CFLs, say four per households, can be provided to each
consumer, and the cost of the same can be recovered through electricity bills
Promotion of 36-watt tube light instead of 40- watt tube lights is also being
considered under Approach Improved cook stoves can be supplied free of cost
through Dzongkhag ofﬁ ces, for fodder cooking Specially designed turbo cook
stoves developed by organizations such as The Energy and Resources Institute
(TERI) can be tried on  demonstration basis 58 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY
DEMAND MAN AGEMENT LPG cook stoves in Bhutan As mentioned in Chapter , efﬁ
ciency improvement of % over and above the efﬁ ciency of currently available LPG
cook stoves is possible the South Asia Regional Initiative for Energy programmes
Similarly, schemes for promotion of energy-efﬁ cient lighting can also be taken
up Use of modern fuel and renewable energy sources Strategy : Use of briquettes
and pellets for space heating Briquettes made from saw dusts are now available
in Thimphu region, which are mainly supplied through briquetting plant set up by
the Natural Resources Development Corporation (NRDC) Similar briquetting plants
can be installed at other places so that briquettes are available in most parts
of the country Further, small pellets made from sawdust and forest waste can be
used for space heating Pellet manufacturing is  major industry in Europe, and
sophisticated pellet stoves are also available Strategy : Promotion of efficient
LPG stoves LPG is  modern cooking fuel, causing less pollution It is an efﬁ
cient burning fuel and is easy and convenient to use Use of LPG as cooking fuel
is common in urban areas However, in rural areas, LPG is still not  preferred
fuel due to the following reasons # High cost mainly due to high transportation
costs Limited availability Difﬁ culty in transporting it to the households # #
Goal Replacing fuelwood with LPG and efﬁ cient use of LPG by introducing efﬁ
cient LPG cook stoves Goal The strategy is to reduce fuelwood consumption for
space heating Approach Small LPG cylinders that are easy to transport can be
introduced Figure  depicts  woman carrying LPG cylinder Simultaneously, energy-
efﬁ cient LPG cook stoves can also be introduced Approach Pellets and briquettes
can be produced from saw dust and forest wastes Pine needles and other forest
waste can be effectively used for manufacturing pellets Recommendations It is
expected that LPG consumption is likely to increase by three to four times by
Introduction of standards and labelling system for LPG cook stove can help in
introducing efﬁ cient Recommendations Small-scale saw dust should be introduced
along with forest waste briquetting and pelletizing in various towns of the
country Simultaneously, new energy-efﬁ cient pellet stoves and boilers should
also be introduced in towns Strategy : Promotion of solar lanterns and home
lighting systems in unelectrified areas Proper lighting is the basic requirement
in  modern society It is not only important from health point of view but is
also essential for socio- economic development, as it gives an opportunity to
people to extend their working hours and also enables students to study for
longer period People can carry on with their day-to-day activities even after
sunset According to the Census 2005, there are about 46 064 households that use
kerosene as  primary FIGURE   WOMAN CARRYING LPG CYLINDER 59 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT
OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT available in various models and sizes The DoE has
been working with some organizations like Barefoot Engineer College, Tilonia,
India, for training rural youth in installation and operation and maintenance
(&) of these systems About 300 rural women were trained recently under an Asian
Development Bank (ADB)-funded programme Promotion of solar lantern and/or solar
home lighting systems as an interim solution for lighting can be done in two
ways  Direct sale Direct sale of solar lanterns and home lighting systems to
individual households under subsidy scheme can be promoted through the Dzongkhag
ofﬁ ces or the Bank of Bhutan or Bhutan Development Finance Corporation (BDFC)
or Renewable Natural Resource (RNR) centres women source of lighting and about
4502 households that use fuelwood, candle or other resources for lighting Figure
shows the percentage use of fuels for lighting purpose in households in Bhutan
Goal To reduce the use of imported kerosene as well as to reduce indoor
pollution and provide improved lighting to rural unelectriﬁ ed households
Approach Though all households will eventually be covered under rural electriﬁ
cation programme, an immediate and intermediate solution can be providing solar
lighting systems and solar lanterns Recommendations Solar lanterns are designed
to provide quality light for about two to six hours Solar home lighting systems
are typically designed with two to four CFL tube lights and an additional point
for small radio or TV Both these products are commercially available in the
international and local markets They are scheme Solar entrepreneurs, especially
women, can be groomed, who can set up charging stations for charging solar
lanterns during daytime and rent them to users during night-time However, the
scattered nature of village households and entrepreneur  Solar FIGURE  SOURCES
OF LIGHTING IN HOUSEHOLDS (CENSUS 2005) 60 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND
MAN AGEMENT installation is high due to geographical reasons and small market
size mountainous terrain may affect the efﬁ cacy of such schemes The Renewable
Energy Division of the DoE is already in the process of training rural women on
solar home lighting systems as ‘barefoot engineer’ from Barefoot College,
Tilonia, and Rajasthan, India These women can be further trained to run small
business of renting solar lantern Recommendations The DoE has already carried
out initial studies on solar water heating systems for institutional consumers
The studies have established the fact that these systems are workable, but the
costs are very high Moreover, electricity and fuelwood – two most commonly used
fuels for water heating – are very cheap Therefore, following suggestions are
made for promoting solar water heating systems Initially, solar water heating
systems can be # promoted in urban areas through awareness campaign Special soft
loans can be made available to interested users through the BDFC The DoE may
also offer  rebate on monthly electricity bills for those users who have
installed solar water heating systems Similarly,  rebate may be given on annual
municipal/property taxes to commercial and institutional buildings with solar
water heating systems Simultaneously, the use of kerosene wick lamps through
awareness should be discouraged campaign Solar home lighting systems are already
being promoted in Bhutan under different funding programmes Most of these are
promoted in rural areas that fall under protected forest areas Recently,
proposed draft Renewable Energy Policy by the DoE envisaged supply of solar home
lighting systems to 3018 households for off-grid electriﬁ cation The same scheme
can be extended to the households in rural areas, where electricity is not
likely to reach for another four to  ve years # # Strategy : Promotion of solar
water heating systems Water heating is another end use application in Bhutan,
which consumes  lot of energy Water is heated mostly in kitchen or by using
bukharis Solar water heating systems have proved their effectiveness in saving
electricity and other fuels that are used for heating water Specially designed
smaller and lighter systems using plastics can be installed on demonstration
basis Strategy : Use of hydrogen as  cooking fuel In future, the potential of
hydrogen production using hydropower to store surplus hydro energy can be
explored  pilot study and  pilot plant for hydrogen production and storage have
been suggested elsewhere in this report Use of hydrogen for cooking can be
explored at  later stage Issues such as costs and safety need to be addressed
before this technology can be recommended for large-scale use Figure  shows
hydrogen cook stove developed by Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi The Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), Government of India, has been funding
research programmes on hydrogen various technology development Some of the
technologies, such as hydrogen-based motorcycles, can be tested in Bhutan in
future Goal The main goal under this strategy is to introduce solar water
heating systems to save electricity and fuelwood Approach In Bhutan, initial
studies carried out by the DoE through Austrian consultants have shown that
these systems may not be cost-effective TERI team carried out an analysis of
solar water heating system with the help of RETScreen software by using cost
details provided by the local solar system supplier The analysis showed that
subsidy and soft loans are required for making solar system attractive, and the
cost of transportation and 61 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT
detailed note on energy conservation in the buildings in Bhutan is given in the
subsequent section Energy conservation in buildings in Bhutan Design concept of
eco-housing and eco-friendly building ensures the following # Overall site
planning and design of building architecture have coherence and integration with
the surroundings All buildings are oriented and designed for energy efﬁ ciency
and use natural climatic conditions to reduce energy consumption by adopting
passive solar design concepts Conservation and efﬁ cient use of natural
resources such as rainwater available at site are ensured Renewable energy is
used, such as using solar energy for water heating and space heating, using
biogas for cooking, and using other renewable energies, wherever applicable Eco-
friendly, low-embedded energy materials, and energy saving building materials
are used Energy-efﬁ cient technologies and appliances are used to reduce energy
consumption in the building For example, using heat pumps for space heating and
cooling, using insulation in walls and roofs for reducing heat loss, and using
energy-efﬁ cient lighting  xtures # FIGURE  HYDROGEN COOK STOVE DEVELOPED BY
BANARAS HINDU UNIVERSITY, VARANASI # Development of energy efficient housings/
buildings Energy consumption for lighting and space heating can be reduced by
using suitably designed houses and buildings Eco-friendly housing designed to
reduce heat loss and use daylight for internal lighting is effective in reducing
the energy consumption for space heating and lighting  brief note on energy
conservation techniques in the buildings is presented in Annexure  Following
strategy is suggested for the introduction of energy-efﬁ cient housing in Bhutan
# # # Strategy : To introduce energy-efficient housing in Bhutan Goal The goal
of this strategy is to introduce energy- efﬁ cient buildings in Bhutan Bhutan
has developed its own traditional housing and building design guidelines, which
are being followed strictly Traditionally, locally made mud bricks and
traditional housing construction techniques using bamboo and mud are still used
in rural areas However, in urban areas, the practice of using cement and
concrete for construction, and using galvanized iron (GI) sheets for rooﬁ ng
material is prevalent Approach The energy-efﬁ cient building designs can be
introduced initially for new housing complexes being developed by government
agencies Recommendations External expert agencies can be initially involved in
developing designs This can be simultaneously followed by organizing capacity
building training courses for architects and builders The DoE can develop such
courses jointly with the Government of India and government agencies like Bureau
of Energy Efﬁ ciency (BEE) In the context of Bhutan, following are the
recommendations to develop and adopt eco- friendly and energy-efﬁ cient housing
codes and concepts # National-level awareness programmes and capacity-building
programmes for common citizens and architects need to be developed 62 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY
ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT $ Collaborative programmes with other
agencies, especially with the government agencies like the BEE, can be
undertaken to develop database for weather data, best practices, design norms
for Bhutanese weather conditions, alternative materials, and so on Materials
like bamboo and mud walls need to be analysed and documented The use of bamboo
and its products for buildings, such as mats for walls and bamboo- based rooﬁ ng
materials, can be explored Currently used GI sheet rooﬁ ng material can be
replaced with bamboo mats Workshops for architects and construction agencies to
sensitize them on energy conservation and energy efﬁ ciency in buildings should
be conducted Agencies like Standards and Quality Control Authority (SQCA),
National Housing Development Corporation, Construction Association of Bhutan,
National Environment Commission, Ministry of Works and Human and Urban
Development Settlement, Department can work towards together developing energy-
efﬁ cient buildings Some speciﬁ  recommendations that can be considered are as
follows Longer façades should face the north–south $ Inﬁ ltration should be
controlled by having concrete cornices for windows # General recommendations
Since capital cost of energy-efﬁ cient/renewable energy devices is  major
barrier in adopting loan scheme for energy- them,  common efﬁ cient/renewable
energy devices can be taken into consideration This loan scheme can provide
loans on convenient terms to individuals for the purchase of energy-efﬁ
cient/renewable energy devices certiﬁ ed by the DoE Till the time such labelling
facilities are developed in the country, energy/star-labelled energy-efﬁ cient
devices as well as those renewable energy systems that conform to international
standards may be endorsed by the DoE for use in Bhutan Small isolated houses can
explore small wind machines and small solar photovoltaic (PV) power plants for
providing electricity to the households Wind/solar hybrid pumps can be used in
farmhouses # # # # COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL SECTOR The commercial and
institutional sector comprises four major types of consumers as far as energy is
concerned  Bulk users like armed forces, monastic bodies, # schools, hospitals
Tourism activities  Commercial ofﬁ ces  Small shops direction Spacing between
buildings should take into $ account winter sunpath and should get maximum
radiation on south glazing for direct solar space heating Bulk users use energy
for cooking, water heating, lighting, and space heating, while shops and
commercial ofﬁ ces use energy mostly for lighting, space heating, and running
other appliances like computers and printers Most commonly used fuel in these
sectors are fuelwood for cooking and water heating, mainly by bulk users,
monastic bodies, schools and hospitals, and so on, and electricity for lighting
and heating, mainly by the hotel industries and commercial ofﬁ ces Following
paragraphs describe the strategies that can be used for the reduction in the
demand for fuelwood and kerosene and can be helpful in saving electricity Spaces
that are occupied during the day time $ in residential units should face south
side Night-time spaces should be located on the $ north side, with thermal
insulation on the north wall Insulation is also recommended for the walls on the
east and west sides $ There should be double-shuttered double- $ glazing windows
Heaters with timers should be used for $ different heating set points for day
and night operations Glazing should be on the south wall, with $ internal low ‘’
glass 63 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND
SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT of of use energy-efﬁ
cient Promotion appliances Use of modern fuel and renewable energy sources
Development of energy-efﬁ cient buildings However, these electric cookers by
themselves are not ISI marked, and efﬁ cient electric cook stoves need to be
promoted # # In urban areas where LPG and electricity are available, the use of
efﬁ cient LPG cook stoves, and electric rice cookers and curry cookers is
recommended Turbo cook stoves, or wood gas cook stoves, can be introduced in the
institutional segment Canada (< acdi-cidagcca/CIDAWEB/acdicidansf/ En/STE-
320162243-T98>) also distributed efﬁ cient cook stoves in schools in Bhutan Such
projects can be taken up more aggressively through coordinated efforts for
effective distribution, efﬁ cient after- sales service, and post-project
monitoring # Promoting the use of energy-efficient appliances Strategy 10: Use
of energy-efficient cook stoves and other devices for cooking Army units,
monastic bodies situated in remote areas, and schools with hostels use fuelwood-
based cook stoves for cooking stoves, Wood- red water-jacketed commonly known as
Althaps, which are produced locally, are found to be used in many places These
were developed under the UNDP-funded projects International Agency cook Strategy
11: Promotion of CFL and other energy-efficient lighting fixtures in commercial
buildings CFLs are efﬁ cient and effective in saving electricity that is used
for lighting Commonly used appliances are electric bulbs for lighting
Replacement of these bulbs with CFLs can save as much as 80% of electricity used
for lighting Box  gives the comparison of an 11- CFL and  60- incandescent lamp
Goal Goal of this approach is to promote the use of energy-efﬁ cient cook stoves
for these institutions Approach Reduction in fuelwood consumption can be
encouraged through awareness campaign and promoting fuel-efﬁ cient cook stoves
and bukharis Goal The main aim is to reduce energy consumption in the commercial
and institutional sector by introducing energy-efﬁ cient lighting systems
Recommendations The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) was recently engaged in
promoting electric rice and curry cookers for institutional users These cookers
have shown good potential for saving fuelwood   COMPARISON OF  60- INCANDESCENT
LAMP WITH AN 11- COMPACT FLUORESCENT LAMP (CFL) Lamp characteristics    CFL (11
) GLS (Incandescent lamp) Lamp wattage () 11 60 Lamp life (burning hours) 10 000
1000 Colour temperature (CCT °) 2700 2700 Lumen output (Lumens) 900 720 Lumen
effi cacy (Lumens/watt) 12 Colour rendering index (CRI) 82 100 Energy saving 60%
— Simple payback periods (months)  to  — 64 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY
DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Use of modern fuel and renewable energy sources Approach One
approach is promoting CFLs and energy- efﬁ cient lighting through awareness
campaign Providing CFLs through subsidy/cost-sharing scheme can also be
considered Strategy 13: Promotion of dish-type solar cookers Dish-type solar
cooker may be promoted in the monastic bodies, schools/colleges hostels, hotels,
and so on, where large-scale cooking is required This will help in reducing the
fuelwood consumption for cooking Recommendations In Thimphu/Phuentsholing and
other urban areas, introduction of the CFL under promotional scheme for
replacing bulb can be undertaken under an appropriate programme launched by the
DoE through  designated department Energy audit may be made compulsory for big
hotels, commercial complexes, and institutions This will motivate the users to
switch to the use of energy-efﬁ cient CFL lights and other electrical  xtures
Strategy 14: Promotion of solar water heaters Solar water heaters are the most
useful devices for saving fuelwood as well as electricity, which are being used
for heating water in most of the hotels and institutions These institutions can
be provided with special incentives to install solar water heating systems to
meet their hot water requirement Although there are hindrances to installing
solar water heaters, such as low cost of electricity and lack of required
infrastructure, know-how, and service network, the DoE can promote the use of
solar water heaters by undertaking awareness campaigns, highlighting their
environmental beneﬁ ts, providing incentives to the user, and making them
compulsory for large hotels Strategy 12: Introducing energy efficiency in the
hotel industry The hotel industry is an integral part of the tourism industry
Energy efﬁ ciency measures focused on hotel industry would go  long way towards
eco- tourism and energy savings Hotels in Bhutan vary from simple lodges to  ve-
star hotels built by international groups Typically, hotels in Bhutan have about
20–30 rooms The tourism department has planned to develop and upgrade facilities
of the existing hotels to three- or four-star grade Use of energy-efﬁ cient LPG
cook stoves and lighting  xtures will reduce the total energy demand of the
hotels Strategy 15: Promotion of solar PV and small wind-based power plants
Solar PV based power plants and small wind-based power plants may be promoted in
institutions, especially monasteries and schools This will reduce the dependency
on hydropower, especially in winter when the power from hydro system become less
This solar PV and small wind-based plants will also help in electrifying the
rural area where grid electricity has not reached Recommendations # Energy
auditing can be made mandatory for hotels having  minimum of 20 rooms The DoE
can provide the auditing support These hotels can be asked to submit the details
of energy consumption to the DoE on an annual basis Over  period of time, norms
for energy consumptions can be developed for the hotel industry Hotels can be
encouraged to adopt energy efﬁ ciency through star rating systems Development of
energy-efficient buildings Energy consumption in buildings can effectively be
reduced by suitably designing the buildings The DoE may promote the development
of eco- friendly buildings, which are designed to reduce heat loss and use
daylight for internal lighting # # 65 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN
AGEMENT Strategy 16: Introduction of energy efficient commercial buildings Goal
The main aim of this strategy is to introduce energy-efﬁ cient commercial
buildings in Bhutan Impact/energy saving potential The Long-range Energy
Alternatives Planning (LEAP) analysis has shown that implementing these measures
will save approximately 10% of electricity in future Implementation strategy The
DoE has established an energy laboratory under the IEMMP project The laboratory
facilities and the infrastructure available with the Department of Industries on
Training and Capacity Building can be used to develop training and energy audit
programmes for small-scale industries The programmes can be developed for speciﬁ
types of industries such as textile, paper, food processing, and so on Approach
New ofﬁ ce buildings of Royal Government of Bhutan can be made energy efﬁ cient
on the lines of the new building of the DoE This design can be extended to other
institutions also Recommendations An energy-efﬁ cient building code for Bhutan
may be developed, and it should be incumbent on hotels and big institutions
buildings, including the commercial ofﬁ ce buildings, to follow this code as per
the building category To generate awareness on these energy-efﬁ cient buildings,
the DoE may organize some training courses for the owners of the buildings,
builders, and the government department Barriers Small-scale investments
industries may  nd in energy efﬁ ciency equipment an expensive proposition Lack
of awareness is one of the reasons for not using efﬁ cient devices Demand side
management in new industries should be followed diligently for reducing the
total demand for energy INDUSTRIAL SECTOR The industrial sector mainly consumes
electricity, fuelwood, furnace oil, and coal The country’ growth is based on the
industrial growth, which is taking place at  rapid pace Because of this growth,
energy consumption in the country, as discussed in Chapter , is enormous To
reduce energy consumption in the industrial sector, speciﬁ  strategies for
different categories of industries are required As Bhutan has good potential for
electricity generation and is dependent on the import of fuels like furnace oil
and coal, it is necessary to reduce the consumption of fuelwood, coal, and oil
by the industries The strategy for fuel consumption reduction in the industries
is as follows Energy demand reduction strategies, by industry Ferro alloys From
earlier analysis, it is observed that the ferro alloy industry is one of the
most energy- intensive industries in Bhutan and  signiﬁ cant consumer of
electricity This industry accounts for more than one-third of the domestic
electric consumption So, even  small saving can indeed make  signiﬁ cant
difference to total electricity scenario for Bhutan The largest ferro alloy
plant in Bhutan is the Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd (BFAL) However,  number of such
units are expected to come up by It is recommended that energy-efﬁ cient
technologies be used extensively Some application-based technological
recommendations are as follows # Strategy 17: Promote the use of energy-
efficient equipment and technologies in small- and medium-scale industries Goal
The main aim of this strategy is to improve energy efﬁ ciency and reduce energy
consumption as well as pollution in the small- and medium-scale industries and
Use of pre-heated (up to 950 °) charge in  specially designed reactor (such as
rotary kiln/ vertical shaft furnace) can bring down the speciﬁ  power
consumption to less than 3000 kWh 66 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN
AGEMENT Cement industry The cement industry is poised to play  big role in
meeting Bhutan’ major infrastructural need in the coming years As mentioned
earlier, the cement industry is an energy-intensive industry in which
electricity and coal form major inputs load to production Process optimization,
management, and operational improvement can lead to signiﬁ cant energy saving,
and although it involves marginal  nancial investment, it is found to have
encouraging results in energy saving These include the following # These
reactors can also be converted to reduction reactors for supplying pre-reduced
manganese ore to electric smelting unit Use of hot pre-reduced ore from the
above reduction reactors (rotary kiln/vertical shaft furnace) integrated to
smelting unit can bring about  drastic reduction in speciﬁ  power consumption
(around 2000 kWh) Although it is possible to run the electric furnace with an
MnO content of the slag as low as 15%– 16%, it would mean high slag basicity,
high power consumption, and high fume losses For producing low phosphorus (less
than 20%) ferro-manganese, calcium oxide/barium oxide (CaO/BaO)-based  ux is
recommended for the dephosphorization of liquid high carbon Fe– Mn But the melt
will have to be desiliconized to less than 20% Si before dephosphorization
Injection of Ca–Si cored wire in the melt can reduce phosphorus in liquid ferro-
manganese to less than 15% Laboratory investigations have been completed for
optimizing parameters such as composition of the reagent, amount to be added,
effect of variation in silicon contents, treatment temperature, and treatment
time It is worth mentioning that for 10% decrease in phosphorus, the premium
obtained is around Rs 500 per tonne of ferro-manganese The use of partially
burnt coal (jhama) as  partial substitute to coke needs to be looked into and
tried in actual practice, as it is expected to increase the charge resistance
Annual energy auditing can be made compulsory, as it helps to identify the
under/overutilization of machineries, leading to increased consumption of
energy, particularly electricity Use of energy-efﬁ cient technologies in new
plants with soft loan/tax credit to cover part of additional expanses can be
made mandatory # # Plugging of leakages in kiln and pre-heater circuit, raw
mill, and coal mill circuits Reducing idle running Installing improved
insulating bricks/blocks in kilns and pre-heaters Utilizing hot exit gases in an
efﬁ cient manner Optimizing cooler operation Optimum loading of grinding
media/grinding mill optimization Rationalizing compressed air utilization
Redesigning of raw mix Installing capacitor banks for power factor improvement
Replacing over-rated motors with optimally rated motors Optimizing kiln
operation Changing from  at belt to -belt # # # # # # # # # # # # # Use of
energy-efﬁ cient equipment gives very encouraging results even at the cost of
some capital investment The energy-efﬁ cient equipment that can be used by the
cement industry are highlighted below # # Slip power recovery system Variable
voltage and frequency drive Grid rotor resistance Soft starter for motors High
efﬁ ciency fans High efﬁ ciency separators Vertical roller mill Pre-
grinder/roller press Low pressure pre-heater cyclones Multi-channel burner
Bucket elevator conveying # # # # # Units violating the rated norms can be  ned
based on the degree of violations Regular training programmes can also be made
mandatory for plant ofﬁ cials, which will help them use energy efﬁ ciently and
also provide them with latest information on state-of-the-art technological
developments # # # # # in place of pneumatic # 67 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY
DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Fuzzy logic/expert kiln control system Improved ball mill
internals High efﬁ ciency grate cooler DRI from DRI reactor to EAF These systems
include mechanical conveyors, transport vessels (rail or truck), and pneumatic
conveying systems There are two primary beneﬁ ts of hot charging of DRI to an
EAF: () lower energy consumption for melting and () increased productivity due
to shorter tap-to-tap time The energy savings occur because less energy is
required to bring DRI to melting temperature As  thumb rule, power consumption
can be reduced by about 20 kWh/ tonne of liquid steel for each 100% increase in
the composite charge temperature Also, in addition, there is saving in electrode
consumption to the tune of 004 kg/kWh due to its linear relationship with power
consumption At 80% hot DRI charging, the savings in electrode work out to be Rs
50 per metric tonne (PMT) at current electrode prices Some speciﬁ  measures that
can be adopted are as follows # # # # Active participation of employees in
energy conservation efforts has been very fruitful in India (National Council
for Cement and Building Materials) The suggestion box schemes, quality circles,
brainstorming sessions, and cash rewards for good suggestions are some of the
schemes the plants can adopt for ensuring active participation of employees
Setting up of an energy conservation cell for monitoring and controlling energy
performance of the plant is gaining importance in the Indian plants Cement units
can also train manpower, as has been done in the Indian cement manufacturing
companies Industry audits should be made mandatory, and as mentioned earlier,
there should be provisions for imposing  nes for violations against non-
compliance Effectively utilizing free space post combustion Scrapping pre-
heating system Using hot runner and riser Insulating pit for hot empty ladles
Converting to spout tapping Using hot metal in EAF Blowing lime  res into EAF
Using supersonic oxygen blowing Sliding gate system in EAF tap hole Placing
ladlehood in ladle furnace station Continuous DRI/HBI charging Post combustion
system Insulating pit for hot empty ladle Modifying ladle cover and reduction in
cover height Using submerged tap hole Using hot metal Modifying ladle cover for
online wire feeding Changing mix optimization Ladle in circulation Using ladle
pre-heating system Using evacuating system Using post-combustion technology
Using foamy slag practice Using lime as  ux Measuring  nished bath temperature
Using crucible and riser # Iron and steel  number of licensed industries are
expected to come up in Bhutan Iron and steel plants will constitute  signiﬁ cant
number, with some specializing in iron re-rolling, while others in the iron and
steel making The globalization of the steel industry has ushered in  new era of
cost- competitiveness The steel industry is the single largest energy consumer,
accounting for about % of the world’ energy consumption The energy used is
major cost factor for the steel industry In developed countries, cost of energy
is between 15% and 20% of the overall cost of production In India, it is between
30% and 33%, and for Bhutan, it is close to 40% In the steel industry, the
greatest saving in energy is achieved through improvement in technologies used
for manufacturing iron and steel In the current route, through direct reduced
iron (DRI) to electric arc furnace (EAF),  rst cold DRI/hot briquetted iron
(HBI) is produced at ambient temperature, and this is then fed to EAF to produce
steel This involves loss of substantial energy due to multiple heating and
cooling So, there is  potential for saving energy by utilizing the energy
technology and process of steel making Various scrap pre-heating technologies
are now available and have been designed to convey hot # # tapping submerged # #
# # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # # 68 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND
MAN AGEMENT Strategies for surface transport, which are put forth in the policy,
include the following # reported by MECON India Ltd, by As implementing some of
(energy conservation opportunities), some selected steel plants based on
electric arc furnace and induction furnaces have reported signiﬁ cant reduction
in energy consumption The demand side management in industries is effectively
done by adopting energy efﬁ ciency measures energy-efﬁ cient promoting
technologies The energy audits carried out by TERI during the IEMMP project have
shown that industries have the potential to save energy Ferro-silicon plants in
India have reported more efﬁ cient performance than that reported by the Ferro-
silicon Company in Bhutan The advanced technologies can be introduced in new
companies Awareness programme, along with support for energy audit, can be
adopted as  strategy for the industrial sector Similarly, industry-speciﬁ
energy efﬁ ciency measures can be suggested for most small- and medium-scale
industries after energy audit the ECOs Improving rural access and inter-
connection among Dzongkhags Exploring alternate modes of transport Enhancing
safety and trafﬁ  management system Improving frontline services Promoting the
use of public transport Promoting regional cooperation in transport # # # and #
# ‘Good Governance Plus’ recommends eco-friendly mass transport system in the
major urban areas Petrol and diesel are the two fuels that are used in the
transport sector in Bhutan The country imports both these fuels, and over
period of time, there is an increasing trend in their consumption levels Diesel
imports were 51 460 kilolitres in 2005, of which  substantial proportion (about
49 197 kilolitres) was used in the transport sector alone The imports for petrol
stood at 13 795 kilolitres in 2005, which was mainly used for transportation At
present, alternative fuels such as natural gas, electricity, and LPG are not
used in Bhutan Bhutan has no vehicle manufacturing facilities, and all vehicles
are imported Majority of vehicles are imported from India, Japan, and Korea
Import of vehicle is increasing as the economy is progressing The number of
different categories of motor vehicles imported in Bhutan in 2005 is given in
Table  Industries like wood and steel milling industries can be speciﬁ cally
targeted by conducting energy audit Replacement of motors and use of energy- efﬁ
cient lighting are two major energy measures for these small units TRANSPORT
SECTOR The transport sector in Bhutan comprises road and air transport Bhutan’
transport sector contributed 16% to the overall gross domestic product (GDP) at
the end of the Eighth Five-year Plan (1997– 2001) The development strategy for
the transport sector in Bhutan aims at achieving  number of milestones, as
articulated in  comprehensive vision statement of Bhutan’ future (Bhutan 2020:
Vision of Peace, Prosperity and Happiness) These milestones include () 75% of
rural population living within half-day’ walk from nearest road, () national
trunk roads upgraded to take 30-tonne lorries, and () completing second
transnational highway The vision of Bhutan’ National Transport Policy is to
ensure ‘access to quality transport services by all, taking into consideration
the requirements of  landlocked country’ Table  IMPORTS OF DIFFERENT CATEGORIES
OF MOTOR VEHICLES (IN NUMBER) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Vehicle category
Passenger cars 1807 2270 1533 1457 1363 Two-wheelers 629 673 303 299 785 Buses
20  11   Trucks 108 331 234 188 180 Others 44 62 182 542 80 Source MoF (2005)
Currently, vehicles are concentrated in Thimphu, Paro, and Phuentsholing area,
where more than 80% vehicles are registered 69 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY
DEMAND MAN AGEMENT In future, petrol and diesel will remain the encourage the
use of fuels of certain speciﬁ cations, which also contain low percentages of
pollutants In case of Bhutan, the import of latest vehicles, for example 4WD Hi
Lux or Scorpio, which need special high-octane petrol has also been accompanied
by import of this fuel in the past few years This is evident from the import
gures of the past few years  separate Transport Sector Master Plan is being
developed, which is essentially looking into the aspects of () emission
reduction strategies, () trafﬁ  density and trafﬁ   ow analysis, and ()
suggestions on mass transport and alternative transport means like rope ways and
river navigation for mountainous areas The Transport Sector Master Plan study
team has already identiﬁ ed some strategies for the above aspects However, it is
advisable to study them from energy efﬁ ciency point of view so that energy-efﬁ
cient technologies are selected For  place like Bhutan, which has very few
industries and no thermal power plants, the transport sector contributes
substantially to air pollution As all major settlements are situated in valleys,
local air pollution levels are bound to increase due to the extensive use of
fossil fuels in the transport sector The Transport Sector Master Plan is looking
into the pollution levels and emission standards issues; hence, these are not
considered exclusively in this study dominant fuels Current and anticipated
issues in the transport sector of Bhutan The options to improve energy efﬁ
ciency and reduce consumption of petroleum fuels in the transport sector can be
classiﬁ ed into following major categories # Introducing efﬁ cient mass
transport and/or improving mass transport efﬁ ciencies Improving energy efﬁ
ciency of petrol and diesel vehicles by making the latest European vehicle efﬁ
ciency norm compliance mandatory for the imported vehicles Introducing
alternative fuel vehicles Designing transport system, including trafﬁ   ow
analysis, for reducing trafﬁ  congestion Introducing alternative transport
methods such as river navigation and rope ways # # # # Improving energy
efficiency of petrol and diesel vehicles Situational analysis Bhutan imports
vehicles from nearby countries Majority of vehicles come from India, followed by
Korea and Japan Due to regulations in customs and major imports being through
the state-owned State Trading Corporation of Bhutan and balance through the
agents of major vehicle manufacturers like Maruti Motors in India and Hundai
from Korea, Bhutan has so far not experienced dumping of old vehicles from
nearby countries due to the prohibition imposed by the Royal Government of
Bhutan (RGoB) This has prevented the use of old and inefﬁ cient vehicles in the
country However, in the future, import of even more efﬁ cient motor vehicles
should be encouraged Engine exhaust emissions are also closely linked to the
fuel efﬁ ciency of the vehicles Thus, use of efﬁ cient vehicles is of paramount
importance to keep the local air pollution levels low Various fuel efﬁ ciency
norms are developed and adopted in India and other European countries As  policy
measure to promote the use of fuel-efﬁ cient vehicles, the government could put
in place mandatory strict vehicle emission control norms These norms also
Introduction of vehicles running on alternative fuel Vehicles running on
alternative fuels are becoming reality in many countries Alternative fuels offer
choice of fuels that contain less or practically zero pollutant Examples of such
fuels are CNG (compressed natural gas) and biofuels, which can be produced in an
environment-friendly way by using carbon-neutral bioenergy Vehicles running on
electricity are also becoming popular Futuristic options include hybrid vehicles
that run on hydrogen and electricity  range of fuel options are being evaluated
for the transport sector worldwide (TERI 2005) and are discussed in the
subsequent sections 70 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT
Compressed natural gas Use of CNG as  clean and cheaper fuel for transport has
proved to be successful in many cases, including public transport system of the
Indian capital city of New Delhi It is  safe, clean burning, and environment-
friendly fuel It has been established that exhaust emissions like hydrocarbons
and carbon monoxide are signiﬁ cantly reduced when CNG is used as compared to
other fuels Toxic emissions of lead and sulphur are completely eliminated
Existing petrol vehicles can use CNG by  tting  conversion kit The CNG-
converted vehicles have the  exibility of operating either on petrol or on CNG
Recently, major vehicle manufacturers in India have introduced CNG vehicles in
the Indian market However, in Bhutan, lack of infrastructure and limited
availability of CNG are major barriers in the use of CNG in the transport sector
However, under South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
initiative, Bhutan can look into the possibility of getting CNG for the
transport sector and industries, at least in the border areas of Bhutan Techno-
nancial feasibility studies are required for this purpose, which can be taken up
in the Tenth Plan period Investments in the development of infrastructure for
CNG transport and handling would be  critical issue, considering the number of
vehicles in the countries and their distribution provided at subsidized rate
Thus, because the use of LPG as  cleaner fuel to reduce air pollution is an
option, its import under subsidy quota for transport applications could be
discussed in bilateral meetings with India This may have impact on trade balance
study to compare the pros and cons of using LPG for other applications in
general and for the transport sector in particular is required, as other issues
like infrastructure for distribution, and market segments and their share in LPG
demand are also important and need to be studied in detail  joint study between
Bhutan and India can be taken up in the Tenth Plan Biofuels Biofuels are the
fuels derived from biomass, that is, recently living organisms or their
metabolic by- products Ethanol, methanol, and bio-diesel are important biofuels
that can be used for vehicular applications Ethanol and methanol Mixing of
ethanol and methanol in petrol and diesel, up to 10%, is possible for use in
conventional petrol and diesel engines without any modiﬁ cation Ethanol and
methanol are generally produced as by-products in sugar and other industries
Bhutan currently has no industries producing ethanol or methanol Bio-diesel Bio-
diesel is produced by processing vegetable oil This process, called as esteriﬁ
cation, converts vegetable oil to  diesel-like fuel having properties similar to
diesel The interest in bio-diesel is increasing worldwide since The US and the
European countries are using soybean, rapeseed, and other edible oils for
producing bio-diesel In India, bio-diesel production using locally available
species of non-edible oil-bearing plant seeds such as jatropha and pongamia is
preferred In Bhutan, locally available oil-bearing plants can be studied, and
indigenous development of bio-diesel can be taken up as  joint research project
with the Indian institutes under the aegis of the Department of Science and
Technology (DST) This would be  medium-term ( ve to seven years) strategy, which
can be initiated in the Tenth Plan Liquefied petroleum gas LPG is deemed to be
superior to petrol and diesel in terms of vehicular emissions To abate pollution
caused by vehicles,  number of countries have been using LPG as auto fuel
Typically, the exhaust emissions of vehicles running on LPG comprise # 75% less
carbon monoxide, 85% less hydrocarbons, 40% less nitrous oxide, and result in
87% less ozone depletion # as compared to vehicles running on petrol # #
Recommendations Currently, Bhutan imports LPG from India, and under the
bilateral arrangement, the LPG is 71 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN
AGEMENT Electric vehicles With vast potential available for hydropower
generation, use of electricity for mass transport and use of electric/hybrid
vehicles for personal transport are viable options for Bhutan in medium term
Hybrid (petrol–electric) and electric vehicles are now being developed by many
major automobile manufacturers worldwide Currently, vehicles are imported from
India, Japan, Korea, and China Automobile companies in these countries, in India
and Japan, have already especially  ooded the market with electric vehicles
Major automobile manufacturers like / Mahindra and Mahindra and / Bajaj Auto Ltd
from India are already testing electric three-wheelers (six- seater vehicles) in
Indian markets These vehicles can be introduced in Bhutan on demonstration basis
for public transport in cities like Thimphu and Phuentsholing  note on the
experience of implementing electric vehicles as public transport is given in Box
Market for electric cars like REVA can also be explored, especially in  at
terrain areas in southern Bhutan Electric minibuses are being introduced by many
Indian automobile manufacturers like Mahindra and Mahindra and others Minibuses
and three-wheelers running on electricity can be promoted in small urban areas
and in major town areas like Thimphu The DoE and the Ministry of Information and
Communications (MoIC) can undertake  joint project, which can also be submitted
as  Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) project fuel economy of new small cars
sold in India is about km per litre, while that of  small four- stroke
motorcycle is 54 km per litre, and that of buses is around  km per litre These
gures do not reﬂ ect the state-of-the-art technology but point to the fact that
due to lower power requirement and small size, coupled with advanced technology,
considerable improvements are possible in vehicles The fuel economy based on
typical vehicles likely to be operated in India through 2020 is given in Table
These could be considered for Bhutan as well, as most of the vehicles are
imported from India Table  FUEL ECONOMY BASED ON TYPICAL VEHICLES LIKELY TO BE
OPERATED IN INDIA Fuel economy in 2000 (km/litre) Fuel economy in 2020
(km/litre) Vehicle type Gasoline motor scooter (two-stroke) Gasoline motor
scooter (four-stroke) Gasoline car Diesel car Diesel bus 27 36 Note Fuel
consumption estimates are based on the study by Bose and Nesamani (2000) Diesel
vehicles have better fuel economy than the gasoline ones, as diesel engines are
more efﬁ cient and diesel fuel contains more energy per litre However, emissions
from diesel vehicles are  serious problem The sulphur in diesel has considerable
potential to pollute the air and adversely affect human health, causing
respiratory disorders due to the Recommendations on improving energy efficiency
of petrol and diesel vehicles Technological innovations are increasingly gaining
importance in the transport sector The average     NEPAL’ EXPERIENCE WITH
ELECTRIC VEHICLE To tackle the problem of air pollution in Kathmandu valley,
Nepal started using electric vehicles in These were known as Safa tempos About
600 of these tempos were introduced Subsequently,  major project was initiated
by ‘Kathmandu Electric Vehicle Alliance (KEVA)’ to improve the operational effi
ciency of these tempos KEVA is  joint programme undertaken by an NGO (non-
governmental organization), government, and private sector to improve the air
quality of the Kathmandu valley Details of the project are available at <
cleanairnetorg/caiasia/articles-60355_projectpdf> 72 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR
ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT and, most importantly, proper storage, handling, and
processing of harvested produce to reduce wastage are few things that can be
considered jointly by the DoE and Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) Various studies
conducted and data generated show that the diesel-powered multi-utility power
tillers are the most useful and, hence, sought-after farm equipment in Bhutan
These are currently subsidized under Japanese funds The RGoB can consider
providing further support for this programme to improve the availability of such
power tillers Some applications for the agriculture sector, which can help
reduce the overall energy demand or import of energy, are discussed subsequently
emission of high level of respirable particulate matter Hence, low sulphur
diesel, that is, diesel containing % sulphur by weight as against the normal
proportion of % by weight, or ultra low sulphur diesel, that is, diesel
containing 25% sulphur, is used in many countries The Ministry of Economic
Affairs can consider making ultra low sulphur diesel mandatory in phased manner
in Bhutan AGRICULTURE SECTOR Energy needs of the agriculture sector vary at
different stages, as shown in Figure  Currently, energy consumption in farming
is very low, mainly due to the mountainous nature of the terrain, small farm
size, and low investment in farming However, modern energy based interventions
to improve farm productivity and labour efﬁ ciency, thereby reducing the
requirement of human labour FIGURE  ENERGY INPUTS IN THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR IN
BHUTAN 73 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND
SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Biogas-based water
pumping, space heating, and food processing The agriculture sector generates
biomass residue as  farm product waste, along with other wastes like animal dung
Biogas plants may be developed at these farm sites, and the gas produced can be
used for pumping water, space heating, and food processing applications The DoE
can take initiatives in the implementation of these plants by creating awareness
and providing subsidy schemes demonstration programme Also, solar-powered
fencing may be implemented in the farms Mechanization/cold storage
facilities/ice production facilities Refrigerated/ice cooled trailers for power
tiller/ refrigerated vehicles Loss of agriculture produce in transit between
farms and marketplace is common in Bhutan due to difﬁ cult terrain and lack of
farm roads in most parts of the country This loss can be reduced by developing
small movable refrigeration/ice storage systems, which can store farm produce in
cold storage till they are delivered Special research and development project
can be taken up jointly by research organizations in India, such as TERI, in
collaboration with the DoE and MoA This would prove to be  very useful strategy
in long term Diesel-powered power tillers Diesel-powered power tillers are
currently provided by the MoA through Japanese government’ aided scheme on
subsidy These power tillers are multi- purpose and are quite popular among
farmers as is evident from the fact that there is  waiting list for procuring
these tillers These tillers are driven by diesel and their faster penetration
would lead to improved farm productivity Promotion of gasifier for cardamom
drying Cardamom is one of the most important agriculture products in Bhutan,
which requires drying To use the locally available biomass resources for the
drying purpose, biomass gasiﬁ ers can be used for drying Initially, the DoE may
install  gasiﬁ er under  demonstration project and then promote the installation
of these gasiﬁ ers by undertaking awareness campaign and providing subsidy to
farmers Small wind-operated pump sets Bhutan’ agriculture sector represented by
dry land farming, which depends on rainwater Because the terrain is mountainous,
It is difﬁ cult to dig canals and pump water In windy areas, small mechanical
wind pumps or small wind electric generator powered pump sets can be installed
These would be site-speciﬁ  applications The DoE can initiate  demonstration
programme on these lines Overall implementation strategy for the demand side
management The precise time schedule for the implementation of the strategies
suggested above are given in Table , and the results of the impact assessment of
the proposed strategies are given in Table  Energy-efficient pump sets Although
water pump sets are not used extensively in the agriculture sector in Bhutan
when compared with other countries, energy-efﬁ cient pump sets can be promoted
through labelling scheme, which is proposed for all electrical appliances
ESTIMATED BUDGET FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFERENT STRATEGIES RECOMMENDED FOR
DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT OF ENERGY  budget has been estimated for different
strategies, by sector, as suggested for the implementation of the plan related
to the demand side management of energy and is given in Table  This budget head
does not include the capital cost and manpower cost involved from the
implementing agencies Solar-powered pesticide sprayers and solar fencing Solar-
powered pesticide sprayers are handy equipment, which run on solar-powered packs
These would be useful for farmers as they are light weight and easy to operate
It is recommended that the MoA and DoE introduce them under jointly funded
subsidy/ 74 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Table  PROPOSED
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE FOR DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT (DSM) MEASURES
Promotion of improved cook stoves Promotion of efficient fodder cooking devices
Use of energy-efficient liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) stove Promotion of energy-
efficient appliances and compact fluorescent lamp (CFL)     Promotion of
briquettes and pellets    Promotion of solar lanterns or home lighting systems
Promotion of solar water heating systems  Use of hydrogen cook stoves Promotion
of energy-efficient building technologies/ materials Promotion of small wind
systems for farm houses Use of energy-efficient cook stoves and other devices
for cooking       Promotion of CFL and other energy-efficient lighting fixtures
in commercial buildings         Promotion of use of dish-type solar cookers
Promotion of solar water heaters    Promotion of solar photovoltaic systems for
schools/ monasteries      Promotion of energy-efficient buildings/codes  Energy
efficient systems and mandatory measures for energy efficiency in industries
Introduction of norms for energy consumption in industries      Deployment of
electric vehicles   Alternate (LPG/liquefied natural gas) fuel vehicles
Efficient public transport system for cities and inter- cities        City
traffic planning Biogas based water pumping , space heating, food processing
Solar fencing for agriculture farms       Promotion of solar and wind pumping
systems      Development and deployment of hybrid dryers   Promotion of
gasifiers for cardamom drying 75 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT
Table  IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF PROPOSED STRATEGIES Social equity Energy security
Reduction in local pollution Forest conservation Trade balance Energy
conservation Millennium Development Goals served Main categories Promotion of
compact fluorescent lamp Yes Promotion of improved cook stoves Yes Yes Promotion
of briquettes and pellets Yes Yes Yes Yes Promotion of energy-efficient
appliances Yes Yes Yes Promotion of energy-efficient building
technologies/materials Yes Yes Yes Yes Promotion of efficient fodder cooking
devices Yes Yes Yes Yes Promotion of solar water heating systems Yes Yes Yes
Promotion of solar lanterns and home lighting systems Yes Yes Yes Yes Hydrogen
cook stoves Yes Yes 76 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Table
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF DIFFERENT STRATEGIES FOR DEMAND SIDE
MANAGEMENT (IN MILLION NU) Proposed strategy/measure Targets Role of the
Department of Energy 2012 2015 2020 Total Sector Promotion of improved cook
stoves 50% (40 000) of the total households that are using wood/kerosene for
cooking will be provided with improved cook stove by 2012, 75% will be provided
by 2015, and 100% by 2020 Providing subsidy and then distribution of improved
cook stove, especially in rural areas 120 120 50 290 Promotion of efficient
fodder cooking devices About 500–1000 cook stoves on demonstration basis in the
Tenth Plan Providing subsidy and then distribution of improved cook stove for
fodder cooking 50 50 50 150 Use of energy-efficient liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) stove 50% replacement of old LPG cook stoves with efficient cook stoves by
2015, and 100% by 2020 Organize awareness campaign and providing subsidy for
efficient LPG stove and make available these stoves to people 10 10 10 30
Promotion of energy efficient appliances and compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) 50%
of the households start using CFLs by 2015 and 100% by 2020 Implement the scheme
of distribution of the CFLs to the all households    15 Promotion of briquettes
and pellets One or two briquette making industry may be developed by 2015
Develop  plan for the implementation of the briquetting/pelleting industry    15
Promotion of solar lanterns or home lighting systems Providing solar
lanterns/solar PV systems to the households that use fuelwood or kerosene as
source for lighting; 50% to be provided by 2012 and 100% by 2015 Develop
strategy for distribution of the solar lanterns/small solar PV systems to rural
households 250 100 50 400            Promotion of solar water heating (SWH)
systems 25% of the total households would start using SWH system by 2015 (that
is,  million litres per day capacity water heating system ) and 50% by 2020 (
850 000 litres per day) Make plan for implementation of the solar water heating
systems by the households in Bhutan 162 150 150 9352 Use of hydrogen cook stoves
%–10% of the households start using Hydrogen cook stoves by 2020 Organize
awareness campaign 10 10 Promotion of energy-efficient building technologies/
materials 2500 new households constructed by 2015 will be energy–efficient; and
this figure will be about 5000 by 2020 Organize awareness campaign for the
public as well as the architects and developers, Financial support for
incorporation of measures 350 350 Promotion of small wind systems for farm
houses %–10% households will start using small wind-solar hybrid systems for the
lighting in their houses by 2015 Implement few small windmills on demonstration
basis and provide subsidy to the people for using these windmills 200 300 100
600 Table  contd 77 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
CHAPTER  DEMAND SIDE EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT OR ENERGY DEMAND MAN AGEMENT Table
CONTD Targets Role of the Department of Energy 2012 2015 2020 Total Sector
Proposed strategy/measure Use of energy-efficient cook stoves and other devices
for cooking 50% of the commercial users will start using improved cook stoves by
2015 Subsidy schemes, awareness creation, promotional campaign 200 200 200 600
Promotion of CFL and other energy- efficient lighting fixtures in commercial
buildings Replacement of normal bulbs by CFL in all commercial buildings Subsidy
schemes, awareness creation, promotional campaign 200 200 200 600
Promotion of the use of dish-type solar cookers 50 installations by 2012 Subsidy
schemes, awareness creation, promotional campaign    Promotion of SWH Subsidy
scheme, Promotional activities 15 20 25 60           Promotion of solar PV/ wind
hybrid systems for schools/monasteries 1000 installations by 2012 Feasibility
study, subsidy scheme, Implementation 50 50 50 150 Promotion of energy-efficient
buildings/ codes 10–15 buildings by 2012 Awareness campaign and development of
codes for energy efficiency in buildings 200 500 1000 1700 Energy-efficient
systems and mandatory measures for energy efficiency in industries Five major
industries by 2012 Support to carry out audits, Funding for implementation,
Awareness campaign and development of the measures for energy efficiency 10 20
30 60                Introduction of norms for energy consumption in industries
Norms to be developed by 2012 Development of norms and formation of policies/
regulation 10 10 10 30  Development of scheme for promotion, subsidy support 50
50 100 200 Deployment of electric vehicles 100 vehicles by 2012 Alternative
(LPG/liquefied natural gas) fuel vehicles Feasibility study by 2010,
Infrastructure development by 2015 Funding for feasibility study 10 500 510
Efficient/electric public transport system for cities and inter-cities
Feasibility study by 2010, Infrastructure development by 2015 Study for
implementation model, project development, implementation for Thimphu- Paro road
100 - - 100 City traffic planning Transport plan to be developed through RSTA
Awareness campaign and development of plan 50 50 Biogas based water pumping ,
space heating, food processing 100 plants by 2012 Feasibility study and
technology assessment 10 10 10 30 Solar fencing for agriculture farms 100 farms
by 2012 Subsidy support, supply of solar fencing  10 10 22
Promotion of solar and wind pumping systems 100 numbers by 2012 Feasibility
study, technology assessment, subsidy programme 20 20 20 60 Development and
deployment of hybrid dryers 500 numbers by 2012 Feasibility study, technology
assessment, subsidy programme 50 50 50 150     Promotion of gasifiers for
cardamom drying 100 numbers by 2012 Feasibility study, technology assessment,
subsidy programme     TOTAL 2060 2717 2493 44 78 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN         Overarching issues: energy, development, and
environment There are many issues that are closely to meet the needs of  growing
industry Bhutan’ energy system is also particularly vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change, given that water  ows are likely to be affected due to global
warming in future (ICIMOD 2005) Apart from this, other climate change adaptation
issues may emerge over the period The issue of adaptation to climate change is
discussed later in this chapter For  developing country like Bhutan that has
mountainous terrain, energy security also needs to be looked at from  micro
perspective—are the remotest regions and the poorest assured of secure and
affordable energy? The basic nature of energy would imply that the energy for
essential household needs should be given preference when energy is available in
limited quantity Although policy directives are clear on this front, this also
necessitates that decentralized or non-conventional source of energy be tapped
not just to minimize import dependence but also to provide energy where
conventional supply networks cannot reach Following points reﬂ ect some of the
country- speciﬁ  energy security concerns in Bhutan # related with the way the
development of the energy sector is taking place in Bhutan While some of these
cross linkages are quite obvious,  few are not that apparent The following
sections attempt to put these critical issues in the right perspective ENERGY
SECURITY The concept of energy security has witnessed  paradigm change
Historically, energy security focused primarily on concerns on oil disruption in
the oil-producing world This concern has not been addressed till now In fact,
many other related concerns have emerged now Concerns over energy security are
not limited to oil alone; reliability of electricity supply systems has become
an important issue, given the chronic power shortages in developing countries
and incidents of blackouts in the developed world Sophisticated integration of
energy systems also means that  break at any point in the supply chain can
reverberate through the entire system Moreover, it must be recognized that
energy security is not  stand-alone entity It assumes  larger dimension among
countries At the same time,  new range of vulnerabilities has become more
evident—energy systems are at unprecedented risk from political turmoil,
terrorism, and the impacts of climate change Bhutan is already confronting some
of these issues The country has no known reserves of fossil fuels and has no
option but to import oil to satisfy its growing needs While hydropower is
available in plenty to meet the country’ needs, there are concerns about the
shortage of electricity in the lean season, especially Plugging electricity
demand–supply gap during lean period High dependence on hydropower, with
hydropower accounting for more than 99% of the electricity generated
Furthermore, country’ two major power plants, namely, Chukha and Tala hydropower
plants, are responsible for the majority of electricity generation Vulnerability
of power generation to water supply due to the impact of climate change
Dependence of the country on oil import from India # # # 79 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY,
DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT Little choice of other energy resources, as the
electricity sector is highly subsidized and hydropower is cheap regional
disparities – in terms of per capita income and availability of basic services –
both across the different geographical regions of the country as well as between
rural and urban areas Almost 70% of the Bhutan’ population, comprising 634 982
people (Census of Bhutan 2005), resides in rural areas Not surprisingly, poverty
in Bhutan is largely  rural phenomenon as the data of the Bhutan Living
Standards Survey 2003 noted that about 40% of the rural population was poor,
while less than % of the urban population was poor Likewise, the poverty gap and
poverty severity indices showed that poverty was deeply entrenched and more
severe in rural areas as compared to urban areas The regional disparity is also
evident in the spread of the electricity network in the country, as discussed in
Chapter  These disparities are reﬂ ected in the tendency of most immigrants to
move towards the western part of the country Migration to towns in the western
region is almost double of that in the eastern region This divide would need to
be tackled using  two-pronged approach—on the one hand, there is  need to plan
more townships, particularly in the eastern part of the country, on the other,
the ‘push factor’ from rural areas needs to be arrested through concerted
efforts at rural development The importance of rural development in poverty
reduction is evident from the fact that it has been identiﬁ ed, together with
the promotion of balanced regional development, private sector development, and
infrastructure development as the main objectives in the Tenth Five-year Plan
guidelines The next section describes the challenges facing in Bhutan and rural
economic development expounds how energy services can address them # While
maintaining the security of supply at the macro and micro levels by investing in
infrastructure and diversiﬁ cation of the energy portfolio, another important
aspect of energy security is reducing energy consumption by improving energy efﬁ
ciency This has increasingly become  feasible alternative today due to the
advancement of technology and the possibility of international technology
transfers In most cases, the best near-term option for increasing energy
security is through energy efﬁ ciency These options are covered extensively in
the earlier chapters ENERGY FOR POVERTY REDUCTION AND BALANCED REGIONAL GROWTH
It is now well established that income (or the lack of it) is only one aspect of
poverty In  wider sense, poverty is deprivation, which may be traced to  ve
inter-related clusters of disadvantages: physical weakness (lack of strength,
under-nutrition, ill health, disability, high ratio of dependents to active
adults); isolation (physical remoteness, ignorance, and lack of access to
information or knowledge); income poverty (lack of income and wealth);
vulnerability (increased exposure to contingencies, and danger of becoming more
deprived); and powerlessness (inability to cope, adapt, and choose) (Chambers
1989) Energy can play  fundamental role in minimizing each of these
disadvantages, as shown in Figure  While issues related to electricity export
and optimizing the use of electricity for the promotion of domestic industry
have been dealt with before, this section discusses the importance of energy
systems and options to be planned so as to promote regionally balanced
development  quick look at the economic and social indicators for Bhutan shows
the presence of Challenges in rural development About 66% of the Bhutanese
workforce is engaged in agriculture and forestry (Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan
2005) Farming in Bhutan is  challenge  The poor include households with real
consumption less than the poverty line  The Poverty Gap Index measures the
intensity of poverty for the population—it reﬂ ects the difference between the
poverty line and actual expenditure The Poverty Severity Index is calculated as
the weighted sum of poverty gaps (as  proportion of the poverty line), with
weight proportionate to poverty gaps  The main cereals growing in Bhutan are
rice, maize, wheat, barley, buckwheat, and millet Cash crops include oranges,
potatoes, apples, plums, walnuts, and vegetables Cereal cultivation is, however,
dominated by maize and rice 80 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT FIGURE
ENERGY SERVICES CONTRIBUTE TO BREAKING THE DEPRIVATION TRAP Livestock rearing is
an integral part of the farming system in the country Close to 95% of the rural
households own an average of  ve to nine cattle, which primarily serve as
source of draught power and manure for their  elds and dairy products for
household uses However, the potential of livestock in contributing to farm
income is constrained by the lack of adequate feed and fodder and poor health
services because of low soil fertility, poor infrastructure, small landholding
size, occurrence of natural disasters like  oods, and the mountainous terrain,
all of which make the activity labour-intensive The majority of the farming
households own less than  acres of land (RNR Statistics 2000), which can only
provide subsistence living, as is evident from the fact that less than % of the
domestic rice production in the country in 2002 (38 000 tonnes) was marketed
Some 54 000 tonnes of rice was imported to meet domestic demand Studies suggest
that in many villages, up to 50% of the households are often food insecure,
while seasonally, this  gure may go up to 75% Box  presents constraints
encountered in food grain production Inadequate return from agriculture is
fuelling migration from rural to urban areas The resulting decline in the
availability of labour further affects the productivity of the sector, which has
historically been labour-intensive The inﬂ ux of migrants is restricted to  few
urban centres Some estimates suggest that at 10% rate of growth of population,
81 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING
ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT     CONSTRAINTS IN FOOD GRAIN
PRODUCTION According to  survey carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture,
Royal Government of Bhutan, the main constraints faced by the farming households
in food grain production include destruction by wild animals (54% of the
respondents saw this as  major concern), lack of irrigation (28%), labour
shortage (20%), and small size of landholding (13%) Destruction by pests and
diseases (13%) and limited access to markets (10%) also aff ect food grain
production Source RNR Statistics (2000) Thimphu is growing at  rate, which is
more than three times the national rate, with Phuentsholing only slightly behind
At this rate, close to half of Bhutan’ population will be living in urban areas
within the next 20–25 years (Vision 2020) The rate of urbanization is  concern
for several reasons # services, including land legislation and land markets, are
not well developed Employment opportunities in urban areas will not be enough
for  growing urban population, which could result in social and political
instability in the country (see Box ) # Given the topography of the country, the
land required to accommodate the growing urban population is limited The general
absence of  at land for population could result in the settlement at steeper
valley slopes, which should be best left for vegetation cover Apart from
enhancing deforestation, this could also add to the risks of erosion, disruption
of watercourses, and the possibility of  ooding and landslides during monsoons
Towns are poorly equipped to deal with  rapid inﬂ ux of migrants, as urban
infrastructure and There is  need to restrict migration by creating viable
opportunities in rural areas, which would allow the poor to participate in the
market economy and improve their livelihoods Given the intrinsic constraints
faced by the agriculture sector in Bhutan, the key to rural development will be
agricultural diversiﬁ cation and promotion of small-scale and cottage industries
in rural areas, with an emphasis on high-value niche markets This will also
catalyse more dispersed and regionally balanced growth and employment compared
to #     RURAL–URBAN MIGRATION: DRIVERS AND FALLOUT The fi rst labour force
survey held in 1998 found that 76% of the labour force was employed in the
agriculture sectorAfter that, employment in the Renewable and Natural Resources
(RNR) sector decreased to about 66% in Over 81% of the unemployed in Bhutan live
in rural areas  study on rural–urban migration, carried out by the Ministry of
Agriculture, found that 47% of all households comprised migrants While lack of
educational facilities was the reason behind migration of 46% of the people, 19%
left their villages due to small landholdings, drudgery of farm work,
unproductive agriculture, crop damages by wild animals, and natural calamities
The demographic transition in the country will mean that the growth in the
demand for jobs will far exceed the rate of population growth Vision 2020 for
Bhutan notes that by 2020,  total of 267 000 jobs will need to be created even
under the most favourable demographic scenario The number of job seekers will be
considerably higher if one factors in those who chose to leave the RNR sector
and migrate to urban areas and those who are displaced as  result of
mechanization or improvements in labour productivity in the agriculture and
other sectors On the other hand, the gross domestic product (GDP) growth in
Bhutan in the last decade or so has been driven by hydropower, construction,
service, and power-intensive manufacturing sectors, which have relatively low
employment elasticity The Bhutanese have  preference for public sector jobs;
however, given the emphasis on the formation of  compact, professional, and effi
cient organization, future opportunities in the government will also be limited
82 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING
ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT resources Several initiatives are
being undertaken in rural areas, as listed below # large industry Currently,
over 55% of industries in Bhutan are located in Thimphu, Chukha, and Paro
Dzongkhags (Statistical Yearbook 2005) The importance of industry and services
in rural areas is evident from the fact that in rural areas,  greater proportion
of the non-poor work in these sectors compared to the poor (Table ) Enhancing
food grain production through improved crop varieties and complementary inputs
Exploiting the regional and seasonal comparative advantages that Bhutan has in
the cultivation of both temperate and sub-temperate fruits and vegetables In
2004, exports of oranges constituted about % of the total value of top 10
exports from Bhutan (Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan 2005) The government aims at
increasing the value of horticultural exports by 200% by 2007 and by 300% by
2012 (Vision 2020) Diversifying the rural economic base by encouraging other
high-value, low-value, and off-season produce, such as medicinal and aromatic
plants, and  oriculture Developing small and cottage industries in rural areas
with an emphasis on creating productive employment rather than capturing export
markets Promoting animal health services, feed and fodder production, and animal
breeding services, given that livestock represent an important asset, especially
for the marginal farmers Further, development of backyard livestock farms can
also bring down imports of animal products like cheese and meat # Table  SECTOR
OF EMPLOYMENT, BY POVERTY STATUS Urban (%) Rural (%) Sector of employment Poor
Non-poor Poor Non-poor Agriculture 49 76 52 89 Industry 96 47 54 81 # Services
55 77 94 30 Source National Statistical Bureau (2004) Though small- and cottage-
scale  rms comprise about 40% of the industrial units in Bhutan (Figure ), the
sector is dominated by micro-enterprises (largely comprising small family-run
business such as restaurants, tea stalls, and rice mills) that have limited
scope for expansion The Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) is following  ‘triple
gem approach’ for agricultural development and diversiﬁ cation by increasing in
productivity, accessibility, and marketing order to achieve national food
security, raise cash incomes and employment opportunities in rural areas,
generate export revenue, and achieve an improvement in the nutritional status of
the rural population while conserving and managing natural # # The realization
of these objectives calls for urgent and signiﬁ cant expansion of rural
infrastructure, including farm mechanization, irrigation, roads, cold storage
facilities, and access of small-scale producers to technology, credit, and
markets Left to market mechanisms, the focus on the growth of urban and large
industry will continue for reasons related to economies of scale, proﬁ tability,
and access to infrastructure, markets, credit, and technology Energy will be
key input in the government’ efforts towards rural development and reducing the
rates of rural–urban migration The Vision Statement clearly brings out the
importance of roads and electricity in bringing the communities out of their
isolation, increasing access to markets FIGURE  DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRY, BY
SIZE (%) 83 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY Preservation the and environment are the main principles of the
development philosophy in Bhutan This is not only important in itself but also
closely linked to both economic growth of the country (given the economic
importance of hydropower and tourism) and poverty reduction (given the
dependence of communities on forests for food, medicines, energy, fodder,
organic fertilizers, and so on) Environmental sustainability would, therefore,
be  key criterion in the policy-making across sectors From the point of view of
the energy sector, important environmental issues include possible diversion of
forest land towards constructing energy infrastructure, ecological impacts of
large hydro projects, more so in the case of storage projects that are likely to
come up in future, and the potential impacts of climate change on the energy
sector of Bhutan Subsequent sections discuss these aspects in detail and
services, and facilitating rural industrialization and, hence, creating
productive employment in rural areas sustainable use of Energy for rural
development Energy is  key ingredient for rural development, for agricultural
growth and whether diversiﬁ cation, for the promotion of rural industry or for
augmenting the provision of basic education and health care services Energy
constitutes  key direct and indirect input into agriculture Direct energy needs
include energy required for land preparation, cultivation, irrigation,
harvesting, post-harvest processing, food production, storage, and the transport
of agricultural inputs and outputs Indirect energy needs are in the form of
sequestered energy in fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, and insecticides
Modern energy consumption can also be expected to increase agricultural
productivity and food security Agriculture in Bhutan continues to be based, to
large extent, on animal and human energy Commercial energy use in agriculture is
limited (Bhutan Energy Data Directory 2005) While the input supply system in
Bhutan is subsidized and access is universal, its beneﬁ ts are constrained by
the lack of proper storage facilities, transport, and access roads, the
development of all of which is dependent on energy infrastructure in rural areas
For example, horticulture products require  temperature-controlled atmosphere
for transportation between the farm and the end market, and storage Again,
irrigation systems in the country, largely dependent on the monsoons, are
usually small, being typically less than 100 hectares in extent, and are
gravity-fed from streams The development of engineered irrigation, especially
for horticulture, will also need energy inputs as is true for livestock health
services Small-scale rural industry can also beneﬁ  from augmented energy
infrastructure in rural areas it is Impacts of energy infrastructure on forest
area and ecology Conservation of forests and biodiversity is  central tenet in
Bhutan’ development endeavour The Department of Forests (now known as the
Department of Forestry Services) was, interestingly, the  rst government
department to be instituted in 1952, with the objective to harvest timber, the
most visible natural resource at the time The principle of conservation against
exploitation began as early as 1969 when the Bhutan Forest Act was enacted The
Act brought all forest resources under state control with the intent to curb
exploitation and rationalize usage Subsequently,  number of legislations have
been enacted to protect the forests of the country Box  gives  chronology of
conservation legislation and initiatives in Bhutan Bhutan currently has about
72% of its total area under forest, including about 25% area declared  Analysis
at  broad regional level suggests  correlation between high per capita modern
energy consumption and food production While regional data may conceal many
differences between countries, crop types, and urban and rural areas, the
correlation is strong in developing countries, where high inputs of modern
energy can be assumed to have  positive impact on agricultural output and food
production levels The correlation is less strong in industrialized countries,
where food production is near or above required levels, and changes in
production level may reﬂ ect changes in diet and food rather than any advantages
gained from an increased supply of modern energy 84 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY,
DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT as protected area The National Forest Policy and
the Constitution of Bhutan made it mandatory to keep 60% of the land under
forest cover Forests in the country face extreme pressure in terms of meeting
the needs of the population (for timber, fuelwood, fodder, medicinal and
aromatic plants, pastures, organic manure, bamboo and cane for handicrafts and
household implements, and pulp for traditional paper making) as well as
commercial harvest of forest resources, resulting in localized overuse of
forests Such activities are not prohibited in forest areas but are restricted
and subject to  clearance from the government The Environmental Assessment Act,
2002, establishes procedures for the assessment of the potential effects of
strategic plans, policies, programmes, and projects on the environment and for
the determination of policies  CHRONOLOGY OF CONSERVATION LEGISLATION AND
INITIATIVES IN BHUTAN    The Department of Forests (now known as the Department
of Forestry Services) was the very fi rst government department to be instituted
in The objective was to harvest timber, the most visible natural resource at the
time The principle of conservation against exploitation was introduced as early
as 1969 when the Bhutan Forest Act was enacted The Act brought all forest
resources under state control, with the intent to curb exploitation and
rationalize usage As the forerunner of all modern legislation, it also refl
ected the importance attached by the government to the conservation of forests
This was further consolidated in 1974 with the formulation of the National
Forest Policy, the nationalization of logging operations in 1979, and the
establishment of  network of protected areas in ban on the exports of wood logs
was imposed in 1973, which aff ected the cutting of forests in Bhutan for
commercial exploitation The Bhutan Trust Fund (BTF) for Environmental
Conservation was created in 1991 under the Royal Charter as an independent
mechanism to sustain fi nancing for environmental conservation, primarily in
protected areas The national protected areas system was revised again in 1993 to
make it more representative of the various major ecosystems in the country In
1995, the Forest and Nature Conservation Act, or FNCA, was ratifi ed, repealing
the Bhutan Forest Act, The aim of the FNCA was to address evolving conservation
needs, including community participation and protected area management In the
same year, Bhutan ratifi ed two major international conventions related to
environmental conservation—the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) In keeping with
the requirements of the CBD, the country produced its fi rst Biodiversity Action
Plan in 1998 and, subsequently, updated it in 2002 to refl ect progress and new
conservation needs  network of biological corridors linked the national
protected areas system in 1999, enlarging the system from 26% to 35% of the
country’ total geographical area In November 1999, the biological corridors were
bequeathed as  ‘Gift to the Earth’ from the people of Bhutan The Environmental
Assessment Act was passed by the National Assembly in 2000 and the Regulation
for Environmental Clearance of Projects and the Regulation on Strategic
Environmental Assessment came into eff ect in The Environmental Assessment Act,
2000, entered into force on 14 July The Regulation for Environmental Clearance
of Projects and the Regulation on Strategic Environmental Assessment came into
eff ect on  April Many conservation milestones were charted as Bhutan passed the
National Biodiversity Act, 2003, and acceded to the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) of Wild Fauna and Flora and the UN
Convention on Combating Desertifi cation (UNCCD) in Source Department of
Forestry Services, Ministry of Agriculture 2004; National Environment Commission
website <  At present, two deﬁ nitions exist for the calculation of forest cover
in Bhutan The legal deﬁ nition in the Forest and Nature Conservation Act deﬁ nes
forest as ‘any land and waterbody, whether or not under vegetative cover, in
which no person has acquired  permanent or transferable right of use and
occupancy, whether such land is located inside or outside the forest boundary
pillars, and includes land registered in  person’ name as grazing land or
woodlot for collection of leaf litter’ While the international deﬁ nition of
forests includes only forest proper and scrub forest, the legal deﬁ nition
includes woodlot for collection of leaf litter, pastureland, and waterbodies It
is noted that the Ministry of Agriculture uses both these deﬁ nitions in
different contexts—for prevention of encroachments and management of forest
area, the legal deﬁ nition is used, whereas for resource assessment, the
international deﬁ nition is adopted 85 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT
maps of areas to be taken up for compensatory afforestation, phased forestry
operations, by year, details of species to be planted and  suitability certiﬁ
cate from afforestation/management point of view, along with the cost structure
of various operations while seeking approval for proposals of dereservation or
diversion of forest land for non- forest uses There are two basic ways in which
compensatory afforestation has been envisaged in India  Afforestation to be
carried out over an area equivalent to the diverted forest land This land should
be close to reserved forest or protected forest so as to enable the forest
department to effectively manage the newly planted area and measures to reduce
potential adverse effects and promote environmental beneﬁ ts To support the
implementation of the Act, the Regulation for the Environmental Clearance of
Projects and Regulation of Strategic Environmental Assessment was adopted in The
National Environment Commission (NEC) has issued guidelines for  number of
sectors, including hydropower, and transmission lines to assist project
proponents through the process of acquiring an environmental clearance for their
project The main the Environmental Assessment Act in the context of hydropower
projects are summarized in Box  While these cover the major impacts that are
likely to arise, it is suggested that in view of the possible increase in the
diversion of forest areas for the creation of large generation capacity
(especially if storage projects are also built in the future) and transmission
infrastructure,  policy of compensatory afforestation be introduced once the
project meets all the requirements of the Environmental Assessment Act
requirements under  Compensatory afforestation may be done on the degraded
forest land the extent of which is twice that of the forest area that is being
diverted/dereserved The identiﬁ ed non-forest land is claimed by the state
forest department and declared as protected forests so that the plantation
raised can be maintained permanently In India, for instance, compensatory
afforestation is one of the most important conditions stipulated by the central
government at the behest of the Supreme Court This  nancial mechanism mandates
providing  comprehensive scheme, including the details of non-forest/degraded
forest area identiﬁ ed for compensatory afforestation, It is further suggested
that forests that are managed and valued primarily for their ecological values
(as against timber and non-timber forest products) be classiﬁ ed as conservation
forests, with more severe restriction on diversion compared to other forests
DETAILS SOUGHT FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE OF HYDROPOWER PROJECTS    • Project
details (for example, type, size, location, costs, technical parameters) • Roads
and transmission lines to be constructed • Alternatives, including energy and
site alternatives • Project physical environment details, for example,
topography, hydrology, possibility of being aff ected by glacier lake outburst
fl ood (GLOF), erosion rates, and sediment yield • Biological environment, for
example, impact on land use, vegetation, protected areas, wildlife, fi sh
species, and wetlands • Social environment, for example, land tenure of areas,
families aff ected, loss of houses and infrastructure, cultural and heritage
sites, water use confl icts (presence of water users in dewatered areas),
aesthetics • Mitigation measures and costs • Monitoring programme Source
Application for Environmental Clearance Guideline for Hydropower, National
Environment Commission, RGoB, 2004 86 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT
Forest conservation and forest regeneration In Bhutan, forests are developed
using the principle of natural forests The forest area that is cleared is left
untouched for the regeneration of forest naturally This policy is followed to
retain the composition and nature of natural forest Plantation of outside
species is not encouraged However, in rural areas that are close to settlements,
community social forestry is now being encouraged June  is celebrated as ‘Social
Forestry Day’ every year, which encourages afforestation Transmission network
needs large area of land to establish the network, and efforts are needed to
keep it safe from forest  res Mainly the land around the tower is cleared, and
once electrical lines are installed, green cover is regenerated in most of the
area Pruning and cutting are done to maintain the clarity and visibility between
the trees and transmission lines Forests are also important to maintain the
watershed areas and reduce the erosion of land, which ultimately affects the
silting of hydropower plants and river basins impacts Situated in one of the
most seismically active zones of the world, Bhutan faces continual threat of
earthquakes Flash  oods and landslides are annual occurrences, which cause
signiﬁ cant losses to lives and damage to property IPCC (2007) reiterates that
settlements in mountain regions are at enhanced risk to glacial lake outburst
oods, or GLOFs, caused by melting glaciers  note on climate extreme events is
given in Box  The most likely climatic events in Bhutan are increased GLOF
events and  ooding Also, increased precipitation in areas without proper
drainage systems can cause soil instabilities and, consequently, landslides and
ash  oods The  rst National Communication (NATCOM) of Bhutan identiﬁ es six key
areas vulnerable to climate change These include forests and biodiversity,
agriculture, water resources, GLOFs, health, and landslides The agriculture and
hydropower sectors are the most vulnerable owing to their innate dependency on
the monsoon and temperature patterns As more than 70% of the Bhutanese
population depends on subsistence farming, crop failure and stress on livestock
rearing will affect the most vulnerable communities in the rural areas
Uncertainty associated with the timing of monsoons adds to the vulnerability of
the farming community The main cash crops grown by farmers (rice, potatoes,
chillies, apples, and oranges) are extremely sensitive to water and temperature
variations (NEC 2006) The presence of mountainous topography and scattered
settlements implies high costs for social services and development of
infrastructure, which add to the climate vulnerability of the country Potential
impacts of changing climatic conditions on the energy sector Despite Bhutan
being  low contributor to the global emissions, climate change is likely to have
adverse impacts on the country, spanning all sectors of the economy and
impacting livelihoods and well-being at large Several studies project the
impacts of climate change to be severe in fragile ecosystems such as mountainous
regions As  least developed country situated in  mountain ecosystem and owing to
its limited coping capacity, Bhutan is doubly vulnerable to possible climate
change Impacts on the hydropower industry due to changes in the water regime and
increased natural     NOTABLE CLIMATE EXTREME EVENTS IN BHUTAN • The October
1994 fl ash fl ood on the Pho Chhu river, following  glacial lake outburst in
the Lunana area, seriously damaged the lower valleys of Punakha •  rare dry
spell with no snowfall occurred in the winter of 1998, and even rarer mid-summer
snowfall occurred in some places in the north in July • Flash fl oods in early
August 2000 caused by torrential rains had large-scale impacts on life and
property  < 87 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT Adaptation and
mitigation options The National Adaptation Programme of Action identiﬁ es least-
cost options (economic, social, and environmental) based on the use of local
resources for adaptation to climate change There are also several ‘no-regrets’
strategies These are usually targeted on the most severe effects and the
greatest vulnerabilities to climate change Investments in such options
essentially present ‘win-win’ solutions, since they have ancillary beneﬁ ts,
apart from avoiding direct climate-related costs Some adaptation measures
suggested for the country to address various hazards are listed in Table  These
measures will require the development of information and research systems to
better monitor and understand the impacts of climate change as well as assess
signiﬁ cant capacity building of relevant institutions in the country and
climate- sensitive sectors, and inform the vulnerable population on climate
change and adaptation issues have been options Several of these disasters can
hamper production, leading to the reduction of exports, which will ultimately
impact economic growth (Alam and Tshering 2004) Changes in the climate system
have both direct and indirect implications on the hydrological regime An
increase in rainfall intensity may increase run- off and rates of soil erosion
on cleared land and may also accelerate sedimentation in the existing water
supply network or reservoirs Increase in temperature will result in the retreat
of glaciers, increasing the volume of lakes, ultimately leading to GLOFs
Possible impacts of GLOFs in Bhutan include disruption of river  ows and changes
in sediment yield, thereby impacting hydropower generation and water supply;
destructing settlements, infrastructure, and agricultural land; and leading to
the loss of biodiversity, apart from other impacts on human lives downstream
Table  ADAPTATION OPTIONS ACCORDING TO HAZARD TYPE Adaptation option Climate
hazard Glacial lake outburst flood (GLOF; due to temperature rise) Installation
of early warning systems Artificial lowering of glacier lake levels Assessment
of glacial lake outburst flooding threats to hydropower projects Landslide (due
to high-intensity rain) Soil conservation and land management Preparation of
national database on landslide-prone areas and intensity of landslides to assess
the risk of landslides River bank protection and small stream catchment
protection Slope stabilization of areas prone to major landslides and flash
floods Flash flood (result of GLOF or due to high-intensity rain) Watershed
catchment management integrated with land management/soil conservation Weather
and climate forecasting Promote community-based forest management and
afforestation projects in ways to conserve land, water resources, and wood
production Protect water treatment plants to ensure safe drinking water Drought
(due to temperature rise and/or longer intervals between rains) Optimize the
installed power plant capacities Low river flow/water shortage studies/impact on
hydropower generation, drinking, and irrigation water supply, and so on Weather
and climate forecasting Research and development on water use efficiency,
resistant crop varieties, water harvesting 88 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND
ENVIRONMENT (involving large sunk costs) While competition should be encouraged
in the former segment, the latter should be regulated and perhaps even be
operated by the public sector Further, the new model needs to be pursued after
carefully assessing institutional and structural prerequisites in  speciﬁ
country or industry highlighted in National Adaptation Programme of Action
(NAPA) and NATCOM It is proposed that  high-level taskforce, headed by the NEC,
be constituted to study the impacts of climate change on the hydropower sector
speciﬁ cally and propose various mitigation and adaptation measures that need to
be taken in  time-bound manner its GOVERNANCE OF ENERGY The energy sector needs
to be governed for meeting social, environmental, and growth objectives linked
to energy while providing conditions that are conducive to private investment,
thus empowering local governments and communities to play  proactive role in
managing energy systems In Bhutan, the Bhutan Power Corporation (BPC) is
responsible for the construction and maintenance of the transmission and
distribution network in the country Additionally, the BPC also owns and operates
small and micro power plants Major power plants like Tala, Chukha, Kurichu, and
Basochhu are operated by independent power corporations or authorities The
Department of Energy (DoE) has brought these generating companies under one
umbrella by creating larger Druk Green Power Corporation Ltd (DGPC) Some of the
issues that would need to be factored in while determining structural reforms in
the energy sector are as follows # Structure of the energy sector One important
aspect of governance is the ownership and structure of the energy sector and its
regulation For much of the 20th century and in most countries, network utilities
were vertically and horizontally integrated state monopolies The reasons for
public control of infrastructure were many—the sector’ economic importance,
desire to protect public interest in industries supplying essential services,
concerns about private monopolies, and the belief that the large investments
required for infrastructure creation could only be augmented from public
resources However, state-owned monopolies was far from satisfactory, whether in
terms of efﬁ cient and cost-effective delivery of services or in the attainment
of universal service obligations The 1990s saw  dramatic change in views on how
network utilities should be owned, organized, and regulated, with much emphasis
on the efﬁ ciency beneﬁ ts of competition and privatization However, over
period of time,  strong need has emerged to qualify the beneﬁ ts of the new
model and develop clear guidelines on how it should work (World Bank 2004) One
of the key messages that emerged from the experience of the last decade is that
network utilities encompass distinct activities with entirely different economic
characteristics Electricity generation and distribution may be potentially
competitive segments, but transmission is  natural monopoly State of network
facilities Unbundling and introduction of competition require mature well-
developed network facilities, minimizing the need for new investments wherein
the incentive problems are more likely as compared to potentially competitive
like distribution In case of Bhutan, as discussed in Chapter , network
facilities still require considerable expansion and investment from transition
capacity The Institutional monopoly to competition or the co-existence of the
two forms in different segments of the sector plays  critical role Regulatory
requirements in the latter systems are likely to be far more complex, requiring
strong institutional capacity Proﬁ le of consumers The general economic status
of consumers and their ability to pay are important determinants of the success
of privatization Private investment may not be forthcoming in cases where the
government wants to provide energy at lifeline tariffs to  large section of
consumers, as is the case in Bhutan, unless the private investors are assured of
reasonable rate of return segments the performance of # # 89 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY,
DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT before granting any further licenses, keeping in
mind their stipulated energy demand and available supply options during the lean
seasons The setting up of industries needs to be determined within an overall
environmentally sustainable framework Promotion of industries should be such
that aspects such as available power, export of power, utilization of export
proceeds, employment generation, value addition, trade, and alternative patterns
of industrial growth are carefully considered In the existing subsidized regime
for the industrial sector, provision of subsidized power to the energy-intensive
sector may be at the cost of revenues forgone from exports Integrating the
opportunity cost in supplying to the industrial sector, it is recommended that
niche industries be encouraged in Bhutan, which utilize natural resources, along
with other industries that can function with minimal energy  note on viability
of power-intensive industries is given in Box  The existing tariff regime should
also be modiﬁ ed so as to recover the complete economic cost of providing
electricity The tariff rationalization towards gradual removal of subsidies to
high voltage and medium voltage consumers remains important in this respect It
is seen that while the average tariffs have been revised several times, they
still remain highly subsidized In January 2003, the  at rate system of tariff
was replaced by the progressive charge with different rates for the domestic and
industrial usage Accordingly, in the low-voltage category, consumers with less
than 80 kWh consumption had to pay Nu 60  unit, while the rate for those
consuming 80–120 kWh and above 200 kWh per month was  xed at Nu 95 and Nu 20 per
unit, respectively The tariff for the medium and high voltage was  xed at Nu 95
and Nu 90 per unit, respectively, along with the capacity charge of Nu 54 000
per megawatt per month Though the steps towards tariff revisions have reduced
the level of subsidies, the burden still remains high The Bhutan Electricity
Authority (BEA), an independent regulator, has been entrusted with the
responsibility of tariff regulation The Authority For all these reasons, it may
be premature to restructure and open up the electricity sector in Bhutan On the
other hand, the DGPC is  holding company responsible for building additional
hydropower projects as well as operating and maintaining the built-in projects
by 2008, in  manner similar to the National Hydro Power Corporation (NHPC)
established in India Further, transmission and distribution are likely to remain
in the public sector in the foreseeable future However, given the limited
availability of public  nancial and administrative resources, the government
should tap private investment, the electricity including generation sector and
more proactively involve local communities in managing off-grid systems and the
operation and maintenance of local distribution lines foreign capital, in Tariff
regime The other related issue in terms of  nancial and cost constraints is
tariff setting for the sale of electricity domestically and for exporting to
India Over the years, Bhutan has regulated the electricity prices domestically,
setting them below the economic costs to fulﬁ  the social obligations and
promote industrial sector This act is justiﬁ ed in providing assistance to the
underprivileged sections and in promoting regional balanced development, but has
led to increased inefﬁ ciencies in the consumption patterns of energy Coupled
with this is the lack of demand side management (DSM) measures, which have
further resulted in inefﬁ cient usage of the available resources The prevalent
low tariffs have also resulted in subsidizing the inefﬁ ciencies in the
industrial sector While the pricing policies have been designed to strengthen
the industrial base in Bhutan, provision of subsidized electricity in several
ways can harm the economic progress if it is unable to generate adequate forward
linkages to compete with the export proceeds of sale of power to India In the
current situation of low electricity tariffs, while power-intensive industries
are foreseen to emerge,  careful feasibility analysis needs to be performed
Compendium of background papers, BIMSTEC workshop on ‘Sharing of experience in
developing hydro projects’, 30–31 October 2006, organized by the Ministry of
Power, Government of India 90 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN CHAPTER  OVERARCHING ISSUES: ENERGY, DEVELOPMENT, AND ENVIRONMENT
VIABILIT  OF POWER INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES Electricity tariff  have largely been
aff ordable to stimulate the industrial sector in Bhutan The industrial sector
consumes % of the total energy and is the largest consumer of electricity in the
country; its consumption is pegged at 420 MU, which is about % of total
electricity consumed by the industrial sector in The main manufacturing
industries in Bhutan are Penden Cement Authority Ltd (PCAL), Bhutan Ferro Alloys
Ltd (BFAL), and Bhutan Calcium Carbide Ltd (BCCL) Besides these, Druk Cement
Company Ltd (DCCL), Druk Iron and Steel Plant (DISL), and Bhutan Steels Ltd
(BSL) have also been set up, which consume almost 95% of the electricity used by
the sector As seen from the energy demand analysis for the BAU (business-as-
usual) scenario, with the upcoming industries that have recently received
licenses, the energy demand from the sector is bound to increase in the coming
years This increased demand level would lead to  serious confl ict with the
total available supply, which has to meet the growing needs of other sectors as
well, besides industrial sector Besides the availability factor, viability of
the power industries is also dependent on the cost of available supply With the
prevalent low tariff regime for the industrial sector, industries are viable
options However, with the phasing out of subsidies, as proposed by the Bhutan
Electricity Authority (BEA), their existence might come under threat
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY The power transmission and
distribution network in Bhutan is managed by the BPC and comprises two main
grids, the western grid and the eastern grid, each of them covering parts of
eight Dzongkhags would determine the tariff as per the tariff policy, with
public announcement and dissemination The overriding objective of the tariff
policy has been gradual phasing out of the subsidies— 10% increase in power
tariff is proposed annually for the next  ve years till Besides tariff revision,
another option that could be explored in the context of Bhutan is cost plus
tariff In case the industry wishes to overdraw electricity, the regulator could
consider the option of providing it at  cost above the actual tariff rate,
subject to the availability and fulﬁ lment of legal requirements The other
alternative could be to charge the second tariff to the level of export proceeds
System planning The network can be divided into  bulk power transmission system
for supplying power from Bhutan to India and an area supply or sub-station
system for supplying domestic loads (WRMP 2004) 91 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER          RECOMMENDATIONS Recommendations This
chapter consolidates various At the same time, energy development must plan for
environmental externalities because,  rst, augmenting energy infrastructure will
have impacts on forests, biodiversity, and the environment; and second, in
designing energy systems, the potential impacts of climate change in Bhutan need
to be taken into consideration Governance of the energy sector will be crucial
in meeting social and environmental obligations while tapping various sources of
investments and building capacity across the tiers of the government to manage
energy systems This is especially relevant, since the political system in Bhutan
is in  phase of transition But  rst,  critical cross- cutting issue of energy
security is considered, which almost all countries of the world are facing
components of the energy management plan in  comprehensive manner The analysis
carried out in the earlier chapters has identiﬁ ed and quantiﬁ ed current and
future needs of the energy sector, and accordingly, certain strategies have been
recommended with probable impact analysis INTEGRATED ENERGY MANAGEMENT PLAN
COMPONENTS The previous chapters discussed speciﬁ  supply and demand side
strategies for Bhutan This chapter examines some overarching issues that cut
across these strategies and, in  sense, link them with the larger development
objectives of the country The national development targets, as reﬂ ected in the
Ninth Plan and Bhutan 2020, closely match the Millennium Development Goals and
reﬂ ect  strong national political commitment to socio- economic development
Energy systems need to be planned in such  way that they promote these
objectives, with  focus on poverty reduction and balanced regional development,
taking into account the special needs of remote and rural communities This will
require an emphasis on small- and medium-sized units and reduced dependence on
the (hydropower) construction industry such that the employment generating
capacity of industry is enhanced Also, there is an urgent need to revive
agriculture through  focus on value-added products and rural development, since
over 60% of the country’ labour force is still dependent on agriculture
INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP The analysis of the energy sector of Bhutan reveals that
there is no focal ministry/department to undertake the coordination of all the
activities related to energy Moreover, the relevant information is scattered on
various energy sources/fuels along various sources because single source of
information is not available As far as renewable energy and energy
conservation/efﬁ ciency are concerned, there is very limited awareness among the
stakeholders, particularly the users This lack of awareness hampers their
ability to make an informed and judicious choice The existing institutional
infrastructure for the energy sector in Bhutan is shown in Figure   brief note
on different institutions presented in Figure  is given in the subsequent
section 93 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
RECOMMENDATIONS power sector policy, plans, programmes, and
guidelines/regulations; feasibility studies related to hydropower development;
and preparing detailed project reports (DPRs) for the sustainable development of
hydropower projects The DoE also performs the function of Royal Government of
Bhutan (RGoB)/donor/lender fund coordination related to energy/power sector
projects It also has the mandate to issue techno- economic clearances and
technical sanctions for all capital works in the energy/power sector conducting
Bhutan Electricity Authority The Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA) is
functional autonomous agency established as per Section  of the Electricity Act
of Bhutan, 2001, to regulate the electricity supply industry of Bhutan four
commission The Authority consists of members and  chairman, appointed by the
minister as per the Electricity Act, 2001, and has  full-time secretariat in
Thimphu Functions of the BEA are as follows # FIGURE  EXISTING INSTITUTIONAL
INFRASTRUCTURE IN ENERGY SECTOR Ministry of Economic Affairs The erstwhile
Ministry of Trade and Industry, which was subsequently renamed as the Ministry
of Economic Affairs, was established in Initially, known as the Ministry of
Trade, Commerce and Industry, it was established as  full- edged Ministry in
1968, under the reign of the third Druk Gyalpo His Majesty King Jigme Dorji
Wangchuck, and renamed as the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Forests Presently,
besides the inclusion of the power and mining sector, it has been ofﬁ cially
designated as the Ministry of Economic Affairs from 17 October The Ministry of
Economic Affairs comprises four technical departments, namely, the departments
of trade, industry, energy, and geology and mines besides the four service
divisions, namely, the Policy and Planning; Administration and Finance; Human
Resource; and Intellectual Property To regulate the electricity supply industry
To set technical, safety, and performance standards for the electricity supply
industry To develop electricity tariff regulations and approve domestic tariffs
To develop subsidy regulations To issue licenses and monitor compliance to
licenses To settle disputes that may arise between licensees and between
licensees and customers To prescribe royalties,  nes, and penalties, to be paid
by licensees # # # # # # Druk Holding and Investment Pursuant to the Royal
Charter dated 11 November 2007, and the Executive Order of the prime minister,
the Druk Holding and Investments Ltd (DHI) have been formed for the following
purpose # Department of Energy The Department of Energy (DoE) within the
Ministry of Trade and Industry has been formed during the restructuring process
of the erstwhile Department of Power in July The DoE is responsible for the
formulation of energy and Hold shares of government-linked companies (GLCs), the
primary mandate of which is commercial Strengthen the corporate sector Make
investments by optimal usage of resources or raising funds # # 94 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  RECOMMENDATIONS Hydropower
development and planning (including hydrology, meteorology, and  ood warning
services) Hydropower promotion and trade Power systems Sustainable energy Fossil
fuels Lead, complement, and spearhead the growth of  dynamic private sector,
individually or through joint ventures # # # Druk Green Power Corporation The
Druk Green Power Corporation Ltd (DGPC) was formed on  January 2008, with the
amalgamation of the erstwhile hydropower corporations The DGPC is responsible
for the optimal utilization of resources in the management of existing power
plants and building capacity to develop hydropower projects either
independently, through joint venture or by any other arrangement # # #
Considering the facts that () any surplus electricity is  potential source of
revenue earner through exports and () the preservation of its pristine
environment is country’ topmost priority, it is evident that much more emphasis
would have to be laid on () new renewable energy resources (such as biomass and
solar) and () energy conservation and energy efﬁ ciency To attain these goals,
the present Renewable Energy Department (RED) may be converted to Sustainable
Energy Department (SED) The SED would, therefore, make the endeavour of
mainstreaming renewable energy and energy efﬁ ciency within the country The SED
would also help in taking an integrated view of the energy situation, wherein
renewable energy and energy conservation play complementary roles The broad
functions of the SED will include the following # Bhutan Power Corporation
Bhutan Power Corporation Ltd (BPC) was launched as  public utility on  July
2002, with the mandate of distributing electricity throughout the country and
also providing transmission access for generating stations for domestic supply
as well as export One of BPC’ basic mandate was to not only ensure that
electricity is available to all the citizens but to also make sure that it is
reliable, adequate, and above all, within the means of all consumers Given the
complexities of different energy sub- sectors in the country, it is desirable to
take an integrated and holistic approach to address myriad challenges that the
country is facing in the  eld of energy It is, therefore, suggested to bring
petroleum as well as coal under the purview of the DoE, besides electricity,
renewable energy, and energy conservation/efﬁ ciency In order to take on these
wider responsibilities, the DoE may be transformed into  full- edged Ministry of
Energy Indeed, Good Governance Plus document also mentions the formation of the
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources Management This move would accelerate the
progress of development as envisaged in the vision documents and master plans
formulation, planning, Facilitation, policy coordination, and monitoring in
renewable energy Promotion of & and energy efﬁ ciency in association with the
engineering colleges; demonstrations and resource assessment Capacity
development at various levels, including at the Dzongkhag levels Energy
labelling/endorsement Financing Knowledge management creation Integration with
other organizations and developmental programmes # # # # awareness and # # With
the SED playing  pivotal role, the following is suggested to promote
institutional set-up renewable energy and energy efﬁ ciency # In the interim,
the DoE may be mandated to look after not only the hydropower energy and
renewable energy but also policies regarding import of petroleum fuels and coal
Thus, different departments/divisions may be created to look after the speciﬁ
areas, as mentioned subsequently The SED would formulate guidelines, policy
measures, plans, and programmes in consultation with Dzongkhags The policy
framework may 95 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER
RECOMMENDATIONS be designed taking into account the district needs and
recommendations The bottom-up approach would help in providing solutions
appropriate to the Dzongkhags concerned It may be desirable to have
‘decentralized institutional set-up’ at the Dzongkhag level Rather than creating
new agencies, the relevant existing department(), the Planning Department, may
be designated and empowered to carry out activities related to renewable energy
and energy efﬁ ciency The SED may undertake setting up of energy efﬁ ciency
labelling programme in collaboration with the STQA and the Industrial
Development Centre The task of creating awareness at various levels, on the
potential and relevance of renewable energy and energy efﬁ ciency in the
emerging energy scenario as well as their different aspects may be undertaken by
the SED through the dzongkhags, Industrial Development Centre, Royal Society for
Protection of Nature (RSPN), Bhutan Chambers of Commerce and Industries (BCCI),
and suitable NGO() The SED may establish an information centre on renewable
energy and energy efﬁ ciency, which would function as  single source of
information # like # # Figure  shows the suggested institutional set- up
graphically  detailed note on the structure and function of the organization is
given in Annexure  # Ministry of Energy Department of Hydropower Development and
Planning Department of Hydropower Promotion and Trade Dzongkhags Department of
Power Systems Engineering College Renewable Energy Sustainable Energy Department
NGOs Energy conservation/ energy efficiency Industrial Dev Centre Department of
Petroleum Import and Trade Department of Coal STQA RSPN BCCI NGOs FIGURE
SUGGESTED INSTITUTIONAL SET-UP 96 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  RECOMMENDATIONS IMPLEMENTATION OF ELECTRIC VEHICLES With
vast potential available for hydropower generation, use of electricity for mass
transport and electric/hybrid vehicles for personal transport are viable options
for Bhutan Hybrid (petrol–electric) and electric vehicles are now being
developed by many major automobile manufacturers worldwide Use of electric
vehicle by the individuals as well as for the public transport system may reduce
the burden of import of petrol and diesel on the Bhutanese economy It is
observed that the replacement of personnel petrol vehicle and some public
transport systems such as mini buses in the city like Thimphu with the electric
vehicles can not only reduce the petrol consumption of the city but will also
help in reducing pollution Total petrol consumption in 2005 was 13 775
kilolitres, which is projected to increase to 34 105 kilolitres in 2015 and to
51 673 kilolitres in 2020 under the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario Petrol is
mainly consumed by light transport vehicles such as cars and two-wheelers In
2000, total number of light vehicles was 7438, which increased to 17 712 in
projection has been made based on the trend from 2000 to 2006, and it is found
that the number of light vehicles will be increased to 48 452 in 2015 and to 73
680 in 2020 under the BAU scenario To reduce the petrol consumption by vehicles,
the government may promote the use of electric vehicles by citizens An analysis
on the potential savings in petrol accrued by using electric vehicles is
presented in the subsequent section Cost in Rs/person/km 50 00 50 00 50 00 50
occupancy  occupancy  occupancy  occupancy Level of occupancy Petrol vehicle
Electric vehicle FIGURE  COST PER PERSON PER KILOMETER FOR PETROL VEHICLE AND
ELECTRIC VEHICLE AT DIFFERENT OCCUPANCIES Potential for petrol saving by using
electric vehicles Following assumptions have been made to calculate the
estimated petrol savings # Electricity consumed during one full charging of the
electric vehicle is  kWh Distance travelled by electric vehicles in one full
charging is 80 km Mileage of petrol vehicle is 12 km per litre Price of
electricity is Rs 00 per kWh Number of days the vehicles are used in  year is
365 days Price of petrol is Rs 00 per litre Average run per day per vehicle is
about 15 km # # # # # It is suggested that initially, about 1000 personal
electric vehicles may be introduced by 2012 and then up to 5000 vehicles by 2015
and up to 15 000 vehicles may be introduced by Based on the assumptions given
above, saving in the amount of petrol is calculated It is estimated that by
following this approach, total saving of petrol by the year 2015 will be about
2281 kilolitres, and by 2020, it will be about 6843 kilolitres The replacement
of petrol vehicles with electric vehicles will reduce the petrol demand in
future and will increase the total electricity demand in Bhutan Based on the
above assumptions, it is estimated that by 2015, Bhutan may save about Nu 94
million per year, and by 2020, it will save about Nu 280 million per year
Economy of the use of electric vehicles An analysis has been carried out for
comparing the economy in the use of petrol vehicle and electric vehicle The
result is presented in Figure , which shows the cost in Nu/km/person for
different occupancies of the vehicle For the most common case of two occupancy,
the use of petrol vehicle costs about Rs 50 per person per kilometre, while the
electric vehicle costs about Re 11 per person per kilometre (Figure ) 97
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN CHAPTER  RECOMMENDATIONS
CDM potential of using electric vehicles There is  good potential for Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) by using electric vehicles The use of electric
vehicle will also help Bhutan in keeping its environment clean and reducing the
greenhouse (GHG) emission because of the reduction in petrol consumption and the
use of clean electric power, which is generated by hydropower projects It is
estimated that by 2015, Bhutan can help in reducing about 5656 tCO2 per year,
and by 2020, about 16 969 tCO2 will be reduced per year by replacing petrol
vehicles with electric vehicles commuting between ofﬁ ce and home Various
organizations may also provide charging plugs in the parking place of the ofﬁ ce
building, so that employees may charge their vehicles whenever they want to This
charging facility may be available on paying nominal fees or it may be provided
free to the employees to promote the use of electric vehicles in initial phase
Charging stations may be set up at various parking places and the charging
facility can be provided free of cost as  subsidy to the electric vehicle owners
The government may introduce mini buses running on electricity within Thimphu
city and later on from Thimphu to Paro It is, therefore, suggested to develop
master plan for the introduction of electric/hybrid vehicles in Bhutan Strategy
for the implementation of electric vehicles The implementation of electric
vehicles can be initially for the ofﬁ ce-goers, who will require 98 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN            Projected socio-economic
variables Table  Table  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT (NU BILLION @ 2000 PRICES)
POPULATION STATISTICS (IN THOUSAND) Rural regular population Urban regular
population Transient and institutional population Floating population Total
population BAU HIG Year Year 2005 2006 31 2005 2007 35 2006 185 2008 2007 2009
2008 221 2010 2009 2011 2010 2012 2011 2013 62 2012 2014 2013 2015 75 2014 2016
2015 2017 2016 63 2018 2017 43 2018 2019 271 2019 2020 259 805 BAU – business-
as-usual; HIG – high growth 2020 BAU – business-as-usual; HIG – high growth 99
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  PROJECTED
SOCIO-ECONOMIC VARIABLES Table  Table  GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT PER CAPITA
(THOUSAND NU @ 2000 PRICES) NUMBER OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS (SHOPS AND
RESTAURANTS) BAU HIG Year BAU HIG Year 2005 2005  967  967 2006 2006  385  564
2007 2007  832  220 2008 2008  310  942 2009 2009  822  736 2010 2010  369  610
2011 2011  955 10 571 2012 2012  582 11 628 2013 88 2013 10 252 12 791 2014 2014
10 970 14 070 2015 2015 11 738 15 477 2016 2016 12 560 17 025 2017 2017 13 439
18 727 2018 91 2018 14 380 20 600 2019 2019 15 386 22 660 2020 102 2020 16 463
24 926 BAU – business-as-usual; HIG – high growth BAU – business-as-usual; HIG –
high growth Table  TOURIST INFLUX (IN THOUSAND) BAU HIG Year 2005 2006 2007 18
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 BAU – business-
as-usual; HIG – high growth 100 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE             TARIFF DESIGN List of upcoming industries Table
LIST OF UPCOMING INDUSTRIES IN BHUTAN Activity Location Power demand Power
allocated Industries AWP Brewery Projects Manufacturing beer Gelephu  MWh
Bhutan Dairy and Agro Products Ltd Ultra high temperature (UHT) milk and fruit
juice /ling 44 Bhutan Brewery Pvt Ltd Production of beer 700 kVA Pasakha 64
Bhutan Carbide and Chemicals Ltd Low carbon silico manganese 11 MW Pasakha 11
Bhutan Carbide and Chemicals Ltd Manufacturing magnesium metal 12 MW Pasakha 12
Bhutan Concrete Bricks Manufacturing solid bricks and hollow blocks Pasakha 05
Bhutan Ferro Industries Manufacturing ferro silicon 27 MW Pasakha  Bhutan Health
Food Products Pvt Ltd Manufacturing specialty fats 1000 kW Pasakha  Bhutan
Metals Pvt Ltd Manufacturing copper wire Pasakha 18 Bhutan Packaging Industry
/ling 25 Bhutan Polymers Company Ltd Production of woven fabrics Samtse  Bhutan
Rolling Mills Pvt Ltd Steel re-rolling Bhalujhora  MVA  Bhutan Wood Panel
Manufacturing wooden products /ling 27 Choden Engg Workshop Automobile workshop
/ling 26 Drangchu Beverage Production of soft drinks /ling  Druk Ferro Alloys
Ltd Manufacturing ferro silicon Pasakha MVA 18 Druk Iron and Steel (Phase II)
Manufacturing steel ingots Rabtengang  MW  Druk Wang Alloys Ltd Manufacturing
ferro silicon MVA Pasakha Gyeltshen Steel Industries Manufacturing steel ingots
MW Pasakha  Jatu Wood Industries Manufacturing wooden furniture /ling 09 Jigme
Industries Pvt Ltd Dolomite processing Samtse 45 Jigme Polytex Pvt Ltd Polyester
yarn texturing Samtse 75 Kenpa Pvt Ltd Manufacturing vanaspati Pasakha  MWh
Kimpex Pvt Ltd Stone crushing /ling 13 Kimpex Pvt Ltd Manufacturing of laundry
and toilet soaps Pasakha 420 000 units 13 KK Iron & Steel Pvt Ltd Induction
furnace Pasakha #$ *(15 Kuenchap Rod and Wire Industries Pvt Ltd Manufacturing
copper rod and wire Pasakha  Lhojong Emulsion Industry Bitumen emulsion /ling 05
Mega Pvt Ltd Manufacturing vanaspati, margarine, and edible oils Pasakha 05
Bhutan Ferro Alloys Ltd Manufacturing ferro silicon Pasakha 33 18 MVA Table
contd 101 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  LIS
OF UPCOMING INDUS TRIES Table  CONTD Activity Location Power demand Power
allocated Industries Omzin Manufacturing Company Manufacturing polyster yarn and
silk fabrics Bhalujhora 43 Quality Gases Production of liquefied nitrogen/oxygen
1000 KW Pasakha  Rabten Wire Industry Manufacturing wire products Pasakha 26 RSA
Poly Products Pvt Ltd Manufacturing poly films and fabricks 1200 KVA Pasakha
RSA Polymers Manufacturing multi-layer filaments/yarn /ling 65 RSA Pvt Ltd
Marble slabs Pasakha 75   Eastern Bhutan Ferro Silicon Manufacturing ferro
silicon /Jongkhar 19 MVA 17 Samphel Norbu Products Pvt Ltd Production of
livestock feeds Pasakha 02 Singye Vanaspati Manufacturing Company Production of
vanaspati oil and fats Pasakha 05 Tashi Metal and Alloys Pvt Ltd Manufacturing
calcium silicide cordwire Pasakha MVA 12 Ugen Ferro Alloys Pvt Ltd Manufacturing
ferro silicon Pasakha 20 MVA 18 Yarab Pvt Ltd Manufacturing copper wire /ling
Yarkey Minerals Manufacturing marble slabs, chips, and tiles Pasakha 43 Yarkay
Poly Products Manufacturing textured polyster yarn /ling 65 Yarkay Poly Products
Manufacturing textured polyster yarn /ling  Zoya Enterprise Manufacturing zinc
chloride Pasakha 02 Bhutan Aluminum Products Pvt Ltd Manufacturing aluminum rod
and ACSR conductors Pasakha 400 KVA 36 Chaksampa Steel Pvt Ltd MS ingots and
structural steel Pasakha  MW  Dragon Sarvesh Bhutan Pvt Ltd Manufacturing fused
dolomite Pasakha  MW  Dralha and  Piyarelall Steel Co Pvt Ltd Manufacturing MS
angles, rods Pasakha  Lhaki Steels and Rolling Pvt Ltd Wire rod re-rolling, TMT
bars and structural steel Pasakha 20 MW 12 Non-Ferrous Metals Extrusions Ltd
Manufacturing non-ferrous metals Pasakha 7000 KW  Royal Government of Bhutan
Dungsum cement project ( MTPA) Nanglam 18 MW 18  Gobain Ceramic Materials Bhutan
Ltd Manufacturing silicon carbide Pasakha 26 MW 13 United Industries Pvt Ltd
Manufacturing specialty fats Pasakha  KVA  102 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE             TARIFF DESIGN Projected energy demand
in Bhutan, by fuel Projection of the demand of each fuel under different
scenarios has been carried out using LEAP Results of the projections are given
Abbreviations used BAU – business-as-usual; EE – energy-efﬁ cient; HIG – high
growth; HIGEE – high growth combined with energy efﬁ cient Table  Table
PROJECTED ELECTRICITY DEMAND (MILLION UNITS) PROJECTED FIREWOOD DEMAND (THOUSAND
TONNES) Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE 2005 735 735 735 735 2005
612 612 612 612 2006 749 754 744 749 2006 763 763 769 769 2007 827 837 810 820
2007 862 862 872 872 2008 830 637 804 618 2008 2215 2017 2232 2042 2009 834 640
801 616 2009 2465 2185 2490 2217 2010 840 645 801 617 2010 2494 2206 2528 2247
2011 850 653 805 620 2011 2524 2229 2570 2280 2012 862 661 813 627 2012 2557
2253 2616 2317 2013 877 674 825 638 2013 2592 2279 2665 2355 2014 896 688 842
653 2014 2629 2307 2720 2398 2015 918 706 865 672 2015 2832 2482 3555 3167 2016
944 727 895 697 2016 2880 2518 3629 3226 2017 974 751 931 727 2017 2937 2560
3717 3295 2018 1010 780 975 763 2018 2999 2605 3813 3372 2019 1051 813 1028 807
2019 3067 2655 3920 3457 2020 1097 850 1091 859 2020 3067 2655 3921 3458 103
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  PROJECTED
ENERGY DEMAND IN BHUTAN, BY FUEL Table  Table  PROJECTED LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
(LPG) DEMAND (THOUSAND TONNES) PROJECTED COAL DEMAND (THOUSAND TONNES) BAU EE
HIG HIGEE Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year 2005 2005 34 34 34 34 2006 2006 60 60 87 87
2007 2007 96 96 31 31 2008 2008 22 04 84 66 2009 2009 66 31 37 19 2010 2010 02
66 99 73 2011 2011 37 02 61 35 2012 2012 73 46 23 96 2013 2013 17 81 94 67 2014
2014 61 26 73 38 2015 2015 05 61 53 09 2016 2016 50 05 33 97 2017 2017 94 50 30
86 2018 2018 47 03 27 74 2019 2019 00 47 34 81 2020 2020 53 00 49 96 Table
Table  PROJECTED KEROSENE DEMAND (THOUSAND KILOLITRES) PROJECTED DIESEL DEMAND
(KILOLITRES) BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year 2005 2005 51 440 51 440
51 440 51 440 2006 2006 60 467 60 467 62 417 62 417 2007 2007 66 123 66 123 70
360 70 360 2008 2008 72 193 64 974 79 099 71 189 2009  2009 78 706 70 835 88 710
79 839 2010   2010 85 694 77 124 99 284 89 355 2011   2011 93 192 83 873 110 914
99 823 2012   2012 101 237 91 114 123 707 111 337 2013   2013 109 870 98 883 137
780 124 002 2014     2014 119 133 107 220 153 260 137 934 2015     2015 129 072
116 165 170 288 153 260 2016     2016 139 737 125 763 189 019 170 117 2017
2017 151 180 136 062 209 623 188 661 2018     2018 163 459 147 113 232 288 209
059 2019     2019 176 634 158 971 257 219 231 497 2020     2020 190 771 171 694
284 642 256 178 104 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  PROJECTED ENERGY DEMAND IN BHUTAN, BY FUEL Table  Table  PROJECTED
PETROL DEMAND (KILOLITRES) PROJECTED AVIATION TURBINE FUEL (ATF) DEMAND
(KILOLITRES) BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year BAU EE HIG HIGEE Year 2005 13 775 13 775 13
775 13 775 2005 1145 1145 1145 1145 2006 14 570 14 570 15 125 15 125 2006 1303
1303 1296 1296 2007 16 181 16 181 17 387 17 387 2007 1398 1398 1447 1447 2008 17
909 15 402 19 875 17 093 2008 1501 1501 1598 1598 2009 19 763 16 996 22 612 19
446 2009 1610 1610 1749 1749 2010 21 753 18 708 25 623 22 035 2010 1728 1728
1900 1900 2011 23 888 20 544 28 934 24 884 2011 1854 1854 2120 2120 2012 26 179
22 514 32 577 28 016 2012 1989 1989 2340 2340 2013 28 637 24 628 36 584 31 462
2013 2134 2134 2560 2560 2014 31 275 26 896 40 992 35 253 2014 2290 2290 2780
2780 2015 34 105 29 330 45 841 39 423 2015 2457 2457 3000 3000 2016 37 141 31
942 51 174 44 010 2016 2637 2637 3415 3415 2017 40 400 34 744 57 041 49 055 2017
2829 2829 3830 3830 2018 43 896 37 751 63 494 54 605 2018 3036 3036 4244 4244
2019 47 648 40 977 70 593 60 710 2019 3257 3257 4659 4659 2020 51 673 44 439 78
402 67 426 2020 3495 3495 5074 5074 105 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL
AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE             TARIFF DESIGN Tariff design Tariff design,
from the point of view customer chooses the option that best meets his
requirements of an operator, is aimed at proﬁ  maximization, while the
government’ interest is welfare maximization and making available affordable
service to the poor To maximize proﬁ ts, the operator seeks prices that equate
marginal revenue (deﬁ ned as the extra revenue the operator receives when it
increases output by one unit) and marginal costs Different types of options
exist for designing tariffs, and some of them are discussed in the subsequent
sections Peak load pricing Peak load pricing is  kind of pricing variation,
wherein the operator would maximize his proﬁ ts by charging higher prices during
the peak hours and lower prices during the off-peak hours The peak load pricing,
however, requires sophisticated measurement of customer usage, with advanced
metering technologies for energy and water sectors The cost of implementing
these technologies, however, must be weighed against the welfare gains for
metering before pursuing the usage of peak load pricing MARGINAL COST PRICING In
case of competitive environment, marginal revenue equals marginal costs This
marginal cost pricing maximizes welfare, with the interest of the operator
coinciding with the interests of the government REGULATION OF THE ENERGY SECTOR
Irrespective of the structure of the sector, there is  need to introduce an
arms-length energy regulator, combining the powers of rule making (legislative)
and implementation and enforcement (executive) with quasi-judicial powers of
review and appeal against their orders (judicial) Independent regulation is
required to safeguard consumer interests, especially those of vulnerable groups
and geographically distant consumers, promote efﬁ ciency and economy in the
sector, accelerate decision-making, facilitate investors and others in planning
and raising  nances for the long-term investments, and supply quality services
at economic prices The Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA) has been established
under the Electricity Act, 2001, to play the role of  regulator in the
development of the energy sector Some of the important functions of the
Authority as per the Act include development of regulations, standards, codes,
principles and procedures; process applications; modifying and revoking licences
and monitoring the performance of licensees and their compliance; determining/
Deviation from marginal cost pricing: multipart prices In case the operator
possesses some market power, its proﬁ  maximization prices would exceed the
marginal cost, resulting in welfare loss unlike the perfectly competitive
environment An example of  deviation from the marginal cost pricing is the
multipart tariffs, wherein the operator charges separate prices for different
elements of the service unlike in linear tariff, wherein  single price is
charged for the service  common example of multipart tariff is the two-part
tariff in the electricity sector, where the customer pays  monthly fee for
access and  usage fee for the consumption of electricity Optional tariffs
Optional tariffs are closely related to the multipart tariff, where the operator
offers the customer  menu of pricing plans, amongst which the 107 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN tariffs;
prescribing approving/reviewing and collecting fees, charges or royalties from
licensees; imposing  nes, sanctions or penalties for any breach of provisions of
this Act; establishing  dispute resolution process; and settling disputes and
other duties or responsibilities delegated by the minister While the BEA can
play the role of  regulator in the short term, experience worldwide has
underscored the need for rule-making, decision- making or adjudicative functions
to be under an independent regulator outside of the government and the legal
system Government departments may be perceived as not being able to provide
insulation from external inﬂ uences Also, it may not be feasible to develop
courts for different kinds of expertise required In addition, independent
regulators can also bring in more stability since they are not concerned with
electoral politics but have to keep the interest of the public in mind Further,
entrusting price regulation to  regulatory body also has major advantages for
governments— it provides insulation from politically unpopular pricing decisions
that need to be taken in the interest of the industry and creates  source of
expertise To progressively reﬂ ect cost of supply of electricity and also reduce
and eliminate cross- subsidy within  speciﬁ ed time frame To ensure that tariff
is sensitive to the type of consumer, time of supply, area of supply, and
nature/purpose for which supply is required To promote renewable energy through
incentives built into tariffs # # # Some other important functions of the
regulator would be as follows # Promoting energy efﬁ ciency and enforcing
various energy efﬁ ciency measures and developing infrastructure/standards/codes
for energy efﬁ ciency Promoting the growth of renewable and non- conventional
sources of energy, including solar, mini-micro hydel, and so on Regulator can
look into the utilization/creation of additional funds to support the
development of the renewable energy sector for electricity generation Bridging
the gap in people’ understanding of the sector, including the demand/supply
situation and the accompanying imperatives, implications, and status of reforms
through public hearings and proactive information dissemination, which are not
merely perfunctory This understanding is crucial for public buy-in of reforms,
minimizing uncertainties in public reactions, and creating an environment that
is more conducive for foreign direct investment (FDI) # # In the foreseeable
future, the government will remain the largest player in the electricity sector
in the country (likely in the form of Druk Green Power Corporation) Here, the
regulator should closely monitor the capital and revenue expenditure of the
incumbent utility and ensure that costs are not padded so as to get higher
tariffs or that the utility is not unduly burdened with the costs of the
government’ social obligations Simultaneously, the regulator would need to
identify segments where private capital and competition can be introduced The
regulator would need to ensure the harmonious co-existence of the private sector
(in generation) with the natural monopoly segment, transmission, likely to
remain in the public sector, with particular attention to non-discriminatory
access to incumbent facilities One of the key areas that  regulator would need
to focus on is tariff determination The following issues are of importance # The
success of the regulator in meeting these objectives will require capacity,
transparency, strong political and accountability, and  administrative
commitment to their effectiveness DECENTRALIZED ENERGY GOVERNANCE Bhutan has
well-designed for decentralized planning process at the Dzongkhag and Gewog
level The government has established Dzongkhag Yargay Tshochung (DYT), or
district development committees, giving the Dzongkhags administrative
responsibilities At the block level, Gewog Yargay Tshochung (GYT) has been
formed framework To set multi-year tariff principles 108 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN The collection of
tariff and maintaining accounts of tariff collection are the responsibilities of
the community, and  village committee is set up for this purpose This experiment
has been successful so far, and in future, such decentralized governance of
small plants should be encouraged Bhutan is also planning to develop FDI policy
for hydropower development, which will encourage IPP and captive power
production  whole range of issues needs to be addressed for this to materialize
The DoE has suggested change in its current organization structure to include
additional responsibilities such as negotiating contracts with private
producers, marketing hydropower projects, and so on for devolving administrative
responsibilities to the blocks Measures are also being taken to improve the
resource base and capacity of these bodies In the energy sector, these local
bodies can play  major role in decentralized mini hydro projects and in
operation and maintenance of local distribution lines, involving the local
community in billing and collection In the 1990s, small hydropower plants were
managed by the community; however, due to various constraints such as lack of
capacity and technical know-how required to operate and maintain these plants at
community level, these plants were brought under the control of the Bhutan Power
Corporation (BPC) However, recently built 70-kW mini hydroplant at Chendenbji
and 100- kW hydroplant at Sengor are being transferred to community for
operation and maintenance, with technical backstopping and support being
provided by the Department of Energy (DoE)/BPC Ideally, regulator should look
into these matters as an independent authority and develop suitable guidelines,
regulation, and so on and advise the government on policy and rules,
regulations, and acts 109 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN INDICATIVE TARIFF FOR MEDIUM SIZE HYDRO PLANT (CAPTIVE
POWER GENERATION) ASSUMPTIONS All costs are in million Rs Capital cost 6000
Capitalized cost of project 72 Cost 5100 Debt 10 Grant component 15% Equity 62
Equity 30% Debt 70% Plant load 55% factor Return on equity 14% Interest rate 12%
& % of capital cost Repayment years Escalation in % period & (inclusive of
moratorium) Moratorium  years Fuel  consumption Life 30 years Fuel cost
Construction  years Escalation in % period fuel cost Discount rate 00% Annual
generation LEVELIZED TARIFF ESTIMATION Year          10 11 12 Return on equity
(ROE) 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 Debt 10 83 56 28 01 74 46 19 92 64 37
09 Capital repayment 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 27 Depreciation 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Interest payment 70 51 31 12 93 74 54 35 16 96 77 89
& expenses 03 59 18 81 46 15 87 63 42 25 12 50 Total expenses 18 54 94 37 84 33
86 43 03 66 34 84 Sales 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 Tariff 95 89 82 76
70 63 57 51 44 38 32 02 Levelized tariff 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
Discounted ROE 89 Discounted interest payments 93 Discounted & 75 Discounted
principle 33 Repayment Discounted expenses 90 Discounted sales 99 Levelized
tariff (Rs/kWh) 60 110 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN Capacity 100 MW Allowance of funds used during
construction Capital cost 5100 Year  Year  Total IDC Interest during
construction (IDC) Debt 3570 Expenditure 40% 60% Equity 1530 2040 3060 Loan 1836
1734 3570 1836 3570 Equity 00 00 00 Interest on 32 72 loan Levelized generation
cost 60 Royalty sale % 09  Cost of rest of units 95% 71 66 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45
45 45 82 55 27 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 27 27 27 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 58 39 19 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 02 96 94 96 02 12 26
45 67 95 27 63 05 51 02 58 19 85 05 79 58 41 46 56 71 89 12 39 71 08 49 95 46 02
63 30 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 26 19 13 07 07 08 08
09 09 09 10 10 11 12 12 13 14 11 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 111 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN INDICATIVE TARIFF
CALCULATION FOR MEDIUM SIZE HYDRO PLANT FOR INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCTION (IPP)
ASSUMPTIONS All costs are in million Rs Capital cost 6000 Capitalized cost of
project 40 Cost 6000 Debt 68 Grant component % Equity 72 Equity 30% 70% Debt
Plant load factor 55% Return on equity 14% % Interest rate & % of capital cost
years Escalation in & % Repayment period (inclusive of moratorium) Moratorium
years Fuel consumption  Life 30 years Fuel cost  Construction Period  years
Escalation in fuel cost % Discount rate 00% Annual generation LEVELIZED TARIFF
ESTIMATION Year          10 11 12 Return on equity (ROE) 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04
04 04 04 04 Debt 68 97 26 54 83 12 41 70 98 27 56 85 Capital repayment 71 71 71
71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 71 Depreciation 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
Interest payment 46 85 25 64 04 44 83 23 62 02 42 06 & expenses 80 64 51 42 37
35 38 45 56 71 90 00 Total expenses 30 53 80 10 45 83 26 72 22 77 36 10 Sales 80
80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 Tariff 98 93 87 82 77 71 66 61 56 50 45 03
Levelized tariff 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 68 Discounted ROE 56
Discounted interest payments 78 Discounted & 59 Discounted principle repayment
63 Discounted expenses 55 Discounted sales 99 Levelized tariff (Rs/kWh) 68 112
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN
Capacity 100 MW Allowance of funds used during construction Year  Year  Total
IDC Capital cost 6000 Interest during construction (IDC) Debt 4200 Expenditure
40% 60% Equity 1800 2400 3600 Loan 2160 2040 4200 2160 4200 Equity 00 00 00
Interest on loan 378 68 Levelized generation cost Royalty sale 10% 18  Cost of
rest of units 90% 62 83 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 04
04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 04 14 42 71 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 71 71 71 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 81 21 60 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 14 42 75 13 55 02 54 11 74 41 14 92 76 65 61 62 69 83 99
67 40 17 59 06 58 15 78 45 18 96 80 70 65 66 73 87 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80
80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 40 34 29 24 24 25 25 26 27 27 28 28 29 30 31 31 32 29 68
68 68 68 68 68 68 68 113 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR CHAMKAR HYDROPOWER
PLANT - LARGE HYDRO POWER PLANT WITHOUT GRANT All costs are in million Rs
ASSUMPTIONS Capital cost as per Masterplan in $ Estimated cost with % escalation
in 2007 Capital cost 37 520 546 965 06325 25 53 Cost 37 520 05 Grant component %
Capacity 670 MW Net generation (MU) 3207 Equity 30% Debt 70% Plant load factor
55% Return on equity 14% Interest rate % & % of capital cost Repayment period
years Escalation in & % (inclusive of moratorium) Moratorium  years Fuel
consumption  Life 30 years Fuel cost  Discount rate 00% Construction period
years Escalation in fuel cost % LEVELIZED TARIFF ESTIMATION Year          10 11
12 13 Return on equity (ROE) 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 Debt 82 16
51 85 20 54 89 24 58 93 27 62 96 Capital repayment 65 65 65 65 65 65 65 65 65 65
65 65 65 Depreciation 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 Interest payment 08
94 81 67 53 39 25 11 97 83 69 56 42 & expenses 80 06 54 25 19 38 80 48 41 60 05
77 77 Total expenses 94 06 40 97 78 82 11 65 44 49 80 38 24 Sales 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Tariff 12 06 00 94 88 83 77 71 65 59 54 48 42 Levelized
tariff 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 Discounted ROE 00 Discounted
interest payments 80 Discounted & 73 Discounted depreciation 15 Discounted
expenses 69 Discounted sales 97 Levelized tariff (Rs/kWh) 73 Total cost of
generation 66 Revenue from royalty sale 15% 05 30 32 Revenue from export 85% 95
80 71 Total revenue 03 Net revenue -63 114 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN Allowance of funds used during
construction Capitalized 02 cost of project Capital cost 37 520 Interest during
Year  Year  Year  Year  Year  Year  Total IDC Debt 33 82 construction (IDC)
Expenditure 10% 20% 25% 20% 15% 10% Equity 14 21 Debt 26 264 3752 7504 9380 7504
5628 3752 Equity 11 256 Loan 3377 8442 938  26 264 3377 10 130 18 572 25 326 26
264 26 264 Equity 20 40 00 40 00 00 11 00 Interest on loan 912 736 516 34 76 76
024 Unit (GWh) Tariff Levelized 3207 73 generation cost Royalty sale 15% 05
Cost of rest of 85% 95 98 units 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
30 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 31 65 65 65 67 67 67 67 67
67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 67 28 14 00 04 60 45 60 06 82 89 29 02 08 48 23
33 80 64 85 45 38 80 51 66 11 87 95 35 07 13 53 28 39 86 69 90 50 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 36 30 25 25 26 26 27 27 28 28 29 30 30 31 32
32 29 73 73 73 73 73 73 73 115 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR DAGACHU
HYDROPOWER PLANT WITHOUT GRANT All costs are in million Rs ASSUMPTIONS Capital
cost 8208 Cost 8208 Grant component % Capacity 651 MW Generation 500 GWh Equity
25% Debt 75% Plant load factor 41 Return on equity 14% Interest rate % & % of
capital cost Repayment period years Escalation in & % (inclusive of moratorium)
Life 30 years Fuel cost  Discount rate 00% Construction period  years Escalation
in fuel cost % LEVELIZED TARIFF ESTIMATION Year          10 11 12 13 Return on
equity (ROE) 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 Debt 75 50 25 00 75 50 25 00
75 50 25 00 75 Capital repayment 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
Depreciation 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 Interest payment 07 59 12 65
18 71 24 77 30 83 36 88 41 Loan repayment 67 19 72 25 78 31 84 37 & expenses 08
36 78 33 02 86 86 01 33 83 50 36 41 Total expenses 72 53 48 56 78 15 67 35 20 23
43 82 40 Sales 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Levelized tariff 24 24 24
24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 Discounted ROE 89 Discounted interest payments 07
Discounted & 93 Discounted depreciation 90 Discounted expenses 79 Discounted
sales 59 Levelized tariff (Rs/kWh) 24 Total cost of generation 38 Revenue from
royalty sale 15% 00 30 50 Revenue from export 85% 00 80 00 Total revenue 50 Net
revenue -88 116 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
TARIFF DESIGN Capitalized cost of project 00 Debt 75 Capital cost 8208 Total
interest during construction Equity 25 Debt 6156 1677 Equity 2052 Levelized
generation cost 500 24 Royalty sale 15% 00  Cost of rest of units 85% 00 58 14
15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98 98
98 98 98 98 98 98 50 25 25 25 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
94 47 67 14 82 73 88 28 93 85 04 52 30 40 81 56 67 13 98 19 18 40 31 46 85 51 42
62 10 88 97 39 14 24 71 55 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 24
24 24 24 24 24 24 117 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  TARIFF DESIGN INDICATIVE TARIFF CALCULATIONS FOR CHAMKAR HYDROPOWER
PLANT - LARGE HYDRO POWER PLANT WITHOUT GRANT All costs are in million Rs
ASSUMPTIONS Capital cost as per Masterplan in $ Estimated cost with % escalation
in 2007 Capital cost 37 520 965 06325 53 546 Cost 37 520 05 Grant component %
Capacity 670 MW Net generation (MU) 3207 Equity 30% Debt 70% Plant load factor
55% Return on equity 14% Interest rate % & % of capital cost Repayment period
(inclusive years Escalation in & % of moratorium) Moratorium  years Fuel
consumption  Life 30 years Fuel cost  Discount rate 00% Construction period
years Escalation in fuel cost % LEVELIZED TARIFF ESTIMATION Year          10 11
12 13 Return on equity (ROE) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Debt 50 60
70 80 90 00 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 Capital repayment 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90 90
90 90 90 Depreciation 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 Interest payment 07
19 32 45 58 71 84 97 10 23 36 48 61 & expenses 18 89 92 30 03 11 55 36 55 12 08
44 21 Total expenses 29 12 29 80 65 86 43 37 69 39 48 97 87 Sales 00 00 00 00 00
00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Levelized tariff 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56 56
Discounted ROE 51 Discounted interest payments 06 Discounted fuel cost 00
Discounted & 87 Discounted depreciation 83 Discounted expenses 27 Discounted
sales 76 Levelized tariff (Rs/kWh) 56 Total cost of generation 03 Revenue from
royalty sale 10% 80 30 54 Revenue from export 90% 20 80 16 Total revenue 70 Net
revenue 66 118 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
TARIFF DESIGN Allowance of funds used during construction Capitalized 02 cost of
project Capital cost 37 520 Interest during Year  Year  Year  Year  Year  Year
Total IDC Debt 33 82 construction (IDC) Debt 26 264 Expenditure 10% 20% 25% 20%
15% 10% Equity 14 21 Equity 11 256 3752 7504 9380 7504 5628 3752 Loan 3377 8442
938  26264 3377 10130 18572 25326 26264 26264 Equity 20 40 00 40 00 00 00 Units
(GWh) Tariff Interest on loan 912 736 516 34 76 76 024 Levelized 3207 73
generation cost Royalty sale 15% 05  Cost of rest of 85% 95 98 units 14 15 16 17
18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
10 10 10 80 90 90 90 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 94 74 87 40
00 05 53 46 85 70 04 86 17 00 34 20 61 56 07 15 18 92 09 57 50 89 75 08 90 22 04
38 25 65 61 12 20 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 56 56 56 56
56 56 56 119 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
TECHNO-ECONOMIC AN ALYSIS DETAIL  OF -MW BIOMASS-BASED POWER PL ANT
Techno-economic analysis details of  -MW biomass-based power plant  techno-
economic analysis of -MW biomass-based power plant has been carried out and the
detailed  nancial analysis is given %
%         %   %              %                          &
&
(                                                        %     %
)                           /                                          %
%   %      %       %
120 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  TECHNO-
ECONOMIC AN ALYSIS DETAIL  OF -MW BIOMASS-BASED POWER PL ANT
%    %  )     )
)    /   ( (                                      )      )    (
(                                                     &
&                                            (
)          (                                                          121
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES Biomass densification technologies Many non-
woody biomass residues Table  cannot be used efﬁ ciently, as they have low bulk
densities For example, the bulk density of majority of the agro-residues lies in
the low range of 50–200 kg/m3 (Table ) as compared to 800 kg/m3 for the coal of
the same size This necessitates huge storage space This is combined with difﬁ
culty in handling and higher transportation cost All these factors make them
uneconomical as  marketable commodity for their widespread utilization over
longer distances Also, low bulk densities and loose nature of available biomass
are associated with faster burning of fuels, resulting in higher  ue gas losses
(lower operating thermal efﬁ ciencies) and emissions in the form of   ash or
particulates in the atmosphere This makes them poor quality biomass fuel In
order to improve the marketability of the available loose biomass and exploit
this renewable and sustainable source of energy, pre- processing becomes
necessary Densiﬁ cation of biomass can be done by using technology, which
briquetting or pelletizing compresses loose biomass into densiﬁ ed form called
briquettes or pellets This takes care of the low bulk density of biomass and
helps in reducing transportation and storage cost and improves the quality of
biomass so that it could be used as  better combustible fuel from Densiﬁ ed
briquette/pellet produced biomass is  fairly good substitute for coal, lignite,
and  rewood, and offers several advantages Densiﬁ ed briquette is  renewable and
sustainable source of energy It has the following advantages BULK DENSITY OF
SELECTED LOOSE BIOMASS Bulk density (kg/m3) Biomass material Bagasse pith 74
Bamboo dust 205 Coffee dust 215 Coir pith 47 Cotton shell (pulverized) 79
Groundnut shell 165 Jute dust 74 Mustard stalk (pulverized) 208 Rice husk 235
Source Biomass thermo-chemical characterization, IIT Delhi, 2002 It is cheaper
than coal It has consistent quality and size It has better thermal efﬁ ciencies
than loose biomass It has high speciﬁ  density (800–1200 kg/m3) compared to
loose biomass (50–200 kg/m3) It is easy to handle It requires less storage space
It involves low handling and transportation cost # # # # # # # APPROPRIATE
BIOMASS RESIDUE FOR BRIQUETTING Almost all types of biomass can be densiﬁ ed
However, there are many factors that need to be considered before biomass qualiﬁ
es as an appropriate feedstock for briquetting The main characteristics of
appropriate biomass residue 123 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES for briquetting are
described in the subsequent sections making the bonding during compaction strong
Binders, that is, high viscous bonding media, such as tar and other molecular
organic liquid or cow dung, are used in low-pressure compaction to enhance
adhesion among biomass particles by creating solid–liquid bridges Lignin in
biomass helps in creating such bonds due to its softening at higher temperatures
and its adsorption on solid particle layers, which can contact, or penetrate
into, each other The strength of the resulting agglomeration depends on the type
of interaction and the material characteristics Selected important
characteristics and their signiﬁ cance are discussed in the following sections
Moisture content Higher moisture content poses problem in grinding, and higher
energy is required for drying operation Therefore, biomass with lower moisture
content, preferably below 10%–15%, is  more attractive feedstock for briquetting
Ash content and composition Majority of biomass residues (except rice husk with
20% ash) have low ash content, but they contain higher percentages of alkaline
(especially potash) minerals They also contribute towards lowering sintering
temperature, leading to ash deposition, and higher ash content increases the
slagging tendency, which becomes more intense in biomass with more than % ash
Effect of particle size Granular biomass material of size - mm, with about
10%–20% powdery (<  mesh) material, normally gives best results Though high-
pressure (1000–1500 bar) compaction machines such as piston press or screw
extruder can produce briquettes from larger particle size biomass, they can lead
to the choking of the entrance to ram or die Condensation of vapour released
from larger particles on  ner particles can create lumps, affecting free  ow
However, only  ner material is not always good due to low density and
owability, and the presence of particles of varying size improves the packing
dynamics, contributing to higher strength Flow characteristic Finer granular
material with uniform size  ows easily in fuel hoppers and storage bins/silos
Thus, some of the appropriate biomass material for briquetting includes saw
dust, coffee husk, groundnut shell, pulverized mustard stalk, cotton sticks, and
so on Binding mechanism of densification Briquetting is one of the several
agglomeration techniques used for the densiﬁ cation of biomass residues On the
basis of compaction, briquetting technologies can be classiﬁ ed as follows #
Effect of moisture Moisture content is  very critical factor Right amount of
moisture (%–10%) develops self- bonding properties in lignocellulosic substances
at elevated temperatures and pressures prevailing in piston press and screw
extruder briquetting machines Higher moisture content can result in poor and
weak briquettes with cracks due to the escape of steam and also results in
erratic operation due to the choking of feed  ow because of steam formation It
is also important to maintain the moisture content in input feed material so as
to ensure that briquettes produced have moisture content higher than the
equilibrium value, otherwise it would regain moisture from the atmosphere,
resulting in swelling during briquette High pressure compaction Medium pressure
compaction Low pressure compaction # # Normally, binders are not required in
high- and medium-pressure compaction, but sometimes, preheating of biomass is
carried out to enhance the compaction process In all compaction processes,
individual particles are pressed together in  conﬁ ned volume In case of
biomass, the binding mechanism under pressure can be divided into cohesion and
adhesion forces, van der Waal’ attractive forces between solid particles, and
mechanical interlocking bonds under pressure, 124 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT
MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES sugar mill
waste mud (commonly called as press mud), jute waste, coir pith, and so on as
raw materials All these biomass briquettes, except press mud, have  caloriﬁ
value of the order of 3800–4000 kcal/kg, which is considered good Commercially,
briquetting technologies used for biomass without binder include the briquetting
machine based on screw press and # ram-piston press technology storage and
transportation stages, and would disintegrate when exposed to humid conditions
Effect of biomass feed temperature At higher temperatures, moisture of biomass
gets converted into steam under higher prevailing pressures, which hydrolyses
the hemicellulose and lignin portion of biomass into lower molecular
carbohydrates, lignin products, sugar polymers, and other derivatives These act
like in situ binding material Better compaction, along with higher biomass feed
temperature and pressure, results in briquettes with higher density and strength
(Figure ) This also softens the  bres and their resistance to briquetting, which
results in lower power requirements and reduction in wear of the contact parts
However, the temperature should be kept lower than 300 °, as beyond this
temperature, decomposition of biomass starts Briquetting can be done with or
without  binder material No binders are generally required in high-pressure
briquetting Prior to its introduction into the briquetting machine, biomass has
to be disintegrated into small size and then dried so that the moisture content
is in the range of about 12%–15% Briquetting plants set up so far in India are
using saw dust, bamboo dust, groundnut shell, mustard stalk, cotton stalk,
coffee husk, bagasse, # In both the piston press and screw press technologies,
the application of high pressure increases the temperature of biomass, and
lignin present in the biomass liqueﬁ es and acts as  binder Ram-piston press
technology Biomass briquetting using ram-piston technology involves drying,
grinding, sieving, and compacting Moisture is removed from the loose biomass
with the help of  dryer, and then it is ground in  hammer mill grinder The
ground material is then separated from the air by using cyclone separator It is
then sieved and stored in the bin above hopper for ensuring continuous  ow of
biomass material into the press In piston press technology, biomass is punched
into  die by  reciprocating ram to Density of briquette (/cm ) cm3 ) Density of
briquette (/ 05 Initial bulk density of ground mustard stalk (zero moisture
content) =208 /cm3 Initial bulk density of groundnut shell after grinding (zero
moisture content) =268 /cm3  95  85  75  65  55  50 90 130 Pressure (kg/cm ) 170
210 250 50 90 130 Pressure (kg/cm ) 170 210 250 120 ° Room temperature 100 ° 80
° 60 ° 120 ° Room temperature 100 ° 80 ° 60 ° () Groundnut shell () Mustard
stalk FIGURE  VARIATION IN BRIQUETTE DENSITY WITH PRESSURE AT DIFFERENT BIOMASS
FEED TEMPERATURE: () MUSTARD STALK, () GROUNDNUT SHELL 125 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES
produce briquettes (Figure ) The ram moves about 250–300 times per minute in the
process In briquetting machine, the wear of contact parts, here, ram and piston,
is  major issue and requires frequent maintenance and/or replacement The average
frequencies of replacement for some of the machine components are 300 hours (for
ram, scrapper, and wear rings) and 500 hours (taper and split die, and hammers)
Table  CONTRIBUTION OF INPUT COST IN UNIT COST OF BRIQUETTE FOR COARSE GRANULAR
WET MATERIALS Briquetting machine production capacity (kg/hour) 250 500 750 1000
1500 2250 Input cost component Capital    Raw material In India, commercially
available piston press briquetting machines are commonly used in different parts
of the country They are available in different capacities, ranging from 250 kg/
hour to 2250 kg/hour Table  gives the share of various input costs in the
production of biomass briquettes It can be seen that at higher production
capacities, the raw material contributes more as input cost, and the share of
other costs diminishes due to scale of production Table  gives the power
requirement for machines with different capacities for briquetting various types
of biomass materials Power requirement is higher for higher capacity machines
Production capacity increases from  ner to coarser to stalky biomass due to
increasing pre- processing requirement of biomass Wet biomass requires higher
power for additional drying operation in order to bring the moisture content in
feed material to uniform desired value for smooth operation as well as for
generating better quality briquettes Operation      Electricity Repair and
maintenance       Source Tripathi et al (1998) Table  POWER REQUIREMENT FOR
BRIQUETTING UNITS Power requirement (kW) Briquetting production capacity
(kg/hour) Fine granular Coarse granulated Stalky material Dry Wet Dry Wet Dry
Wet 250 500 750 1000 1500 Screw press technology In this process, biomass is
dried to get an optimum moisture content value by passing hot air produced 2250
Source Tripathi et al (1998) Cyclone Flash drying column Centrifugal fan Rotary
air lock Holding bin Screw conveyor Turbo mill Hammer mill grinder Briquetting
press Hot air Generator FIGURE  RAM PISTON TYPE BRIQUETTING PRESS 126 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION
TECHNOLOGIES by burning part of briquettes in furnace Using heated oil obtained
in heat exchanger, the biomass is further preheated to about 100–120 ° so as to
minimize wear of the die and improve the true density of the briquettes formed
This preheated material is then fed to the screw extruder, where revolving screw
(at about 600–700 RPM) continuously compacts the material through  tapered die,
which is heated externally to reduce friction between the biomass and die
surface (Figure ) The outer surface of the briquettes obtained through this
technology is partially carbonized and has  hole in the centre The briquettes
extruded using screw press are more homogeneous (as output is continuous and not
in strokes), with better crushing strength and combustion properties (due to
large combustion area per unit weight) Since outer surface of the briquettes is
carbonized, it facilitates easy and clean ignition, and this impervious layer
provides protection from moisture ingress, thereby increasing the storage life
of the briquettes However, power consumption and wear of screw are higher than
those experienced in ram-piston-type reciprocating machines Table  shows
comparison between  piston press and  screw extruder Table  COMPARISON OF
PISTON PRESS AND  SCREW EXTRUDER Piston press Screw extruder Parameter Optimum
moisture content of raw material 10%–15% %–% Wear of contact parts Lower Higher
Output from machine In strokes Continuous Power consumption 50 kWh/tonne 60
kWh/tonne – /cm3 Density of briquette – /cm3 Maintenance Higher Lower Combustion
performance of briquettes Good Better Homogeneity of briquettes Non-homogenous
Homogenous Source FAO Field Document No 46, 1996 Pelletizing machine Biomass
with very low bulk density is normally densiﬁ ed using  at die pelletizing
technique Pelletizing generally requires conditioning of biomass material either
by mixing binder or raising the temperature of the biomass by direct addition of
steam The material is dropped in the pressing chamber of the pellet mill, where
it builds  carpet on the die surface The rollers roll over this layer and
compress it through tapered die holes The pressing force keeps on increasing
during rolling in the direction of die holes With every roll pass,  Hopper;
Electric motor/diesel engine;  Engine wheel;  Engine pulley;  Main pulley;
Bearing house;  Pre-heater outer cylinder;  Pre-heater inner cylinder;  Die
heater exhaust pipe; 10 Die heater (biomass fired) upper portion; 11 Die heater;
12 Briquette; 13 Die; 14 Screw; 15 Screw housing        10 Section – Electric
motor/ diesel engine  15       11 12 10 13 14 FIGURE  SCHEMATIC OF SCREW
BRIQUETTING MACHINE WITH BIOMASS STOVE DIE HEATER 127 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN
AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION TECHNOLOGIES
small disc is formed in the die hole, which gets attached to the pressed piece
already in the die hole The plugs are uniformly pushed forward and hot pellets
are ejected at  temperature of about 50– 90 °, which are cooled on conveyor
belts before their storage (Figure ) Compared to briquetting machine, pellet
mills are simpler, and since they work with rotary motion, the power consumption
levels are lower The processing requirements are also relatively less rigid for
pelletizing LOW-DENSITY BRIQUETTES USING BINDER In remote areas, for
decentralized operation,  simple low-pressure briquettng technique using binder
material like tar or cow dung is generally adopted The Energy and Resources
Institute (TERI), New Delhi, has developed  simple screw extruder (Figure )
coupled to  small motor, which produces medium-density briquettes (400–600
kg/m3) The system was operated in village Dhanwas in Haryana for converting
locally available agro-residues (mustard stalk) into briquettes (after manual
preprocessing like chopping and pulverizing) using cow dung as  binder material
These briquettes were sold in local area as fuel substitute to coal in roadside
restaurants (called dhabas) and as gasiﬁ er fuel to provide electricity to
village community and for operating the briquetting machine (Raman et al 1993)
Recently, TERI has successfully carried out feasibility study for making
briquettes from oil reﬁ nery waste sludge by mixing it with locally available
loose biomass material This would not only take care of the waste disposal
problem of hazardous waste from oil reﬁ neries but also produce easy-to-use
briquettes, which can substitute coal in the surrounding region (TERI 2001) In
IIT Delhi,  simple briquetting plant operated by hand mould was developed for
making beehive charcoal briquette for using it as  clean burning fuel,
substituting charcoal Locally available leafy biomass or pine needles are
carbonized using simple pyrolyser, which is prepared using 200 litres of used
oil barrel This is then mixed with suitable binding material like clay and cow
dung, and the mixture is prepared using adequate quantity of water This material
is then pressed into hand mould to form large cylindrical briquettes of about 90
mm height and 125 mm diameter, with several (about 19) parallel vertical holes
in it (Figure ) One person can make FIGURE  SCHEMATIC OF PELLETIZING MACHINE
Hopper Biomass briquette Screw extruder (spiral) Gear box Coupling Ball bearing
FIGURE  LOW-DENSITY SCREW EXTRUDING BRIQUETTING MACHINE 128 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOMASS DENSIFICATION
TECHNOLOGIES FIGURE  LOW-DENSITY BEEHIVE BRIQUETTING MOULD powder, the caloriﬁ
value is about 18 MJ per kg, or  MJ per briquette, and one briquette can burn
for about an hour Normally, single briquette is used in Indian chulha, but
multiple vertically stacked briquettes for long duration operation are commonly
used in high altitude areas of Tibet about 30 briquettes (weighing about  kg
after drying) per hour if charcoal–clay mixture is kept ready These briquettes
after drying can be used in angethi chulha, which burns slowly for long duration
without releasing any smoke These are becoming popular as livelihood option in
rural areas With about 20% clay content in hardwood charcoal 129 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN            Bioenergy technologies
for thermal applications – potential biomass technology options INTRODUCTION
Biomass can be utilized for different purposes such as cooking, process heating,
electricity generation, steam generation, mechanical or shaft power
applications, as well as producing variety of chemicals as by-products Various
biomass conversion processes can be broadly classiﬁ ed into the following
categories Thermo-chemical # Combustion $ of combustion is to start the process,
as high (at least 550 °) temperature is required for the ignition of biomass
However, once ignition takes place, it is difﬁ cult to stop the combustion
process if sufﬁ cient air supply is available till complete combustion converts
the biomass into residual ash Figure  shows the  re triangle, emphasizing
essential components like fuel, air, and heat, which permit  re/combustion to
continue to grow Fire can be extinguished either by removing fuel or by
smothering (removing air) or by cooling (spraying with water) Biomass combustion
is being used for various useful applications such as electricity generation,
process heating, and cogeneration (simultaneous, sequential production of
electricity and process heat) With rising prices of fossil fuels, biomass is
gaining importance, and there is increasing reﬁ nement of the biomass combustion
process to exploit its energy content In order to harness the energy content of
the biomass to the maximum, it is important to understand the properties of
biomass fuels and fundamentals of numerous complex reactions associated with
their oxidation to carbon dioxide and water This can help in - Fixed bed or
grate- red - Suspension burners - Fluidized bed systems Pyrolysis Gasiﬁ cation -
Updraft (countercurrent) - Downdraft (co-current) - Cross draft - Fluidized bed
$ $ Liquefaction $ Ammonia production $ Chemical: acid hydrolysis Biochemical
Anaerobic digestion to produce methane $ Ethanol fermentation $ Physical: densiﬁ
cation into briquettes # # # Only  few of these technologies are covered under
the planned Global Environment Facility (GEF) project, given the scale and type
of target industries concerned Other technologies are yet to be commercialized,
for their scale of operation is not suitable for the target intervention
clusters Heat Heat transfer COMBUSTION Combustion is the direct process of
converting biomass into usable energy, which can be used for various
applications The most difﬁ cult aspect Fuel Air Mass transfer FIGURE  FIRE
TRIANGLE 131 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY
OPTIONS manipulating biomass combustion for maximizing thermodynamic efﬁ ciency
and minimizing adverse environmental impacts Combustion is  process in which
carbon and hydrogen in the fuel react with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and
water through  series of free radical reactions, resulting in the liberation of
useful heat General combustion mechanisms have been proposed, deﬁ ning various
stages of chain reactions like initiation, propagation, and termination
Generally, these mechanisms include the following processes # The combustion efﬁ
ciency is mainly determined by completion of combustion process and the heat
losses from the furnace or combustion device Flame temperature also plays an
important role in the overall efﬁ ciency of combustion device Excess air has
more inﬂ uence on adiabatic  ame temperature than moisture content
Theoretically, highest temperature can be achieved with stoichiometric air
supply ( = ), but in reality, excess air is always supplied to ensure complete
combustion The optimal values of lambda depend on furnace design, fuel type, and
fuel feeding/ ring system used The value of  in well-designed
furnaces/combustion devices is in the range – , while in poorly designed
furnaces, the value of  reaches as high as – Heating and drying Pyrolysis and
reduction Gas phase pre-combustions and combustion reactions Char oxidation
reactions Post-combustion reactions # # # # BIOMASS STOVES Archaeological
evidence indicates that mankind has known the use of  re for 400 000 years now
In the early years,  re was used to keep the caves warm The use of  re for
cooking started 100 000 years ago, and in the earlier days, open  re was used
(mainly for cooking/roasting meat), with fuel arranged in pyramid shape The
beneﬁ ts of  re in preserving food, protecting against large animals and
rodents, and providing warmth outweighed the drawbacks of improper control on
re and smoky conditions  major development in open  re was the evolution of
vessels of different shapes, followed by the development of shielded three-
stone stove for holding the pot  rmly over the open  re Subsequently, shielded
re was changed to  -shaped mud or mud/stone stove, with front opening for
feeding fuel and entry of combustion several air developmental work on wood
stoves, large population in the developing world still employs traditional
three- stone or -shaped shielded  re stove, and in many cases, there is
retrogressive movement from the use of wood to the use of cow dung cakes and
agro-residues as fuel (FAO 1993)  general biomass combustion model is shown in
Figure  This general model gives some insight into combustion reaction that can
be generalized as  +    + → + (  25  )    xCO    (      )  Direct combustion
systems are generally used to produce heat, which can be either used directly or
transferred to working  uid, such as steam, for further use in process heating
or in steam engine or turbine for power production The combustion efﬁ ciency can
be deﬁ ned as follows thermal energy available in the flue gas =  comb chemical
energy in th ee sup plied fuel Despite FIGURE  REPRESENTATIVE MODEL OF BIOMASS
COMBUSTION MECHANISM 132 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS
TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS Classification of biomass stoves Stoves that burn biomass
such as  rewood and agro-residues are called biomass stoves These are used at
both domestic as well as institutional levels for cooking, heating, and space
heating purposes Stoves burning biomass can be classiﬁ ed in several different
ways, based on their attributes, functions, material, fuel types, and so on (FAO
1993) Stoves can be classiﬁ ed as follows # local biomass are the two important
social factors that need to be taken into account while designing  stove User
needs include various cooking operations such as boiling, frying, baking,
grilling, steaming, pressure cooking, and so on, which are needed to be
performed using  stove Apart from this, it is also important to know cooking
time and process heat requirement, which would determine power range for the
stove Availability of the local construction material, desired portability,
seasonal availability of local biomass, and so on also need to be considered
while designing  stove for the target group under consideration Fuel type: woody
biomass, powdery biomass, briquettes, cow dung, and so on Function: monofunction
or multifunction stoves Construction material: metal, clay, ceramic, brick, and
so on Portability: portable (metallic, ceramic) or  xed (mud, clay, brick)
Number of pots: single, two pots, three pots, and so on # # Technical factors
high-performance stove should be efﬁ cient and low in emission  fuel-efﬁ cient
stove would reduce the drudgery of users in fuel collection, while improvement
in emissions would save users from harmful impacts due to smoke exposure
However, as mentioned earlier, the general strategy # # Stove designed for
particular fuel and for  particular application can be used with different fuels
and can have various applications but might not perform with same efﬁ ciency
Amount and type Power output Food Needs Size of combustion chamber Number of
dishes and pan sizes Number of holes and hole sizes (or more stoves) Pans Time
Design criteria Stove is  consumer-speciﬁ  device Efforts on developing improved
stoves are mainly improving energy aimed at efﬁ ciency fuel) or (saving reducing
emissions (improving working conditions, reducing impact on health) adverse
stove, While designing and both social non-engineering parameters are required
to be considered Fuel Wood Control Charcoal Local resources Grate Agriculture
waste Dampers Material Metal Clay Skills Final design Burn hazards to children
Cost Fuel economy Safety/ health  engineering or Fire hazards Chimney Smoke
Portable Hot water Comfort Cooking posture Height and location of stove Social
factors Interlinkage between various criteria for stove design is shown in
Figure  (Verhaart 1983) User need and availability of Social (customers)
considerations Engineering considerations Development and ecological
considerations FIGURE  DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR  STOVE 133 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR
THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS adopted in designing
improved stove is improving energy efﬁ ciency (by enhancing heat transfer) and
providing chimney for the removal of smoke Though this strategy improves the
fuel efﬁ ciency and also indoor air quality, the overall emission reduction is
questionable Therefore, besides improving the heat transfer efﬁ ciency, it is
necessary to ensure improvement in combustion efﬁ ciency, whereby emission of
unburned harmful pollutants can be minimized Complete combustion can be ensured
by adopting the following steps temperatures # Table  QUALITATIVE EFFECTS OF
VARIOUS FACTORS ON STOVE DESIGN Factor Action needs to be taken to Maximize
efficiency Minimize emissions Stove factors Maximize Minimize Combustion chamber
volume Minimize Maximize Temperature of combustion chamber Maintaining higher
combustion chamber Providing sufﬁ cient air and ensuring proper mixing for
complete combustion Ensuring sufﬁ cient residence time for the completion of
combustion reactions the in Excess air levels Optimize Optimize # Preheating of
primary air Maximize Maximize Thermal mass # For short cooking time Minimize
Minimize For long cooking time Maximize Maximize Operational factors Process
factors Composition of biomass in terms of –– content, ash, and moisture-free
nature is quite similar (as mentioned earlier), but other parameters such as
moisture content and volatile fraction have profound effect on its combustion
characteristics Besides, there are  number of other process factors that need to
be considered while designing  stove for maximizing efﬁ ciency and minimizing
emissions The effects of these process factors are not easily quantiﬁ able Table
summarizes their qualitative effect The overall thermal efﬁ ciency ( ) of  stove
is deﬁ ned as the ratio of the amount of useful heat absorbed for cooking food
to the amount of energy content in the fuel used It is  combination of partial
efﬁ ciencies such as combustion efﬁ ciency   (fraction of energy content of
fuel converted into heat through its combustion), heat transfer efﬁ ciency
(fraction of heat generated, which is transferred to the pot), and pot efﬁ
ciency   (fraction of useful energy actually used for cooking food out of total
heat transferred to pot) Fuel burning rate Minimize Maximize Fuel charge size
Minimize Minimize Ratio of charge size to burn rate Minimize Minimize Volume to
surface ratio Maximize Maximize Fuel factors Moisture content Optimize @ 10%
Optimize @ % Volatile matter content Minimize Minimize Ash content Minimize
Minimize monoxide (CO), total suspended particulates (TSP), polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH), and formaldehyde Several design and operating parameters
result in incomplete combustion, thus contributing to these emissions These
parameters include insufﬁ cient supply of combustion air, lower temperatures in
combustion zone, improper mixing of air and fuel, and so on Many  times, some
design modiﬁ cations to improve thermal performance or efﬁ ciency, such as
reducing gap between the pan and the stove mouth as well as between the pan and
the grate, may prove detrimental, resulting in increased emissions Therefore,
there is  need to take into consideration the effect of any design modiﬁ cation
on stove as  whole Generally, with increasing power levels, emissions from the
stove are observed to increase Similarly, higher Emissions from biomass stoves
Useful heat abosrbed by food Heat conetent of biomass fuel used = =    cc × ×
Among the numerous pollutants emitted from biomass stoves, the most signiﬁ cant
ones are carbon 134 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS
TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS reactions to produce volatile matter and provide heat energy
necessary for further endothermic reduction reactions to produce producer gas,
which mainly consists of  mixture of combustible gases such as CO, hydrogen,
traces of methane, and other hydrocarbons Normally, the air is used as
gasifying agent; however, the use of oxygen can produce rich, higher caloriﬁ
value gas, but due to cost implications, it is not usually preferred emissions
are observed with smaller stoves Many  times, this is due to the lower residence
time of the fuel in the combustion chamber of the stove, resulting in incomplete
combustion and, hence, higher emissions BIOMASS GASIFICATION Thermochemical
biomass gasiﬁ cation is  process in which solid biomass fuel is converted into
gaseous combustible form (called producer gas) by means of partial oxidation The
reaction is carried out at elevated temperatures in  reactor called gasiﬁ er
Application of gasiﬁ ers assumed signiﬁ cant importance during World War II due
to the scarcity of petroleum products By the end of the World War in 1942, more
than million vehicles using gasiﬁ ers were in operation throughout the world
However, after the end of the War, they were largely decommissioned, as
petroleum products once again became widely available at cheap rates The energy
crisis in the 1970s generated renewed interest in gasiﬁ cation The technology
was perceived as  relatively cheaper option in developing countries having sufﬁ
cient sustainable biomass for small-scale industrial as well as power generation
applications Gasiﬁ cation of biomass looks simple in principle, and many types
of gasiﬁ ers have been developed Production of gaseous fuel from solid fuel
offers easy handling, better control on combustion, and possibility of using it
in internal combustion engine for shaft power or electricity production, which
makes gasiﬁ cation very appealing, especially for small decentralized options
However, biomass fuel used in gasiﬁ er varies widely in its physical and
chemical properties, and makes the gasiﬁ er reactions complicated to design
Gasification reactions  complete understanding of the various complex reactions
occurring in  gasiﬁ er has not been possible so far However, the following
reactions explain the process of gasiﬁ cation fairly well +O2 —> CO2+393 800
kJ/kg mole (combustion) +H2O —> CO+H2 – 131 400 kJ/kg mole (water gas) +CO2 —>
2CO – 172 600 kJ/kg mole (Boudouard reaction) CO+H2O —> CO2+H2+41 200 kJ/kg mole
(water shift reaction) +2H2 —> CH4+75 000 kJ/kg mole (methane reaction) With the
help of the above reaction scheme, and with the knowledge of the equilibrium
constants, it is possible to predict the equilibrium composition of the gaseous
products The equilibrium composition of  given solid fuel depends on the air
supply per unit weight of the biomass  dimensionless parameter, known as the
equivalence ratio (ER), is applied to characterize the air supply conditions,
and is usually deﬁ ned as follows Weight of the actual oxygen supplied/Weight of
the theoretical oxygen required The denominator in the above equation is the
oxygen required for the complete combustion of the fuel, and it varies from fuel
to fuel It is generally observed that for effective gasiﬁ cation, the ER should
be in the range of – Below the ER value of , pyrolysis dominates the process and
above the ER value of , combustion predominates Principle of gasification
Biomass gasiﬁ cation is  process of converting solid biomass fuel into gaseous
combustible gas (called producer gas) through  sequence of complex
thermochemical reactions In the  rst stage, partial combustion of biomass to
produce gas and char occurs along with the generation of heat This heat is
utilized in drying biomass to evaporate its moisture as well as for pyrolysis In
real gasiﬁ er, however, the composition of the gas does not reach the
equilibrium value and is 135 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL
BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS of higher moisture content in the gas, more air is
required to combust biomass required to generate heat for drying/heating of the
biomass as well as for achieving endothermic gasiﬁ cation reactions As  result,
with higher moisture content in the biomass, the carbon dioxide fraction in the
gas increases and CO fraction reduces It also becomes difﬁ cult to maintain high
fuel bed temperature, as the biomass has very high moisture content The
percentage of hydrogen in the gas increases slightly initially till the biomass
has about 20% moisture content, but then again it starts decreasing generally
dependent on the gasiﬁ er design Factors affecting the gas composition are
temperature distribution in the fuel bed, average gas residence time, and the
residence time distribution These are, in turn, dependent on the mode of air
entry, dimensions of the gasiﬁ er, and the quantum of heat loss to the
surroundings The modelling of the various processes occurring in the gasiﬁ er
requires not only the knowledge of kinetics but also an understanding of the
heat and mass transfer processes occurring in various zones of the gasiﬁ er
brief description of some important factors that affect the quality of producer
gas generation in gasiﬁ er is given subsequently Residence time Often, the
effect of residence time is overlooked while designing  gasiﬁ er In order to
generate good quality gas at various rates of fuel burning (or rates of
producing gas), there is  need to ensure sufﬁ cient time for the completion of
gasiﬁ er reactions within the reactor zone This helps in achieving tar cracking
under reducing environment in the high temperature zone in the presence of char,
resulting in reduced components for tar cracking Cleaning in this system may
work out to be  costly affair, especially for smaller systems Fuel size Fuel
size affects fuel movement within biomass as well as the rate of reactions and
energy intensity per unit volume Large wood pieces provide smaller surface area
per unit volume of reactor, which, in turn, affects the quality of gas, as
volatilization or pyrolysis becomes less intense Very small-sized biomass leads
to intense volatilization process, leading to the formation of signiﬁ cant
pyrolytic liquid, which is not desirable in gasiﬁ cation, though it might be
desired otherwise for obtaining liquid fuel Larger fuel size also leads to fuel
bridging, which hampers the smooth fuel movement within gasiﬁ er reactor Smaller
fuel size results in higher pressure drop across the fuel bed in the reactor
Therefore, normally, fuel of the size one-fourth or one- fth of the smallest
dimension of the reactor cross-section is preferred to avoid fuel bridging If
pulverized fuel is used in the  xed bed gasiﬁ er, the fuel movement becomes non-
uniform and takes place in an uneven manner, and many  times, tunnelled gas
pathways are generated in the fuel bed, causing tar carryover without cracking,
resulting in high tar content in raw gas Ash content and its nature Materials
with high ash content are difﬁ cult to handle, as they can lead to the problem
of clinker formation in the fuel bed, especially if ash has low fusion point
Also, the presence of several inorganic matters such as mud, sand, and grit is
not quite unusual in agro-based biomass This may not pose any problem in
combustion devices/furnaces but can block the entire reactor operation due to
ash fusion taking place inside the reactor at higher temperatures, which hampers
the fuel movement and gasiﬁ cation process Gasifier reactor types The various
types of reactors used for biomass gasiﬁ cation can be classiﬁ ed in different
ways, of which density factor (ratio of dense biomass phase to total reactor
volume) is  simple and effective way of classiﬁ cation Thus, gasiﬁ ers can be
classiﬁ ed as follows Fuel moisture content With higher moisture content, the
net caloriﬁ  value of fuel decreases and so does the caloriﬁ  value of the
producer gas generated, thereby leading to  reduction in gasiﬁ cation efﬁ ciency
Also, the tar fraction in the producer gas increases with an increase in the
moisture in the biomass Because 136 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL
BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS Dense phase reactors Lean phase reactors furnaces, as
it gives higher operating thermal efﬁ ciencies If the gas is to be used for
electricity generation by internal combustion (IC) engines, it has to be cleaned
thoroughly # # In dense phase reactors, such as  xed bed reactors (updraft,
downdraft, cross draft, and so on), biomass or feedstock occupies maximum
reactor volume, with typical density factors of about – On the contrary, in lean
phase reactors, such as  uidized bed reactors, biomass occupies very little
reactor volume, that is, of the order of 05– Dense phase reactors can be classiﬁ
ed as follows In most updraft gasiﬁ ers, steam is injected or evaporated into
the hot partial combustion zone, which has  beneﬁ cial effect on the gas quality
and also prevents the lower portion of the gasiﬁ er from overheating Generally,
the sensible heat of the producer gas or the radiative heat from the gasiﬁ er
shell is used for generating the necessary amount of steam The characteristics
of an updraft gasiﬁ er are as follows # Updraft, or countercurrent gasifier In
countercurrent moving bed reactor, also called as updraft gasiﬁ er, the air  ows
in countercurrent to downward fuel  ow and enters into the gasiﬁ er from below
the grate and  ows in the upward direction within the gasiﬁ er The updraft gasiﬁ
er has deﬁ ned distinct zones for partial combustion, reduction, and
distillation (Figure 4A) The gas produced in the reduction zone leaves the gasiﬁ
er reactor, along with the pyrolysis products and the steam from the drying zone
The resulting combustible producer gas is rich in hydrocarbons (tars) and,
therefore, has relatively higher caloriﬁ  value Therefore, it is more suitable
for thermal applications such as direct heating in industrial for various It has
clearly deﬁ ned zones reactions Its efﬁ ciency is high because hot gases pass
through entire fuel bed and leave at lower temperatures The sensible heat of the
hot gas is used for reduction, pyrolysis, and drying processes Products from
pyrolysis and drying, containing water vapour, tar, and volatiles, leave the
gasiﬁ er without passing through high temperature zones and, therefore, do not
get cracked Hence, elaborate gas cleaning is required before using it, making it
less suitable for engine operation It is unsuitable for high volatile fuels # #
# Downdraft, or co-current gasifier In  co-current moving bed reactor, or
downdraft gasiﬁ er, the air enters at the middle level of the gasiﬁ er, above
the grate, and the resulting mixture of air and gas  ows down cocurrently
through the gasiﬁ er reactor (Figure 4B) All the decomposition products from the
pyrolysis and drying zones are forced to pass through an oxidation zone This
leads to the thermal cracking of the volatiles, resulting in reduced tar content
in the producer gas For this reason, this gas is preferred for engine
applications There is always  constriction at the level of the oxidation zone to
force the pyrolysis products through  concentrated high temperature zone to
achieve complete decomposition This concentrated oxidation zone can cause
sintering or slagging of ash, resulting in clinker formation and consequent
blocking of the constricted area and/or 20 ° Solid fuel to be burned 80 ° Drying
Pre-heating 100 ° 200 ° Gas Removal of volatile matter 600 ° 800 ° 1000 ° 1100 °
1200 ° Reduction layer Oxidization layer 800 ° 200 ° Ash sludge layer Fire mouth
Air Cooling layer Ash pocket FIGURE 4A UPDRAFT GASIFIER 137 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR
THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS This gasiﬁ er is not
suitable for high ash, high moisture, and low ash fusion temperature fuels #
Cross-draft gasifier In  cross-draft gasiﬁ er, the air enters from one side of
the gasiﬁ er reactor, and gas leaves from the other side (Figure 4C)  cross-
draft gasiﬁ er has very few applications and can hardly be credited with any
advantage besides  good permeability of the bed The characteristics of this type
of gasiﬁ er are given below # Drying zone Distillation zone Hearth zone Air Air
Grate not required Single air tuyere Ash formed due to high temperature falls to
the bottom and does not hinder operation The high exit temperatures of the gas
and high carbon dioxide emission result in poor quality of the gas and low efﬁ
ciency # Reduction zone # Gas Ash pit # FIGURE 4B DOWNDRAFT GASIFIER channel
formation Continuous rotating ash grates or other mechanical shaking may be
required to avoid this problem Compared to an updraft gasiﬁ er, the
disadvantages of  downdraft gasiﬁ er are higher gas outlet temperature and lower
thermal efﬁ ciency Additional steam or water injection is not common in
downdraft gasiﬁ ers They can be operated at very high speciﬁ  gasiﬁ cation rate
– in the range 2900–3900 kg/ m2 – which corresponds to about  Nm3/ m2 (highest
reported was 5020 kg/ m2) The initial ignition time required for  downdraft
gasiﬁ er is lower compared to an updraft gasiﬁ er, which is in the range of
15–20 minutes, but it is still perceived longer  downdraft gasiﬁ er has
relatively better load following capability (ability to quickly extend the
partial combustion zone to produce higher required gas quantity) The
characteristics of  downdraft gasiﬁ er are as follows # Tables  and  give
typical operational data and producer gas composition and quality for different
gasiﬁ er reactors Drying zone Distillation zone Reduction zone Air Gas Hearth
zone Before leaving, tar-laden gases pass through the high temperature bed of
coal in the oxidation zone and, hence, get cracked Thus, the output gases are
relatively clean, requiring less elaborate gas cleaning system The gases leave
at  relatively high temperature, about 400–500 °; hence, the operating thermal
efﬁ ciency of this gasiﬁ er is less than that of an updraft gasiﬁ er Ash pit
FIGURE 4C CROSS-DRAFT GASIFIER Producer gas cleaning and conditioning As
mentioned earlier, the quality of gas with respect to impurities such as tar,
dust, and water vapour varies with different reactors, and even for # 138
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS
Table  TYPICAL OPERATIONAL DATA FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF GASIFIERS Downdraft
Updraft Fluid bed Conventional Circulating – – – 40 Grate energy release, GJ/m2
600–800 75–150 650–850 800–900 Off gas temperature, ° 001–01 05–15 01–05 – Oils
and tar, kg/kg dry feed 02 01–02 02–05 – Char loss, kg/kg dry feed Table
PRODUCER GAS CHARACTERISTICS FROM DIFFERENT GASIFIERS Gas quality Gas
composition, dry, vol % HHV (MJ/m3) Gasifier reactor type Tars Dust CO CO2 20
CH4  N2 50 H2  Fluid bed air-blown 14  Fair Poor 11 Updraft air-blown 24   53
Poor Good 17 Downdraft air-blown 21 13  48  Good Fair 32 Downdraft oxygen- blown
48 15   Good Good 15 Multisolid fluid bed 47 15 23  Fair Poor 31 Twin fluidized
bed gasification 48  21  Fair Poor HHV – high heating value agricultural
products, tar needs to be removed, as the seed layer acts like  granular bed
lter and tar gets deposited in the  rst layer Similarly, in some cases, tar
needs to be removed in pottery or ceramic industry application in order to
prevent any adverse effect on the product quality  particular reactor type, it
varies with the fuel used as well as operating conditions Depending on the
application, the gas needs to be cleaned and conditioned There is always
possibility of tar and vapour condensing along with dust particles to form
semi-solid mixture, which blocks various  lters and gasiﬁ er system components
down the line In order to prevent this, the gas is cleaned and conditioned
However, the best strategy would be to obtain  clean gas, which, in turn, would
reduce gas cleaning requirement Normally, dust particulates from the gas are
removed in hot conditions (tar and water vapour remaining in gaseous form), and
then the gas is cooled to condense tar and water vapour to form liquid
condensate, which is then trapped and removed The extent of treatment required
varies, depending on gas applications Generally, no elaborate treatment is
required for direct thermal applications of gas, as all the tar gets burned if
burner is designed properly Thus, only dust particulates are removed However, if
the gas is to be used directly for drying seeds or Producer gas utilization
Depending on the gasifying agent, like air and oxygen/steam, gas with low
(caloriﬁ  value of – MJ/Nm3) or medium (caloriﬁ  value of 12–16 MJ/Nm3) heat
value is produced In most of the gasiﬁ ers, air is used as  gasifying agent, and
so, gas with low heating value is produced, which needs to be utilized at the
site, as compressing and transporting it become expensive due to high (about
50%–55%) nitrogen content in gas The primary objective of gasiﬁ cation is to
convert solid biomass into  more convenient- to-use gaseous form (two steps up
on the energy ladder) called producer gas, which, in turn, can be used in gas
burners to use biomass more efﬁ ciently 139 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS –
POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS (reducing biomass consumption) or replace
fossil fuel (gas/oil  red burners) Also, after extensive cleaning, the gas can
be used for producing power by using IC engines Various gas characteristics
(physical and chemical parameters), along with velocity, affect the performance
of the gas in  burner These are listed as below # producer gas is used instead
of natural gas, and therefore, modiﬁ cations in  ue gas paths might become
necessary for compensating higher head losses Lower  ame temperature attainable
with producer gas can have limitations in its use (and so at higher temperatures
like metal melting of cement kiln dual  ring becomes necessary) and also result
in lower heat transfer efﬁ ciencies, resulting in derating of burner capacity
Gas density compared to air density Heating value of gas Stoichiometric air
requirement (for complete combustion) Flame speed coefﬁ cients of gas
constituents # Gasifier stove The heating of biomass causes chemical
decomposition (‘pyrolysis’), which releases volatile solids or gases, which need
to be subsequently burned in ‘secondary combustion’ process This process occurs
nearly simultaneously in regular biomass combustion stoves/ res, making the two
stages difﬁ cult to observe or even control But if these pyrolysis gases are not
burned immediately, they can escape as products of incomplete combustion (PIC)
As mentioned earlier, the PIC have more global warming potential (GWP) than
carbon dioxide, which is obtained through complete combustion of fuel The
pyrolysis process is easier to understand, observe, and control This process is
informally known as ‘gasiﬁ cation’ As mentioned earlier, commercially viable
gasiﬁ cation has long been understood and used in the industry sector and even
in transportation, but does not  nd application for small applications such as
household stove Since 1985, Dr   Reed worked for about  decade on the
development of  very small gasiﬁ er for meeting the domestic stove needs of
impoverished people He worked on developing # # Variation in these parameters
can result in  ame lift-off (excessive gas velocity, resulting in its losing
contact with the burner), internal burning of  ame back (lower gas velocity than
ame propagation, resulting in internal burning) or unstable  ame Flame back can
be dangerous as  ame starts moving upstream in  premixed gas–air mixture and can
be prevented by  ame arrester but can result in the  ame getting extinguished
While changing the type of gaseous fuel used in the gas burner, there is  need
to give attention to caloriﬁ  value (heating value), stoichiometric air
requirements, and its effect on adiabatic  ame temperature as well gas  ue gas
volumes Table  gives  comparison for the usage of low heating value (LHV),
medium heating value (MHV), and natural gas in the burner It can be observed
that for the generation of  MJ of energy, the producer (LHV) gas requirement is
times higher than the natural gas requirement As  result, higher  ue gases are
generated when Table  COMPARISON OF HEATING VALUE, STOICHIOMETRIC COMBUSTION
VOLUMES, AND FLAME TEMPERATURE Adiabatic flame temperature (°) (with 10% excess
air) Stoichiometric combustion volumes (Nm3/MJ) Heating value (MJ/Nm3) Fuel Air
Fuel Fuel+air Flue gases LHV 20 231 43 39 30 1480 MHV 20 104 30 27 1870 Natural
gas 25 027 28 28 1860 LHV – low heating value; MHV – medium heating value 140
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS in
2001,  prototype forced air gasiﬁ er stove was operated on  kitchen table Figure
shows the schematic diagram and photographs of gasiﬁ er turbo-stove  series of
modiﬁ cations and improvisation resulted in the gasiﬁ er turbo-stove concept
These modiﬁ cations include different stackable units in  heat column over
gasiﬁ er unit with an air pipe, smaller holes for the entrance of secondary air,
pre-heated secondary air,  tapered chimney, and independent structural
components for the stove body The gasiﬁ er chamber is removable and, therefore,
can be emptied to save the resultant charcoal, re-loaded with biomass, re-
lighted, and re-inserted into the heat column Later in 2002,  ‘wood gas camp
stove’ was developed with forced air designs with the intention of constructing
stove for the afﬂ uent North American camper market It had  battery-powered fan
and could produce an impressive blue  ame for sustained periods an inverted
downdraft (IDD) natural convection gasiﬁ er stove Figure  shows the schematic
diagram of  gasiﬁ er stove He tested this stove for efﬁ ciency measurement,
which was quite high, of the order of 30%–35% Later, he worked on sizing the
stove and trying to use it for making charcoal There was no real success with
applications So, Dr Reed stopped his research work in However, later in 1998, he
began working on  smaller, forced convection model with  fan, and Cooking pan
Gas wick Insulation Secondary air BIOGAS TECHNOLOGY Microbial conversion of
agricultural, industrial, and domestic waste has been  common practice for the
past 50 years The conversion leads to the utilization of biomass waste as
valuable resource and production of  fuel gas called biogas, which can be used
for cooking, lighting, and power generation Biogas systems have, in recent
years, become an attractive option for decentralized rural development, as they
produce  cheap fuel and good quality, rich manure They also provide an effective
and convenient way for disposing of Pyrolysis gas Charcoal zone Flaming
pyrolysis zone Unburned wood Grate Primary air control FIGURE  NATURAL DRAFT
GASIFIER STOVE OPERATING ON INVERSE DOWNDRAFT PRINCIPLE FIGURE  GASIFIER TURBO-
STOVE 141 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY
OPTIONS involving  number of microbial populations is controlled by various
environmental and factors ionic strength or salinity, nutrients, and toxic or
inhibitory substrates Among all these, the most crucial parameter is
temperature, as methanogenesis is strongly temperature dependent, with reaction
rates generally increasing with the increase in temperature The most optimum
temperature range for gas production is 30–35 ° (mesophilic), below which the
digestion process slows down, with little gas produced at  temperature of 15 °
and less Therefore, in areas that witness temperature  uctuation, such as
mountainous regions, temperatures have to be maintained by providing heat or
increasing insulation to prevent heat losses The hydrogen ion concentration, or
the pH, is another important factor, as most anaerobic conversion processes
operate best at near neutral pH Excess production and accumulation of acidic or
basic conversion products such as organic fatty acids or ammonia lead to pH
uctuations outside the optimal range, thereby displacing the bicarbonate buffer
system that has more neutral pH, thus inhibiting methanogenesis Methane
formation is also affected by the quantity of daily feeding (loading rate) and
the retention period of the feedstock in  biogas plant The loading rate and
retention period are optimized, depending on the nature of the feedstock and
climatic conditions  high loading rate that is more than the rated capacity will
form excessive acids, leading to low rate of gas formation and production of
undigested slurry The retention period for most plants ranges between 30 days
and 55 days, and is found to reduce if temperatures are raised or more nutrients
are added to the digester The optimum nutrient requirement is generally 20–30 /
ratio The presence of trace elements like iron, magnesium, calcium, sodium,
barium, tungsten, and nickel activates the enzyme systems of acetogenic and
methanogenic bacteria and results in higher gas production, while heavy metals
like mercury, lead, chromium, and sulphites, if present, are toxic to the
anaerobic process night soil and generate social beneﬁ ts in terms of reduction
of drudgery, time, and effort for fuelwood collection and cooking by women and
young girls They do not generate smoke, thus eliminating the adverse effects of
smoke on women and children like pH, temperature, Process The process of
anaerobic digestion is  three- stage process The stages proceed simultaneously
and include the activities of diverse group of microbes with speciﬁ  metabolic
requirements In the  rst stage of enzymatic hydrolysis, bacteria like
Clostridium, Ruminoccus, and Cellumonas produce extracellular enzymes, such as
cellulase, protease, amylase, and lipase, which degrade organic materials like
complex carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins present in the organic biomass into
more simple compounds such as sugars During the second stage of acidiﬁ cation,
fermentative acid- producing bacteria, such as Anaerovibrio lipolytica,
Bacteroides amylophilus, Bacteriodes ruminocola, and so on, convert the simpliﬁ
ed compounds into volatile fatty acids, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide In this
process, the facultative anaerobic bacteria utilize oxygen and carbon, thereby
creating anaerobic conditions necessary for methanogenesis In the  nal stage,
obligate anaerobes, which are archaebacteria and mainly include Methanosarcina
barkeri, Methanococus mazei, and Methanothrix soengenii, decompose low molecular
weight (acetic acid, hydrogen, carbon compounds dioxide) to form biogas,
sometimes also referred to as ‘gobar’ gas This gas consists of methane and
carbon dioxide, along with some traces of other gases, notably hydrogen sulphide
The exact composition will vary according to the substrate used in the
methanogenesis process, but as an approximate guide, when cattle dung is  major
constituent of fermentation, the composition of the resulting gas will be
55%–66% methane, 40%– 45% carbon dioxide, and  negligible amount of hydrogen
sulphide and hydrogen Factors affecting methanogenesis The anaerobic microbial
conversion of organic substrates to methane is  complex biogenic process 142
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS
Design of biogas plant Biogas plants are classiﬁ ed on the basis of loading
cycle, gas storage system, digester position and size, and feed material The
process can be  continuous, semi-continuous or batch type In the batch type, the
loading of digester is done periodically, and after  fall in the gas production,
the digester is unloaded and recharged This is suitable for crop and forest
waste, agro-industrial waste, and other waste that does not mix homogeneously
with water In  semi-continuous digester, feeding is done once in three to four
days, and the digester is suitable for cattle dung, crop residues, forest waste,
and so on Continuous digesters are more suitable for regularly and sufﬁ ciently
available waste that can be mixed homogeneously, such as cattle dung and night
soil  typical biogas plant consists of  digester in which the slurry (dung mixed
with water) is fermented; an inlet tank, which is used to mix the feed and from
where it is passed into the digester;  gas holder/dome in which the generated
gas is collected; an outlet tank to remove the spent slurry; distribution
pipeline() to take the gas to the kitchen; and  manure pit in which the spent
slurry is stored Based on the gas storage system, there are two main digester
designs: the  oating dome and the  xed dome In the  oating dome biogas plant,
also known as the KVIC model, the biogas is stored in  drum that can be made of
steel, ferro-cement or  bre glass Based on the quantity of the gas stored in it,
the drum moves up and down on  guide frame, which is  xed in digester walls In
the  xed dome type, the digester and gas storage dome are integrated with the
space for storing usable gas between the dome and the digester, and the most
common design is the Deenbandhu model While the Deenbandhu model is appropriate
and more suitable for individual family-type requirements, the large-sized
oating dome KVIC design biogas plants have been successfully adopted for cattle
dung, night soil, kitchen and domestic waste, vegetable market waste, and so on
(Figure ) While the ministry continues to promote individual cattle dung based
family-type biogas plants under its National Biogas Programme, an Mixing tank
Outlet tank Gas storage Digester FIGURE  KVIC FLOATING DOME BIOGAS PLANT
approach for promoting medium-sized biogas plants for small communities (six to
eight families) is being adopted Salient features of the KVIC model with respect
to its features and cost economics are as follows # Feedstock: cattle dung,
night soil, kitchen waste, leafy biomass, vegetable market waste Single chamber
digester with  oating drum for gas storage Retention time of 35–40 days Cost
economics Cost of plant ( m3/day): Rs 4500 $ $ Feedstock: 25 kg/day Payback
period: – years $ $ # # # liqueﬁ ed petroleum gas (LPG) saved: Rs 3982/annum
Kerosene saved: Rs 2105 /annum $ Wood saved: Rs 1894 /annum $ Manure production:
4500 kg/annum $ Designs for alternative feedstock In rural areas, it is  common
practice to use cattle dung and night soil as feedstocks in biogas plants that
meet the cooking energy requirements However, the availability of cattle dung in
rural areas is limited, and the cattle population is also diminishing fast
Hence, there is  need to use alternative feedstocks for meeting the increasing
143 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS $
LPG saved: Rs 3982/annum $ Kerosene saved: Rs 2105/annum $ Wood saved: Rs
1894/annum $ Manure production: 1500 kg/annum cooking energy needs Alternative
organic feed substrates like agriculture residues, oil cakes, dry and wet
leaves, vegetable market waste, and kitchen waste, which are abundantly
available in villages, also have the potential, which can be tapped through
appropriate technology for energy generation, thus, meeting the increasing
cooking energy demand So, the production of biogas from other biomass like leafy
waste, agro-residues, and kitchen waste garbage is an attractive option, which
will facilitate extending the beneﬁ ts of biogas technology to  larger section
of the society It is estimated that the total potential of leafy biomass
production in India is of the order of 1130 million tonnes (MT) (dry) If even
10% of this biomass could be mobilized for biomass production, about 67% of the
rural families could be provided with biogas for cooking After years of &
efforts, different designs have been developed in order to harness the biogas
potential of such substrates The acid reactor is daily fed with waste in serial
order and submerged in water for microbial action The water is re-sprinkled
thrice  day for 15 minutes over the waste bed Percolate rich in volatile fatty
acid is collected from the bottom of the reactor after six days and is fed to
the methane reactor The efﬂ uent discharged from the methane reactor is recycled
to the acid reactor for drawing more acid-rich liquor from the waste  biphasic
plant based on the similar principle is operational at Maharashtra Scooters for
treating 300 kg/ day of canteen waste generated in their campus canteen
APPLICATION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY TO RURAL AREAS PLUG FLOW DIGESTER The
Application of Science and Technology to Rural Areas, or ASTRA, design developed
at IISc, Bangalore, is based on the fermentation and  oating properties of the
biomass feedstock (Figure ) Main features of this design are as follows # TERI’
ENHANCED ACIDIFICATION AND METHANATION PROCESS TERI’ Enhanced Acidiﬁ cation and
Methanation, or TEAM, reactor is  biphasic design, which is operational since
the past four years at Gual Pahari, Haryana (Figure ) Main features of this
design reactor are as follows # Feedstocks: mixed green leaf biomass, grasses,
twigs Single chamber brick masonry structure for the digester walls and
cylindrical brick masonry vault cover Retention time of 35 days Feedstocks:
different agro-residues, vegetable market waste, and kitchen waste Six acidiﬁ
cation modules One methanation reactor Retention time of seven days Minimal
water requirement and operational problems like scum formation Cost economics
Cost of plant ( m3/day): Rs 20 000 $ Feedstock: 50 kg/day organic waste $ $
Payback period: – years # # # # # # # FIGURE  TERI’ ENHANCED ACIDIFICATION AND
METHANATION PROCESS FIGURE   TEAM REACTOR 144 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS –
POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS Gas collected in balloons Minimal water
requirement Operational problems like scum formation Cost economics Cost of
plant ( m3/day): Rs 7500 $ Feedstock: 17 kg/day $ $ Payback period: two to four
years LPG saved: Rs 3982/annum $ Kerosene saved: Rs 2105 /annum $ Wood saved: Rs
1894/annum $ $ Manure production: 3000 kg/annum  mixer/pulper for crushing the
solid waste Premix tanks (three in number), pre-digestion tank, air compressor,
and solar heater for heating water Gas delivery system Main digestion tank Tank
for recycling of water and water pump Gas utilization system Retention time of
12 days Cost economics Cost of plant ( m3/day): Rs 3500 $ Feedstock: 25 kg/day
organic waste $ Payback period: – years $ $ LPG saved: Rs 3982/annum Kerosene
saved: Rs 2105/annum $ Wood saved: Rs 1894/annum $ $ Manure production: 4500
kg/annum # # # # # # # # # # # # In plug  ow digesters, freshly fed biomass
feedstock in the slurry form undergoes about three to  ve days of rapid
decomposition while being submerged under the digester liquid This removes the
problematic volatile fatty acid producing this phase, methanogens constituents
After adequately colonize the partially decomposed biomass The biomass acquires
buoyancy at this stage and  oats above the fermenter liquid The rate of
acidogenesis and methanogenesis is adequately balanced, which produces biogas
Two plants of capacities 60 ×  m3 and 60 ×  m3 are operational near Kannati,
Chikkamangalur, for treating coffee waste water These are being run for eight
months with leafy biomass and for the balance three months as biomass-supported
xed  lm biogas plant for treating coffee waste water The conventional biogas
KVIC design has been modiﬁ ed in two ways First, by introducing  - HP mixer to
process the waste before putting it into  pre-digester tank, and second, by
using thermophilic microbes for faster digestion of the waste The growth of
thermophiles in the pre- digester tank is ensured by mixing the waste with hot
water and maintaining the temperature in the range of 55–60 ° by using solar
heater From the predigester tank, the slurry enters the main tank, where it
undergoes anaerobic digestion The undigested ligno-cellulosic and hemi-
cellulosic material then enters the settling tank Manure is dug out from the
settling tanks about  month later The gas generated in the plant is used for
cooking in the nearby canteen/hostel and also for gas-based lights  tted around
the plant BHABHA ATOMIC RESEARCH CENTRE The Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
developed  biphasic system that uses the potential of thermophiles for enhanced
recovery of biogas by using conventional biogas KVIC model Main features of the
plant are as follows # Feedstocks: kitchen waste, vegetable waste, and leafy
biomass 145 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
SMALL WIND SYS TEMS Small wind systems While large grid-connected wind sectors
of the economy However, the production and use of fossil fuels for power
generation, industrial application, and transportation have been associated with
adverse local environmental impacts such as deforestation, land degradation, and
water and air pollution In addition, there are concerns about the release of
greenhouse (GHG) emission from the energy sector, particularly during power
generation using fossil fuels One strategy to address these environmental issues
and diversifying sources of energy supply at the same time is the development
and promotion of renewable energy technologies During the past two decades,
considerable efforts have been made towards large-scale penetration of renewable
energy technologies in India Grid-connected power generation through wind energy
in the country has crossed the 9521 MW mark, making India the fourth largest
wind power generating country in the world after Germany, Spain, and USA At the
end of 2006, worldwide capacity of wind-powered generators was gigawatts,
although it currently produces just over % of worldwide electricity use farms
are now common in many countries, small wind machines are also developing their
own niche in the renewable energy sector Typically, small wind machines of
capacity up to 100 kW are called small wind machines Small wind energy systems
are of the following types # Mechanical pumping systems Battery charging aero-
generators of capacities less than 100 kW small Grid-connected wind machines
(Figure  illustrates small wind mills installed in Thailand) # farms using #
SMALL WIND MACHINES Energy is the prime mover of economic growth and human
development, which encompass all Wind energy All renewable energy (except tidal
and geothermal power), including the energy in fossil fuels, ultimately comes
from the sun The sun radiates 174 423 000 000 000 kWh FIGURE  WIND FARM USING
SMALL WIND MACHINES Source Unitron, India 147 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS
TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND SYS TEMS of energy to the earth per
hour In other words, the earth receives 74 × 1017 watts of power About %–% of
the energy coming from the sun is converted into wind energy, which is about 50
to 100 times more than the energy converted into biomass by all plants on earth
Wind is  form of solar energy and is created by the unequal heating of the
earth’ surface by the sun During the day, the air above the land heats up more
quickly than the air over water The warm air over land expands and rises, and
the heavier, cooler air rushes in to take its place, creating winds At night,
the winds are reversed because the air cools more rapidly over land than over
water In the same way, the large atmospheric winds that circle the earth are
created because the land near the earth’ equator is heated more by the sun
compared to the land near the North Pole and South Pole The terms ‘wind energy’
and ‘wind power’ describe the process by which the wind is used to generate
mechanical power, or electricity Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy in the
wind into clean electricity Wind power uses the kinetic energy of the  owing air
to generate mechanical energy in  wind turbine, which can be transformed into
pollution-free electricity Air moves around the earth because of the existing
differences in temperature and atmospheric pressure Wind turbines harness the
movement of the air to produce energy The wind turns the blades, which turn
rotor shaft This produces mechanical power, which is used to drive an electric
generator When the wind spins the blades of the wind turbine,  rotor captures
the kinetic energy of the wind and converts it into rotary motion to drive the
generator Most turbines have automatic overspeed-governing systems to keep the
rotor from spinning out of control in very high winds Flow chart given in Figure
shows the steps of generation of energy from wind and its distribution FIGURE
GENERATION OF WIND ENERGY AND ITS DISTRIBUTION vertical axis type such as the
egg-beater-style Darrieus model, named after its French inventor Most large
modern wind turbines are horizontal axis turbines Horizontal axis Most wind
machines that are in operation today are the horizontal axis type Horizontal
axis wind machines have blades that resemble airplane propellers  typical
horizontal wind machine stands as tall as  20-storied building and has three
blades that span across 200 feet Vertical axis Vertical axis wind machines have
blades that span from the top to the bottom, and the most common type (Darrieus
wind turbine) looks like  giant two-blade egg beater This type of vertical wind
machine is typically 100 feet tall and 50 feet wide These machines are available
in the capacity size of 650 watts to  MW for onshore application For offshore
application, -MW capacity wind turbine is commercially available Horizontal and
vertical axis wind turbines are presented in Figure , and the internal structure
of  horizontal axis turbine is given in Figure  Almost all wind turbine
generators consist of rotor blades, which rotate around  horizontal hub The hub
is connected to  gearbox and  generator, which are located inside  nacelle The
nacelle houses electrical components and is mounted at the top of  tower Wind
turbine types Modern wind turbines fall into two basic groups: the horizontal
axis type such as the traditional farm windmills used for pumping water and the
148 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND
SYS TEMS  = (* Cp***V3) where,  = power output, kilowatts Cp = maximum power
coefﬁ cient, ranging from 25 to 45, dimensionless (theoretical maximum = 59)  =
air density, lb/ft3  = rotor swept area, ft2 or ( D2 )/ ( is the rotor diameter
in feet,  = 1416)  = wind speed, mph  = 000133,  constant to yield power in
kilowatt (multiplying the above kilowatt by 340 converts it to horsepower [that
is,  kW = 340 horsepower]) Rotor diameter Rotor blade Gearbox Generator Nacelle
Rotor diameter Rotor height Fixed pitch Rotor blade Tower Gearbox Generator
Horizontal axis Vertical axis FIGURE  HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL AXIS WIND TURBINES
To get  preliminary estimate of the performance of  particular wind turbine, the
following formula is used AEO = 01328 *D2* V3 where, AEO = annual energy output,
kWh/year  = rotor diameter, feet  = annual average wind speed, mph Pitch Low-
speed shaft Rotor Gear box Generator Anemometer Wind direction Controller Basic
parts of small wind electric system Small wind energy systems for home lighting
generally comprise  rotor,  generator or an alternator mounted on  frame,  tail,
tower, wiring, and the balance of system components, controllers, inverters,
and/or batteries (Figure ) Through the spinning blades, the rotor captures the
kinetic energy of the wind and converts it into rotary motion to drive the
generator Brake Yaw drive Wind vane High-speed shaft Nacelle Yaw motor Blades
Tower FIGURE  INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND TURBINE Turbine
components Horizontal following # turbine components include the Rotor  blade or
rotor, which converts the energy in the wind to rotational shaft energy  drive
train, usually including  gearbox and  generator  tower that supports the rotor
and drive train Other equipment, including controls, electrical cables, ground
support equipment, and interconnection equipment Generator/ alternator Tail # #
Tower # The formula for calculating power from  wind turbine is FIGURE  BASIC
PART OF SMALL WIND TURBINE 149 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND SYS TEMS Wind turbine  wind turbine generator
converts mechanical energy into electrical energy (Figure ) Most turbines
manufactured today are horizontal axis upwind machines with two or three blades,
which are mostly tubular and made of steel The blades are made of  bre-glass-
reinforced polyester or wood-epoxy will depend on the application The balance of
system required will also depend on whether the system is grid-connected, stand-
alone or part of  hybrid system For  residential grid-connected application, the
balance of system parts may include  controller, storage batteries,  power-
conditioning unit (inverter), and wiring Stand-alone systems Stand-alone systems
(systems not connected to the utility grid) require batteries to store excess
power generated for use when the wind is calm They also need  charge controller
to keep the batteries from overcharging Small wind turbines generate DC (direct
current) electricity In very small systems, DC appliances operate directly off
the batteries Grid-connected systems In grid-connected systems, the only
additional equipment required is  power-conditioning unit (inverter), which
makes the turbine output electrically compatible with the utility grid Figure
depicts the arrangement showing wind turbine connected with grid Following
components form  part of small wind turbine systems # From grid Inverter
Batteries Control and protection systems Towers Tilt-up towers usually for
systems with $ # Batteries To house capacity under 1000 watts ( kW) FIGURE
SMALL WIND TURBINE FOR HOME LIGHTING Tower Wind speed increases with height;
therefore, the turbine is mounted on  tower In general, the higher the tower,
the more power the wind system can produce The tower also raises the turbine
above the air turbulence and obstructions such as hills, buildings, and trees
general rule of thumb is to install the wind turbine on  tower with the bottom
of the rotor blades at least 30 feet ( metres) above any obstacle that is within
300 feet (90 metres) of the tower AC to grid Wind turbine AC utility meter AC
electrical circuits DC voltage input AC voltage input Main utility breaker panel
Inverter and interconnects Balance of system The parts that are needed in
addition to the turbine and the tower, or the other system parts, FIGURE  WIND
TURBINE CONNECTED TO GRID 150 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND SYS TEMS $ Guyed towers usually used for systems
with Generation of electricity from wind at  given wind speed and wind turbine
type varies to  great degree with the wind speed distribution around the mean
value For example, on  site where 50% of the time wind speed Vav = 12 / and 50%
of the time Vav =  /,  wind turbine would generate much more electricity than
that which is on  site where 100% of the time wind speed Vav =  / This is due to
the fact that wind energy, in theory, is proportional to the cube of the wind
speed Wind resource evaluation is  critical element in projecting turbine
performance at  given site The energy available in  wind stream is proportional
to the cube of its speed, which means that doubling the wind speed increases the
available energy by  factor of eight Furthermore, the wind resource itself is
seldom  steady, consistent  ow It varies with the time of day, season, height
above ground, and type of terrain Proper siting in windy locations, away from
large obstructions, enhances  wind turbine’ performance capacity between  kW and
50 kW $ Self-supporting towers usually for turbines with capacity above 50 kW
Battery Inverter Rectiﬁ er Monitoring system # # # # Wind speed to operate
turbine The greater the annual mean wind speed, the better  turbine works In
general, most small/micro wind turbines start generating electricity when wind
speeds are in the range of approximately – / , and most products achieve their
maximum, or rated, output at  wind speed of 10–12 /, which is crucial when
comparing products In order to measure the annual wind speed, the knowledge of
prevailing wind and its direction are required at the site In addition to
geologic formations, other obstacles such as trees, buildings, and hills should
also be considered The turbine needs to be sited upwind of buildings and trees,
and it needs to be 30 feet above anything to reach the height of 300 feet Any
site will have different average wind speeds at different locations An
assessment of the site should include taking into consideration elevated
structures like hills in the vicinity of the turbine Such sites with elevations
are more suitable than gullies or the lee side of hills  site where annual mean
wind speed is  /,  turbine with  rating of  kW and  diameter of   would generate
approximately 1200 kWh, or units, of electricity per year For an average
household to meet all its electricity needs from  small wind turbine,  system of
– kW would be needed, depending on wind speed In general, annual average wind
speed of  / (11 miles per hour, or mph) is required for grid-connected
applications Annual average wind speed of – / (– mph) may be adequate for
unconnected electrical and mechanical applications such as battery charging and
water pumping Wind resources exceeding this speed prevail in many parts of the
world Wind power density is  useful way to evaluate the wind resource available
at  potential site The wind power density, measured in watts per square metre,
indicates how much energy is available at the site for conversion by  wind
turbine Wind speed generally increases with height above ground Table  gives the
classes of wind power density at 10  and 50  elevation Another useful indirect
measurement of the includes observing an area’ wind resource vegetation Trees,
especially conifers or evergreens, can be permanently deformed by strong winds
This deformity, known as ‘ agging’, has been used to estimate the average wind
speed for an area Figure  shows different level of  agging, depending on
different wind speed levels Wind resource assessment Wind resources vary with
the time of day, season, elevation, and type of terrain Wind plays an important
role in determining success or failure of  small wind turbine project At the
same time, the cost of assessing wind resources for  smaller project can be too
high 151 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  SMALL
WIND SYS TEMS Table  CLASSES OF WIND POWER DENSITY AT 10  AND 50  ELEVATION 10
(33 feet) 50  (164 feet) Speed / (mph) Wind power density (/m2) Speed / (mph)
Wind power class Wind power density (/m2)  <100 < () <200 < () II 100–150  ()/
() 200–300  ()/ () III 150–200  ()/ () 300–400  ()/ () IV 200–250  ()/ ()
400–500  ()/ ()  250–300  ()/ () 500–600  ()/ () VI 300–400  ()/ () 600–800  ()/
() VII >400 > () >800 > () FIGURE  LEVELS OF FLAGGING CAUSED BY THE PREVAILING
WIND DIRECTION Windmill pumps  windmill pump consists of  wind rotor,  pump, and
power transmission mechanism connecting the rotor to the pump The rotor extracts
energy from the wind and converts it into useful mechanical shaft power
transmission mechanism conveys the energy from the rotor to the pump rod, which
in turn transmits power to the pump The useful life of  well-designed windmill
pump is expected to be 15 years or more with proper maintenance and care The
useful life of  windmill pump may get reduced due to corrosion, which
predominantly 152 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
ANNEXURE  SMALL WIND SYS TEMS affects the structure and the parts of the pump
Characteristics such as rotor diameter and cut-in and cut-out wind speeds for
various types of small wind turbines are given in Table  Table  CHARACTERISTICS
OF VARIOUS SMALL WIND TURBINES Wind speed (/) Manufacturer Rotor diameter () No
of blades Cut-in Rated Output Capital cost () Solid area (m2) Windmill
design/type GM-II (geared) Rural Engineering School, Bhavanagar  18 55   1256
SICO (General) The Scientific Instrument Company Limited, Allahabad  18 37
1922  18 63   1669 AV-45 (direct) Auroville Centre for Scientific Research
(Aureka), Tamil Nadu  24 70   2220 AV-55 (direct) Auroville Centre for
Scientific Research (Aureka), Tamil Nadu APOLY-12-PU500 (direct) Institute of
Engineering and rural Technology, Allahabad  12 19   763 153 INTEGRATED ENERGY
MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE             BIOENERGY TECHNOLOGIES
FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS Geothermal
energy Geothermal energy is the natural heat are connected to the underground
hot water reservoir in the rocks These are known as hot dry rock (HDR) systems
Another method, which is under investigation, is the exploitation of the large
quantities of heat stored locally at accessible depth in molten rock (magma)
This can provide high temperature underground water, which can provide energy
for many applications These applications include district heating, individual
residential heating, and spa uses Following are the commonly used technology #
of the earth The earth’ interior heat is  result of high temperature dust and
gas that can be traced to over  billion years ago and is continually regenerated
from the decay of radioactive elements that occur in all rocks From the surface
down through the crust, the normal temperature gradient (the increase of
temperature with the increase of depth) in the earth’ crust is 17–30 ° per
kilometre of depth Below the crust is the mantle, which is made up of highly
viscous, partially molten rocks that have temperature in the range of 650–1250 °
At the earth’ core, which consists of  liquid outer core and  solid inner core,
temperatures may reach 4000–7000 ° High temperature: >220 ° Water or steam power
generation; direct use $  ash steam; combined ( ash and binary) cycle; direct
uid use heat exchangers; heat pumps Intermediate temperature: 100–220 ° Water
power generation direct use; $ # GEOTHERMAL ENERGY UTILIZATION Currently,
geothermal energy is exploited from the underground water stored in permeable
rocks This is also called as hydro-thermal system In this process, the water is
heated by hot rocks The heat can also be extracted using geothermal heat pumps
that extract heat directly from the ground binary cycle; direct  uid use; heat
exchangers; heat pumps Low temperature: 50–150 ° Water direct use; direct  uid
use; heat $ # exchangers; heat production Heat available between 100 ° and 150 °
can be used to generate electricity with special type of plants Heat above 150 °
is used for generating electricity In another process, hot rocks are artiﬁ
cially fractured, and water is circulated between two wells – injection and
producer wells – which 155 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR
BHUTAN ANNEXURE             ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN THE BUILDINGS
Energy conservation techniques in the buildings ECO-HOUSING AND ECO-FRIENDLY
BUILDING DESIGN Eco-house is  house that has minimal environmental impact during
its construction and operation period During its construction, it causes minimum
disruption to surroundings After its construction when it becomes habitable, it
consumes very less electricity It is naturally lit and ventilated Energy- efﬁ
cient architecture of eco-house ensures the reduced consumption of electricity
for cooling and heating The plumbing system of eco-house uses less water and
puts relatively fewer loads on city’ sewage system This is designed giving due
consideration to solid waste management system, reducing the burden on city’
solid waste disposal system Broadly, an eco-house follows six basic principles:
site planning, energy-efﬁ cient architecture, energy- efﬁ cient systems in the
building, use of renewable energy, efﬁ cient water management, and solid waste
management system new building During the construction stage, there is efﬁ cient
management of waste water and solid waste Efﬁ cient waste management plan
ensures that the entire site is protected from hazardous construction waste
ENVIRONMENT-FRIENDLY AND ENERGY- EFFICIENT BUILDING DESIGN All buildings in eco-
housing are designed for energy efﬁ ciency There is an efﬁ cient utilization of
natural climatic conditions by using passive solar design concepts These design
concepts include the following # Orientation and shading Buildings are oriented
in such  way that there is efﬁ cient use of sunlight and wind Interiors of the
properly orientated buildings are naturally heated in winters and cooled in
summers Building layout The building layout is designed in such  way that the
rooms have naturally comfortable environs during their occupancy period For
example, if the living room in an eco-house is planned to be used extensively
during afternoons in summers, then its location will be planned in such  way
that it receives sufﬁ cient natural and diffused light so that the environment
remains cool Window design Efﬁ cient window design enhances lighting and
ventilation in the building Windows in an eco-house are sized and placed
according to solar path During summers, only diffused light comes from the
window, and during winters, warm sunlight  lters through these windows and makes
interiors # EFFICIENT SITE PLANNING Overall site planning and design of an eco-
building integrates all natural principles These give due consideration to
preservation and conservation of natural features or resources present on the
site These resources may include trees and vegetation, soil, water, and other
natural characteristics of the site The building layout is drawn without
disturbing trees and vegetation Care is taken to ensure that trees are not
disturbed by construction activities The fertile eco-housing site is preserved
before starting the construction process and is utilized again for landscaping
of the # 157 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN THE BUILDINGS more cosy The windows of an eco-
house are high-performance windows; these are shaded well in order to protect
the interiors from the sun in harsh summers and from rains in monsoons If the
buildings are air-conditioned then the window frames of high performance windows
reduce heat losses and bring down the loads on air-conditioners Energy- and
resource-efﬁ cient technologies in building construction An eco-house is
constructed with efﬁ cient building technologies, which use eco- friendly
materials, and less water and power during construction Low-energy building
materials An eco-house is constructed with low energy materials Manufacture and
transport of building materials are very resource and energy intensive Low
energy materials comprise materials that are locally available and require less
energy and resources during the construction process The materials that are made
from waste or are the by-products of some other industry are also considered as
low energy building materials consumption, and there is efﬁ cient utilization of
water for various applications in buildings Emphasis is laid on two aspects,
that is, water conservation and water efﬁ ciency Water conservation means the
preservation and efﬁ cient management of water This includes use of  xtures that
lead to conservation of water Water efﬁ ciency includes prevention of wastage,
overuse, and exploitation of the available resource # EFFICIENT WASTE MANAGEMENT
IN THE BUILDING Eco-housing solid waste management in the building Solid waste
generated from households generally reaches the city dumping sites There is no
resource recovery in most of the cases In general, the household waste generated
constitutes various materials such as plastics, paper, and glass that can be
recycled and reused In addition, the waste has  high organic content, which can
be used to recover useful resources such as energy and manure Solid waste
management in  building would also ensure safe and environment-friendly disposal
of waste its own traditional Bhutan has developed housing and building design
guidelines, which are being followed strictly Traditionally, locally made mud
bricks and conventional housing techniques using bamboo and construction mud are
still used in rural areas However, the use of cement and concrete for
construction in urban areas and the use of GI sheets for rooﬁ ng material are
prevalent In the context of Bhutan, following recommendations to develop and
adopt eco-friendly and energy-efﬁ cient housing codes and concepts can be
considered # on emphasizes # USE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY IN THE BUILDING All
buildings in eco-housing are fully or partly powered by renewable sources of
energy Examples are using solar energy for water heating and space heating,
biogas for cooking, and other renewable energies wherever applicable USE OF
EFFICIENT SYSTEMS IN THE BUILDING The lighting, cooling, heating, and air-
conditioning systems are efﬁ ciently designed in the eco- housing High
performance, energy-efﬁ cient, and energy-labelled products are commonly used in
buildings These appliances are based on the use of energy-efﬁ cient technologies
and appliances, and automatic control systems Use of such equipment reduces
energy consumption in the building For example, heat pumps are used for space
heating and cooling, insulation is used in walls and roofs for reducing heat
loss, and so on National-level awareness programmes and capacity-building
programmes for common citizens and architects need to be developed Agencies like
the Standards and Quality Control Authority (SQCA), National Housing Board,
Association of Construction Contractors, National environment Commission,
Ministry of Works and Human Settlement, Urban Development Department, and so on
can work together # EFFICIENT WATER MANAGEMENT IN THE BUILDING Eco-housing
emphasizes on water conservation There is signiﬁ cant reduction in water loss
and 158 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  ENERGY
CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN THE BUILDINGS The SQCA, which is already working with
the construction industry, can be strengthened to work as  focal agency for
sustainable buildings Capacity building will include vesting national- level
authorities with following responsibilities To govern the construction
activities taking $ place in the country To guide and monitor the local
development authorities for energy-efﬁ cient building techniques To study,
analyse, and document the local architecture and locally available materials,
and explore and identify energy efﬁ ciency techniques in the buildings To
explore energy-efﬁ cient techniques and their implications in contemporary era
To develop new building technologies To develop building codes efﬁ ciency about
energy conservation and energy efﬁ ciency in buildings There should be market
development for sustainable habitat and encouragement of the industries that
process and manufacture environment-friendly building products like solar water
heaters, photovoltaic cells, energy- efﬁ cient household equipment, low volatile
organic compound (VOC) paints, low energy building materials, water-efﬁ cient
plumbing  xtures, sewage treatment units, recyclable and reusable products, and
so on # # # $ $ ACTION POINTS Study on buildings and materials and development
of database for modifying building codes to incorporate energy efﬁ ciency and
sustainability in buildings Pilot projects to demonstrate energy-efﬁ cient
technologies, design practices, and low energy materials These projects can be
taken up under the ongoing government projects like construction of housing
colonies and school buildings This would lead to the development of guidelines
for such type of projects The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of
India, has prepared similar guidelines, which can be accessed at <
iass/Construction_Manualpdf> # $ $ $ # for energy To collaborate with
international architects $ for advisory services Collaborative programmes with
other agencies, especially with the Government of India agencies like the Bureau
of Energy Efﬁ ciency (BEE) to develop database for weather data, best practices,
design norms for Bhutanese weather conditions, alternative materials, and so on
can be developed Workshops should be designed for architects and construction
agencies to sensitize them # # 159 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN
FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE             ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN THE BUILDINGS
Institutions in the energy sector and their functions THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
The Department of Energy (DoE) is  central government agency responsible for the
formulation of policies, plans, programmes, and guidelines related to the energy
sector Formed in 2002, it deals with all forms of energy, including hydropower
and alternative forms of energy It also provides technical advice to the Royal
Government of Bhutan on all aspects related to energy, including formulating
development strategy, monitoring and evaluating implementation plans, and
preparing and maintaining programmes and schedules It is also responsible for
giving techno-economic and budgetary clearances to major projects and programmes
related to energy The responsibilities of the DoE are increasing over the period
It is assumed that it will play increasingly important role in the overall
development of the energy sector Therefore, there is  need to strengthen and
reorganize the DoE The responsibilities of the DoE are likely to expand and
include activities that can be classiﬁ ed/ categorized under various divisions,
as discussed subsequently The DoE has four divisions—the Planning and
Coordination Division (PCD), Hydro-Met Services Division (HMSD), and Renewable
Energy Division (RED) Additionally, the Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA) is
also under the DoE coordination of internal activities, it also coordinates
donor-funded projects handled by the DoE Major tasks handled by this division
are as follows Complete planning of the energy sector # Planning and preparing
detailed project reports for new projects Executing new projects Negotiating
with the Government of India and other funding agencies Coordinating with donor-
funded projects Coordinating and monitoring with Bhutan Power Company, other
power generating companies, and other stakeholders Coordinating with other
ministries # # # # # # Hydro-Met Service Division The HMSD has three sections:
hydrology,  ood warning, and meteorology The  ood warning section monitors  ood
warning stations established across the country and coordinates with the
Government of India on  ood warning data collection and information sharing The
hydrology section is responsible for the collection and analysis of hydrology
data for hydropower plant design The meteorological section is responsible for
collection and processing of meteorological data It has set up 72 weather
stations across the country and has  repository of the weather data for last few
years The division also maintains  ood warning systems, which are established in
coordination with India Planning and Coordination Division This division is
looking after the overall planning and coordination work Besides planning and
161 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  INS
TITUTIONS IN THE ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS Renewable Energy Division
This division for promoting is responsible renewable energy related activities
in the country The division, so far, has concentrated its activities on the
distribution of solar photovoltaic home lighting system, preparation of
feasibility reports for small and micro hydro projects (four projects are being
studied), development of improved cook stoves and bukharis in collaboration with
Austrian Development Agency, rehabilitation of solar photovoltaic systems,
development of servicing and training network, and so on The division has also
worked on developing the draft renewable energy policy Planning and coordination
The activities of the meteorological and hydrological services department can be
classiﬁ ed into three categories  Routine activities Coordination with $ other
ministries, departments, generating companies, and power corporations
Coordination with donor agencies $ Monitoring of implementation of plans $
Coordination with the Government of India $  Development of accelerated hydro
master plan and private sector participation Private sector participation in the
power $ sector would increase the responsibilities of the department manifold
Some important functions of the department would include the following -
Developing policies and norms for private RENEWABLE AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY
RELATED ACTIVITIES Promotion of energy-efﬁ cient appliances and monitoring of
the same Monitoring of renewable energy resources and preparation of long-term
database for solar, wind, biomass, and other energy resources Promotion of
renewable energy devices Formulation of subsidy and  nance schemes for promoting
renewable energy systems Promotion of energy-efﬁ cient buildings Development of
local capacities in developing and operating renewable energy and energy efﬁ
ciency technologies Establishment of energy efﬁ ciency laboratory and making
available training, auditing, and other services to industries, hotels, and
institutions for improving their efﬁ ciencies Coordination with other agencies
and developing and implementing strategies for using other energy resources such
as biomass, solar, wind, and waste to energy projects # # sector participation -
Developing site and preparing project reports # - Evaluating and approving
private sector # projects - Monitoring of projects and facilitation of # project
completions # - Resolving disputes  Implementation of large hydropower projects
Includes implementation of ongoing and planned projects $ #  Management and
coordination of National Load Despatch Centre # MODELS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND
THEIR USEFULNESS AND LIMITATIONS WITH RESPECT TO BHUTAN Various  nancial and
business models, which are successfully used in market-based country situation
for delivering solar photovoltaic systems are as follows RED can be renamed and
restructured as Sustainable Energy Division METEOROLOGICAL AND HYDROLOGICAL
SERVICES Analysis of hydrology data and preparation of long-term data archives
Maintaining meteorological data in scientiﬁ  and internationally approved
formats Direct Cash Sales Model # The consumer buys the renewable energy system
by either paying cash or by arranging the dealer credit # # 162 INTEGRATED
ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  INS TITUTIONS IN THE
ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS Concession Model The end-user immediately
becomes the owner of the system # Structurally identical to the Fee-for-Service
Model, with the only difference being the concession availed to serve speciﬁ ed
region with some degree of monopoly Concessionaire and regulatory-type model
approach to rural electriﬁ cation is being tested in many countries and maybe
more suitable for rural off-grid electriﬁ cation # Credit Sales Model The model
involves  specialist  nance partner, along with  maintenance contract during the
nance term End-user acquires the renewable energy system on credit Credit sales
are divided into three categories # # # Rural Energy Service Concession Model
Bhutan has developed Rural Energy Service Concession Model (RESCOM), which is
combination of Fee-for-Service Model and Concession Model With this approach,
consumer would not be required to make his own payment, and quality of services
is systematically assured This modiﬁ ed model also enables the development of
market for renewable energy technologies by creating  critical mass essential
for making commercially sustainable business Rural energy service provider
operator will be selected through bidding for it to have concessional exclusive
rights, being technically and  nancially qualiﬁ ed service provider for  speciﬁ
region for  speciﬁ  period of time By effective application of RESCOM, Bhutan is
planning off-grid electriﬁ cation of  households by Dealer Credit Model On
receiving all the payments for an renewable energy system through credit
arrangements, renewable energy dealer/ supplier sells renewable energy system/
to end-user and the end- user immediately becomes the owner of the system  End-
user Credit Model After providing third party consumer credits to the end-user,
renewable energy dealer/supplier sells the renewable energy system to the end-
user Usually, the end-user becomes the owner of the system immediately, but this
can be delayed until all the payments are made The renewable energy system is
used as  collateral against the loan  Lease/Hire Purchase Model The solar
photovoltaic supplier/dealer or   nancial intermediary leases the photovoltaic
system/ to an end-user At the end of the lease period, ownership may or may not
be transferred to the end-user, depending on the agreement During the lease
period, the leaser remains the owner of the system and is responsible for its
maintenance and repair Getana Model The Getana Model has been implemented by the
Department of Energy (DoE) with the purpose of demonstrating  scheme for
community-based solar photovoltaic energy services Figure  shows the framework
and other details of the Getana Model Fee-for-Service Model  large-scale
‘utility–type’ approach that usually involves providing subsidies to users An
energy service company (ESCO) owns the system and provides energy service to
end-user, who pays  periodic fee (for example, monthly) to ESCO The end-user is
not responsible for the maintenance of the system and never becomes the owner #
HYDROPOWER AND CLIMATE CHANGE The recently released Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) assessment reports have established the phenomenon of
global warming beyond any doubt The climate change may bring about  tremendous
impact on the high mountainous glacial environment like that in Bhutan Many of
the big glaciers melt and form glacial lakes The global warming induces faster #
# 163 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  INS
TITUTIONS IN THE ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS  Capital Nu  436 00 recurrent
budgetary support  Spares 252 00  Service cost 33 480  Total 285 876
>2647/hh/annum Ministry of Finance Renewable energy division Service cost per
annum (cid:) Nu 310 108=Nu 33 480 Cost of spares/ (cid:) Nu 2337 108=Nu 252 00
Solar village committee (solar technicians)  technicians, Nu 810/ Capital
cost=Nu  436 00 Fee collection (cid:) Nu 30 108=Nu 3240/ =Nu 38 880/ Solar users
(108 HH) FIGURE  GETANA MODEL would also help in assessing the environmental
condition of the high mountainous regions rate of ice and snow melting, leading
to  rapid level rise in these lakes The sudden discharge of large volumes of
water and debris from the glacial lakes – known as glacial lake outburst  ood
(GLOF) – could cause  ooding downstream The GLOF can severely damage hydropower
plants This had happened in Nepal in 1985 when the Dig Tsho GLOF destroyed the
Namche small hydropower project THE ‘DUTCH DISEASE’ As detailed elsewhere in
this report, the export of hydropower is the mainstay of the Bhutanese economy
In  classic economic parlance, such  situation might lead to ‘Dutch disease’
natural resource-based export boom can cause major distortions in an economy by
discouraging production and investment in the non-booming exportables sector,
often referred to as ‘Dutch disease’ However, the studies show that there is no
evidence of  stagnation of the non-power tradable sector so far Nonetheless, it
would be prudent to take the necessary preventive measures Given the fact that
Bhutan is blessed with so many natural resources that can be utilized both for
value-added It is recommended, therefore, to set up ‘Glacial Lake Outburst Flood
Monitoring and Early Warning System’ to continuously monitor the likely GLOF
hazards and take early preventive actions Towards this end, Bhutan may work with
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); the International Center for
Integrated (ICIMOD), Nepal; Mountain Development National Remote Sensing Agency,
India; and Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok Such  system  Kojo   Bhutan:
Power Exports and Dutch Disease Centre for Bhutan Studies Monograph #2005 164
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  INS TITUTIONS
IN THE ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS ENERGY AND MDGS The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) reﬂ ect an international undertaking to signiﬁ cantly
improve the condition of the world’ poorest by MDGs were drawn from the actions
and targets present in the Millennium Declaration that was adopted by 189
nations during the UN Millennium Summit held in September Eight MDGs and their
18 quantiﬁ able targets, along with their 48 trackable indicators that were
adopted by the UN, can also be compared with the targets and goals set by the
Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) Table  gives  glimpse of the goals and targets
of the MDGs Four main pillars of Gross National Happiness (GNH) have been
elaborated to guide public products and for power generation, the focus may be
concentrated on such decentralized cottage industries Therefore, there is  need
to shift focus from large, power-intensive industries to small, village-level
industries Such industries can be established around decentralized power plants
based on small hydro, biomass, and solar energy Such an approach would also help
in minimizing the migration of the rural populace to cities Besides, taking
advantage of cheap and abundant electricity, clean environment, and the educated
youth, Bhutan may establish itself as  hub for service-oriented exports (for
example, software, business, and knowledge process outsourcing) This may fetch
much more revenue than the plain exports of electricity Needless to say, this
would also result in the creation of job opportunities for the local youth Table
MDG GOALS AND THEIR TARGETS Targets MDG goal Eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger Reduce by half the proportion of people living on less than  dollar  day
between 1990 and 2015 Reduce (between 1990 and 2015) by half the proportion of
people who suffer from hunger Achieve universal primary education Ensure that by
2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete  full
course of primary education Promote gender equality and empower women Eliminate
gender disparity in primary and secondary education, preferably by 2005, and in
all levels of education no later than 2015 Reduce child mortality Reduce by two-
thirds, between 1990 and 2015, the under-five mortality rate Improve maternal
health Reduce by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality
ratio Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases Have halted by 2015 and began
to reverse the spread of HIV /AIDS Have halved by 2015 and begun to reverse the
incidence of malaria and other major diseases Ensure environmental
sustainability Integrate the principles of sustainable development in country
policies and programs and reverse the loss of environment resources Halve, by
2015, the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water
and basic sanitation Develop further an open rule-based, predictable,
nondiscriminatory trading and financial system Develop  Global Partnership for
Development Address the social needs of the Last Developed Countries’ exports
Address the special needs of landlocked developing countries and small island
developing states Deal comprehensively with the debt problems of developing
countries through national and international measures in order to make debt
sustainable in the long term In cooperation with developing countries, develop
and implement strategies for decent and productive work for youth In cooperation
with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to affordable essential drugs in
developing countries In cooperation with the private sector, make available the
benefits of new technologies especially information and communication
technologies 165 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE
INS TITUTIONS IN THE ENERGY SECTOR AND THEIR FUNCTIONS  Car free Sunday  Create
public awareness and opinion about energy efﬁ ciency and pollution due to
vehicles policy: equitable socio-economic development, conservation of the
natural environment, promotion of cultural heritage, and establishment of good
governance GNH is based on the belief that the pursuit of happiness is the
inherentt desire of every human being, and that of every citizen of the kingdom
The concept suggests  much broader, comprehensive, and balanced approach to
development The operationalization of GNH, which entailed transposing cultural,
social, spiritual, and environmental consciousness into development, has been
conducted in Bhutan, essentially through  ve year plans  One family one vehicle
- Second/third vehicle can be an electrical vehicle Introduce electric mass
transport vehicles Mini busses with frequent trips $ Designated areas for
electric bikes/ $  Point to point electric/hybrid car service # - Tourism
initiative High quality vehicles to attract tourists Encourage tourists to
travel within city on trendy electric vehicles specially designed for Bhutan
tourism Other alternate fuels Natural gas in border areas $ Natural gas
/hydrogen vehicles in Thimphu $  Global Environment Facility (GEF)/ Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) project # # THIMPHU AS SOLAR AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
CAPITAL CITY BY 2015 Target is to meet more than 90% energy needs from
renewables in all sectors # Thimphu energy balance energy Thimphu Dzongkhag
consumption in the residential and commercial sectors Major areas: Residential
and commercial urban has Trolley ropeways from Motithang to main $ city centres
Feasibility study can be taken up Energy consumption areas Plan – Phase  Develop
plan for transport sector fuel replacement/ reduction # Small-scale industries
Use of natural gas by 2015 South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) has initiated the process of developing regional grid and gas pipeline
network among SAARC countries, which may be persuaded earnestly Reduce intra-
city vehicle movement Improve public transport $ Curb on vehicle movements $ 166
INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN ANNEXURE  BIOENERGY
TECHNOLOGIES FOR THERMAL APPLICATIONS – POTENTIAL BIOMASS TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS
References and Bibliography REFERENCES Alam  and Tshering  Adverse Impacts Of
Climate Change On Development of Bhutan: integrating adaptation into policies
and activities Capacity Strengthening in the Least Developed Countries (LDCs)
For Adaptation to Climate Change (CLACC) Working Paper No  Bhutan: IIED
(International Institute for Environment and Development) IPCC (Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change) Climate Change 1995: impacts, adaptations
and mitigation of climate change: scientiﬁ -technical analyses Contribution of
Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the IPCC Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press NEC (National Environment Commission) Bhutan National
Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) Royal Government of Bhutan ESMAP (Energy
Sector Management Assistance Programme) Technologies to Convert Biomass to
Modern Energy [Advancing Bio-energy for Sustainable Development]  Washington,
DC: World Bank RGoB (Royal Government of Bhutan) Bhutan Trade Statistics for the
Year Thimphu: Department of Revenue and Customs, Ministry of Finance, RGoB TERI
(The Energy and Resources Institute) IEMMP (Integrated Energy Management Master
Plan) Survey New Delhi: TERI FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation) Indian
Improved Cookstoves:  compendium [Field Document No 41] Rome: FAO Gyenden
Report on the reconnaissance study of thermal springs (Tsachhus) and medicinal
water (Menchhus or cold springs) in Gasa and Punakha Dzongkhag, Bhutan, Thimphu,
Bhutan: Division of Geology and Mines, Ministry of Trade and Industry
BIBLIOGRAPHY Garud   and Gurung   (eds) Bhutan Energy Data Directory, Thimpu,
Bhutan: Department of Energy, Ministry of Trade and Industry IPCC (Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change) The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: an
assessment of vulnerability  Special Report of Working Group II of the IPCC
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 167 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER
PL AN FOR BHUTAN REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY Royal Government of Bhutan Bhutan
2020 -  Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness Planning Commission Thimphu,
Bhutan IPCC (Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change) Climate Change 2007:
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, summary for policy makers Working Group
II Contribution to the IPCC, Fourth Assessment Report Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press Solar Energy Program review and preparations of sustainable
solar energy programmes and project proposals for Bhutan, United Nations
Industrial Development Organisation-2002 MoA (Ministry of Agriculture) Selected
Renewable Natural Resource (RNR) Statistics Thimphu: Policy and Planning
Division, MoA Mini-micro hydels and solar PV systems for sustainable development
in off-grid rural areas of Bhutan ‘Towards Electricity for all by 2020’,
Renewable Energy Division, Department of Energy, Thimphu, Bhutan-Nov NEC
(National Environment Commission) Initial National Communication of Bhutan under
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Royal Government of
Bhutan The Integrated Master Plan study for Dzongkhag wise electriﬁ cation in
Bhutan, Japan International Cooperation Agency, Economic Development Department-
Oct 2005 NSB (National Statistical Bureau) Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan,
Thimphu: NSB, Royal Government of Bhutan Strategy document (more details, title)
Country Strateg and Program , Bhutan, Asian Development Bank, September-2005 NSB
(National Statistical Bureau) Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan, Thimphu: NSB,
Royal Government of Bhutan Renewable Natural Resource (RNR) Statistics- 2000
rnrstat2000pdf NSB (National Statistical Bureau) Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan,
Thimphu: NSB, Royal Government of Bhutan OoCC (Ofﬁ ce of the Census
Commissioner) Population and Housing Census of Bhutan Thimphu: OoCC, Royal
Government of Bhutan 168 INTEGRATED ENERGY MAN AGEMENT MAS TER PL AN FOR BHUTAN
Integrated Energy Management Master Plan for Bhutan           Prepared for
Department of Energy Ministry of Economic Affairs Royal Government of Bhutan
The Energy and Resources Institute