Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/BTN/  Programme rationale  The small Himalayan Kingdom of Bhutan has
transformed into  rapidly growing low middle-income country by managing its
natural resource endowment and unlocking hydropower potential Guided by the
philosophy of ‘gross national happiness’, strong economic growth, investments in
health and education, and the peaceful transition to  democratic constitutional
monarchy2 in Bhutan saw poverty drop from to  per cent in little over  decade
Life expectancy increased remarkably from 32 years in 1960 to years in Ranked
132 out of 188 countries, Bhutan is in the medium human development index
category Its progress in tackling extreme poverty is among its most notable
Millennium Development Goal achievements The country is also recognized6 for its
commitment to remain carbon neutral, reinforced by its 2017 ratification of the
Paris Climate Agreement Seventy-one per cent of land area is under forest cover
and more than half of the country’ landscape is protected  Future progress in
eradicating poverty – and preventing people from falling back into poverty –
will depend in part on how successfully Bhutan manages the relationship between
its people and the land Nearly 60 per cent of the population relies on
agriculture to make  living, poverty is predominantly rural in nature,10 and –
in  country driven by the pursuit of happiness – women farmers are the “least
happy” group111213 Climate-related disasters have increased in number and
magnitude They have reversed the gains of farming communities and are
threatening the country’ poverty reduction efforts141516 Roads that give farmers
access to markets and imported fuel, rice and medicine are increasingly
vulnerable to landslides Projected variability in rainfall due to climate
change17 may jeopardize future hydropower revenues,18 on which poverty
eradication will depend While the country’ conservation record is strong,
adaptation and mitigation systems are not yet fully in place  Despite its rural
roots, the population is increasingly urbanized, young,19 online and educated20
With half the population below age 28 and two thirds of working age, now is the
time for Bhutan to capitalize on its demographic dividend, respond to the
changing needs of youth, and invest in jobs Attractive opportunities for youth
are limited, however Public-sector led growth has contributed to  weak private
sector,21 hydropower produces few jobs,22 the civil service has passed
absorption capacity,23 and  culture of high productivity is yet to take hold24
Pulled to migrate by the prospect of opportunities and modernity, and pushed by
the poverty, hardship and remoteness of rural agricultural life, the number of
unemployed youth in cities is rising – from per cent in 2012 to 28 per cent in
2015,25 with unemployment  The Economist Intelligence Unit, United Nations
common country analysis, Bhutan living standards survey, The poverty rate was
per cent in Human development index, Human Development Report, UNDP, Ibid  The
intended nationally determined contribution for Bhutan is one of seven globally
considered to be ° compatible or better:  21st Conference of the Parties of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  Bhutan State of the
Environment Report, Bhutan living standards survey, 10 Bhutan Poverty Analysis
Report, 2017, World Bank 11 Gross national happiness survey, Centre for Bhutan
Studies, 12 Lessons from Gender Analysis, UNDP-Global Environment Facility,
UNDP, 13 Gender Assessment and Action Plan for Supporting Climate Resilience and
Transformational Change in the Agricultural Sector, UNDP, 14United Nations
common country analysis, 15 Climate change vulnerability assessment, UNDP, 16
Ibid 17 State of Climate Change Report for the Renewable Natural Resources
Sector, Royal Government, 18Van Vliet, Wiberg, Leduc, Riahi, Power-generation
system vulnerability and adaptation to changes in climate and water resources,
19 Population situation analysis, UNFPA, 20 State of the World’ Children, United
Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), 2017 21 Private Sector Review, United Nations,
Bhutan, 22 Bhutan Development Report, World Bank, 23 United Nations common
country analysis, 24 Doing Business 2018, World Bank 25 Labour Force Survey
Report, DP/DCP/BTN/ figures for young urban women twice those of young urban
men26 Increased civic engagement by youth and  rise in social innovation and
entrepreneurship are national priorities27 Bhutan met the criteria to graduate
from least developed country status by the end of its twelfth five year plan,
dubbed ‘the last mile’ plan by the Royal Government,28 but the economic
vulnerability index remains  challenge Economic reforms are underway to
stimulate job creation across the country’ “five jewels”: hydropower,
agriculture, tourism, cottage and small industries, and mining,29 along with
efforts to encourage the national private sector to invest in  green economy30
While the urban poor account for only  per cent of the population,31
urbanization has given rise to other vulnerabilities An estimated 10 per cent32
of the population of the city of Thimphu live in informal settlements Increased
demands for safe water supply,33 sanitation and solid waste management are not
being met34 The rising air pollution, owing to the tripling of light vehicles
since 2005, threatens the country’ carbon neutral promise, while public
transport – the predominant mode of transport for women – is poor The population
of Thimphu is set to double by 35 As cities grow in size and influence, so too
will subnational governments Fifty per cent of the national budget is slated for
decentralization by 2023, while local capacities to deliver results are
limited363738 Further analysis of the impact of urbanization and
decentralization is needed to better understand opportunities and risks ahead39
In both rural and urban contexts, potential win-wins from eradicating poverty
and wise environmental management are reflected in the national Twelfth Plan40
They are also reflected in the country’ approach to the Sustainable Development
Goals While each Goal is considered important, Bhutan has prioritized Goal  (No
Poverty), Goal 13 (Climate Action) and Goal 15 (Life on Land) The 2015 rapid
integrated assessment of the current Eleventh Plan41 indicates that of 143
relevant global Goals targets, 134 are already included The Twelfth Plan42
further mainstreams the Goals, and identifies data gaps, institutional
challenges and capacity weaknesses43  Demonstrating progress against the Goals
will be aided by the country’ growing attention to issues of inequality, and
will help ensure national averages do not sideline those in danger of being left
behind44 In 2017, Bhutan established  national vulnerability baseline,45
identifying 14 socioeconomic groups considered most vulnerable to risk, stigma,
discrimination or to falling back into poverty Together with the 2016 climate
vulnerability assessment,46 and 2018 national census data, the vulnerability
baseline provides  strong basis for improved development targeting over the next
five years  For people with disabilities, the development of the first national
disability policy and efforts to explore ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disability are 26 National Commission for Women and
Children Strategy,  His Majesty’ 110th National Day Address, 28 13th Round Table
Meeting Report, 29 United Nations common country analysis, 30 Priority sector
lending guidelines, Royal Monetary Authority, 31 World Bank, 32 Vulnerability
baseline assessment, Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 33 Preparation
of  national adaptation plan, Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 34
Nationally appropriate mitigation action in the waste sector, Royal Government,
UNDP, 35 Sustainable low-emission urban transport systems,  proposal, UNDP
36Fiscal Decentralization, Dasho Lam Dorji, UNDP, 37 Local government support
programme, Evaluation, UNDP, 38 Mainstreaming reference groups, Evaluation,
UNDP, 2017 39 Independent Evaluation Office, 40 Impact assessment of least
developed country graduation, Triennial Review, United Nations Department for
Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA), 41Rapid integrated assessment of
mainstreaming the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP, 42 12th five-year plan
guidelines, Royal Government, 43 Out of 169 Sustainable Development Goal
targets, 40 are fully aligned, 58 partially aligned, 71 not aligned Out of 244
Goal indicators, 62 are fully aligned, 54 partially aligned, 128 not aligned
Data Ecosystem Mapping Report, United Nations, 44 Human development index, Human
Development Report 2016, UNDP Adjusted for inequality, Bhutan drops from the
medium to low human development category 45 Vulnerability baseline assessment,
Gross National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 46 Climate change vulnerability
assessment, Global Environment Facility, DP/DCP/BTN/ indicative of the country’
intent to advance human rights47 This is also true for people affected by HIV,
where new research48 recommends steps to improve the policy and legal
environment to reduce vulnerability and ensure access to treatment Such progress
on human rights by the Royal Government requires sustained capacity development
and financial support up to and beyond the 2019 Universal Periodic Review, such
that it translates into the further realization of people’ rights  The
commitment of Bhutan to developing  national gender equality policy and
nationwide survey on violence against women and girls similarly illustrates its
intent on inequality While Bhutan has made progress on gender mainstreaming,49
traditional social norms, cultural beliefs and stereotypes weigh it down50
Bhutan ranked 124 among 144 countries on the 2017 global gender index51 Women’
participation in the workforce is dropping52; and only  per cent of Parliament
are women – down from 13 per cent in 53 Women working to exploitation, stigma
and discrimination55 Trafficking in persons is  new concern, though data is very
limited5657 Women’ acceptance rate of domestic violence stands high at 74 per
cent,58 and gender-based violence is recognized in the country programme theory
of change as an immediate impediment to women’ empowerment in urban drayangs54
are vulnerable  The role of civil society in working with the Royal Government
to advance  rights-based approach, improve services and encourage participation
and accountability is increasingly recognized,59 but its capacities, while
promising and improving, are weak60 In crossing the ‘last mile’ towards least
developed country graduation – which may influence the continued withdrawal of
development partners – the role and effectiveness of civil society will be
increasingly important as  bridge between vulnerable groups and the executive,
legislative and judicial branches of government The national constitution marks
its tenth anniversary in 2018, so concluding the country’ first decade of
democracy During that time, the institutional structures of the country’
democratic constitutional monarchy were established, but were accompanied by
decrease in people’ perception of good governance61 For Parliament, capacity
gaps remain in the fulfilment of technical, representation, legislative,
oversight, accountability and transparency functions and the quality of services
delivered62 For the offices of the judiciary and the Attorney General,
provisions for legal aid are in place but not yet implemented, while
expectations of increasingly specialized legal services, such as on
environmental law, are not yet met63 New strategic plans are in place for the
National Assembly, National Council, Office of the Attorney General and the
justice sector However, they are not yet implemented With access to justice as
new national priority in the Twelfth Plan, the focus on institutional capacity
to deliver results will intensify The interconnected challenges of addressing
inequality through  weak civil society and young judicial and legislative
institutions, while advancing  climate-resilient, green and job- rich economy to
continue poverty reduction, speak to the UNDP comparative advantage in Bhutan64
Recognizing UNDP strengths vis--vis other partners on capacity development,
policy advice, convening power and knowledge networks, the 2017 independent
country 47Independent Evaluation Office, 48 HIV and the Law, Ministry of Health,
UNDP, 49 Independent Evaluation Office, 50 Bhutan Gender Equality Diagnostic,
Asian Development Bank, 51 Global Gender Gap Report, 52 Bhutan Labour Force
Survey Report, 53 National Assembly strategic plan, , UNDP, 54 Legal
entertainment establishments where workers dance and sing karaoke 55 Gross
National Happiness Commission, UNDP, 56 Human Trafficking Situation in Bhutan,
National Commission for Women and Children, 57 Legal and Policy Review of Human
Trafficking in Bhutan, United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime, 58 National
health survey 2012, Ministry of Health 59 United Nations, 60 Civil society
perception study, Bhutan Centre for Media and Democracy, 61 Centre for Bhutan
Studies, 62 Parliament’ strategic plans, , UNDP, 63 Office of the Attorney
General strategic plan, 64 Comparative advantage analysis, United Nations,
DP/DCP/BTN/ programme cites the UNDP contribution to the country’ sustainable,
green, inclusive and climate-resilient growth and disaster preparedness as
‘highly relevant’ and ‘valuable’, and notes the ‘significant UNDP contribution’
to democracy and evidence-based decision-making The independent country
programme evaluation65 cited UNDP as ‘uniquely well positioned’ to lead an
integrated approach to the Sustainable Development Goals, illustrated by  2017
impact assessment,66 where UNDP interventions to improve access to piped water
also led to the improved health of beneficiaries and better school attendance
The programme’ theory of change builds on the evaluation’ recommendations to
increasingly consider the connection between rural and urban communities, to
invest in the enabling environment for job creation, and – as bilateral partners
pull out – to support its transition from being  least developed country with
new and creative approaches to financing gross national happiness and the Goals
II Programme priorities and partnerships The UNDP country programme is  subset
of the United Nations Sustainable Development Partnership Framework (UNSDPF),
2019-Based on wide-ranging consultations and  common United Nations country
analysis, the framework will focus on: () timely evidence on people at risk; ()
social services; () inclusive governance and access to justice; and ()
resilience and livelihoods The goal to leave no one behind, as Bhutan graduates
from least developed country status, guides interventions across the four areas
Based on  common comparative advantage analysis67 and institutional capacity
assessment,68 UNDP will offer  platform for ongoing Sustainable Development
Goals integration across the five ‘Ps’ of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development – people, partnership, planet, prosperity and peace UNDP will
directly contribute to outcome areas () and (): addressing inequality with weak
civil society and young judicial and legislative institutions, while advancing
climate-resilient, green and job-rich economy to continue poverty reduction
Through these lenses, UNDP will also address aspects of outcome area () UNDP is
committed69 to working with United Nations organizations in response to the 2016
quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for
development of the United Nations system, including by implementing the common
chapter of the UNDP, UNFPA, United Nations Children' Fund, and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
strategic plans This will include working jointly on data, gender-based
violence, advancing the rights of people with disabilities, and disaster
preparedness and response Target groups for this programme include women –
focused on economic empowerment, resilience and tackling violence against women
and girls; youth – focused on entrepreneurialism and job creation, innovation
and civic engagement; people with disabilities; and people affected by HIV In
addressing the poverty-environment nexus, the programme will target landscapes
where low gross national happiness and climate vulnerability merge,70 avoiding
overlap and seeking collaboration with partners, including the World Bank and
the World Wildlife Fund71 Support to other targeted landscapes, such as the
highland landscapes, will also be prioritized where possible Building on the
theory of change, and in line with UNDP signature solutions two (governance),
three (resilience) and six (gender) of the Strategic Plan, , outcome  will focus
on addressing inequality with  weak civil society and young judicial and
legislative institutions UNDP will support the executive, legislative and
judicial branches of government in Bhutan in their efforts to provide equal
opportunities for all, particularly those at most risk of being left behind,
while strengthening the capacities of women and vulnerable 65 Independent
country programme evaluation of the UNDP country office in Bhutan, Independent
Evaluation Office, 66 Impact assessment, NAPA II, UNDP, 67 United Nations, 68
Institutional capacity assessment, United Nations, 69 UNDP Strategic Plan,
Bhutan living standards survey, 71 Development partners mapping, United Nations,
DP/DCP/BTN/ groups It will do so through three interlinked solution pathways
combining technical support, capacity development, research and advocacy such
that, by 2023: () National and local government capacity to integrate, monitor
and report on the Sustainable Development Goals and priority actions to meet
international agreements is improved; () The enabling environment for civil
society is improved to help advance opportunities for and increase resilience of
women as agents of change and of targeted vulnerable groups, while the
capacities of vulnerable groups to have their voices heard and acted on also
improves; () Parliament and justice sector capacities and approaches are
strengthened with increased inclusion, transparency and accountability UNDP will
help to strengthen central and decentralized capacities to mainstream the 2030
Agenda, including – linked with outcome  – the integration of natural resources,
climate and disaster management into local plans with stronger engagement of
women and persons with disabilities To better understand rural-urban migration
and rapid urbanization, UNDP will help to analyse existing and new data from
human development perspective to inform policy approaches UNDP will continue its
support to Bhutan in preparing for international fora, including the High Level
Political Forum and other strategic meetings UNDP will develop the capacities of
civil society to influence change, particularly those working with the Royal
Government on the needs of targeted vulnerable groups At the same time, UNDP
will advance upstream policy efforts to tackle inequality - especially with
respect to women and girls – as articulated in the national key result area 10
of the twelfth five-year plan For the Parliament and justice sector, UNDP will
facilitate implementation of the new strategic plans of the Parliament, the
Office of the Attorney General and the justice sector,72 including induction
support for new parliamentarians, capacity development on civic engagement,
including public hearings, technical assistance in the harmonization and review
of laws, the institutionalization of  legal aid system, and in meeting
specialized needs in emerging areas such as contract and environmental law UNDP
will also support Bhutan in responding to Universal Periodic Review
recommendations73 On South-South and triangular cooperation, Bhutan will
collaborate with and benefit from the experiences of other countries as part of
the multi-country pilot on gender-based violence South Asian countries’
experiences of decentralization and urbanization will inform capacity
development and research, while peer networks will be strengthened between
regional parliaments, lawyers, judges and civil society UNDP will collaborate
with United Nations organizations and national partners, including the
Department for Local Governance, the Gross National Happiness Commission
Secretariat, the Cabinet Secretariat, and the National Statistics Bureau to
mainstream the 2030 Agenda, the National Commission for Women and Children, the
Royal Bhutan Police, the Parliament, the Anti-Corruption Commission, Office of
the Attorney General, the judiciary, and the Bhutan National Legal Institute to
support implementation of their strategic plans, and with academia, civil
society and international partners to advance the resilience of and
opportunities for vulnerable groups Drawing on UNDP signature solutions one
(poverty), three (resilience), four (nature- based solutions), and six (gender),
outcome  will focus on advancing  climate-resilient, green and job-rich economy
to continue poverty reduction with four interlinked solutions pathways to help
communities and the economy become more resilient to climate-induced and other
disasters and biodiversity loss UNDP will address this challenge through
upstream technical assistance, capacity development, community engagement,
innovative finance, and research such that, by 2030: 72 Justice sector strategic
plan, March 73 Bhutan reports in DP/DCP/BTN/ () More multi-hazard, risk-informed
solutions are in place to tackle poverty through sustainable natural resource
management; () Green house gas emissions of identified sectors are well-managed;
() Data and evidence-based analysis and tools enable gender-sensitive, risk-
informed disaster preparedness and response; () Bhutan capitalizes on access to
green finance; national policies increasingly foster innovative financing; and
nature-based solutions lead to entrepreneurship and sustainable agricultural
livelihoods Noting the vulnerability of Bhutan communities and economy to
climate change, UNDP will help tackle poverty by reducing disruptions to market
access and support integrated landscape management, including by
operationalizing biological corridors, improving water and soil management,
advancing sustainable forest management, and climate-proof critical
infrastructures UNDP will help improve the resilience and quality of life for
farmers, particularly women, through smart agricultural approaches, with skills
training to strengthen nature-based productive capacities, and support the
climate resilience of health systems Human-wildlife conflict solutions will be
tested and scaled through  ‘safe systems’ approach Women’ role in climate action
will be supported with enhanced research and data, including on gender-based
violence, while farmers’ use of climate data to improve crop cycles will advance
UNDP will help establish the country’ medium-to-long-term adaptation approach,
including on water as  key rural and urban problem, while supporting the
elaboration and implementation of the nationally determined contribution for the
Paris Climate Agreement UNDP will support the implementation of low-emission
strategies and mitigation actions for industry, human settlements, energy
efficiency, waste and transport – including by stimulating market mechanisms and
regulatory frameworks to incentivize  behaviour shift towards greener vehicles
and to improve the air quality of urban life In keeping with the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction,74 UNDP will strengthen coordination and
capacities for effective, evidence-based disaster-risk management, including
through improved zonation, seismic and climate risk assessments , and
vulnerability mapping to risk-inform planning and investment decisions (see also
outcome ) In collaboration with partners, UNDP will support preparedness through
contingency planning UNDP will assist the country’ smooth transition from least
developed country status with graduation support measures, job creation,
development finance, and national and subnational capacity development With low
gross national happiness levels among youth75 and youth unemployment  national
priority, UNDP will enhance entrepreneurialism and civic engagement through
innovative approaches and partnerships UNDP will invest in job and livelihood
prospects for youth in line with the national priority sector lending scheme,
including in agriculture and ecotourism including on economic diversification,
UNDP will help maximize the timely access of Bhutan to technology and green
financing, including through the Green Climate Fund, the Global Environment
Facility, the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions Facility and the Least
Developed Country Fund Once secured, UNDP will help leverage grants to de-risk
additional private and public investment UNDP will support capacity development
towards direct access, generating domestic finance, and increasing the
efficiency of investments On South-South cooperation, Bhutan will benefit from
and contribute to the experiences of other countries on ecotourism, green
transport, and financing solutions for biodiversity and climate change, to
encourage the broader uptake of innovative financing Bhutan will share its
climate adaptation experience – including in landslide mitigation and
establishing early warning systems – with neighbours facing similar challenges,
and draw on others’ experiences in using drone technology to monitor risks in
remote locations UNDP will facilitate relationship building on earthquake
preparedness 74 Disaster Risk Management Review, 75 Centre for Bhutan Studies,
DP/DCP/BTN/ The Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat, the National
Environment Commission Secretariat, the National Commission for Women and
Children, the ministries of Agriculture and Forests, Works and Human Settlement,
Economic Affairs, Information and Communications, Home and Cultural Affairs, as
well as local governments, the Royal Monetary Authority, the Tourism Council,
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and other private and financial sector
partners will be counterparts in this outcome UNDP will work closely with the
World Wildlife Fund as  partner of Bhutan for Life, ensure complementarity with
international finance institutions, and collaborate with partners, including
Germany, Norway, the United States and the European Commission through
multilateral windows UNDP will work with the Royal University of Bhutan, the
Information Technology Park, the media, and civil society, including on
entrepreneurialism and climate data III Programme and risk management The
programme was prepared in consultation with the Royal Government, United Nations
organizations, development partners, the private sector and civil society
organizations It will be nationally executed In consultation with UNDP, the
Government will select an implementing partner for each project guided by an
assessment of their capacity to manage funds and ensure the effective and
efficient delivery of results The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be
used in collaboration with other United Nations organizations to assess and
manage financial risks The implementation modality for each project – national
implementation, national implementation with UNDP support, or direct
implementation – will be guided by government requirements and the harmonized
approach to cash transfer assessment, and selected to maximize the efficiency
and effectiveness of UNDP contributions to results Direct implementation will be
used where the Government requests access to UNDP systems, processes and
technical expertise and will finance the intervention In all cases, the
implementation modality will be grounded in strong national ownership In
accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/, all direct costs associated with
project implementation will be charged to the concerned projects The programme
outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit
of accountability to the Executive Board The accountabilities of managers are
prescribed in UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and the
internal control framework In line with United Nations reform, UNDP76 will
provide technical and advisory services to lead system-wide planning, risk
management, financing for development, and integration of the Sustainable
Development Goals UNDP will lead common back-office support, as articulated in
the business operations strategy of the UNSDPF, based on  fee-for- service model
The programme is informed by recommendations of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for Development and the
development finance assessment of Bhutan77 The Royal Government faces  sizeable
funding gap to realize its Twelfth Plan objectives due to hydropower delays
However, Bhutan is already  middle- income country with  relatively low aid
dependency ratio, notwithstanding its unique bilateral relationship with India,
therefore negative impacts on aid inflow due to least developed country
graduation may be limited78 The programme’ level of ambition will depend on
resource mobilization efforts with the Royal Government, including on whether
UNDP is identified to assist Bhutan in accessing Green Climate Fund and Global
Environment Facility financing As part of  support package on graduation, UNDP
will explore an integrated approach to financing for development, leveraging
green financing to deliver results for the Goals across outcome areas – such as
on gender-based violence and environmental law – while exploring innovative
financing opportunities to enhance domestic resources As  contingency plan for
outcome , UNDP will invest in civil society strengthening for vulnerable groups
as part of an exit strategy in the 76 United Nations document /72-/2018/ 77
Development finance assessment, United Nations, 78 Ibid  DP/DCP/BTN/ governance
area The UNDP country programme is designed to de-risk current and future
investments and enhance the sustainability of results Risk from changes in
policy direction, natural disasters and implementation capacity challenges will
be monitored and mitigated UNDP will enhance its harmonized approach to cast
transfers and invest in strengthening institutional delivery and risk-management
capacities The theory of change will be monitored and adapted periodically UNDP
will work through  common business continuity plan for the uninterrupted
delivery of critical programmes in an emergency IV Monitoring and evaluation
UNDP will follow  stringent monitoring and evaluation strategy, in line with the
2017 evaluation and ‘satisfactory’ audit recommendations As  delivering-as-one
country, and in the context of United Nations reform, this will include an
increasingly harmonized approach to planning, quality assurance, monitoring,
evaluating and reporting Common indicators are adopted where feasible, drawing
on the national qualitative gross national happiness survey Drawing on
evaluation recommendations, the programme will retain  reduced number of
indicators and improve the use of online monitoring systems The UNDP gender
marker will be used to ensure that 15 per cent of programme expenditures
demonstrate substantive gender contributions To help implement the national data
ecosystem79 recommendations, the country programme will enhance data
disaggregation in target areas, including on climate-gender and hydromet data,80
develop national capacity for effective data use and monitoring of the Twelfth
Plan and the Goals, including investing in  real-time monitoring dashboard, and
establish systems to generation, document and share the climate adaptation story
of Bhutan UNDP will encourage innovative means of monitoring, capitalizing on
the country’ high usage of smart phones and social media in designing
participation and communication approaches The cost of data collection,
monitoring, assurance and communications will be met through an allocation of at
least  per cent of the programme budget 79 Data Ecosystem Mapping Report, 80
Green Climate Fund proposal, UNDP, DP/DCP/BTN/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Bhutan () NATIONAL PRIORITIES: 13: Democracy and decentralization
strengthened; 16: Justice services and institutions strengthened; 10: Gender
equality promoted, women and girls empowered Outcome : (UNSDPF Outcome ): By
2023, Government institutions provide equal opportunities for all, and women and
vulnerable groups hold leaders accountable UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: ()
Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions; and () Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Data source and frequency
of data collection, and responsibilities Indicative resources by outcome (in
thousands of United States dollars) UNSDPF outcome indicators, baselines and
targets Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines
targets) Major partners/ partnerships Gross national happiness survey, five
years United Nations organizations Regular: 039 Other: 287 OUTPUT  National and
local government capacity to integrate, monitor and report on the Sustainable
Development Goals and other international agreements is improved  Gross national
happiness index on good governance Baseline: (2015) 077 Target: at baseline
(IRRF ; ) Gross National Happiness Commission Secretariat, National Commission
for Women and Children (NCWC), justice sector, Parliament, National Statistics
Bureau, Government Performance and Monitoring Division, Department for Local
Government, civil society, academia least maintain  Number of national, local
governments plans and budgets with the Goals integrated, and disaggregated data
in place for monitoring Baseline:  (national) Target: At least  Source: Gross
National Happiness Commission Secretariat (IRRF / ) Human Development Report,
UNDP, Annually  Gender inequality index Baseline: (2016) 477, rank 110 Target:
300 to 400 (IRRF )  Policies/strategies on decentralization and urbanization in
place, including gender and disability analysis Baseline:  (no gender and
disability analysis) Target: At least  ( with gender and disability analysis)
Source: GNHC (IRRF )  National integrity score Baseline: (2017) 89 Target:
(IRRF ) National integrity assessment, Anti- Corruption Commission, three to
four years  Citizens’ confidence in judicial services Baseline: (2017)  Target:
at baseline (IRRF ) OUTPUT  The enabling environment for civil society to
advance opportunities for, and increase resilience of, targeted vulnerable
groups is improved Bhutan living standards survey, National Statistics Bureau,
five years least maintain  Number of civil society organizations enabled to
advance opportunities for target groups, and increase resilience of women,
youth, vulnerable groups Baseline:  Target: 10 Source: UNDP projects  Percentage
women  who experiencing violence in their lifetime, by partner and non-partner
report National health survey, Ministry of 10 DP/DCP/BTN/ Health (timeline TBC)
Baseline (2012) Partner violence Physical: % Sexual: % Psychological: % Non-
partner violence Physical: % Sexual: % Psychological: %  Evidence-based
integrated framework in place to prevent and respond to gender-based violence
Baseline: Some policy and legislation in place Target: Integrated framework in
place and being implemented Source: NCWC (IRRF / ) OUTPUT  Parliament and
justice sector capacities and approaches are strengthened with increased
inclusion, transparency and accountability Target: tbc Partner violence
Physical: Sexual Psychological Non-partner violence Physical: Sexual:
Psychological: (IRRF1; )  Parliament’ capacity to undertake inclusive,
effective, accountable law-making, oversight and representation is improved
Baseline: Basic capacities Target: Improved capacities Source: Parliament annual
reports (IRRF )  Rule of law and justice system strengthened supporting
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations
Baseline: Draft national key result area on access to justice in place Target:
National key result area implemented Source: OAG, GNHC (IRRF )  Number of laws
reviewed and proposed for harmonization with new International Conventions,
covenants, treaties, protocols, agreements entered into by Bhutan Baseline:
(2017)  Target: 13 Source: Parliament (IRRF )   policy/legal framework/strategy
on legal aid in place and implemented Baseline:  (2017) Target:  Source: OAG 11
DP/DCP/BTN/ NATIONAL PRIORITIES:  Economic diversity and productivity enhanced;
Poverty eradicated and inequality reduced;  Healthy ecosystem services
maintained;  Carbon neutral, climate and disaster resilient development enhanced
Outcome : (UNSDPF Outcome ): By 2023, Bhutan’ vulnerable communities and its
economy are more resilient to climate-induced and other disasters and
biodiversity loss UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: () Advance poverty eradication
in all its forms and dimensions; and () Accelerate structural transformations
for sustainable development OUTPUT  Inclusive, multi-hazard and risk-informed
systems and capacities in place to tackle poverty through the sustainable
management of natural resources  Gross national happiness index on ecological
diversity and resilience Baseline: (2015) 094 Target: at least maintain baseline
(IRRF ) Gross national happiness survey, five years  Number of climate-risk
informed biological corridors operationalized Baseline:  Target:  Source:
Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (IRRF ) Regular: 767 Other: 071 United
Nations organizations GNHC, Ministry of (Agriculture and Forests, Foreign
Affairs, Finance, Works and Human Settlements, Economic Affairs, Information and
Communications), NCWC, Royal Monetary Authority, Information Technology Park,
subnational governments, Tourism Council, Chamber of Industry and Commerce,
Royal University, private sector, civil society, media Gross national happiness
survey, five years  Number of hectares of forest area brought under
participatory sustainable management regime Baseline: 357,915 Target: 377,186
Source: UNDP projects (IRRF )  Gross national happiness index on living
standards Baseline: (2015) 083 Target: tbd (IRRF1) Bhutan living standards
survey, five years  Proportion of population living below the national poverty
line by sex, population group (rural/urban) Baseline: (2017) % Target: % (IRRF )
Kilometres of physical assets made more resilient to climate variability and
change Baseline: Irrigation: 153 Target: Irrigation: 326 Baseline: Access road:
Target: Access road: 51 Source: UNDP projects Communications to United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change  Carbon sink capacity Baseline: (2016)
total forest coverage 71 per cent Target: maintained at/above 60 per cent (IRRF
10)  Number of men and women benefiting from improved enabling environment for
decent work/livelihoods based on natural resource management/climate resilience
Baseline:  Target: 96,400 (50 per cent women) from sustainable natural resource
management Baseline:  Target: 25,826 (50 per cent women) from climate resilient
infrastructure Source: UNDP 12 DP/DCP/BTN/ (IRRF ) OUTPUT  National policies
foster innovative financing, inclusive business, and improved livelihoods
through climate resilient/nature-based solutions  Number of financing solutions
applied to leverage innovative, diversified sources of financing for development
Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP (IRRF )  Number of enterprises created and/or
owned by women and youth generating sustainable livelihoods Baseline:  Target:
Owned by women: 50 per cent Owned by youth: 50 per cent Source: Ministry of
Agriculture and Forests, Tourism Council (IRRF )  Improved enabling environment
for decent work and livelihoods Baseline:  draft policies/mechanisms in
place/introduced Target:  under implementation Source: GNHC (IRRF ) OUTPUT
Greenhouse gas emissions managed in select sectors  Acres of agriculture land
brought under sustainable and climate resilient management practices Baseline:
(2016) ) Organic farming: 23,530 ) Sustainable land management: ,231 Target: )
23,930 ) 12,351 Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (IRRF ) 13
DP/DCP/BTN/  Number of facilities to safely manage solid waste to reduce
emissions Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP (IRRF )  Zero/low emission vehicles
uptake Baseline: 99 Target: 300 Source: Ministry of Information and
Communications (IRRF /) OUTPUT  Data-driven, evidence-based, gender-responsive
tools, mechanisms and solutions applied for multi-hazard preparedness and risk
reduction  Sex and disability-disaggregated data and evidence on climate change
and natural hazard risks generated, analysed, and applied Baseline: Not
available Target: Available, applied Source: UNDP (IRRF /)  Evidence-based
medium to long-term gender-responsive national adaptation plan for climate
change available for implementation Baseline: Short-term adaptation options
available and implemented Target: National adaptation plan available and
financing options in place Source: National Environment Commission (IRRF )
Proportion of farmers who have access to multi-hazard advisory services for
agriculture planning/decision-making Baseline:  Target: / of all farmers in
target districts (50 per cent women) Source: UNDP  Number of human-wildlife
conflict management solutions tested and upscaled Baseline:  14 DP/DCP/BTN/
Target:  Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests  United Nations–Government
disaster preparedness and contingency plan in place and tested Baseline: Draft
plan Target: At least  simulation Source: United Nations (IRRF ) 15