Energy Strategy and Action Plan for Burundi Background Region Burundi Only two
percent of Burundi’ population have access to electricity Of these, most live in
Bujumbura, the capital city Since 1993, the country’ energy infrastructure has
been largely destroyed as  result of inter-ethnic conflict Additionally, an
embargo in 1996 and the scarcity of for- eign currency have contributed to
energy projects receiving little investment Burundi’ electrical grid supplies
MW, most of which comes from the Rwegura and Mugere hydropower plants
(generating 18 and  MW respectively) Project Partner Ministry of Energy and
Mining Directorate General of Energy and Water Project Manager Steffen Behrle
Term November 2009 – April 2011 Biomass The effective measurement of wood-fuel
production and consumption is essential to achieving the sustainable use of
Burundi’ wood-fuel resources In another step towards balancing demand and
supply, important improvements can be made by increasing the energy efficiency
of forestry and wood combustion Three main activities thus stand in focus:
awareness creation among consumers, the promo- tion of improved cooking stoves
and improved demand measurements The extreme demand on these two plants makes
the power supply highly unreliable During the dry season the power supply
deficit can increase from 13 to MW, meaning that people increasingly turn to
expensive, diesel- powered generators as an alternative source of energy
Technical and commercial losses of % have further reduced the availability of
electricity Burundi’ energy envi- ronment also harms its natural resources: high
population growth and reliance on traditional biomass for cooking have
contributed to severe deforestation, exacerbating the damage caused during the
1993 to 2004 political crises Petroleum Products The heavy cost of oil imports
on Burundi’ balance of trade has to be reduced through increased market
competition and better regulation of consumption  new pipeline to Bujumbura
could also improve the security of Burundi’ oil supply Strategic Targets The
objective of EUEI PDF‘ project “Energy Strategy and Action Plan for Burundi” was
to support the Ministry of Energy and Mines in developing  new national energy
policy Burundi’ 2006 energy sector policy requires up- dating and amending,
taking into account the country’ domestic situation and integrating the regional
energy strategy developed with the East African Community (EAC) This will be
complemented by an implementation strat- egy and investment plan, all of which
will be in line with the country’ national poverty reduction strategy adopted in
2007: the Cadre Stratégique de Croissance et de Lutte contre la Pauvreté (CSLP)
Electricity The policy proposes three phases to develop the electricity sector:
 Recovery: The sub-sector will concentrate on () repair- ing and modernising
existing equipment, (ii) reducing demand and (iii) taking urgent measures to
limit the consequences of shortages  Equipment: The implementation of new
strategic areas concentrates on: () development of national and region- al
hydropower, (ii) formation of  highly interconnected transmission system, and
(iii) resumption of peri-urban and rural electrification Strategy Actions Major
recommendations of the new national energy policy (Lettre de Politique
Energétique Nationale), developed with the support of EUEI PDF, were made for
the following sub-sectors:  Expansion: In order to achieve  tenfold increase in
gen- eration capacity of 300 MW by 2020, private nickel and other metal
extraction industries need to be established to help meet the country’ growing
electricity demand Main capacity additions will come from hydropower and other
renewable resources Agricultural waste can be transformed into briquettes and
thus provide an efﬁ cient and sustainable source of energy Renewable and non-
Conventional Energy Governance Two strategies have been devised to develop solar
energy in Burundi: In addition, important recommendations are proposed regarding
instruments of governance, the most relevant of which are legal, institutional
and regulative, and relate to energy tariffs, private sector involvement,
regional coopera- tion and research and development  Priority is given to the
electrification of social infra- structure (schools, hospitals, health centres,
pumping stations, local administration offices) in remote, off-grid areas
Finally, resource needs for implementing the energy policy are specified
according to processes, human resources, financial resources, and monitoring and
evaluation  In the medium to long-term perspective, Burundi’ elec- trical grid
will be connected to solar power stations The Way Forward The following
strategic points were proposed for wind power: Adoption of the energy strategy
has been delayed due to local, parliamentary and presidential elections from May
to July 2010, as well as election-related tensions and violence Nevertheless,
the draft strategy was discussed at  workshop on rural electrification in
Kigali, Rwanda, in July The strategy was agreed on at  national stakeholder
workshop in Bujumbura in November The final docu- ments were submitted to the
Ministry of Energy and Mines in March The government of Burundi is expected to
adopt the energy policy – including the associated imple- mentation strategy and
investment plan – in  Development of  wind atlas  Electrification of social
infrastructure in off-grid and remote areas  Wind-powered water pumps in
isolated areas  Development of utility-scale wind parks for grid connection
Burundi possesses large deposits of peat in the order to 50 million tonnes
Household energy needs could be met by carbonising peat with agricultural waste
in small, cost-effi- cient, and widely distributed stoves Located at the margins
of the Rift Valley, Burundi is also well placed to benefit from geothermal
energy However, exploration costs are too high for the country to carry alone
For more information, please contact: / Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH  Box 5180 65726 Eschborn, Germany  +49 () 61  63 12
info@euei-pdforg   EU Energy Initiative Partnership Dialogue Facility (EUEI PDF)
November 2011