Table of Contents:  Programme rationale : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/BDI/  Programme rationale  The 2005
elections enabled Burundi to re-establish  democratic system and enhance the
business environment for private sector development, which led to an average
economic growth rate of  per cent1 between 2005 and However, the 2015 political
crisis slowed the country’ economic development trajectory, and peacebuilding
and social cohesion have remained challenging since then  The country has
continued to implement its national development agenda with  focus on community
development and social cohesion, with commendable results in improving access to
education (96 per cent) and drinking water (73 per cent) Burundi has achieved
universal primary and lower secondary education Burundi ranks 108 of 188 on the
Gender Inequality Index with  rate of 4744 and is making progress on political
representation with women holding 32 per cent of seats in the National Assembly,
42 per cent in the Senate, per cent at the provincial level and 16 per cent at
the local level However, gender inequality is still  challenge because of
patriarchal social norms, which, for example, hinder women’ rights to
inheritance and to complete basic education Burundi experiences low human
development with  2016 Human Development Index of 404, ranking it 184 of 188
countries The development of the health sector is lagging behind with the
incidence of malaria remaining very high at 549 per 100,000 population and an
average annual estimate of 80,000 cases of HIV and ,500 cases of tuberculosis
The poverty level in rural areas remains high, at per cent in Low agricultural
productivity and processing combined with inadequate trading capacity and access
to electricity ( per cent) as well as climate change effects (drought, floods,
landslides and erosion) prevent growth Limited financial inclusion of women8 (
per cent compared to per cent for men), youth and vulnerable groups (the Batwa
community, returnees and displaced communities) paired with restricted access to
land10 for women and minorities (mainly previously nomadic Batwas) prevent these
groups from livelihood opportunities which in turn contributes to poverty This
is exacerbated by other factors that impact the overall growth of the economy, ,
the decline in foreign direct investment and development aid, low urbanization
(11 per cent)11 and depreciation of the Burundian franc  In an attempt to
address poverty and high levels of inequality, the Government has sought to
improve citizens’ access to services and fundamental rights (rights to property
including land, particularly for women, and right to equality) through
strengthening judicial institutions and administrative reforms Administrative
service delivery has been decentralized to improve citizens’ access (53 per
cent) through five pilot one-stop-centres in five provinces (Ngozi, Gitega,
Mwaro, Muyinga and Bururi) Penal and criminal codes were revised and the
judgment enforcement rate, particularly on land disputes, increased with 95 per
cent of judgements on land disputes enforced12 between 2017 and  The 2018
universal periodic review (UPR) generated 242 recommendations, of which the
Government has accepted The UPR and the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women13 highlighted that access to quality services and
fundamental rights remains  challenge notably for poor and vulnerable groups
(returnees, displaced communities, people with  Perspectives Economiques
Africaines, UNDP Human Development Report Government of Burundi, Statistical
Yearbook of Education 2015–UNDP Human Development Report Burundi Independent
Electoral Commission, 2015 Election Report  Republic of Burundi, Programme
National de Lutte contre le SIDA (PNLS), Cadre de Performance,  et Programme
National de Lutte contre le Paludisme, Cadre de Performance,   World Bank,
Indigenous people accounting for  per cent of the population 10 Republic of
Burundi, “Implementation of national gender policy Action Plan 2017- 2021”, June
11  12 Ministry of Justice 13  and   DP/DCP/BDI/ disability and Batwa),
particularly women Low capacities of key service delivery institutions such as
judicial, health and administrative services, deficient mechanisms for
accountability and transparency at national and local levels, and low capacity
of right holders to claim their rights are key contributing factors to these
persistent challenges The 2017 Ibrahim Index of African Governance cited Burundi
among the 12 African countries where global governance deteriorated between 2007
and 2016 (-) with  score of out of 100 and  rank of 44 of 54 African countries
Burundi’ development process has left behind vulnerable groups and their
specific needs not only in terms of access to justice and administrative
services (civil status registry) but also in terms of access to basic health
services (HIV, tuberculosis and malaria treatment) The HIV prevalence rate among
those aged 15 to 49 is about  per cent for women compared to  per cent for men;
about 49 per cent of seropositive women between 35 and 44 suffer from severe
anaemia and 27 per cent of these women do not receive full treatment to reduce
mother-to-child transmission of HIV Despite government efforts to combat gender-
based violence (GBV), the prevalence is still high with 50 per cent of women
declaring having been subjected to economic, emotional, physical or sexual
violence;14 assistance remains limited with only four holistic care centres for
GBV in 18 provinces  Ranked 171 of 181 countries for resilience to natural
disasters and climate change,15 Burundi is highly vulnerable to extreme climate
events such as droughts, soil erosion, landslides and floods16 These events have
reversed some of Burundi’ development gains and eroded capacities of vulnerable
households, resulting in loss of life and of livelihoods17 and internal
displacements (178,267 people in 2018 in 15 of the 18 provinces)18 El Niño and
la Niña phenomena continue to affect agricultural production and food security
notably in the provinces of Muyinga and Kirundo19 Burundi has made some progress
on early warning systems for disaster risk management, which has allowed the
country to better prevent and respond to shocks and stress, thus building
community resilience Despite this progress, there is  lack of coordination among
institutions responsible for disaster management and  lack of community
capacities for prevention and management of disaster risk reduction These
factors pose challenges to addressing immediate needs, resilience and
socioeconomic reintegration of displaced communities  The Government'
reforestation programme increased the forest coverage rate from  per cent in
2010 to 12 per cent in However, environmental degradation persists due to
demographic pressure, soil erosion and excessive use of firewood as the main
source of energy (95 per cent of the national energy balance)With an
electrification coverage rate of  per cent compared to an average of 16 per cent
for Africa and 41 per cent for other low-income countries,21 access to
electricity in Burundi is low, especially in rural areas The lack of access to
and control of resources and new energy technologies limits opportunities for
local development and has  disproportionate impact on women and girls, as they
collect firewood from distant locations, with implications for their safety and
ability to pursue education and achieve economic independence22  The evaluation
of the previous country programme23 () highlighted the key role of UNDP as
catalyst and facilitator of Sustainable Development Goal prioritization and
contextualization and as  contributor to the achievement of development results
that benefited the most vulnerable communities With UNDP support and in
partnership with the Governments of Belgium and Japan, the Peacebuilding Fund,
Global Environment Facility (GEF) and Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Government
has been able to: () in line with the Sustainable Development Goals, 14 National
Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (Institut de Statistiques et
'Etudes Economiques du Burundi (ISTEEBU), Third Demographic and Health Survey in
Burundi, 15 Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index, 16   17 Gouvernement du Burundi,
Contribution Prévue Déterminée au niveau National, 2015 18  and  19 Ministry of
Agriculture, Intergovernmental Authority on Development report, 20  21 Ministry
of Energy and Mines, Analytical Study of the Energy Sector within the framework
of the Secretary-General initiative on sustainable energy for all, 22 Ministry
of Gender, Plan of Action for implementation of the National Gender Policy 23
DP/DCP/BDI/ formulate upstream policies and strategies for development (national
development plan, employment, fight against GBV, decentralization,
industrialization, energy and disaster risk management); () improve access to
justice (judgement of ,597 GBV cases, reduction of 41 per cent of 48,894
backlogged courts cases related to land disputes) and quality administrative
services to citizens (five pilot one-stop-centres established and individual and
institutional capacity-building); () increase national capacities to prevent and
manage disasters through the strengthening of 10 provincial platforms and 10
local government contingency plans; and () increase community peace and
resilience through the establishment of 18 platforms for youth dialogue,
creation of 45,579 livelihoods and temporary job opportunities (32 per cent
women), financial inclusion for 13,755 people (60 per cent women), mobilization
of 554 youth volunteers (46 per cent women) and creation of 186 micro-
enterprises for ,601 youths affected by conflict Notwithstanding these valuable
development contributions, the evaluation as well as the Common Country
Assessment (2017) and  conflict and development analysis undertaken by the
country office in 2016 found that the programme’ focus on high-level policy work
resulted in limited impact on the lives of women, men, youth, returnees and
displaced communities on the ground The latter found that in the absence of any
clear position regarding national implementation programming in such
politically fragile context, UNDP should aim to apply direct implementation
methods where possible and appropriate24 As  mitigation measure, the country
office switched to direct implementation, which allowed for adjustment of
programme implementation related to the crisis situation while reinforcing
capacities of national counterparts to deliver results, as weak presence in the
field compounded by limited national expertise hindered programme delivery and
sustainability of interventions UNDP is recognized by partners, including the
Government, for its impartiality, neutrality, transparency and accountability25
UNDP will shift its interventions to the local level and focus on building
resilience of people and communities by leveraging areas where it has
comparative advantage (access to justice, access to public services, local
governance, livelihoods and socioeconomic reintegration, environmental
protection, durable solutions, climate change adaptation and disaster
management), while in parallel maintaining essential support at policy level
This will be done through localization and implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals II Programme priorities and partnerships The National
Development Plan  (NDP) is aligned with the African Union Agenda 2063 and the
Sustainable Development Goals and prioritizes 111 targets26 for the Goals The
Government’ key priority for the next 10 years is structural transformation of
the economy to alleviate poverty27 The programme’ theory of change assumes that
reducing inequalities and strengthening resilience of women and men in rural
areas will be achieved through: () developing rural non-farm sectors through
innovative gender-responsive processing and manufacturing units, inclusive
markets, enterprise creation, improving access to financial and non-financial
assets; () improving access to basic gender-sensitive quality administrative,
health and judicial services, and increasing technical and operational
capacities for national and local institutions for effective planning,
governance and accountability mechanisms; () and the establishment and
improvement of early warning mechanisms for early action, which will enable
national, local and community capacities to anticipate/prepare for and respond
to disaster as well as adapt to climate change and promote sustainable energy
resources to create alternative economic activities The theory of change also
assumes sustained peace, resource availability, national ownership and the
mainstreaming of gender across the programme, underpinned by gender analysis to
ensure that all interventions address gender equality gaps The programme will
adopt an integrated approach between the three priorities under the umbrella of
the broader resilience and Sustainable Development Goal agenda, targeting
disadvantaged people 24 UNDP Burundi, Conflict and Development Analysis and
Programme Review, January 25 UNDP Burundi, Partners’ Survey, 26 Government of
Burundi, National Sustainable Development Goal Prioritization Report, 2018 27
National Development Plan, 2018-DP/DCP/BDI/ (returnees and displaced women,
youth at risk, Batwas, persons living with disabilities) in the most vulnerable
areas notably in northern, eastern and southern regions The programme will
support reinforcement of  national hub for the Goals through inclusion of other
stakeholders including the private sector, and the establishment of local hubs
to accelerate localization and implementation of prioritised targets and
showcase innovative practices that can be replicated Programme priorities will
contribute to achieving Goals , , , , , 10, 13, 15 and They are aligned with the
signature solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan,  and will contribute to the
outcomes of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) on
inclusive economic growth and resilience Priority  Development of rural non-farm
livelihoods for local economic growth Aligned with signature solutions ,  and
of the Strategic Plan, this programme will support initiatives to improve income
generation, social capital and livelihoods of the most vulnerable population,
focusing on returnees, displaced persons, Batwas, women, victims of GBV, youth
and persons living with disabilities UNDP will prioritize non-farm livelihoods
through improving access to financial and non-financial assets especially in
rural areas, while strengthening technical capacities for manufacturing,
processing and trading UNDP will provide technical support to the Federal
Chamber of Commerce and Industry and to organizations working with key target
groups (farmers, women and youth) to develop entrepreneurship through the
establishment of business incubators and services UNDP will partner with
microfinance institutions, the Rural Micro-Credit Fund and United Nations
Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) to scale up financial inclusion initiatives
adapted to the needs of vulnerable groups UNDP will collaborate with the Food
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) and International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD) to strengthen technical capacities and support the
establishment of innovative processing units for cooperatives and women’
associations, and to promote inclusive market and economic growth, thus
contributing to the achievement of the Goals ,  and  Priority II Improve access
to and quality of administrative, health and judicial services Aligned with
signature solutions ,  and , this programme will contribute to strengthening
institutional capacities of public services to improve accountability and bring
quality services closer to the population, while ensuring that commitments to
women’ rights are met The UNDP contribution will focus on: () scaling up one-
stop-centres to the remaining provinces and implementing training programmes
through the Judiciary Professional Training Centre (Centre de formation
professionnelle de la Justice (CFPJ)), National Management School (École
Nationale ’Administration (ENA)), Police Academy and the National Training
Centre for Local Administration (Centre National de Formation des Acteurs Locaux
(CNFAL)); () provision of legal assistance to vulnerable populations (widows,
women and Batwa faced with land disputes and land ownership rights), through
legal advice clinics, legal awareness campaigns and capacity-building for
magistrates and lawyers; and () prevention and holistic care for victims of GBV,
including psychosocial and economic reinsertion support, in collaboration with
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-
Women) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) To improve health services,
UNDP will strengthen existing partnerships with the Ministry of Health, Global
Fund to Fight AIDS Tuberculosis and Malaria, World Health Organization (WHO),
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and civil society
organizations (CSOs) to improve access to basic health services and reduce
malaria- and tuberculosis-related morbidity and mortality; and (); improve the
care and treatment of HIV-positive patients and fight against the spread of
HIV/AIDS, thus contributing to the achievement of Goal  In partnership with the
Ministry of Decentralization, the Burundian Association of Local Governments
(Association Burundaise des Elus Locaux (ABELO)), bilateral donors (Governments
of Belgium and the Netherlands, German Agency for International Cooperation
(GIZ) and Swiss Cooperation) and United Nations partners (UNCDF and United
Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), UNDP is supporting the development of  new
decentralization policy () and laws on transfer of competences to local
governments The policy will create an environment conducive to pro-Goal
community development plans to address the needs of men, women, girls, youth and
DP/DCP/BDI/ disadvantaged groups in order to leave no one behind UNDP will
support implementation of these plans through strengthening institutional
capacities of local governments on gender-responsive planning, budgeting and
resource mobilization UNDP will further support local governments to: () align
their planning process with the NDP; () experiment with new forms of decision-
making, such as participatory budgeting and planning, thus strengthen their
accountability to all; and () integrate capacity development programmes into
local economic development strategies The capacities of citizens as right
holders will be strengthened to hold duty bearers accountable and advocate for
public space and dialogue To ensure representation and equal participation of
citizens in local decision-making processes, UNDP will strengthen the
operationalization of existing local mechanisms for good governance and
community development UNDP will promote access to decision-making for women,
youth and other specific groups and strengthen women' political leadership at
the local level UNDP will support CSOs to advocate for the implementation of UPR
recommendations on gender equality and protection of human rights and non-
discrimination of women and girls In the spirit of leaving no one behind, UNDP
will design targeted interventions to tackle GBV and improve women’ access to
land Priority III Strengthen community resilience to climate change and disaster
Burundi has signed and ratified several multilateral environmental agreements
including the Paris Agreement on Climate Change Aligned with signature solutions
and , the programme will support the elaboration and implementation of the
national adaptation plan Within the national strategy on disaster risk reduction
aligned with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, UNDP will, in
collaboration with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), support the development of  country disaster profile and improvement of
communities’ technical and operational capacities for disaster management,
notably in the provinces most affected by floods, landslides and drought
(Bujumbura, Makamba Kirundo and Mumirwa) In partnership with GEF, the programme
will strengthen watershed management through reforestation, early warning and
disaster management mechanisms adapted to the needs of different groups (women,
youth, returnees and displaced communities) and improve meteorological
information This will enhance community resilience and reduce population
displacement The programme will enhance sustainable and gender-responsive
natural resource management In partnership with GCF, UNDP will reinforce the
capacity of the Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Livestock to take
advantage of global partnership opportunities for climate change finance In
2013, within the framework of Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL), UNDP
supported the Government to carry out  study on renewable energy,28 which
revealed high hydroelectric and solar potential UNDP, in partnership with the
Burundi Agency for Rural Electrification, will support the establishment of
mini-grids, micro-grids and solar platforms that will enable women and youth
groups to engage in businesses development In synergy with GIZ, the European
Union, the African Development Bank (AfDB), civil society, the private sector
and other United Nations agencies, UNDP will support Burundi in implementing its
SE4All commitments and meet its nationally determined contributions under the
Paris Agreement UNDP will retain and strengthen its collaboration with like-
minded partners such as the European Union and the Governments of Belgium,
France, Japan, Netherlands and Switzerland by bridging the gap between the
Government and donors, undertaking policy dialogue, joint analysis and field
visits, knowledge-sharing and demonstrating development results It will play
central role in aid coordination and dialogue by revamping the National
Committee for Aid Coordination and facilitating dialogue with partners This
programme will explore alternative strategies for mobilizing domestic resources
to finance the implementation of the Goals In collaboration with the United
Nations development system and humanitarian actors, UNDP will explore
opportunities to bridge the humanitarian-development-peace nexus through joint
analyses and planning Within the United Nations resilience framework for
Burundi, UNDP, in collaboration with UNFPA, UNICEF, UN- Women and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), will play 28
DP/DCP/BDI/  coordinating role in supporting the implementation of the
resilience framework’ outcomes on livelihoods diversification, social cohesion,
peacebuilding and disaster risk management UNDP will: () promote South-South and
triangular cooperation, for example with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and United Republic of Tanzania for cross-border initiatives, durable solutions
and reintegration, Côte ’Ivoire for justice reform and Cameroon for public
administration; and () strengthen partnerships with CSOs (advocacy, services
delivery) and academia (research and internships) and explore partnerships with
the private sector (business and clean renewable energy development) Within the
framework of the common chapter of the strategic plans of UNDP, UNICEF, UNFPA
and UN-Women, UNDP will strengthen the capacities of youth to develop energy and
information and communications technology start-ups In collaboration with UNHCR,
UNDP will support socioeconomic reintegration of returnees through the
development of rural integrated villages III Programme and risk management The
programme will be implemented under the coordination of the Ministry of Finance,
Budget and Cooperation for Economic Development It will be nationally executed
If necessary, national implementation will be replaced by direct implementation
to enable response to force majeure and to ensure protection and accountability
of UNDP programming results The harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT)
will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to
manage financial risks and to develop the capacity of implementing partners and
continually use the results of quality assurance activities to monitor programme
effectiveness and efficiency and support-decision making This country programme
document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country
programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies
and procedures and internal control framework The country office will strengthen
its programmatic and operational capacities to achieve real impact As per
Executive Board decision 2013/, cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the projects
concerned UNDP will continue to partner with national and local government
partners, the private sector and civil society including women’ organizations,
through steering and technical committees at every stage of the project cycle to
ensure the Government’ leadership and mutual accountability The involvement of
these partners in the implementation of the programme will be guiding principles
for UNDP UNDP will use United Nations Volunteers to strengthen project
implementation especially at the community level The programme will serve as
platform for renewed confidence and re-engagement of the technical and financial
partners for their involvement in dialogue and development coordination To this
effect, country platforms on collective resilience and well-being will be
explored to address complex structural problems and deliver innovative solutions
for achievement of the Goals The programme will be built on United Nations
inter-agency coordination and on the development- humanitarian-peace nexus to
curb the risks related to the uncertainties of crisis prediction Programme
implementation may be subject to the following risks: () low resource
mobilization; () effects of climate change on livelihoods; () high turnover of
implementing partners’ staff; () worsening socioeconomic situation; () fiduciary
risks; and () weak institutional capacity To mitigate these risks, UNDP will: ()
strengthen its resource mobilization strategy to diversify its funding base by
developing partnerships with the private sector, foundations, international
financial institutions and the GCF; () apply the UNDP social and environmental
standards to monitor environmental and natural disaster-related risks and fully
mainstream gender when designing and  DP/DCP/BDI/ implementing all projects; ()
advocate for information-sharing and designation of alternate programme
coordination staff within partner offices; () review risks during steering
committee meetings and undertake scenario planning risk analysis to better
adjust the programme; () undertake HACT spot checks to ensure full programme and
financial compliance; and () mainstream institutional capacity-building in
programme implementation IV Programme monitoring and evaluation In close
cooperation with United Nations development systems, multilateral and bilateral
partners, sufficiently disaggregated data from qualitative surveys will be
systematically collected and used to produce the evidence and analysis that form
the basis for the programme and to better monitor national and local efforts
towards the achievement of targeted indicators The UNDP gender marker will be
used to track gender-based investments and to improve planning and decision-
making  thematic evaluation of the gender portfolio will be undertaken
Monitoring and evaluation (&) of the programme will be aligned with the &
frameworks of the UNDAF and NDP In addition, the results and resources framework
is fully aligned with the integrated results and resources framework (IRRF) of
the Strategic Plan Annual, midterm and final reviews will be undertaken with
implementing partners and beneficiary representatives Programme outputs and
outcomes will be monitored through indicators and information gathered will be
used for decision-making In collaboration with other United Nations agencies,
UNDP will work to strengthen the capacity of the National Institute of
Statistics and Economic Studies to produce basic data disaggregated by sex,
provinces and groups This will help to assess progress towards achievement of
the Goals at national and local levels At least  per cent of the programme
budget will be allocated to data collection and & and 15 per cent to gender The
Programme will leverage the national guide on monitoring and evaluation of local
development plans (plans communaux de développement communautaire) to reinforce
the participation of civil society and community groups in monitoring the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals at the local level UNDP will
develop  multi-year study plan and research programme to guide its work with
strategic research institutions such as the University Research Center for
Economic and Social Development, Institute of Economic Development and think
tanks to conduct thematic studies to test certain hypotheses of the programme’
theory of change  DP/DCP/BDI/ Annex Results and resources framework for Burundi
() NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL : Develop growth-enhancing sectors for the
structural transformation of the economy UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2023,
women and youth and the most vulnerable groups are socio-economic and
politically empowered and enjoy social protection RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: OUTCOME : Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable,
incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for
the poor and excluded Data source and frequency of data collection, and
responsibilities Indicative resources by outcome ($) Outcome indicator() of
baselines, target() Major partners / partnerships frameworks Indicative country
programme output Indicator : Proportion of population covered by social
protection floors/systems, by sex, specifically children, unemployed persons,
older persons, persons with disabilities, pregnant women, newborns, work- injury
victims and the poor and the vulnerable Burundi Living Standards Survey Ministry
of Interior and Local Development Ministry of Finance, Budget and Cooperation
for Economic Development Ministry of Social Affairs and Gender Chamber of
Commerce and Industry European Union World Bank/AfDB Governments of Netherlands,
Japan and Swiss Cooperation Peacebuilding Fund CSOs Private Sector Local
governments UNCDF FAO IFAD Output : Women, youth, displaced, returnees, Batwas
and persons with disabilities are empowered to gain access to financial and non-
financial assets to build productive, processing and trading capacities for
sustainable livelihoods Regular: $30,757,650 ISTEEBU Frequency of data
collection: Annual Other: $25,500,000 Indicator  Number of persons accessing
financial assets disaggregated by sex and groups Baseline: () Men: ,402 ()
Women: ,253 () Batwas:  ) Persons living with disability:  () Displaced persons
and returnees:  Target: () Men: 14,002 () Women:18,728 () Batwas: ,000 ()
Persons living with disability: 500 () IDPs and returnees: ,000 Global Food
Index Health Statistics Frequency of data collection: Annual Baseline29: ()
Women: % () Men: % Target: () %; () % Yearbook IRRF data Frequency of data
collection: Annual Indicator  Number of persons accessing non-financial assets
disaggregated by sex and groups Baseline: () Men: 244 () Women: 765 29 Burundi,
Rapport National de Cartographie Indicateurs de Référence ODD, 2018  DP/DCP/BDI/
() Batwas:  () Persons living with disability:  () Displaced persons and
returnees:  Target: () Men: ,070 () Women: ,560 () Batwas: 500 () Persons living
with disability: 200 () IDPs and returnees: ,000 Indicator : Number of micro-,
small and medium-size enterprises in communities, especially women
entrepreneurs/ women’ associations, utilizing service development platforms for
inclusive and sustainable non-farm livelihoods Baseline Male-headed: 176 Female-
headed: 20 Target Male-headed: 276 Female-headed: 200 Output  Central and local
governments have improved technical and operational capacities to mainstream
gender and promote inclusive local development Indicator : Number of local
governments having inclusive local economic development conducive strategies and
plans in place: () with gender-responsive and inclusive institutional
frameworks; () with public-private partnerships for accelerating catalytic local
economic development initiatives Baseline: () ; ()  Target: (): 15; (): 15
Indicator : Existence of  gender-responsive operational development coordination
mechanism Baseline: No Target: Yes 10 DP/DCP/BDI/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL :
Strengthening governance, security and national sovereignty UNDAF OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP  By 2023, women and men of all ages and particularly vulnerable
groups, equitably access services of institutions that guarantee accountability,
peace, gender equality, justice and respect for human rights in an effective,
independent and transparent manner RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Accelerate
structural transformation for sustainable development Ministry of Justice, Bar
Association, Ministry of Interior, CSOs Regular: $14,757,650 Indicator :
Proportion of population satisfied with their last experience with public
services Baseline: Men: 00 Women: % Target: (TBD) Men: 10% increase Women: 10%
increase Ministry of Justice Frequency of data collection: Annual Output :
Increased technical/operational capacities of public institutions to deliver
quality judicial and administrative services to the population, whilst ensuring
women’ rights commitments, are delivered ISTEEBU Other: $77,171,429 IRRF data
Frequency of data collection: Annual Ministry of Public Administration Indicator
Number of people who have access to justice (including land disputes)
disaggregated by sex and other characteristics Baseline: () Men: 19,019 ()
Women: ,598 () Batwas:  () Persons living with disability:  () Displaced persons
and returnees:  Target: (): 24,823 (): ,518 (): 200 (): 200 ():,000 Ministry of
Health GINI Index Frequency of data collection: Annual Human Development Index
Indicator  Number of GBV cases () reported to judicial authorities; and ()
number of reported cases receiving judgment in the formal justice system
Baseline: () ,232 () 499 Target: () ,500 () ,000 Indicator  Number of people
(men and women) accessing the newly established administrative one-stop- centres
Baseline (2018): () Women: ,141 () Men: 10,521 Target: ) Women: 10,000 11
DP/DCP/BDI/ ) Men: 32,000 Output : Increased technical/operational capacities of
health institutions to deliver quality health services to the population and
reduce gender inequalities in health provision Ministry of Health Global Fund
Indicator  Number of persons who have received treatment for malaria, HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis disaggregated by sex and other characteristics Baseline: ()
Malaria cases reached: ,688,412 men; ,445,507 women () HIV/AIDS cases reached:
20,063 men; 40,052 women () Tuberculosis cases reached: ,127 men; ,735 women
Target: () Malaria: Men: ,768,670 (2018); ,467,176 (2019); ,259,195 (2020)
Women: ,542,238 (2018); ,178,859 (2019); ,928,188 (2020) () Men: 20,199 (2018);
21,566 (2019); 22,799 (2020) Women: 40,324 (2018); 43,052 (2019); 45,515 (2020)
() Tuberculosis: Men: ,509 (2018); ,790 (2019); ,074 (2020); Women: ,939 (2018);
,088 (2019); ,240 (2020) Indicator : Existence of inter-institutional gender
responsive, operational health coordination mechanisms Baseline: No Target: Yes
Output  National tertiary institutions have strengthened capacities to improve
gender-responsive technical skills of public servants and local actors CFPJ ENA
Indicator : Number of public servants and local actors benefitting from capacity
development programmes disaggregated by sex and institutions Baseline: ENA ()
Men: 282; () Women: 277 CNFAL Police Academy 12 DP/DCP/BDI/ CFPJ () Men: 22; ()
Women: 41 CNFAL () Men: ,393; () Women: 515 Police Academy () Men: ; () Women:
Targets: ENA ():,000; (): ,000 CFPJ (): 220; () 350 CNFAL (): ,300; (): ,515
Police Academy () Men: 200; () Women: 103 Output  Local actors particularly
women have adequate gender equality and leadership capacities to promote the use
of community platforms in reconciliation, prevention and peaceful resolution of
conflict European Union Governments of Belgium and the Netherlands Indicator
Number of functional dialogue/mediation platforms set up in communities
Baseline: 18 Target: 60 UN-Women Peacebuilding Fund Indicator  Proportion of
women and youth who lead the dialogue initiatives at the provincial and
community level Baseline: () Women: % () Youth: 10% Target: () 30%; () 30%
Output  Local governments have improved technical and operational capacities for
gender-sensitive planning, implementation, monitoring and resource mobilization
Ministry of Decentralization and Institutional Reform Ministry of Interior,
Patriotic Formation and Local Development Indicator : Number of local
governments having gender-sensitive development plans and budgets aligned with
Sustainable Development Goal targets and national priorities ABELO 13
DP/DCP/BDI/ Baseline:  Target: 25 UNCDF Indicator : Number of local governments
with effective innovative mechanisms for civic engagement, including the
participation of women and marginalized groups Baseline:  Target: 25 Indicator :
Percentage of targets met in the implementation of local gender sensitive and
pro-Goal development plans Baseline:  Target: 60% for each Output  National
Statistics Institutions have increased capacity to monitor and evaluate the NDP
() and provision of data disaggregated  by sex and marginalized groups ISTEEBU
Indicator  Existence of data collection and analysis mechanisms providing
disaggregated data (sex, territorial, etc) to monitor progress towards the
Goals: () Conventional data collection methods ( surveys); () Administrative
reporting systems; () New data sources ( big data) Baseline: () No; () No; () No
Target: () Yes; () Yes; () Yes Indicator  Existence of Sustainable Development
Goal hub to accelerate implementation of 2030 Agenda and identify innovative
practices Baseline: No Target: Yes Strategic result : The crises, disasters and
resources are managed for improved community resilience NATIONAL PRIORITY OR
GOAL : Environmentally sustainable management, climate change and land use
planning UNDAF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP  By 2023, the national and decentralized
authorities adopt and apply disaster risk management and prevention mechanisms,
sustainable natural resources management (water, land, forests), climate change
mitigation and adaptation and ecosystems protection to ensure  better community
resilience RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Building resilience to crises and
shocks, in order to safeguard development gains 14 DP/DCP/BDI/ Indicator :
Number of displaced persons as  result of natural disaster disaggregated by sex
Burundi Living Standards Survey Frequency of data collection: Annual Output :
Evidence-based assessment and planning tools and mechanisms applied to enable
implementation of gender-sensitive and risk-informed resilience, prevention and
preparedness to limit the impact of natural hazards on communities Regular:
$22,757,650 Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Livestock Ministry of
Finance, Budget and Economic Cooperation GIZ European Union GEF GCF CSOs Private
sector Other: $32,202,433 IRRF data Frequency of data collection: Annual
Baseline: () Women: 78,790 () Men: 72,730 Target: () 54,600; () 50,400 Indicator
: Number of local governments with operational early warning systems to limit
the gender- differentiated impact of climate change and disaster risks Baseline:
10 Target: 25 ISTEEBU Frequency of data collection: Annual Indicator :
Proportion of natural ecosystems surface area in protected areas Indicator :
Number of internally displaced persons, returnees and members of host
communities benefiting from durable solutions including green jobs and
livelihoods, disaggregated by sex Baseline: Men: ,526 Women: ,426 Target: Men:
,000 Women: 12,000 Baseline: 44% Target: 60% Output : Solutions adopted to
improve access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy particularly for
women and displaced communities Indicator : Number of households accessing
clean, affordable and sustainable energy access (mini-grid, micro- grid, solar
platforms, etc) Baseline: () Women-headed: 100 () Displaced households: 200 ()
Batwas: 50 () Men-headed: 650 Target: () Women-headed: 300 () Displaced
households: 600 () Batwas: 150 () Men-headed: ,950 15 DP/DCP/BDI/ Output
Solutions scaled up for sustainable and gender- responsive management of natural
resource Indicator : Natural resources that are managed under  sustainable use,
conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime: Area of existing protected area
under improved management (hectares): Baseline: ,055 hectares Target: ,000
hectares Indicator : Number of women participating in decision- making on the
use and management of natural resources Baseline:  Target: 20 16