National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 2010 REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA Version
submitted by 13 September 2010 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010 Executive Summary Energy Efficiency –  Government Priority The
Government of Armenia prioritizes energy efficiency as  means of increasing the
country’ energy security, increasing economic competitiveness and reducing the
negative impact on the environment The Government’ commitment and principles to
promotion of energy efficiency are given in the Law on Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency (2005) and the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy (2007) Armenia has significant potential for energy efficiency and can
recoup sizable economic benefits through utilization of this potential Although
its economic activity is less energy intensive than compared to other economies
in the region, large potential remains for further efficiency improvements (up
to % of the country’ GDP, as was estimated in  World Bank study in 2008) The
highest economic effectiveness through energy efficiency investments in the
public sector Other dominant sectors to be considered are the residential sector
(buildings), industry, energy production, transport and agricultural sector is
envisaged Creating an Enabling Environment for Energy Efficiency The main issue
to realise the significant energy saving potential in the country’ economy is
the creation of an enabling environment for energy efficiency and financing of
energy efficiency investments This is mainly linked to  strong policy and to
regulatory measures that need to be implemented and enforced Beside that, there
is great unawareness and lack of information in all sectors (from private
households to industrial enterprises) what to do in regard to reducing energy
intensity and specific demand The country is looking for the introduction of
appropriate market-based incentives for energy efficiency that are  necessary
condition to diversify Armenia’ energy supply and thus improve economic
competitiveness This National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) is another
attempt following different programmatic activities in the past years to making
energy efficiency happen Although the country does have  Law on Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy since 2005 and  National Program on Energy
Saving and Renewable Energy since 2007, basic measures formulated in these two
documents have not been implemented so far The NEEAP is therefore consolidating
set of measures for all relevant economic sectors in the country and specifying
the need for action, especially on the political level It shall provide the
Government of Armenia with  bundle of activities to be realised with different
priorities in the considered period 2010 to The NEEAP focuses on five main
economic sectors The NEEAP is proposing  set of relevant measures to the
Government of Armenia for improving the current legal status and enforcement of
legislation put in place, for  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010 capacity-building (mainly in the public sector) and institutional
setting, for creating awareness across all sectors and  general environment that
is more in favour of energy efficiency improvement in the following sectors:
residential buildings  public and private service sector   industry & energy
production transport  agriculture All in all, 31 relevant measures have been
proposed within the NEEAP, all of them described in chapters  (horizontal and
cross-sectoral measures and  (sectoral measures) The overall time frame for
implementation of the action plan is considered to be  period of ten years, from
2010 until This is also in line with action plans of other countries Indication
of Potential EE Targets For the purpose of the first NEEAP presented here,
intermediate national energy savings targets have been proposed These
intermediate targets shall provide an indication of realistic savings as
percentage of the baseline demand to be achieved in the relevant target year,
consistent with the overall national indicative energy savings target However,
more detailed analysis of potentials and corresponding energy savings requires
in all sectors is necessary, to provide  better data base and solidify the
assumptions made regarding the EE potentials Lack of Basic Statistical Data One
important deficiency is the missing of  detailed annual energy supply and demand
survey for all main sectors of economy that provides data on the annual final
inland energy consumption of all energy users for the most recent years,
including data on:  energy supply (import, production, inventory changes)
energy transformation (primary and secondary transformation processes)   useful
energy demand according user categories (residential heating, industrial final
energy demand of all relevant sectors heat demand, stationary engines, lighting,
air-conditioning, etc) Due to the missing basic data and with the information
made available from different sources, it is at the moment not possible to draw
realistic baseline scenario that will provide  sound base to estimate absolute
savings to be achieved in the target year Therefore, this first NEEAP provides
only an indication of annual savings in relative terms (% ) compared to the
energy demand of the relevant sector (to be defined) II National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 where the proposed measures is part
of They are shown in the following table and further explained in the chapters
and  Table : Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020
Energy saving target adopted in 2020: Residential/Households Industry & Energy
sector Transport Public and commercial services Water sector Source: own
calculation in % in % in % in % in % 23,% 23,% 20,% 14,% 14,% As soon as
detailed energy balances will become available,  final energy demand per sector
(in absolute terms), the second NEEAP (2014) will have to update this
information and provide relevant data on the calculation of the national energy
saving target for the year 2020 as well as intermediate targets for the years
2013 and 2017, as proposed in the template provided in Annex  Evaluation and
Monitoring of Progress Made One important issue is to address regular monitoring
and evaluation of measures in line with the proposed time frame, to assess if
the intermediate energy savings targets are being achieved or if increased
efforts are to be made to get back on the implementation path It is therefore
foreseen that the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources shall submit to the
Government updated NEEAPs:   second NEEAP not later than 30 June 2014
(considering implementation status until end 2013),   third NEEAP not later than
30 June 2018 (considering implementation status until end 2017),  and  fourth
NEEAP not later than 30 June 2021 (considering implementation status until end
2020) The 1st NEEAP – High Priority Measures until 2013 The measures proposed in
the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan have been categorised into “high”,
“medium” and “low” priority Main criterion for the high prioritisation is the
available energy saving potential with possible low funding implications (“low-
hanging fruits”) or eventually already secured donor funding These measures are
to be implemented within the first implementation period until summary of all
high-priority measures proposed in the first NEEAP is given in the following
table III National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 No Title of
the EEI measure  Horizontal Measures Responsibility Duration Implementation of
regular national “Energy Statistic” (with annual updates) Ministry of Energy
National Statistics Office     Implementation of  “National Energy Agency for
Energy Efficienc  and Renewable Energy” Financial Support for Energy Efficiency
measures in all sectors Information campaigns, training and education in the
area of energy efficiency improvements  General regulatory demand side measures
Assessment of the economic rationale of measures proposed in the NEEAP II
Building Sector II National Building Code considering energy performance of
buildings Ministry of Energy Ministry of Energy Ministry of Energy (later:
National Energy Agency) Ministry of Energy, Public Service Regulatory Commission
2010 - 2013 2010 - 2013   ongoing process  Ministry of Economy  Ministry of
Energy, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Urban Development 2010 - 2012 II II II
Standards and calculation methodology to assess energy performanc  in buildings
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Urban Development 2010 -
2012 Institutional capacity-building for implementing and enforcing new
standards Establishing quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) standards that
will  upport the certification of key building materials for energy performance
Ministry of Urban Development 2010 - 2012 Ministry of Urban Development,
Ministry of Economy 2010 - 2012 III Public & Private Service Sector III
Information campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency to be applied in
public and private service buildings Ministry of Energy, National Energy Agency
III Efficient energy services in public facilities - investive Ministry of
Energy 2010 – 2020 ( ontinuous activity) 2011 - 2013 measures Public and private
service facilities' operators IV Industry & Energy Sector IV Considering energy
efficiency as pects for the construction of new industrial facilities IV
Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for Industrial
Enterprises IV Electricity  avings through improvements of existing elec tricity
network, compensation of reac tive power and improvement of transformers
Transport Sector  Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (&) program  Traffic Demand
Managmeent (TDM) scheme  Dissemination of information on technologies and
approaches for reducing energy consumption effectively Ministry of Economy,
Ministry of Environment PSRC Ministry of Energy, (with support from European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development) 2010 - 2012 2010 - 2015 Ministry of
Energy, Electric Networks of Armenia  Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Economy Ministry of Transport  2010 - 2012
2012 - 2020  Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger City of
Yerevan 2010 - 2020 buses operated by natural gas VI Water Sector VI Utilization
of gravity flow in irrigation systems and modernisation of existing pumping
stations and upgrading secondary and tertiary canals Ministry of Agriculture,
Ministry of Energy, Water Committee (under Min of Territorial Administration)
2010 – 2012 IV National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Table
of contents Executive Summary  Introduction     Trends in Promoting Energy
Efficiency Energy Efficiency – the issue for Armenia Scope and Objectives of the
NEEAP Relevant Activities and Programmes related to Energy Efficiency in Armenia
Defining Targets for the Implementation of the NEEAP   Setting the path for
Energy Efficiency in Armenia until 2020 Baseline energy consumption and
calculation of the national EE target  Addressing Barriers for Energy Efficiency
in Armenia  Horizontal and cross-sectoral measures  Overview of horizontal and
cross-sectoral EEI measures         11 18 19 19  Sectoral presentation and
assessment of energy efficiency programmes, energy services, and other measures
to improve energy efficiency improvement 25       Energy efficiency improvement
measures in the residential building sector 25 General introduction on the
building sector25 Overview of sector-specific measures 27 Energy efficiency
improvement measures in the public and private service sector 35 General
introduction on the public and private service sector35 Overview of sector-
specific measures 36  Energy efficiency improvement measures in industry sectors
(including energy production) 41   General introduction on the industry & energy
sectors 41 Overview of sector-specific measures 42  Energy efficiency
improvement measures in the transport sector 48   General introduction on the
transport sector48 Overview of sector-specific measures 48  Energy efficiency
improvement measures in the water sector 53   General introduction on the water
sector 53 Overview of sector-specific measures 54  References Annex : Template
for the calculation of the national energy saving target 57 58 Annex :
Projections of greenhouse gas emissions for Armenia from 2005 to 2020 59  Annex
: List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past 60 National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 List of charts and tables
Chart : Electricity demand of main sectors  (prelim)  12 Chart : Natural gas
demand of main sectors  (prelim)  12 Chart : Total electricity and gas demand
(prelim)  13 Chart : MCA-Armenia Irrigated Agriculture Project  54 Chart :
Projections of greenhouse gas emissions (Gg CO2 equivalent, excl LULUCF)  59
Table : Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until 2020  III Table
: Estimated annual savings per measures in % () compared to final energy
consumption baseline  15 Table : Estimated energy savings cumulated for each
sector until 2020  17 Table : List of horizontal and cross-sectoral measures
under the Armenian NEEAP 20 Table : Estimated savings per measure in the
residential building sector from 2011- 2020  29 Table : List of measures in the
residential building sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP  30 Table :
Estimated savings per measure in the public and private service sector from   38
Table : List of measures in the public and private service sector specified
under the Armenian NEEAP  39 Table : Estimated savings per measure in the
industrial sector from   44 Table 10: List of measures in the industrial sector
specified under the Armenian NEEAP  45 Table 11: Estimated savings per measure
in the transport sector from   50 Table 12: List of measures in the industrial
sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP  51 Table 13: Estimated savings per
measure in the agricultural sector from 2011- 55 Table 14: List of measures in
the agricultural sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP  56 VI National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 List of Abbreviations AEAI AMD
Advanced Engineering Associates International Armenian Dram ArmSEFF Armenian
Sustainable Energy Financing Facility BAU CEE CEEP CO2 EBRD EE ENP ESCOs ESMAP
EU GDP GEF Gg GHG IBRD IDA IEA IFI IMF KfW Kg kWh business as usual Central &
Eastern Europe Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project Carbon dioxide
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development Energy Efficiency European
Neighbourhood Policy Energy Service Companies Energy Sector Management
Assistance Programme (of the World Bank) European Union Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Fund Greenhouse gas Greenhouse gas International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development International Development Agency International
Energy Agency International Financing Institution International Monetary Fund
für Wiederaufbau“ Bankengruppe (group of „Kreditanstalt banks) kilograms kilo
Watt hours LULUCF Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry MCA mto Millennium
Challenge Account million tonnes VII mtoe NEEAP NGO NOx PSRC QA/QC R2E2 SEFF SEI
SMEs TJ National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 million
tonnes equivalent National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Non-Governmental
Organization Nitrogen oxide Public Services Regulatory Commission quality
assurance / quality control Armenian Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency
Fund Sustainable Energy Financing Facility Sustainable Energy Initiative small
and medium enterprises Terra Joule TRACECA TRAnsport Corridor Europe-Caucasus-
Asia TWh UN UNDP UNFCCC USAID USD WB Terra Watt hours United Nations United
Nations Development Programme United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change United States Agency for International Development United States Dollar
World Bank VIII National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Introduction  Trends in Promoting Energy Efficiency In 2008 the World Energy
Council published  paper about “Energy Efficiency Policies around the World:
Review and Evaluation” In this study it is shown that in most world regions the
amount of energy used per unit GDP is decreasing steadily: %  on average at the
world level between 1990 and Since 2000, this trend has however slowed down
significantly, to slightly less than %  Industry is the main sector driving
energy intensity reduction in industrialized countries In developing countries
and economies of transition, on the other hand, households are very often the
main drivers In China and the CIS, energy productivity improvements were almost
equally driven by industry, energy conversion and households There are  few
significant questions to consider when planning about EE improvement: What is
the importance of energy efficiency measures? What are the priorities? What are
the trends? How to introduce an adequate policy level to foster implementation
of EE measures? And how to stimulate energy efficiency innovation cost
effectively? The main factors for stimulating energy efficiency measures
observed are:  Institutional background: Almost all countries have set up
specific institutions dealing with energy efficiency, such as energy efficiency
agencies, either at the national level, or at regional levels or both, and more
recently at local level Although the legal status of these agencies is different
from one country to another, their establishment almost everywhere clearly
indicates that there is  need for having  driving institution taking the lead on
EE activity   proper regulatory framework, with  specific bundle of energy
efficiency legislation and/or national programmes taking into consideration
quantitative, measurable, targets for energy efficiency improvements, can
provide  long lasting context for energy efficiency policies and avoid the
negative effect of “stop and start” actions: many countries have already set up
quantitative targets, with annual monitoring requirements  Electrical appliances
and buildings continue to be the main target for regulations and are spreading
to  larger number of countries In Europe, regulations represent about 40% of the
measures implemented in the residential sector All European countries and most
other OECD countries have energy efficiency standards for all new buildings Some
non-OECD countries outside Europe have recently established standards for
service buildings Altogether, about 60% of the countries surveyed had mandatory
or voluntary standards for new non-residential buildings  National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 The few evaluations studies of the
savings achieved with building codes show that the actual savings for new
buildings are lower than the potential theoretical savings This can be
attributed to non-compliance with standards and changes in behaviour  more
recent trend is to extend regulations to existing buildings (mainly stricter
codes referring to thermal quality standards and introduction of energy
efficiency certification of existing buildings)  Labelling and standards apply
to  growing number of electrical appliances Labelling programmes and efficiency
standards are an effective method of transforming the market and slowing the
electricity demand growth Labelling programmes introduced in developing
countries are based on the experience of OECD countries and use models that have
already been proven: the European label has been used as  model in Brazil,
Tunisia, China and Iran, while labels introduced in Thailand and the Korean
Republic are based on some Australian model Energy labels and standards are
complementary tools Labelling acts as an incentive for manufacturers to
differentiate themselves from their competitors and stimulates the introduction
of new, more efficient models Standards remove from the market the less
efficient appliances To be effective, labelling programmes and performance
standards must be regularly updated  Energy pricing is an important component of
EE policies Adequate pricing is  necessary condition for promoting energy
efficiency One of the first steps of any energy efficiency policy should be to
adjust energy prices to more “real” market levels in order to give correct
signals to consumers, whilst maintaining incentives for behaviour changes or to
acquire energy efficient equipment and technologies Energy producing countries
often maintain low domestic prices, which lead to intensive energy uses, as was
seen previously by the high and increasing energy intensities in these countries
reduction in the subsidies could lead to energy savings that could be sold at
much higher price on the international market and bring benefits to these
economies Adequate pricing means establishing consumer energy prices that
reflect the cost of energy supply,  the long-term marginal cost for electricity,
the long- term price of oil products on international markets for fossil fuels
Although most energy planners agree with such objectives, they often face
reluctance and opposition from decision-makers outside the energy sector, who
fear public resistance and the impact of energy price corrections on the
consumer price index Also, energy is  basic good for which  low price is
condition for low- income households access This makes actual price adjustments
slow or impossible in many developing countries, especially in the household
sector  Financial incentives rely more and more on tax incentives than on direct
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 subsidies
Nevertheless direct subsidies on energy efficiency investments remain popular As
they have often been considered as costly and questionable, they are now better
targeted Subsidies are viewed as  temporary measure to mobilise consumers, to
prepare for new regulations, or to promote energy efficient technologies by
creating  larger market than would exist otherwise, with the objective of  cost
reduction for the subsidised energy efficient technologies  Fiscal incentives,
such as tax credits, tax reductions and accelerated depreciation, are usually
considered cheaper than direct subsidies, especially to households, as they have
lower transaction costs They can work well if the tax collection rate is
sufficiently high: such measures usually perform poorly in an economy in
recession or in transition They are more adapted to well-developed countries: so
far, mainly OECD countries have implemented such fiscal measures Tax reductions
on energy efficient equipment or investments have been introduced in many
countries and almost equally in all regions: they are used in about 30% of the
countries surveyed  One of the main barriers to energy efficiency is the lack of
information to consumers about what they can do To address this issue,  large
range of tools has to be designed:  general information campaigns, labelling of
appliances and even dwellings rating their energy performance, audits, local
information centres, education campaigns in schools and universities, case
studies, and comparative information  Audit schemes are  practical way of
informing consumers about the possible actions to improve energy efficiency They
have been mainly developed in industry and in non-residential buildings and are
increasingly made mandatory Energy audits usually are partially funded by public
agencies or by utilities in European countries and are more often free for
consumers in the other regions to encourage participation Mandatory audits –
like voluntary audits - assume  certain quality of the auditors as well as of
the staff responsible for energy management in the companies (energy managers)
This can be assured by the certification of the auditors and by the training of
energy managers  ESCOs (Energy Service Companies) and EPC (Energy Performance
Contracting) are  very attractive mechanism to capture cost-effective energy-
efficiency potentials worldwide, mainly because they do not involve either
public expenditure or market intervention EPC can probably be considered among
the most effective mechanisms for promoting energy efficiency in the public
sector and, especially in developing countries, in the industrial sector
Several countries are introducing green taxes either on purchase tax or annual
tax dependent on the CO2 emissions or energy efficiency of the cars Fuel
taxation plays  key role in promoting more efficient vehicles and more sensible
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 driving habits Tax
increases are not always motivated by energy efficiency only In some countries,
specific CO2/environmental taxes have been set up for motor fuels ( Scandinavia
and Germany) Green taxes are better accepted by the population, especially if
part of the revenue is used to support energy/CO2 efficiency measures Road
pricing indicates an efficient way to enhance the energy efficiency in
transport, such as; the congestion charge in London  Energy efficiency
obligations have been  success in the EU Member States They have been shown to
work in both monopoly and fully liberalised environment, both for supply and
distribution companies Energy efficiency obligations are attractive also to
governments, as they do not have to support the cost of these obligations Energy
efficiency obligations could be an important policy option for developing
countries to save electricity, as they offer  way for governments to tackle
energy efficiency at  modest increase on electricity customers’ bills Energy
efficiency obligations for utilities are  promising market-based instrument
Quality labels and technical standards are effective tools for maintaining or
improving quality, provided they are successfully enforced ( the Keymark
certification scheme in Europe) The existence of independent certification
centres is  key element to ensure that imported products comply with national
standards The existence of skilled installers and of appropriate network of
after sales services is also essential for stimulating further dissemination of
solar water heating As  summary, the introduction and/or strengthening of energy
efficiency policies are becoming increasingly important and  sustained effort
will be required over the long term To be successful, energy efficiency
programmes need to be based on appropriate strategies, including for example:
The public sector needs to commit itself to EE and lead by example  Need for
favorable and stable institutional framework  Energy efficiency policies should
address all areas with energy savings potentials  To be efficient and cost-
effective, regulations need to be well planned, regularly strengthened and
properly enforced  Adequate pricing:  condition for successful energy efficiency
policies’ implementation to reflect more near-market conditions  Public/private
partnerships to reinforce the effect of public policies  Quality of energy
efficiency services and equipment should be strengthened through certification
and testing facilities  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia
2010  Innovative measures should be promoted based on suitable experiences
elsewhere  Regular monitoring and evaluation of implemented measures using
indicators should be ensured  Energy Efficiency – the issue for Armenia The
Government of Armenia prioritizes energy efficiency as  means of increasing the
country’ energy security, increasing economic competitiveness and reducing the
negative impact on the environment The Government’ commitment to promotion of
energy efficiency is mainly reflected in the Law on Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency (2005) and the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy
(2007) The Law lays out the principles of the government’ policy and governance
structure supporting energy efficiency, and provides for energy efficiency
standards, audits and awareness raising The National Program on Renewable Energy
and Energy Efficiency identifies the sectors with the largest energy efficiency
potential and provides an outline of technical measures/solutions to be taken to
realize the identified technically viable potential Armenia has significant
potential for energy efficiency and can recoup sizable economic benefits through
utilization of this potential While Armenia is one of the less energy intensive
economies in the region, largely due to the structural changes of the economy,
large potential remains for further efficiency improvements Based on the
National Program on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, the World Bank
performed  study in 20081 which identified significant economically and
financially viable energy efficiency potential The study found that Armenia
could save about 132 billion Armenian Drams (more than US$360 million) annually,
equivalent to almost  percent of its GDP, through energy efficiency investments
The above study also identified  number of informational, legal, regulatory and
financial barriers impeding energy efficiency investments There is an estimation
financial returns of energy efficiency investments in public buildings have the
highest return with paybacks of two to eight years Investments in energy
efficiency of public buildings cannot only free up the fiscal space, but also
prime the market, by creating demand for energy efficient equipment and services
and send  strong signal to the private sector and general public about the
Government’ commitment to energy efficiency the economic and that  “The Other
Renewable Resource: The Potential for Improving Energy Efficiency in Armenia”
July, National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 To aid the
implementation of the National Program, the Government of Armenia requested the
World Bank to support with creation of an enabling environment for energy
efficiency and financing of energy efficiency investments of public buildings
The proposed lending and TA project will contribute to achieving the Government’
national priorities as it will help generate awareness of the benefits of energy
efficiency investments, address other information and data gaps related to
energy efficiency, remove institutional and regulatory barriers, address
capacity weaknesses hindering the implementation of energy efficiency measures,
and provide financing for energy efficiency investments in the public sector,
drawing on the recommendations of the National Program Moreover, energy
efficiency is  key reform area for the development policy lending operations of
the World Bank in Armenia Under the development policy operation, the Government
committed to adopt  time-bound Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) For the
development of the action plan, an international consultant was hired by the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources in summer 2010, and the elaboration of
measures proposed in the following report conducted in  process of involving
stakeholders from different ministries (Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of
Natural Protection), the Public Services Regulatory Commission, Armenian
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund, the Energy Institute, utilities,
the World Bank, UNDP/GEF Armenia office, and gas and electricity companies
Scope and Objectives of the NEEAP The main objective of the action plan is to
contribute to the formulation of the future energy policy of Armenia and to
define concrete steps for its implementation One of the main aims of the
national policy in the energy sector is defined to improve energy efficiency and
to further develop the use of renewable energy sources The mentioned Law on
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency and the National Program on Renewable
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy provide general policy measures and an
assessment of energy saving potentials, however they have not been implemented
so far The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan is based on generalised past
trends in energy consumption and presumes  further rise in energy demand up to
It takes into consideration earlier potential assessments made for energy
savings in different sectors of the economy and refers to past and current
projects/programmes dealing with energy efficiency issues and the main barriers
to energy conservation However, it was not the task during the NEEAP preparation
to investigate into the sectoral potentials or even verify existing data,
neither regarding energy efficiency nor economic implementation potentials The
action plan is rather to be understood policy   National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 programme to help overcoming institutional,
regulatory and information barriers, to help the government to focusing on the
most relevant actions to be taken in  short, medium and longer term perspective
capacity-building measures The NEEAP The diverse projects referred to in the
previous paragraph are an important inflow of funds and financial sources into
the country, especially in regard to technical assistance, rehabilitation and
new infrastructure investments and as well awareness and these
programmes/projects and proposes concrete measures per sector as well as
horizontal and cross-sectoral measures together with quantitative targets (in %)
that can be achieved by These targets need to be compared to  baseline energy
demand that considers the average demand for the -years period 2008-is building
upon However, the first stage of the Action Plan presented here is not able to
take into consideration actual figures regarding final energy demand across all
relevant sectors of Armenian economy The problem lies mainly in the
unavailability of reliable up to date statistical information on final energy
demand in considered sectors It is therefore been proposed to the Ministry of
Energy and Natural Resources to define the baseline energy demand during the
first NEEAP implementation period (until 2014, see ) and provide the necessary
data background together with  second NEEAP to be submitted by 2014, while
ensuring this crucial measure, the elaboration of national energy statistic will
be implemented as soon as possible  Relevant Activities and Programmes related
to Energy Efficiency in Armenia To encourage energy efficiency, Armenia has so
far taken several steps on the political and programmatic level: (cid:) Started
to create  legal framework for energy efficiency In 2005, the Government passed
Law on Energy Savings and Renewable Energy, and has since signed the
Intergovernmental standard draft building codes (for new buildings) which
mandate energy efficiency but has not adopted it yet (cid:) Developed  National
Program on Energy Savings and Renewable Energy with solid data on energy use and
energy efficiency in Armenia (cid:) Has taken steps to improve the economic
efficiency of energy use through improved regulation of energy utilities Several
barriers to economic efficiency which also affect the efficiency of energy
resource use—for example, highly subsidized energy tariffs, or the absence of
electricity and gas metering—have been largely removed in Armenia (cid:)
Continued to work actively with development partners like the World Bank, the UN
Development Programme, the EBRD, USAID and other donors on energy efficiency
programs to improve the energy supply infrastructure (electricity and heat
production facilities, transmission and distribution networks) and heat energy
use in public and  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
residential buildings Relevant projects and programs ongoing and of past were
mostly financed with support of the above mentioned IFIs that contribute to the
implementation of an institutional and policy environment in favor of energy
efficiency in Armenia: GEF Program: (cid:) Armenia – Improving the Energy
Efficiency of the Urban Heating and Hot Water Supply (UNDP) (cid:) Armenia
Energy Efficiency Project (IBRD) (cid:) LGGE Improving Energy Efficiency in
Buildings (UNDP) World Bank: (cid:) Urban Heating Project – Armenia (cid:)
Electricity Supply Reliability and Energy Efficiency Project INOGATE Programme:
(cid:) Harmonization of gas and oil technical standards and practices ( Europe
and Caucasus) (cid:) Capacity-building for Energy Regulators in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia (cid:) Capacity building for Sustainable Energy Regulation in
Eastern Europe and Central Asia (cid:) Harmonization of electricity standards
EBRD: (cid:) Armenian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (ArmSEFF) USAID:
(cid:) Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP) International
Finance Corporation: (cid:) Armenia Energy Efficiency Survey Project Millennium
Challenge Account–Armenia (MCA–Armenia): (cid:) Irrigated Agriculture Project
more detailed list with  short description of the mentioned projects is provided
in the Annex : List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past
of this document  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Defining Targets for the Implementation of the NEEAP Armenia can save greatly by
investing in energy efficiency As mentioned above, previous studies made by the
World Bank estimate the realizable saving potential to some  percent of its GDP
This is equal to energy savings of approximately 21 mtoe annually, or  TWh of
electricity and 600 million m3 of natural gas (based on 2008 demand) to
diversify Armenia’ energy supply and Apart from the generated energy and cost
savings, energy efficiency is one necessary condition improve economic
competitiveness And this can be achieved at less cost than investing into new
production capacities or energy imports Energy efficiency investments are in
general economically and financially viable, especially the public sector
investments provide the highest return on investment overall thus  Setting the
path for Energy Efficiency in Armenia until 2020 The action plan is proposing
set of relevant measures to the Government of Armenia for improving the current
legal status and enforcement of legislation put in place, for capacity-building
(mainly in the public sector) and institutional setting, for creating awareness
across all sectors and  general environment that is more in favour of energy
efficiency improvement in the following sectors:  residential buildings  public
and private service sector   industry and energy sector transport  water sector
The overall time frame for implementation of the action plan is considered to be
period of ten years, from 2010 until This is also in line with action plans of
other countries Due to the fact that several measures have  longer duration,
considering enforcement periods or reaction time until market actors are ‘ready’
to implement energy saving measures in the mentioned sectors, the action plan
needs to distinguish short term, medium and long term planning:  Short term
measures: referring to an implementation path during  first implementation
period of the action plan from 2011-They refer to immediate action required in
regard to policy making, institutional setting and awareness and communication
These are typical measures with significant energy saving potential with low
funding implications (“low-hanging fruits”) and eventually already secured donor
funding, which are classified with  high  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for RA Armenia 2010 priority in the action plan  Medium term measures: the
medium priority measures are expected to be implemented within   to  years
period equalling the second implementation period of the action plan from
2014-Long term measures: the timeframe is considered to cover  period of more
than  years The implementation is more complex and thus less easily to be
adopted, or depending on the existence of an institutional and policy setting
For the consideration in the action plan, they are assigned  low priority and
thus are considered to be implemented not before the third implementation period
of the action plan between 2018 and For the purpose of the first NEEAP presented
here, apart from the list of measures, intermediate national energy savings
targets following periods of implementation have been proposed These
intermediate targets shall define realistic savings as  percentage of the
baseline demand to be achieved in the relevant target year, consistent with the
overall national indicative energy savings target referred to in chapter  the
for The targets set for this first action plan implementation period provide an
indication only and have been determined based on experiences made (and
published) in other countries  more detailed analysis of potentials and
corresponding energy savings requires an in-depth national review of economic
sectors, to provide  better data base and solidify the assumptions made
regarding the EE potentials Regular monitoring and evaluation of measures shall
provide the Government and involved stakeholders with  clear view if the
implementation is in line with the proposed time frame, if the intermediate
energy savings targets are being achieved or if increased efforts are to be made
to get back on the implementation path It is therefore foreseen that the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources shall submit to the Government the
following updated NEEAPs:   second NEEAP not later than 30 June 2014
(considering implementation status until end 2013),   third NEEAP not later than
30 June 2018 (considering implementation status until end 2017),  and  fourth
NEEAP not later than 30 June 2021 (considering implementation status until end
2020) All NEEAPs shall describe the energy efficiency improvement measures
planned and realised to reach the targets set out in chapter  The following
NEEAPs shall as well:  include  thorough analysis and evaluation of the
preceding NEEAP; 10 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
include the final results with regard to the fulfilment of the energy savings
targets set out in chapter ; include plans for – and information on the
anticipated effects of – additional measures which address any existing or
expected shortfall vis--vis the target;  use and gradually increase the use of
efficiency indicators and benchmarks, both for the evaluation of past measures
and estimated effects of planned future measures;  be based on latest available
data, supplemented with estimates  Baseline energy consumption and calculation
of the national EE target Armenia can meet only roughly one-third of its total
demand of fuels, mainly natural gas and oil, through own resources, thus the
country is highly dependant on imported energy sources On the other hand it
currently benefits from an electricity surplus produced from own hydro power
plants, one nuclear power plant and several thermal power plants From 2001 until
2008, the amount of electricity consumed grew steadily at about % , which is
less than the annual GDP growth average of -10%  Other fuels used for
residential heating, process heat, transportation and as fuel source for power
plants have also steadily increased, in total about %  between 2001 and The main
fuel type is natural gas In 2009, the preliminary figures show  decline due to
general economic crisis of electricity demand by about % and of gas demand by
almost 22%, compared to The following charts provide an overview of the
electricity consumption and gas consumption in the last  years (, 2009
preliminary figures) that account for estimated 75% of the total energy demand3
For the other sources, no suitable data is available  source: National Program
on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy, Armenian Energy Institute  source: 2005
data provided in National Program on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 11
Chart : Electricity demand of main sectors  (prelim) National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Others Agriculture Transport Industry Public
services Residential Others (incl transportation) Industry Power Sector
Population 000 000 000    000 000 000 - 2005 2006 2007 2008 (2009) Source:
Armenian Scientific Energy Institute Chart : Natural gas demand of main sectors
(prelim)      ,000 ,800 ,600 ,400 ,200 ,000 800 600 400 200 - 2005 2006 2007
2008 (2009) Source: Armenian Scientific Energy Institute 12 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Chart : Total electricity and gas
demand  (prelim) 30,000 25,000 20,000    15,000 10,000 ,000 - Natural Gas
Electricity 2005 2006 2007 2008 (2009) Source: Armenian Scientific Energy
Institute In the National Program on Energy Efficiency from 2007, the Armenian
Scientific Energy Institute and the Energy Design Insitute (Damare CJSC)
provided an assessment of sectoral consumption data for the main user sectors
(for ) However, what is missing since 1989, the last year when the energy
balance was prepared, is  detailed annual energy supply and demand survey for
all main sectors of economy that provides data on the annual final inland energy
consumption of all energy users for the most recent years, including data on:
energy supply (import, production, inventory changes)  energy transformation
(primary and secondary transformation processes)   useful energy demand
according user categories (residential heating, industrial final energy demand
of all relevant sectors heat demand, stationary engines, lighting, air-
conditioning, etc) Due to the missing basic data and with the information made
available from different sources, it is at the moment not possible to draw
realistic baseline scenario that will provide  sound base to estimate absolute
savings to be achieved in the target year Therefore, this first NEEAP provides
only an indication of annual savings in relative terms (% ) compared to the
energy demand of the relevant sector (to be defined) where the proposed measures
is part of As soon as detailed energy balances will become available,  final
energy demand per sector (in absolute terms), the second NEEAP (2014) will have
to update this 13 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
information and provide relevant data on the calculation of the national energy
saving target for the year 2020 as well as intermediate targets for the years
2013 and 2017, as proposed in the template provided in Annex  The table below
provides  summary of estimated energy efficiency savings that shall be reached
by the implementation of measures proposed in the chapters  and  As mentioned
above, the savings reached by each year are indicative targets that are based on
saving estimations in the National Program for Renewable Energy and Energy
Savings for Armenia (mainly for industry and energy sector, transportation,
water sector) and supported by reference to international studies and experience
(mainly for building and service sectors4)  As for building refurbishment and
corresponding energy saving potentials compare  with the World Bank Study
“Status of Energy Efficiency in Western Balkans” (2010) The study estimates the
saving potential in residential buildings to be between 10 and 35% and in
service sector 10 to 30%, and this for economies in transition similar to
Armenia ( Albania, Kosovo, Montenegro) Average quantitative savings have been
regarded as  technical potential to be possibly realised in Armenia as well 14
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 II II II II II II II
Table : Estimated annual savings per measures in % () compared to final energy
consumption baseline Baseline Estimated annual savings per measure in % of the
Sector/Measure  Horizontal measures 2008 2009 2010 average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in
TJ] [in TJ] annual/ cumulated savings 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2019 2020 [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %] [in %]
[in %] in TJ        Implementation of  regular national “Energy Statistic” (with
annual updates) Implementation of  “National Energy Agency for Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy” Financial Support for Energy Efficiency measures in all
sectors Information campaigns, training and education in the area of energy
efficiency improvements / / / / General regulatory demand side measures Assess
the economic rationale of measures proposed in the NEEAP Public Procurement for
Energy Efficiency II Building sector II National Building Code considering
energy performance of buildings Standards and calculation methodology to assess
energy performance in buildings Institutional capacity-building for implementing
and enforcing new standards Establishing quality assurance/quality control
(QA/QC) standards that will support the certification of key building materials
for energy performance no measurable effects on the energy savings (qualitative
improvements) - will effect savings considered in the sectors below annual
cumulated ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 13,% 18,% 23,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / Aggregated savings per measure ,% / ,% / ,% / ,% / ,% /
,% / ,% / ,% / 23,% / Set up road-test procedures for building certification and
methodology for assessment of energy performance for pilot buildings / / / / ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / Training and education in correspondance with
the promotion of integrated building design approach and new energy performance
requirements in buildings Pilot Project: Design competition and construction of
several “best-practice” buildings ( school or other public building, and  multi-
family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an integrated building
design approach within available budget and time schedule for the construction
of  typical building Development of an incentive scheme to promote energy
efficient construction or reconstruction in residential and service buildings ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / 15 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia
2010 Sector/Measure III Public & Private Service Sector III Information
campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency to be applied in public and
private service buildings III Efficient energy services in public facilities -
investive measures III Monitoring of energy consumption and achieved savings in
service buildings IV Industry sector IV Considering energy efficiency aspects
for the construction of new industrial facilities Baseline 2008 2009 2010
average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] / / / / annual/ cumulated savings
annual cumulated annual cumulated IV Implementation of Energy Efficiency
Financing Facility for Industrial Enterprises / / / / Electricity savings
through improvements of existing electricity network, compensation of reactive
power and improvement of transformers IV Estimated annual savings per measure in
% of the 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 [in %] ,% ,% [in %]
,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %]
[in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% 11,% 14,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 11,% 14,% 18,% 23,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% Aggregated savings per measure [in %] in TJ 14,% / ,% ,% ,% / / /
23,% / ,% ,% / / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 11,% /  Transport sector
Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (&) program Traffic Demand Managmeent (TDM)
scheme  Dissemination of information on technologies and approaches for reducing
energy consumption effectively  Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger
passenger buses operated by natural gas VI Agricultural sector / / / / annual
cumulated annual cumulated ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% 10,% 13,% 16,% 20,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 14,% 20,% / / / ,% ,% ,% ,% / / 14,% / Utilization
of gravity flow in irrigation systems and modernisation of existing pumping
stations and upgrading secondary and tertiare canals VI VI Optimization of
drinking water pumping stations VII Total / / / / / / / / / / / / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 10,% / / 16 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 The proposed sectoral energy savings
are based on potential assessments referred to by the author and have been
adjusted to the target year The summary effects to be possibly realised by the
target year 2020 are shown in Table  and further explained in the following
chapters  and  Table : Estimated energy savings cumulated for each sector until
2020 Energy saving target adopted in 2020: Residential/Households Industry &
Energy sector Transport Public and commercial services Water sector in % in % in
% in % in % 23,% 23,% 20,% 14,% 14,% Source: own calculation The report on the
“National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of Republic of Armenia”
just comes up with potential energy savings of the main fuel sources, around
,036 GWh for electricity (ca 23 % of 2008 demand) and 573,000,000 m³ for natural
gas (ca 25% of 2008 demand) These savings are mainly dedicated to the industry
and energy sectors, as well as transportation and water sector References to the
building sector (residential and public/private services) are not found to be
too specific there 17 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Addressing Barriers for Energy Efficiency in Armenia Armenia has taken important
steps to encourage more efficient use of energy, but many more steps must still
be taken However, the potential is mainly untackled due to  number of reasons
that can be summarized in  list of barriers to addressing energy efficiency:
The legal framework needs to be implemented and enforced Especially in the
building sector the existing building code needs binding provisions regarding
thermal quality of new and existing buildings and enforced standards and
methodologies to assess energy performance in buildings  Creating awareness
about energy efficiency needs  lot of information and know-how provided to all
energy consumers (private, business, service sector, etc) Yet, there is  weak
institutional setting in Armenia of communicating energy efficiency with
profound capacity,  through  National Agency or NGOs  Private consumers (
households) miss general and simple information on what can be done to reduce
energy demand in the daily life, such as in housing, use of electric appliances,
transportation etc  Many political decision-makers and private businesses still
fail to see the value in energy efficiency investments, despite the successes of
donor-sponsored pilot projects and programs, because of missing awareness,
sufficient current energy supply and to  certain extent because they simply lack
information on energy consumption for and energy potentials in the main sectors
The natural gas tariff encourages wasteful use by some smaller customers There
tariff structure does not provide an incentive for consumers to use less energy
Furthermore, there are no other financial incentives available that would
encourage saving energy The action plan presented in the next chapters of this
document will address these main barriers and provide  set of selected
instruments and action to overcome the main legal, institutional, decision-
making and information barriers 18 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010  Horizontal and cross-sectoral measures  Overview of horizontal and
cross-sectoral EEI measures Target: Provide the necessary institutional setting
and capacity to implement the Armenian Energy Efficiency Action Plan and ensure
continuous evaluation and monitoring of activities Target group: Ministries /
Agencies Energy efficiency is not merely  matter of  single sector Many measures
are intertwined and mutually supportive Energy efficiency measures affecting
several or all energy consumption sectors are reflected within the horizontal
activities The main objective is to build up the necessary institutional
capacities that will ensure an established structure for the implementation of
the action plan The measures proposed are to focus on cross-sectoral issues for
wide range of user target groups:  Legal aspects: integration of the NEEAP into
existing energy policies ( amending the Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy by taking the action plan as one main instrument for implementation into
consideration); and the necessary reinforcement of the national energy statistic
The issue of public procurement of energy efficient equipment is mainly to
provide public purchasers with technical specifications and the necessary “good
will” to consider the acquisition of energy efficient products and services by
spending public money  Institutional setting: installation of  National Energy
Agency The main responsibility for taking political action will stay with the
Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (legislation and policy making), while
the new Agency will implement, co-ordinate implementation, evaluate and
regularly report NEEAP and give also technical expertise to government in
developing policies The institutional building will also require additional
personnel capacities within the responsible unit of the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources (Division of energy efficiency) and special training should be
provided for new employees in international energy efficiency practices and
strategies (training financed by R2E2 and UNDP/GEF, employees salaries from
state budget)  Awareness, information campaigns and technical
assistance/training on energy topics shall be enforced It is  measures which is
very long-lasting and needs to be reinforced all the time (through specific
campaigns and built-up of proper material and media) The described horizontal
and cross-sectoral measures will factually not create any energy saving per se,
but will be the main driver for achieving savings under the following sectoral
measures described in chapter  However, relevant indicators for monitoring the
outcome are being defined with the measures presented in Table  19 National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Table : List of horizontal and
cross-sectoral measures under the Armenian NEEAP No Title of the EEI measure
Implementation of  regular national “Energy Statistic” (with annual updates)
Description of measures and specific actions there is no regular energy Since
1989, balance produced for Armenia  government decree was approved in 2007 to
prepare  national energy balance sheet, yet however, the decree has not been
implemented Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority 2010 - 2011 High
Ministry of Energy National Office Statistic  State budget EU-Inogate Programme
(Technical Assistance) World Bank (GEF Grant) Necessary actions:  Build-up of
pers onal capacities at National Statistics Office  Technical assistance and
training of dedicated staff to implement energy statistics according to
international standards and methods ( compliance with IEA) the  Performance of
sectoral surveys and analysis (households, industry, service sector, including
survey of changes over the etc), years  industry) consumption large consumers (
regular data on energy requirement of to submit ( update ( 2010) annually) and
Regular publication  Elaboration of  energy balance “baseline” year the new that
will methodology and provide detailed energy supply and cons umption ectoral
data and will serve as  basis for evaluating progress of EEAP in the future
reflect 20 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Energy World Bank
(GEF Grant) 2010 - 2013 High No Title of the EEI measure  Implementation of
“National for Energy Energy Agency Renewable and Efficiency Energy” Description
of measures and specific actions It is necessary to embed the EEAP into
institutional setting for co-ordination and monitoring of progress made The
government is therefore to give   lear mandate, qualified staff and budgetary
means to  national institution or agency to conduct the following main tasks:
Co-ordinate and manage the activities to be implemented under the Armenian EEAP
Regularly evaluate progress of meas ures implemented under the EEAP against
defined baseline consumption  Prepare regular reports and monitoring of EEAP
activities ( every - years) it shall be ensured that Furthermore, the following
activities shall be co-ordinated by the new entity or other responsible
governmental agency(ies):  developing short-term and long-term energy efficiency
programs;  coordinating the energy efficiency activities in different branches
of economy;  conducting information campaigns  developing energy efficiency
standards  conducting certification and labelling;  certifying energy auditors;
and/or licensing 21 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority  High Ministry of Energy
Provision of credit grant lines and from programmes international financing
institutions World EBRD, etc) development assistance EU, bilateral programmes)
(UN, Bank, IMF, KfW, and ( USAID, No Title of the EEI measure  Financial Support
Efficiency measures sectors for Energy all in to and grants properly facilities
planning realis ation Description of measures and specific actions Due to
primary lack of funding means provided by the national budget, it is  key
adapted provide task complementary funding of energy efficiency measures through
providing primarily (in the short term) donor funding to financially support of
energy the efficiency measures This could be done through the following
mechanisms:  investing into energy efficiency meas ures in public kindergartens,
(schools, hospitals, street lighting, etc) capacity-building/training
activities to administration public implement energy policies and strategies
On-lending programmes industry and SME, such Energy as Financing Facility In the
medium to long-term, alternative sources (others than donor programmes), such as
private sponsoring or public-private partnerships are to be sought to:  realise
in particular flags hip energy efficiency projects in industry, public & private
servic es or residential buildings  servic es companies ( ESCOs) - pilot
activities and training programmes the development of energy Sustainable EBRD'
support for for 22 No Title of the EEI measure  Information campaigns, training
and education in the area of energy efficiency improvements and and running
educational Description of measures and specific actions information Organising
projects on campaigns for energy efficiency and financial support actions
relating to the promotion of energy efficiency The campaigns need to be time-
spec ific and targeted to different kind of energy consumers (residential,
servic  sector, industry, etc) Proper indicators for measuring the raising of
measures shall be developed when designing awareness campaigns effectiveness
awareness National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Energy (later:
National Energy Agency) State budget International donors ( UNDP/GEF, World
Bank) Private sponsorship  ongoing process High of will efficient targeted  Use
products energy Campaigns towards be enc ouraging specific actions,  residential
new buildings: construction integrated building (thermal for des ign, use of
optimised equipment lighting, heating- systems incl pumps etc) or ways to
improve existing buildings cost-effectively optimising requirements ,
appliances, household  Information and education actions aimed at changing
consumer behaviour and increasing social acceptance of solutions that improve
energy efficiency in households, tertiary sector and industry  Encourage
providers and consumers to pay more attention to energy efficiency labelling and
to the energy cons umption of products bought and sold  Training for sales staff
as regards energy efficiency labelling and product life cycle costs  Creation of
training system for energy efficiency specialists within tertiary education, as
part of various disciplines  Introduction of energy efficiency subjects into
education programmes at all levels 23 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
RA Armenia 2010 No Title of the EEI measure  General regulatory demand side
measures Description of measures and specific actions  Providing incentives to
energy  onsumers to use energy more efficiently and at real market costs
Introduce load management tools and revise gas and electricity tariff structure
based on detailed cost-benefit analysis Responsibility Funding source Duration
Priority Ministry of Energy, Public Service Regulatory Commission State budget,
World Bank/ ESMAP  High  Assessment of the economic rationale of measures
proposed in the NEEAP Adopt  methodology for assessment of economic viability of
proposed energy efficiency programmes and measures Ministry of Economy State
budget  High  Public Procurement for Energy Efficiency efficiency include Public
procurement contracts must buying aspects when energy products, services or
works Specific criteria for public authorities and contracting parties need to
be prepared, such as technic al spec ifications and evaluation criteria for the
purchase of public goods, works and services in all sectors,  in the fields of:
Public Procurement (under Agency Government) Ministry of Energy, Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Urban Development Relies to purchase goods, works of and
services made from state/municipal budget  Medium  (re)construction of buildings
lighting  ICT and office equipment  air-conditioning and cooling  household
appliances ( washing-machines, coffee-machines ) refrigerators,  vehicles At the
same time it should be ensured that the annual planning of public budgets -
especially when taking into consideration necessary investments into
infrastructure - construction, purchase of equipment, etc - should consider
energy efficiency aspects already in the budgeting phase 24 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  Sectoral presentation and assessment
of energy efficiency improvement programmes, energy services, and other measures
to improve energy efficiency  Energy efficiency improvement measures in the
residential building sector5 Overall Target: Target group: Improved use of
energy for heating and cooling while ensuring thermal comfort, and reduction of
specific energy consumption in the preparation of hot water; implementation of
the necessary large-scale legal and information and awareness raising campaigns
amongst all stakeholders framework; provision of institutional Owners, tenants
and operators of private homes (family houses, multi-family buildings),
architects, planners, construction companies, legislative bodies  General
introduction on the building sector Almost all the Armenian housing stock has
been constructed during Soviet period some  years ago without any regard to
energy efficiency Many of these buildings are now in obsolete condition and do
not provide for minimum hygienic and comfort living conditions Specific energy
use per square meter is almost - times higher than in EU and varies between 320
and 690 kWh/m² per year Nevertheless, in many households, the amount of space
heated is limited to one or two rooms, as tenants have limited available
household budget to cover the high energy costs Also, construction works in
Armenia are presently performed more or less according to former Soviet
practices and norms that almost do not involve buildings’ energy performance and
improvement issues Such designs and construction works result in excessive
energy consumption and growing amount of GHG emissions low thermal technical
performance reflects Currently, residential (and also public) buildings in the
country are of low thermal- technical performance resulting in growing demand
for and consumption of thermal insufficient heat energy Buildings’ conduction
resistance of building envelope and unnecessary expansion of glass cover
Besides, state supervision of mandatory implementation of current norms is
absent Armenia has voted for Intergovernmental construction norm MSN -2004
“Thermal Insulation of the Buildings,” developed by Intergovernmental Normative-
Technical Commission on Standards and Certification in Building Sector of CIS,
however it has not been adopted and applied in Armenia  80% of the total
building stock in Armenia is for residential purposes So there is  specific
focus to be given to the housing sector, nevertheless several measures presented
here also reflect the need to be covered in other building types, mainly from
the public and private service sector 25 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for RA Armenia 2010 According to preliminary research, via efficient thermal
insulation of residential and public buildings, it is possible to reduce energy
consumption for heating at least by 20- 40%, taking into consideration the low
heating level in residential buildings Of course, the technical potential for
improving the building sector is much higher, and able to reach  minimum of 70%
(and up to 90%) to leading New housing stock is largely privately owned and
often built with limited financial means, therefore recommended to put an
emphasis on low- and no-costs energy efficiency measures to overcome the lack of
finance, while strengthening enforcement of the new building regulations
inadequate building materials the use of is It Used building materials are
rarely certified or labelled for thermal quality, while imported materials and
components lack labels or are labelled in an inconsistent manner There is some
potential for developing domestic materials, and  domestic production of quality
construction materials could be developed through the use of licenses for
foreign components However, this would require substantial investments in plants
capacity, technology adaptation, training and marketing that seem to be
premature at this stage, given limited market size Such investments would only
be viable when the standards enforcement capacities are in place, and when  real
demand is effective on the market Since 2004, Armenia is involved in the
European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) The implementation of ENP action plan was
approved in 2006 and is to contribute to harmonization of Armenian legislation,
norms and standards with EU criteria In this regard, improvement of energy
efficiency of buildings and constructions also needs paying attention to EU
directives According to EU Directive on “Energy Performance of Buildings”, cap
values of energy consumption in buildings, buildings’ efficiency rankings,
specific consumption of thermal energy for heating etc Should be identified upon
discretion of each country based on climatic conditions, technical and
demographic data At the same time, improvement of buildings’ energy efficiency
level is reflected in certain provisions of the Armenian “Law on Energy Saving
and Renewable Energy” and of the “National Program on Energy Saving and
Renewable Energy” In this context, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources
and Ministry of Urban Development in cooperation with the “Armenia – Improving
the Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply” UNDP/GEF
project, initiated  harmonization process of standards relevant to the sector
The Project’ work plan for  includes harmonization issues to international and
European standards  Sources: Towards Energy Efficiency Buildings in Europe
(2004) 26 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  Overview
of sector-specific measures Summarizing one can say that apart from climate, the
energy consumption in the building sector is significantly affected by the
thermal-technical properties of buildings, the efficiency of heating and cooling
systems, their regular inspection, maintenance and the behaviour of residents
This fact not only refers to residential buildings, but the same is true for
public and private service buildings The main barriers in the building sector
can be therefore defined as follows:  lack of available energy statistics and
qualitative data on energy demand in the sector,  appropriate legislation
(codes, standards, norms) and its enforcement to induce energy efficient
(re)construction,  coherent strategy for building sector development and plans
for new constructions and renovation of existing buildings,  availability of
funds to support EE investments ( availability of  financing scheme to support
reconstruction and/or refurbishment of residential buildings),  as well as
knowledge and willingness of house owners, planners, architects and operators of
buildings to improve the quality of buildings and support residents in adopting
energy efficiency user practices; Therefore, the main target for the developing
measures in the residential building sector can be specified as follows:
upgrading existing legislation and all by-laws (standards, norms) to reflect the
necessary efforts to be made in increasing the energy of buildings,  setting up
educational programmes (tertiary education, on-the-job-training) to train
students and employees of companies in the planning/design and construction
sector to comply with new integrated design and building standards,  establish
necessary capacities on the enforcement level,  develop pilot projects to
demonstrate building best-practice (for rehabilitation and new buildings) and
provide further incentives to promote energy efficient construction at all
levels, such as introduction of energy passports or building operational costs
to be used for advertising those flats and houses for sale/rent adhering to high
energy efficiency standards (provide incentives for construction companies to
enforce EE construction practices)  broad range of measures proposed for
existing and new buildings will account for approx 23% of total energy savings
of the building sector projected under the Armenian NEEAP by The % savings
attributed to each kind of measures is being demonstrated in Table  Marked red
are the relevant intermediate energy saving target years, according to 27
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 which the following
energy savings are foreseen:  2013: %  2017: %  2020: % Table  provides  more
detailed description of the measures of the building sector 28 II II II II II II
II Table : Estimated savings per measure in the residential building sector from
Sector/Measure II Building sector II National Building Code considering energy
performance of buildings Baseline 2008 2009 2010 average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in
TJ] [in TJ] annual/ cumulated savings annual cumulated Standards and calculation
methodology to assess energy performance in buildings Institutional capacity-
building for implementing and enforcing new standards Establishing quality
assurance/quality control (QA/QC) standards that will support the certification
of key building materials for energy performance National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Estimated annual savings per measure in % of the
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in
%] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% [in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,%
13,% 18,% 23,% [in %] ,% Aggregated savings per measure [in %] in TJ 23,% / ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / Set up road-test procedures for building certification
and methodology for assessment of energy performance for pilot buildings / / / /
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / Training and education in correspondance with
the promotion of integrated building design approach and new energy performance
requirements in buildings Pilot Project: Design competition and construction of
several “best-practice” buildings ( school or other public building, and  multi-
family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an integrated building
design approach within available budget and time schedule for the construction
of  typical building Development of an incentive scheme to promote energy
efficient construction or reconstruction in residential and service buildings ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / 29 Table : List of measures in the residential building
sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for RA Armenia 2010 No Title of the EEI measure II Building Code National
considering energy performance of buildings II Standards calculation and
methodology to assess energy performance in buildings Description of measures
and specific actions Adoption of  National Building code considering energy
performanc  of buildings (compatible with international bes  practices, suc  as
the European Energy Performance Building Directive) with regular revisions of
the building code ( all  years) The new code will consider the total building
energy performance (including heating, hot water, air conditioning and
ventilation) and set specific targets concerning the maximum energy demand of
buildings Construction permits are to be issued taking into consideration that
all requirements Elaborate and adopt national calculation methodology to
determine building energy consumption based on standardized use and establish
minimal requirements for thermal properties of  building, heating and of
ystems, air-conditioning renewable energy sources and relevant design aspects of
buildings ( inclusion of passive solar elements) application Responsibility
Funding source Duration Priority UNDP/GEF 2010 - 2012 High Energy, of Ministry
Ministry of Ec onomy, Ministry Urban of Development Ministry Energy, of Ministry
of Ec onomy, Ministry Urban of Development UNDP/GEF 2010 - 2012 High 30 No Title
of the EEI measure II Institutional capacity-building for implementing and
enforcing new standards II quality Es tablis hing control ass urance/quality
that will (QA/QC) support the certification of key building materials for energy
performance standards National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Development Urban
UNDP/GEF 2010 - 2012 High to and address respons ibilities Description of
measures and specific actions Develop clear procedures within the responsible
Minis try of the Urban Development enforcement of the new building energy
efficiency codes and standards Train staff to ensure compliance with the new
code and throughout capacity maintenance building in energy audits: Define
procedures and methodology for issuance of building energy passports and the
types of buildings for which the passports will become compulsory construction
through phases, design, Ministry Urban of Development, Ministry of Economy
UNDP/GEF 2010 - 2012 High Establish  mandatory testing system for the conformity
of construction materials with building energy performance according to national
standards Establish performance requirements for materials produced locally or
imported, which will allow builders and designers to make better informed
decisions the cons truction about the performance of materials used in new
buildings Introduce  voluntary certification and labelling scheme for
construction materials ( windows, insulation, boilers, etc) to provide
incentives for high-quality materials the Armenian market Furthermore, national
norms for QA/QC shall be established in manufacturing facilities and assis tance
for suppliers to comply with energy-efficiency related national standards to
enter 31 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Development Urban
UNDP/GEF 2012 - 2014 Medium No Title of the EEI measure II certification Set up
road-test procedures for building and methodology for assessment of energy
performance for pilot buildings and methodology Description of measures and
specific actions Set up road-test procedures for building certification for ass
essment of energy performance for several schools, buildings pilot to be
constructed residential buildings) following design integrated approac  Use
experiences and outcomes from relevant projects, such as UNDP/GEF Projec  on
"Improving the Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply”
(UNDP/GEF) building ( 32 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia
2010 Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Education and
Science State budget Intl donors  Medium No Title of the EEI measure II and
education with in Training correspondance the promotion of integrated building
design new energy performance requirements in buildings approach and building
energy performance, Description of measures and specific actions Promotion of
best energy design and construction practices in the construction sec tor: ()
Develop and introduce module on energy efficient building design in the
curricula of University for Architecture and Construction and provide training
assistance and other support materials (Teachers’ Guide) for teaching staff; ()
Design and deliver training courses for staff in the field of solar architecture
and applications for renewable () Provide energy sources in buildings; training
courses for practicing architects and engineers concerning the application of
the new codes and calculation methodologies; building awareness () constructors
on economic, environment and soc ial benefits of integrated building design and
tested locally technologies, materials and other EE applications in buildings (
though public () events at major construction events); Organize information
campaign for the general public promoting benefits of the new building code and
the Energy Passport; () promote results of pilot buildings and integrated
building design regularly through the national media; available Raise and on of
33 No Title of the EEI measure II II Pilot Project: Design competition and
construction of several “best- practice” buildings ( school or other public
building, and  multi-family house) in Yerevan and another larger city, using an
integrated building design approac  within available budget and time schedule
for the construction of  typical building to Development of an incentive scheme
energy or efficient reconstruction in residential and service buildings promote
construction National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority UNDP/GEF 2012 - 2015 Medium
Ministry Urban of Development, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance,
Technical Assistance from Donors Description of measures and specific actions
Pilot project should cover the following: () low- or no-cost measures; ()
monitor energy performance of pilot buildings; () Adopt  new standard design for
newly constructed buildings ( schools) based on the ones applied in the pilot
buildings; () introduce integrated energy efficient design methodology in all
planned public construction (technic al  pecifications for public procurement);
State budget Intl donors 2012 - 2015 Low of of Energy, Finance, international
national and Ministry Ministry with donors banks efficient construction
Development of an incentive scheme for energy or reconstruction Provide
appropriate and financially sound support mechanisms that would allow the
building owners to comply standards with and the opportunity to simultaneously
accept invest into cost-effective energy efficiency measures by realising
visible benefits ( small scale subsidy and financing schemes, support for energy
passport) enhanced 34 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Energy efficiency improvement measures in the public and private service sector
Target: Target group: Reduction, or minimisation of energy consumption in public
and private service sector range of applications in buildings and public space (
street-lighting, use of office equipment, air-conditioning) focusing on  various
Public administration (ministries, towns/municipalities), public lighting
operators, private office owners and tenants, employees in these companies
General introduction on the public and private service sector The Armenian
economy is agricultural-industrial oriented, with  developing service sector The
structure of 2004 GDP in Armenia is: 40% in industrial sector, 35% in service
sector (including construction and transportation), and 25% in agriculture The
share of service sector is - times lower than in developed countries (%) The
energy intensity index in the service sector of Armenia, kg oe/$,000 USD is
close to that of many developed and developing countries: Estonia, 91 kg
oe/$,000 USD, Latvia, kg oe/$,000 USD, Czech Republic, kg oe/$,000 USD (see
Figure ) According to the “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy of Republic of Armenia” paper (2007), the service sector in Armenia is
experiencing the same issues of energy efficiency as in developed countries and
in general does not represent  high absolute energy saving potential Figure :
Energy intensity of economy in  number of countries in 2003, kg oe/thousUSD
Source: Scientific Research Institute of Energy for the Alliance to Save
Energy/USAID: “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy of
Republic of Armenia”; Yerevan 2007 as by Key World Energy Statistics from IEA:
htpp:/ 35 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Nevertheless, the role of the public administration in providing good practice
and thus being  shining example for the other sectors is evident Public spending
is  significant contributor to the countries’ GDP The state administration, all
regional and local authorities and other public institutions ( health sector,
schools) regularly purchase energy consuming devices, such as office equipment,
lighting, diverse household appliances (fridges, dishwashers, washing-machines,
etc) and other equipment used for air-conditioning, ventilation, etc It is
therefore of importance to provide the public sector with  clear strategy,  to
demand energy efficient applications and equipment and directing public spending
towards higher-quality products Energy efficient public procurement will provide
cost- effective means to improve the energy intensity of the sector as slightly
higher purchasing costs will pay back within  couple of years On the other hand
the availability of energy efficient products on the market will steadily
increase, if the demand is rising Pretty the same issues are to be addressed to
the private service sector, although it is generally  very inhomogeneous market
segment which usually is not subject to direct influence by the government The
issue for this sector is therefore to increase the awareness of the protagonists
in this area – business owners, service companies, operators of office space and
commercial trading, etc – and provide them with  scope of measures that would
foster concrete action towards energy efficiency Although most of the energy
used in service buildings is spent for heating and hot water (measures already
covered in chapter ), the growing demand for ventilation and cooling in these
buildings is  serious issue to be addressed in the countries energy policy
Overview of sector-specific measures The operation of public buildings is
relevant cost factor in the public sector due to the share of energy costs in
the total budget Apart from lighting, heating and cooling of buildings and use
of various equipment (ICT, office equipment, household appliances used in
offices etc) are the most significant consumers in service buildings Together
with the improvement of the energy efficiency of mentioned equipment, efficient
user behaviour constitutes for  large saving potential (from 20% to 60%,
depending on the baseline consumption) in this area The general energy
efficiency measures covering the building envelope are already specified in
chapter  (also valid for service buildings) In addition to the energy
consumption in public buildings, operation of lighting in public buildings and
public street-lighting in towns and municipalities make  relevant contribution
to the final energy consumption in the public sector Street-lighting projects
are usually financed out of municipal budgets The current practice is that in
case of efficiency measures implemented (leading to savings in operational costs
covered by the municipal budget) the local authority is not able to dispose of
the energy cost 36 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
savings, as operational budgets in this case will be usually cut by the central
government So there is no real incentive to realise efficiency measures Finding
ways to change this situation ( financing schemes, such as energy performance
contracting) will definitely increase the interest in becoming more energy
conscious As for street-lighting, the largest consumer in this area is the City
of Yerevan, in other towns and municipalities the issue of street-lighting is of
less importance, mainly due to absence of fully operated lighting-systems
Lighting is, to  large extend, being consumed inefficiently, which results from
the use of obsolete light sources, unreliable regulation (switching, declining
power supply voltage) and wrong positioning and location of light sources
Upgrading of public lighting will focus on the installation of modern highly
efficient light sources for public lighting as well and reliable and efficient
regulation and management of operation The three measures proposed for the
service sector can save up to approx 15% of total energy savings of sector by
However, as shown below, the effects are low in the short-term and will grow
steadily with increasing the penetration of efficiency measures in the service
sector The % savings attributed to each kind of measures is being demonstrated
in Table  The relevant intermediate energy saving target years, according to
which the following energy savings are foreseen, are:  2013: %  2017: %  2020: %
Table  provides  more detailed description of the measures of the building
sector 37 Table : Estimated savings per measure in the public and private
service sector from  National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Sector/Measure III Public & Private Service Sector Baseline 2008 2009 2010
average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] III Information campaigns on several
issues of energy efficiency to be applied in public and private service
buildings III Efficient energy services in public facilities - investive
measures III Monitoring of energy consumption and achieved savings in service
buildings / / / / Estimated annual savings per measure in % of the annual/
cumulated savings annual cumulated 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,%
,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] [in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% 11,% 14,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% Aggregated
savings per measure [in %] in TJ 14,% / ,% ,% ,% / / / 38 Table : List of
measures in the public and private service sector specified under the Armenian
NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Responsibility
Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Energy, National Energy Agency
orld Bank / GEF 2010 – 2020 ( ontinuous activity) High No Title of the EEI
measure III Information campaigns on several issues of energy efficiency to be
applied private service buildings public and in  us er provide behaviour of
existing systems Description of measures and specific actions Office equipment
and room ventilation and  onditioning systems used in service buildings great
usually for energy efficiency through potential changing and through optimising
energy efficient operation The result are significant savings on the operation
costs and higher user comfort The advantages and types of measures to be adopted
to optimise existing facilities and systems shall be transmitted through public
information campaigns specifically adressing the following issues: - operating
lighting in offices efficiently - use of office equipment (computers, printers,
copiers, servers, etc) - air-conditioning and ventilation - other household
appliances used in offices ( refrigerators, cookers, etc) - availability of
energy efficiency labels and for can purchasing decisions - evaluation of the
potential of behaviour change of corresponding recommendations to the public
building administration how they provision impact used and be 39 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Responsibility Funding source
Duration Priority Ministry of Energy  orld Bank 2011 - 2013 High and Public
service operators private facilities' National Agency Energy Building owners
2018 - 2020 Low No Title of the EEI measure III Efficient energy services in
public facilities - investive measures Description of measures and specific
actions Defining minimum requirements for provision of energy efficient services
in public facilities, and implementation of correlating investive measures
reducing the energy demand of public (and private) service buildings (heating,
air- conditioning, use of office equipment) and optimisation of public lighting
systems ( learning from experiences made in City of Yerevan); Provide examples
of financing such projects through ESCOs III Monitoring of energy consumption
and achieved savings in service buildings or accounting" "Energy regular
monitoring of energy  onsumption in public buildings is an important aspect to
improve the consciousness regarding energy use Many building operators however
do not know about their building energy cons umption and energy costs the
accrued The idea is to support introduction energy accounting energy consumption
and savings in case of rehabilitations building monitor of to 40 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  Energy efficiency improvement
measures in industry sectors (including energy production) Target: Reduction of
energy intensity with respect to value-added production in the industry and the
energy sector (energy production, companies); and optimisation of energy supply
in the country’ power plants and distribution network transmission distribution
Target group: Stakeholders in industrial production and energy utilities
General introduction on the industry & energy sectors Industrial activities: The
40% share of industry in the GDP (2004) of Armenia is close to the one in
developed countries (%) The industry sector of Armenia has, as compared to other
sectors, also  low energy intensity characteristic, kg oe/$,000 USD, compared to
the one for Uzbekistan, 2616 kg oe/$,000 USD, Estonia, 569 kg oe/$,000 USD,
Moldova, 1264 kg oe/$,000 USD, and Georgia, 304 kg oe/$,000 USD (see Figure )
This means that the spectrum of the energy intensive production in the country
is very low ( “Nairit” factory, “Polyvinylacetate” factory use mainly
electricity, and cement, ore and mining industry is mainly depending on oil and
natural gas), and that the share of production using modern energy efficient
technologies is fairly high (food production, non-energy intensive production)
Nevertheless, it is necessary to make use of energy efficient technologies and
production methods which make it possible to reduce energy intensity of the
production in the main energy consuming industrial sectors (such as chemical
industry, metallurgy), but also within the larger sector smaller and medium-
sized companies Energy production: Armenia has no oil and natural gas reserves,
and imports all its fossil fuel demand Electricity is provided by:   nuclear
power plant which provides %;  Hydroelectric plants satisfy % of the country’
needs Besides, the hydropower generation is declining due to limitations
associated with irrigation purposes of the hydro plants;  The remaining
electricity demand is satisfied by thermal power plants which can burn either
oil or natural gas The share of the thermal plants in the generation mix of the
country is on average % In the heating sector, due to the consequences of the
economic and 41 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
energy crisis that followed the separation of Armenia and its neighboring
countries from the former Soviet Union in 1990, the municipal heat and hot water
supply systems in all Armenian cities essentially collapsed While in some cities
the operations of the former, centralized district heating (DH) system have been
partially restored, the vast majority of the urban population still lacks
organized heat and hot water supply services Nowadays, in larger public and
private service buildings there is often  centralised boiler house existing,
while in residential buildings local heating systems prevail Many of these
centralised boiler houses are operated inefficiently or are generally old They
would need  focus within the Action Plan to undergo major refurbishment or
reconstruction  Overview of sector-specific measures The measures to improve
energy efficiency in the industry sector must be particularly targeted at energy
demand, monitoring and management in the individual technological processes,
introduction of innovative approaches primarily aimed at reducing the energy
intensity of industrial production, and investments in energy efficiency in the
selected industrial branches Generally, there is  lack of awareness and
knowledge on potential EE measures as well as incentives to implement them In
order for these measures to be effective,  change must occur in people’
mentalities and behaviour The National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy has assessed  series of measures throughout the specific sectors, which
need to be tackled Reference is therefore made to the existing potential
analyses and studies, one of which was also prepared by the International
Finance Co-operation (IFC), that is helping Armenian financial institutions
develop sustainable energy finance products, thereby increasing renewable energy
generation and lowering electricity waste and greenhouse-gas emissions Another
of these sustainable energy financing institutions (“ArmSEFF” programme, see
Annex : List of relevant donor projects and programs ongoing and of past) is
being developed by the EBRD (envisaged start: autumn 2010)  focus is also to be
given to the power and gas sector Obsolete and old infrastructure,  high share
of production and transmission losses are putting  pressure on the utilities to
maintain their systems reliable and make them fit for the future – which is
showing sharp increases of energy demand (up to 10%  until 2020, once the
“economic crisis” is over) Although there are several programs running with
support from  the World Bank, continuous improvement and maintenance of existing
energy production and distribution facilities remains  high priority for
ensuring  sustainable and reliable energy system Together with the improvement
of the infrastructure, measures to ensure the affordability of gas and
electricity tariffs (as described as an improvement measure in chapter ) have to
be enforced  summary of the critical measures proposed can be found in 42
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Table The table is
split into demand side measures on the one hand ( efficiency measures at
industrial users) and on the other hand on measures focussing on the supply side
(looking for improvements in the supply and distribution of heat and electricity
through utilities) The targeted savings to be reached by 2020 are significant
and could reach approx 42% of total energy savings of the industry (and energy
production) sector The % savings are also given in Table  The relevant
intermediate energy saving targets are as follows:  2013: %  2017: %  2020: % 43
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Table : Estimated
savings per measure in the industrial sector from  Sector/Measure IV Industry
sector Baseline 2008 2009 2010 average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] annual/
cumulated savings annual cumulated Estimated annual savings per measure in % of
the 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,%
[in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% [in %] [in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,%
,% 11,% 14,% 18,% 23,% [in %] ,% IV Considering energy efficiency aspects for
the construction of new industrial facilities ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% IV
Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for Industrial
Enterprises / / / / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% Aggregated savings per measure
[in %] in TJ 23,% / ,% ,% / / Electricity savings through improvements of
existing electricity network, compensation of reactive power and improvement of
transformers IV ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 11,% / 44 Table 10: List of
measures in the industrial sector specified under the Armenian NEEAP No Title of
the EEI  easure Demand side measures Description of measures and specific
actions Responsibility Funding Source Duration Priority National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 IV Considering energy efficiency
aspects for the construction of new industrial facilities and awareness
management Emphasizing raising measures in industrial enterprises and at
technical level regarding the introduction of energy efficient new
installations; rehabilitations ensuring the improvement of the energy efficiency
of the existing system technologies for for or State budget 2010 - 2012 High
Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Environment PSRC 45 National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 46 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010 Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority Ministry of Energy,
Electric Networks of Armenia World Bank  High No Title of the EEI  easure Supply
side measures Description of measures and specific actions IV Electricity
through savings improvements of existing electricity network, compensation of
reactive power of and transformers improvement  Electricity transmission losses
are considerably higher than the international standard of - percent, at roughly
15 percent Investments into the network are necessary to reduce high amount of
losses and thus contribute to safer supply of energy  Technical losses in the
trans formers and transformer substations as well as distribution lines are to
be tac kled, especially on the medium and low voltage systems 47 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  Energy efficiency improvement
measures in the transport sector Target: Target group: Reduction and
minimisation of energy consumption in freight and passenger transport;
increasing opportunities for public transport Traffic participants, transport
route owners and operators, transport, state owners and operators of means of
administration, local and regional governments  General introduction on the
transport sector The provision of transport linkages and transit carriages has
key role for the development of trade-economic relations between countries For
all developing countries, especially those which are landlocked as Armenia, it
is crucial to implement transit carriages in the light of the tariffs in use and
to spur infrastructure development, modernization of available transport stock,
etc The transport policy of Armenia is conducted onwards transport network,
elaboration of mechanisms for unification of legislative acts and other
regulations Currently, Armenia is implementing the necessary internal state
procedures for joining to the existing agreements and conventions in the field
of transport, which have been signed in the framework of UN Economic Commission
for Europe integrated Euro-Asian the creation of The Republic of Armenia, which
has  quite developed network of roads and railways, taking into consideration
the specific geographical situation of the country, extends major attention to
the modernization of transport infrastructures and for attracting investments in
the said sector, especially for the reconstruction of artificial facilities –
bridges and tunnels In regard with its effectiveness, high priority is given to
the implementation of combined container carriages and modernization of
container terminals The major issue, however, remain the quite underdeveloped
means of public transportation means across the country ( under-utilised railway
system) and especially within its largest city, Yerevan Individual means of
transportation are  huge traffic problem within the city ( there  ten times more
minibuses operated than regular larger buses), causing congestion and high
emissions from this sector Moreover, the electrified transport means, such as
railway, trolley buses or metro (one line in Yerevan) are playing  very limited
role in transport means of the country The share of different public
transportation means in Yerevan (2008) are: trolley buses ca %, metro %, large
and medium buses % and micro buses ca 85% The big challenge is increase the
share of public transportation systems (large and trolley buses, metro) compared
to the high number of micro buses and individual private cars  Overview of
sector-specific measures The energy saving measures for the transport sector
include the development of 48 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010 specific emission norms for vehicles in combination with some
incentives to reduce the emission level, further the optimization of vehicles
and routes, especially when it comes to the introduction of new energy efficient
public transportation to force the replacement of old vehicles with newer,
efficient ones, but still maintain the quite unique large share of gas driven
cars in the world The worst polluters are however the large trucks, they are
usually least efficient and increasingly congesting roads Regular inspection
programs shall be focussing on the vehicles causing the most pollution, and
expanded to other cars like mini buses, taxis and the majority of second-hand
car ownership in the country One important aspect is related to the creation of
awareness among drivers to drive cars efficiently and consider opportunities to
reduce the amount of annual mileage These measures shall be supported by the
implementation of traffic demand management schemes which can include  wide
range of options (such as parking restrictions or fees, tolls, restrictions by
plate numbers) to help ease congestion in bottleneck corridors while promoting
public transport The proposed measures in the transport sector will account for
approx 20% of total energy savings projected under the Armenian NEEAP The annual
% savings including the intermediate energy saving targets up to 2020 are given
in Table 11 as follows:  2013: %  2017: %  2020: % 49 Table 11: Estimated
savings per measure in the transport sector from  National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Sector/Measure  Transport sector     Vehicle
Inspection and Maintenance (&) program Traffic Demand Managmeent (TDM) scheme
Dissemination of information on technologies and approaches for reducing energy
consumption effectively Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger
buses operated by natural gas Baseline 2008 2009 2010 average  [in TJ] [in TJ]
[in TJ] [in TJ] annual/ cumulated savings annual cumulated Estimated annual
savings per measure in % of the 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,%
[in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% [in %] ,% [in %] ,% [in %] [in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,% ,% 10,%
13,% 16,% 20,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% Aggregated savings per measure [in
%] in TJ 20,% / / / ,% ,% / / / / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / 50 Table 12: List of measures in the industrial sector
specified under the Armenian NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010 No Title of the EEI measure  Vehicle Inspection and Maintenance (&)
program  Traffic (TDM) scheme Demand Managmeent  Dissemination of information on
technologies and approaches for consumption reducing effectively energy
Description of measures and specific actions least Trucks are often the worst
polluters, efficient and on the road most frequently Therefore the & program
should focus on trucks in the beginning () In  second step, the & program could
be expanded to minibusses and taxis () - In  third step the program can than be
expanded to all vehicles () - Responsibility Ministry of Transport, Ministry of
Economy Funding source Duration Priority State Budget  High Ministry of
Transport, Ministry of Economy State Budget 2010 - 2012 High fees, including the
city of () To overcome bottleneck corridors, Yerevan shall prepare  TDM scheme
This could parking parking restrictions, tolls, restrictions by plate number, ()
At the same time it is important to promote public transportation (use of metro,
buses instead of individual transport) Restrictions for individual transport
mentioned under () could help to create  shift in the transport modal split
towards public transportation means () Optimisation of public transport routes
and traffic light management to reduce fuel intensity of vehicles Dissemination
of information to users regarding updated legislation and on ways of economising
petrol ( change in air pressure in passenger car tyres, driving skills and
others) Especially in the area of heavy traffic (trucks, buses) training of
drivers for fuel efficiency shall be encouraged Ministry of Transport State
budget International donors 2012 - 2020 High 51 National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Funding source Duration Priority 2010 - 2020
High Private companies (applying for concessions to operate bus lines) No Title
of the EEI measure  Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger buses
operated by natural gas Responsibility City of Yerevan Description of measures
and specific actions In total, there are about ,800 mini-buses ( seats) running
on Yerevan' public bus routes, only about 300 larger buses (with  seats) They
are operated by private companies that mostly use gas (90%) for driving them due
to cheaper running costs However, mini-buses are one reason for increasing
traffic congestion in town which is becoming an environmental problem The City'
plan is to replace in the long- term  mini-buses by  large bus (also being
operated by natural gas, currently at about 50%) This will bring fuel savings at
higher capacity and contribute to reducing congestion Estimated fuel savings is
% per passenger- kilometer The necessary measure is to adapt public tenders for
operating bus routes, which are renewed every  years, and include large buses
types have not as compulsory vehicles Fuel been specfied so far, but as gas is
much cheaper than regular diesel or gasoline, the operators will prefer to run
gas-operated buses anyway 52 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA
Armenia 2010  Energy efficiency improvement measures in the water sector Target:
Structural reforms in water sector, especially reduction of energy intensity in
irrigation systems and for drinking water pumping stations Target group: Owners
and operators of agricultural businesses / water supply  General introduction on
the water sector Armenia has  million hectares of agricultural land, 72% of the
country’ land area Most of this, however, are mountain pastures, and cultivable
land is 480,000 hectares (452,900 hectares arable land, 27,300 hectares in
orchards and vineyards), or 16% of the country’ area In 2006, 46% of the work
force was employed in agriculture (up from 26% in 1991), and agriculture
contributed about 21% of the country’ GDP Back in 1991, Armenia imported still
about 65 percent of its food Agriculture is carried out mainly in the valleys
and mountainsides of Armenia’ uneven terrain, with the highest mountain pastures
used for livestock grazing Fertile volcanic soil allows cultivation of wheat and
barley as well as pasturage for cows, sheep, goats, and horses The principal
agricultural products are grains (mostly wheat and barley), potatoes,
vegetables, grapes and fruits ( apricots) Agriculture provides  significant
share in the country’ energy demand, mainly through intensive irrigation Almost
80% of agricultural products are coming from irrigated lands, which generally
use electric pumping rather than free-flowing gravity schemes In former Soviet
era, there were about 400 pumping stations in the country, and as electricity
always used to be very cheap, nobody cared about the additional irrigation costs
This has changed over the last years, especially due to an initiative started in
2006 by the Millennium Challenge Account-Armenia (MCA-Armenia),  State Non
Commercial Organization established by the Government of Armenia and supported
by the Government of  through the creation of  foundation One main focus of MCA-
Armenia is to improve current irrigation schemes by converting from pump to
gravity- fed irrigation, reducing water losses and improving drainage and thus
contribute to  significant energy saving in the agricultural sector Another
issue is the major energy consumption in the drinking water sector Support has
been given for projects mainly financed by World Bank and USAID to emphasize
water sector reform to develop an efficient and sustainable integrated water
resources management system Despite recent in performance of water companies and
regulatory institutions, much remains to be done, particularly improvement of
water networks in the rural areas One issue is the rehabilitation and
optimization of drinking water pumping stations across the country improvements
53 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  Overview of
sector-specific measures The main measures regarding the water sector addressed
in the action plan is following the activities conducted by the MCA Armenia
program to rehabilitate existing drainage and pumping systems, rebuild existing
secondary and tertiary canals and introduce several new gravity irrigation
schemes that will reduce the demand for electrical pumping This measure does not
refer to the agricultural sector only, but optimisation of pumping stations is
also  big issue in the drinking water sector and shall focus on water utilities
Chart : MCA-Armenia Irrigated Agriculture Project PS12 PS12 PS12 MC1 MC1 MC1 MC5
MC5 MC5 GS1 GS1 GS1 PS5 PS5 PS5 PS17 PS17 PS17 PS16 PS16 PS16 GS5 GS5 GS5
Yerevan Yerevan Yerevan PS02 PS02 PS01 PS01 GS2 GS2 PS10 PS10 PS11 PS11 MC1 MC1
MC1 PS07 PS07 PS08 PS08 PS09 PS09 PS06 PS06 GS3 GS3 GS3 MC4 MC4 MC4 PS14 PS14
PS14 PS15 PS15 PS15 MC5 MC5 MC5 GS4 GS4 GS4 MC3 MC3 MC3 MC2 MC2 PS04 PS04 PS03
PS05 PS03 PS05 PS03 PS01 PS01 PS01 Pump Stations Pump Stations Pump Stations -
Mkhchian , II - Mkhchian , II - Mkhchian , II - Ranchpar , II - Ranchpar , II -
Ranchpar , II  Achajur   Achajur   Achajur   Armash  Armash  Armash  Khor-Virap
Khor-Virap  Khor-Virap  Avshar-Aygevan  Avshar-Aygevan  Avshar-Aygevan  Noyakert
Noyakert  Noyakert Baghramyan Baghramyan Baghramyan Burastan Burastan Burastan
Noyemberyan Noyemberyan Noyemberyan Vorotan  Vorotan  Vorotan  Saralanj Saralanj
Saralanj Dashtadem Dashtadem Dashtadem Martuni Martuni Martuni Zolakar Zolakar
Zolakar GS1 GS1 GS1 Gravity Schemes Gravity Schemes Gravity Schemes  Spitak
Spitak  Spitak  Aigezard  Aigezard  Aigezard  Mantash  Mantash  Mantash  Shenik
Shenik  Shenik  Vardenis  Vardenis  Vardenis Main Canals Main Canals Main Canals
Artashat  Artashat  Artashat  Lower -Hrazdan  Lower -Hrazdan  Lower -Hrazdan
Armavir  Armavir  Armavir  Talin  Talin  Talin  Arzni -Shamiram  Arzni -Shamiram
Arzni -Shamiram  Shirak  Shirak  Shirak Ararat Valley Ararat Valley Ararat
Valley Drainage System Drainage System Drainage System PS13 PS13 PS13 GS3 GS3
GS3    Source: MCA-Armenia The effect of this measure is de facto  decrease of
the energy intensity (by about 15% in average), nevertheless the total energy
consumption in the irrigation sector is going to increase due to the fact that
in most of the projects mentioned in the chart below are also dedicated to
increase the amount of irrigated land As for drinking water pumping stations, it
is estimated that  country-wide programme to be implemented could reach
significant saving of up to 10% by The total effect on the energy consumption is
thus estimated to be roughly minus 14% until The annual % savings including the
intermediate energy saving targets up to 2020 are given in Table 13 as follows:
2013: %  2017: %  2020: % 54 Table 13: Estimated savings per measure in the
agricultural sector from  Sector/Measure VI Agricultural sector Baseline 2008
2009 2010 average  [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] [in TJ] Estimated annual savings per
measure in % of the annual/ cumulated savings annual cumulated 2011 2012 2013
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %]
,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] ,% ,% [in %] [in %] ,% ,% ,%
14,% Aggregated savings per measure [in %] in TJ 14,% / Utilization of gravity
flow in irrigation systems and modernisation of existing pumping stations and
upgrading secondary and tertiare canals VI VI Optimization of drinking water
pumping stations / / / / / / / / ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% / ,% ,% ,% ,%
,% ,% ,% ,% ,% ,% 10,% National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia
2010 55 Table 14: List of measures in the agricultural sector specified under
the Armenian NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Responsibility Funding source Duration Priority 2010 – 2012 High Millenium
Challenge Account - Armenia The World Bank Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Energy,  ater Committee (under Min of Territorial Administration) No Title of
the EEI measure VI Utilization of gravity flow in irrigation systems and
modernisation of existing pumping stations and upgrading secondary and tertiare
canals Description of measures and specific actions The MCA programme activities
forsee the following measures: () Installation of  gravity schemes (Spitak,
Aygezard, Mantas , Shenik, Vardenis) whic  will rehabilitate in total more than
30 km of existing canals and provide highly improved irrigation At the same time
the poss ible arable land () Installation of area will be enlarged; energy
efficient pumping stations: some pumping stations will be rehabilitated and some
renewed with efficient pumps, in total 17 pumping stations will be rehabilitated
() Rehabilitation of  main canals, 250 km of tertiary canals and of Ararat
valley drainage system Similar activities are also been supported by the World
Bank VI Optimization of drinking water pumping stations () Elaborate potential
assessment for rehabilitation of pumping stations () Develop plan for
optimisation of most relevant pumping stations across the country Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Energy,  ater Committee (under Min of Territorial
Administration) Drinking water companies  Medium 56 National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010  References         Law on Energy Saving and
Renewable Energy, The Republic of Armenia (2005) National Program on Energy
Saving and Renewable Energy of Republic of Armenia, USAID (2007) TORs of the
UNDP/GEF project “Armenia - Improving the Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heating
and Hot Water Supply”; UNDP/GEF Scientific Research Institute of Energy for the
Allicance to Save Energy/USAID: “National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy of Republic of Armenia”; Yerevan 2007 Global Environment Facility - GEF:
(2010) The Other Renewable Source: The Potential for Improving Energy Efficiency
in Armenia, Report to the World Bank (2008) Second Communication of the Republic
of Armenia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
UNDP/GEF (2009) UNDP/GEF Project Document “Improving Energy Efficiency in
Buildings”, UNDP/GEF (2009)  World Energy Council : “Energy Efficiency Policies
around the World: Review and Evaluation”:  (2010) 10 Towards Energy Efficient
Buildings in Europe (2004), The European Alliance of Companies for Energy
Efficiency in Buildings 11 Status of Energy Efficiency in the Western Balkans
(2010), The World Bank 57 Annex : Template for the calculation of the national
energy saving target National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
Total final energy consumption Armenia 2008 Unit [TJ] 2009 2007 2010 2006 Final
inland energy consumption within the scope of the EEAP Residential/Households
Industry Energy production Transport Public and commercial services Agriculture
Non-energy use Average final consumption over -year period: Energy saving target
adopted in 2020: Residential/Households Industry & Energy sector Transport
Public and commercial services Water sector Non-energy use Total savings (for
all sectors) Intermediate energy saving targets in the years (total): [in TJ]
23,% 23,% 20,% 14,% 14,% / in % in % in % in % in % in % in TJ 2013 2017 2020 58
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 Annex : Projections
of greenhouse gas emissions for Armenia from 2005 to 2020 The GHG projections
are taken from the “Second Communication of the Republic of Armenia to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change” They provide and
indication of the development of greenhouse gases that are indirectly also
result of energy use in the country The data are based on  % average annual
economic growth and expected volumes of activities in various sectors of economy
Two scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions are being considered – business-as-
usual, which assumes the continuation of the existing practices and
relationships at national level, but also includes certain modernization
processes corresponding to international trends, and rapid stabilization, which
includes measures contributing to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
planned by national and sectoral development programs As  result of the
implemented measures, by 2020, greenhouse gas emissions will amount to 61% of
their level in 1990 (92% in the case of business-as-usual scenario), but however
will almost double in the BAU scenario between 2010 and 2020 (+52% in the
stabilization scenario) And the largest share of emissions (73%) will continue
to fall on the energy sector Chart : Projections of greenhouse gas emissions (Gg
CO2 equivalent, excl LULUCF) Source: Second National Communication of Armenia to
the UNFCCC (2009) 59 Annex : List of relevant donor projects and programs
ongoing and of past National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010
GEF Program: (cid:) Armenia – Improving the Energy Efficiency of the Urban
Heating and Hot Water Supply (UNDP): The project aims to reduce greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions resulting from current heat and hot water supply practices in
Armenian cities The project consists of four components: () Strengthening the
role of condominiums in organizing and managing the heat and hot water supply
services at the building level () Supporting the restructuring process and
building the capacity of the existing DH companies to improve the efficiency of
their operations () Supporting the emerging new service providers in offering
their services to the condominiums and structuring financing for the investments
needed () Documenting and disseminating the results, experiences and lessons
learned nationally and regionally The project was approved in May Total project
costs sum up to 12,030,121 US$ whereof GEF project grant amount to ,950,000 US$
(cid:) Armenia Energy Efficiency Project (IBRD): The Armenian Energy Efficiency
Project will reduce energy intensity of the Armenian economy by funding public
sector energy efficiency investments and removing existing information, existing
information, knowledge, regulatory, and financial barriers that hamper the wide
penetration of energy efficiency investments in public buildings and the
commercial and residential sectors in the country The project was approved in
March Total project costs sum up to around 15,910,000 US$ whereof GEF project
grant amount to ,820,000 US$ (cid:) LGGE Improving Energy Efficiency in
Buildings (UNDP): The aim of this project is to reduce GHG emissions and energy
consumption in the Armenian buildings sector The project was approved in June
Total project costs sum up to around ,440,450 US$ whereof GEF project grant
amount to ,045,000 US$  source:  2010  source:  2010  source:  2010 60 National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 World Bank: (cid:) Urban
Heating Project – Armenia10: The objective of the Urban Heating Project for
Armenia is to support the Borrower to increase the use of clean, efficient, safe
and affordable heating technologies in urban schools and multi-apartment
buildings The changes are related to: () reallocation of credit proceeds from
'goods and works for others' and 'grants' categories both financing capital
grants to the urban poor for gas and heating services to the 'goods and works
for school heating systems' category financing rehabilitation of the heating
system of urban schools; () extension of the project closing date by six months
to allow rehabilitation of the heating system of additional schools; and ()
increase of the disbursement percentage for 'goods and works' category of
expenses from 80 percent to 90 percent so as to maintain the co- financing
requirement by the Government of Armenia on the same level as before the
reallocation The project was approved in July 2005 and will be closed by the end
of Total project costs sum up to around 21,950,000 US$ whereof IBRD and IDA
commitment add up to 15,000,000 US$ (cid:) Electricity Supply Reliability and
Energy Efficiency Project11: The power sector in Armenia addresses four serious
challenges: () emerging power supply gap, () jeopardized power supply
reliability, () the affordability of energy tariffs, and () the financial
viability of the sector is threatened; This project will enhance the reliability
of the power supply by improving the power transmission network back-bone
infrastructure and will reduce the power supply gap by improving the potential
The project is currently under preparation and estimated to be approved by the
board in March Total project cost are 44,000,000 US$ whereof IBRD and IDA
commitment sums up to 36,000,000 US$ efficiency utilization country’ energy the
of 10 source:  SitePK= 301579&menuPK=301612&Projectid=P057880; 2010 11 source:
SitePK=301579&menuPK=301613&Projectid=P116748; 2010 61 National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 INOGATE Programme: (cid:)
Harmonization of gas and oil technical standards and practices ( Europe and
Caucasus)12: The project aims to support the countries' adoption of
international standards, rules and practices for design, construction,
manufacturing, testing, certification, accreditation, operation and maintenance
applied for all main components of gas and oil production / transmission /
storage The project started in December 2007 and will last till August The total
project budget is ,930,500 € (cid:) Capacity-building for Energy Regulators in
Eastern Europe and Central Asia13: The project is to promote and advocate good
and sound energy regulatory practices in the Partner Countries of the INOGATE
Programme and to harmonize energy regulatory practices among them The project
will allow the transfer of EU best practices and the strengthening of
cooperation among the countries involved Furthermore, the project will aim to
educate relevant ministerial level decision makers of these countries about the
purposes and benefits of an independent energy regulatory organization
Beneficiary countries are: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan; The
project started in January 2009 and will last till July The total project budget
is 330,000 € (cid:) Capacity building for Sustainable Energy Regulation in
Eastern Europe and Central Asia14: This is the “successor-project” of the before
mentioned one It started in March 2010 and is planned to last till October The
calculated budget sums up to 505,856 € 12 source:
projects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-
projects/harmonisation-gas-and-oil- technical-standards-and-80104; 2010 13
source:  projects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-
projects/capacity-building-energy- regulators-eastern-46112; 2010 14 source:
projects/inogate_programme/inogate_projects/ongoing-inogate-projects/capcity-
building-sustainable- energy-regulation; 2010 62 National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 (cid:) Harmonization of electricity standards:15
The project' objective is to assist the INOGATE Partner Countries in adopting
international standards, rules and practices in the electricity sector It is
anticipated that cooperation on standardization within the framework of the
INOGATE Programme will lead to market integration and convergence The Project
seeks to increase infrastructure efficiency, enhance quality and reliability of
equipment, ensure safety in electricity transmission and distribution and
facilitate trade and investments in modern technologies Partner countries are:
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan The project started in
September 2009 and will last till March The total project budget is ,482,500 €
EBRD: (cid:) Armenian Sustainable Energy Financing Facility (ArmSEFF):16 The
EBRD’ Sustainable Energy Initiative (SEI) was launched in 2006 to address the
twin challenges of energy efficiency and climate change SEI market segments
include, besides others, the segment for Sustainable Energy Financing Facilities
(SEFFs) through financial intermediaries One of the long-lasting benefits of
this segment is the transfer of specific skills to the local market In addition
to the economic and environmental benefits of the investments themselves, local
bank staff becomes familiar with the particulars of sustainable energy
investments and in which business sectors to find them; prospective borrowers
learn why sustainable energy projects make good business sense and how to
finance them Moreover investment opportunities and where to identify them As
result of regular exposure to international experts, this additional capacity
builds up from both formal training and on-the-job learning by doing The project
development and implementation legacy that remains will facilitate the financing
of future sustainable energy investment opportunities This project will start in
near future in Armenia local engineers become aware of the best practice 15
source:  projects/harmonization-technical-standards-rules-and; 2010 16 source:
2010 63 National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 USAID: (cid:)
Commercialization of Energy Efficiency Project (CEEP):17 This program is working
with private sector energy service companies and the banking sector to increase
the availability of bank financing for energy efficiency projects to encourage
the development of viable energy efficiency market CEEP was implemented by
Advanced Engineering Associates International (AEAI) It started in June 2007 and
will end in November 2010ö The project budget sums up to ,200,000 US
International Finance Corporation: (cid:) Armenia Energy Efficiency Survey
Project:18 The main goal of the project is to assess the current market for
energy efficiency financing in Armenia and to raise awareness among local
financial institutions, small and medium enterprises (SMEs), and policy makers
about existing opportunities for energy efficiency financing in the country By
identifying best practices in SME energy efficiency and finance, the survey will
also provide benchmarks with other countries and might lead to  more
comprehensive program to increase energy efficiency in Armenia and the region
The project started in 2008 and is still ongoing It is supported with funds from
the Austrian Technical Assistance Trust Fund and IFC Millennium Challenge
Account–Armenia (MCA–Armenia): (cid:) Irrigated Agriculture Project:19 In 2006,
the Millennium Challenge Corporation signed  five-year Compact with the
Government of Armenia aimed at reducing rural poverty through  sustainable
increase in the economic performance of the agricultural sector The Millennium
Challenge Corporation is   Government agency designed to work with developing
countries, based on the principle that aid is most effective when it reinforces
sound political, economic, and social policies that promote poverty reduction
through economic growth MCA-Armenia,  State Non-Commercial Organization
established by the Government of Armenia, is responsible for overseeing the
transparent implementation of the Compact signed between the Millennium
Challenge Corporation and the Government of Armenia Presently MCA-Armenia has
one major project – Irrigated Agriculture project (USD 120 million) which
includes Irrigation Infrastructure Rehabilitation component and 17 source:  2010
18 source:  %20Survey, 2010 19 source:  2010 64 National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for RA Armenia 2010 farmers’ assisting Water-To-Market activity (USD
32 million) along with its Institutional Strengthening Sub-Activity (around USD
million) 65