ARMENIA LEAST COST ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: 2020 - 2036 MARKET LIBERALIZATION
AND ELECTRICITY TRADE PROGRAM Yerevan, Armenia November 19, 2019 OBJECTIVES The
Least Cost Energy Development Plan (LCEDP) for Armenia was realized using The
Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System (TIMES) software developed by the International
Energy Agency and used in more than 70 countries The LCEDP for Armenia covering
the period up to 2036 allows us to examine scenarios and to analyze various
pathways to: • Strengthen the energy security and independence of the country •
Bring  reliable supply of energy to meet all consumer needs at the lowest cost
possible • Realize energy efficiency and renewable energy potentials • Assess
the effectiveness of existing generation and consumption technologies available
in the market  TIMES MODEL STRUCTURE Energy Balance Planning Horizon & System
Settings Energy Service Demand Projections Future Resource Supply and
Technologies Fuel and National Model Market Share Limits Supply Sector Demand
Sectors Resources and Imports Agriculture Industry          Power & Heat
Residential Commercial  Main Assumptions for TIMES-Armenia ( of ) ➢GDP growth
was set at 75% in 2018, 65% in 2020 and held constant after 2022 at % per year
➢Population has  small negative growth and will slightly decrease over the
planning period, although residential demand for energy will still grow on
average % per year ➢The commercial sector is the main contributor to demand for
useful energy, with average annual growth of over % ➢The agriculture and
industrial sectors contribute less to the growth of demand for useful energy,
with average annual growth rates of around % and %, respectively ➢The border gas
price is assumed to increase, reaching the European prices level in 2027 (US$
299 m3) and growing at the same rate thereafter  Main Assumptions for TIMES-
Armenia ( of ) ➢Electricity losses decline to  total of % for the transmission
and distribution systems in 2028 and remain constant thereafter ➢Net electricity
imports/exports are held constant at the 2018 levels for the planning horizon:
Export to the South as ,GWh; Import from Georgia as GWh; Import from
Artsakhenergo as17 GWh ➢Both Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) gas-fired thermal plant and
Masrik-  grid-connected solar PV plant are introduced in the system at their
respective Commercial Operation Dates ➢The Armenia Nuclear Power Plant is
assumed decommissioned from 2027 and the old Hrazdan thermal PP from ➢No other
technical limitations are imposed on the introduction of new power generation
candidate technologies in the system for the planning horizon  INITIAL
UNCONSTRAINED BASELINE SCENARIO IU BASE Other Nuclear Gas price Import/Export
The gas price is assumed to increase, reaching the European prices level in 2027
(US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same rate thereafter Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO)
thermal plant and Masrik- grid connected solar PV plant are introduced to system
Electricity import/export held constant at 2018 level through the end of
planning period (2036) ANPP life time extension through 2026  ECONOMIC
PARAMETERS Structure of Total Discounted System Cost to 2036 (US$ Million, %)
Total: US$ billion Investments, 18198, 45% Variable costs without fuel costs,
5495, 13% Fixed costs, 5526, 14% Expenditure on fuel, 11297, 28% Total
Discounted GDP to 2036: $billion  NEW GENERATION ENTRY TO THE SYSTEM  BASELINE-
REFERENCE SCENARIO BASE- Further investigation of all additional scenarios
formed have been done in comparison to the BASE- scenario Nuclear Gas price
Other Import/Export Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid
connected solar PV plant are introduced to system ANPP life time extension
through 2026 Electricity import/export held constant at 2018 level through the
end of planning period (2036) The gas price is assumed to increase, reaching the
European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same rate
thereafter Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is limited to ,500 MW
for solar PV and 500 MW of wind Annual maximum new capacity additions are capped
at 100 MW for central solar PV, / MW for Residential/ Commercial rooftop PV, and
50 MW for wind  BASE-: ECONOMIC PARAMETERS Structure of Total Discounted System
Cost to 2036 (US$ Million, %) Total: US$ 41,029 million ($513 million higher
than in IU BASE) Variable costs without fuel costs, 5607, 14% Fixed costs, 5535,
13% Investments, 17439, 43% Expenditure on fuel, 12449, 30% Natural Gas Fuel
Expenditure for Generation $2015 ,251 Power Plant Builds Power Plant Investment
Scenario MW ,498 $2015 ,897 Baseline Reference (BASE-) 10 NEW GENERATION ENTRY
TO THE SYSTEM The fact that the full constrained amount of solar and wind
capacity is selected by the model as part of the least cost solution for new
generation under this (and all) scenario() underscores the importance to Armenia
of ensuring  policy and institutional environment that supports realization of
new VRES generation to the maximum extent practicable, not only to ensure the
lowest cost generation but also to minimize reliance on other imported energy
sources and to strengthen Armenia’ energy security and competitiveness 11 BASE-:
GDP GROWTH SENSITIVITY ANALYSES GDP Nuclear Other Gas price Import/Export
Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid connected solar PV plant
are introduced to system The border gas price is assumed to increase, reaching
the European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same rate
thereafter +/- 50% growth as compared to BASE- scenario Electricity
import/export held constant at 2018 level through the end of planning period
(2036) ANPP life time extension through 2026 Hrazdan TTP decommissioned in 2021
Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is limited to ,500 MW for solar PV
and 500 MW for wind Annual maximum new capacity additions are capped at 100 MW
for central solar PV, / MW for Residential/ Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for
wind 12 BASE- GROWTH SENSITIVITIES: MAIN RESULTS 13 ADDITIONAL SCENARIOS
IDENTIFIED BY STAKEHOLDERS 14 NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS Nuclear Other Gas
price Import/Export Forced implementation of  new nuclear unit with installed
capacity 300 MW Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid connected
solar PV plant are introduced to system The gas price is assumed to increase,
reaching the European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same
rate thereafter Electricity import/ export held constant at 2018 level through
the end of planning period (2036) Forced implementation of  new nuclear unit
with installed capacity 600 MW Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is
limited to  GW for solar PV and  GW of wind Operating life extension of the ANPP
for an additional  years after 2027 - up to 2032 with additional $300 million
investment Annual maximum new VRES capacity additions are capped at 100 MW for
central solar PV, / MW for Residential/Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind
Operating life extension of the ANPP for an additional 10 years after 2027 - up
to 2037 with additional $600 million investment 15 NUCLEAR SCENARIOS: FURTHER
RESULTS 16 DIFFERENT TRENDS IN IMPORTED GAS PRICES Nuclear Import/Export Other
Gas price Electricity import/export held constant at 2018 level through the end
of planning period (2036) Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid
connected solar PV plant are introduced to system The gas price applies the EU
trend growth rate over the entire period to 2036 ANPP life time extension
through 2026 The gas price is assumed to grow to US$ 180 per 1000 m3 by 2027,
and then to remain fixed at that level until the end of the planning period
Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is limited to  GW for solar PV and
GW of wind Annual maximum new capacity additions are capped at 100 MW for
central solar PV, / MW for Residential/Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind
=> ,500 MW solar 500 MW wind 17 GAS PRICE SCENARIOS: MAIN RESULTS 18 FUEL
SWITCHING FROM GAS TO ELECTRICITY Gas4Electricity Other Gas price Import/Export
Increase in the penetration level for use of electric vehicles to 25% in 2027
and to 50% by 2036 Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid
connected solar PV plant are introduced to system The gas price is assumed to
increase, reaching the European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at
the same rate thereafter Electricity import/ export held constant at 2018 level
through the end of planning period (2036) Increase in the penetration level for
the use of electricity in residential heating to 25% in 2027 and to 50% by 2036
Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is limited to  GW for solar PV and
GW of wind Both of above scenarios combined Annual maximum new capacity
additions are capped at 100 MW for central solar PV, / MW for
Residential/Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind 19 GAS TO ELECTRICITY:
MAIN RESULTS 20 REDUCED GHG EMISSIONS SCENARIOS GHG Gas price Nuclear Other
Import/Export The gas price is assumed to increase, reaching the European prices
level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same rate thereafter Yerevan CCGT2
(RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid connected solar PV plant are introduced
to system ANPP life time extension through 2026 Cumulative GHG 127 Mt
Electricity import/export held constant at 2018 level through the end of
planning period (2036) GHG Target by 2030 Introduction of new VRES generation
capacity is limited to  GW for solar PV and  GW of wind Annual maximum new
capacity additions are capped at 100 MW for central solar PV, / MW for
Residential/ Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind 21 REDUCED GHG EMISSIONS:
MAIN RESULTS 22 FORCED IMPLEMENTATION OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY TARGETS SCENARIOS Gas
price Nuclear Other EE Import/Export The gas price is assumed to increase,
reaching the European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299 m3) and growing at the same
rate thereafter Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and Masrik- grid connected
solar PV plant are introduced to system Electricity import/export held constant
at 2018 level through the end of planning period (2036) ANPP life time extension
through 2026 25% reduced FEC Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is
limited to  GW for solar PV and  GW of wind Annual maximum new capacity
additions are capped at 100 MW for central solar PV, / MW for Residential/
Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind 23 ENERGY EFFICIENCY: MAIN RESULTS
Economic Sector GHG, kt CO2eq - ,486 - ,299 - ,322 - 100  467 Share in total 53%
30% 19% % % -% Transport Residential Commercial Industry Agriculture Power
Sector 24 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS (/) • The LCEDP results emphasize the
importance to Armenia of ensuring  policy and institutional environment to
support realization of new VRES generation to the maximum extent practicable •
This will not only ensure the lowest cost generation but also minimize reliance
on other energy sources and strengthen Armenia’ energy security and
competitiveness • Evaluating higher levels of economic growth introduced no
differences in new power plant capacities in level or by type required to cover
electricity demand through 2036 compared to the baseline • The only effect of
higher income growth was in increased use of existing installed capacity of both
VRES and gas-fired thermal power plants, with  concomitant increase in
expenditures on natural gas fuel 25 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS (/) • Scenarios for
life extension of the ANPP decrease total system cost and reduce GHG emissions
and imports of natural gas for electricity generation, while they increase total
investment costs for new generation capacity by around 12 - 15% compared to
BASE- • Scenarios with new nuclear units to replace the ANPP from 2027 increase
total system cost and reduce GHG emissions and imports of natural gas for
electricity generation, while they significantly increase the required total
investment costs for new power generation by 116 - 164%, compared to BASE- •
While life extension of the ANPP represents  least-cost policy choice for
continuing to maintain nuclear capacity in Armenia’ energy mix, such life
extensions must first and foremost always ensure that all measures required for
the continued safe and reliable operation of this older plant are fulfilled 26
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS (/) • While low gas prices reduce total energy costs,
the increased use of cheaper gas maintains and deepens Armenia’ dependence on
imported energy • Scenarios which imposed GHG emissions reduction targets to
meet the level defined in Armenia’ NDC largely mirror the “new nuclear”
scenarios, increasing total system cost and reducing in GHG emissions and
imports of natural gas for electricity generation, while leading to even larger
total investment costs for new power generation capacity than the nuclear
scenarios • Policies that would promote increased deployment of electric
vehicles and electricity for heating increase the utilization of expanded
domestic VRES, reduce reliance on imported gas and strengthen Armenia’ energy
security 27 Thank You for Your Attention This presentation is made possible by
the support of the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) The contents of this presentation are the sole
responsibility of Tetra Tech ES, Inc and do not necessarily reflect the views of
USAID or the United States Government 28