 Republic of Armenia Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program (SREP) Investment Plan
for Armenia April 2014 FOREWORD An affordable, secure and sustainable energy
supply is essential for the prosperity of the people of Armenia, and for the
growth of our economy Because of Armenia’ dependence on energy imports, energy
prices are largely beyond our control Over the past decade as we emerged from an
energy crisis, we learned the importance of developing our domestic energy
resources, and transformed our government institutions to support private sector
involvement in the energy industry In just  few years,  robust and thriving
small hydropower industry has emerged from these efforts Despite this success,
our energy sector remains vulnerable to price shocks and reliability problems,
and climate change continues to threaten our natural resources and well-being
Yet in the face of these risks, we have  great opportunity: much of Armenia’
conventional energy generation infrastructure will need to be replaced in the
coming years If we can replace some of this with indigenous renewable energy
resources, we can improve energy security while simultaneously reducing our
contributions to global climate change Furthermore, we can leverage our
scientific and technical talent to build domestic renewable energy industries
that will create new employment opportunities for years to come At this crucial
juncture, the Scaling-up Renewable Energy (SREP) Investment Plan will assist us
as we chart  new future for Armenia’ energy industry This Investment Plan
identifies the renewable energy technologies and projects that can best
contribute to the Government’ energy, economic and environmental development
goals As such it is an update and further elaboration of the Renewable Energy
Roadmap developed in It outlines the activities that must be carried out to
realize  new energy future by deploying technologies that have as of yet only
been implemented on  small scale, but which have enormous potential Particular
focus has been given to minimizing risk for private investors in renewable
energy, and to initiatives that can help reduce domestic consumption of imported
fuels SREP will support the Government in reaching its goals for the energy
sector, and help leverage private sector funds to exponentially expand
investment in clean, domestic energy resources Investment Plan was developed
collaboratively in The SREP consultation with representatives from Government,
private industry and academia Our development partners, the WBG, the EBRD, and
the ADB provided expertise and support that was critical to the successful
creation of the plan  thank these institutions and  look forward to their
continued support in this timely and important initiative Armen Movsisyan
Yerevan, April 2014 Table of Contents Proposal Summary    The Role of Renewable
Energy in Armenia SREP’ Role in Removing the Barriers to Renewable Energy in
Armenia  The Proposed Investment Program for Armenia  Country Context    Energy
Sector Framework Legal, Regulatory and Institutional Energy Supply and Demand
Electricity Cost and Pricing  Renewable Energy Sector Context       Analysis of
Renewable Energy Options Costs of Renewable Energy Barriers to Renewable Energy
Projects Government Strategy for the Renewable Energy Sector Role of the Private
Sector On-going and Planned Partners Investments by Development
Prioritization of Renewable Energy Technologies Program Description   Geothermal
Power Exploration and Development Utility-Scale Solar PV Project Development
Financing Plan and Instruments Responsiveness to SREP Criteria Additional
Development Activities Implementation Potential with Risk Assessment 10
Monitoring and Evaluation Appendices Annex  : Project Concept Briefs Annex  :
Assessment of Absorptive Capacity Annex  : Stakeholder Consultations Annex  :
Co-Benefits     11 12 16 20 22 22 26 31 37 38 38 41 45 46 50 54 56 58 59 62 64
84 88 90 Annex  : Existing Activities in the Field of Renewable Energy Annex  :
Assumptions Used in Estimating Levelized Energy Costs Annex  : Comments from
Independent Technical Reviewer 92 93 100 Tables Table : Renewable Energy
Generation Capacity and Production Targets  Table : Financing Plan Table :
Renewable Energy Resource Potential in Armenia by Technology Table  Power
Company Tariffs in Armenia,  (AMD/kWh) (excluding VAT) Table  Feed-in-Tariffs
for Renewable Energy Systems, 2013 (excluding VAT) Table : End-User Tariffs, VAT
inclusive Table : Renewable Energy Resource Potential in Armenia by Technology
Table : Concessional, Commercial and SREP/Commercial Financing Assumptions Table
: Levelized Energy Cost Ranges of Various Solar Power Technologies in Armenia,
Assuming Mixed SREP/Commercial Financing Table  Barriers to Renewable Energy
Development and Mitigation Options Table : Renewable Energy Generation Capacity
and Production Targets     20 21 21 22 27 31 33 37 Table : Ranking of Renewable
Technologies Against Selection Criteria 42 Table : Ranking of Renewable
Technologies Against Selection Criteria 43 Table : Indicative Financing Plan
Table : Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to SREP Criteria Table : Risk
Assessment of the SREP Program in Armenia Table : Results Framework for the SREP
Program in Armenia Table : Indicative Financing Plan for Geothermal Power
Project Table : Timeline for Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project Table :
Indicative Financing Plan for Utility-Scale Solar Power Project 55 56 59 63 68
69 79 Table : Indicative Financing Plan for Utility-Scale Solar Power Project
Figures Figure : Renewable Energy Resources Supply Curve for Armenia,
Commercial, Mixed Commercial/SREP and Concessional Financing Figure  Annual
Change in Real GDP,  Figure  Structure of the Electricity Sector of Armenia
Figure : Natural Gas Consumption by End-Use Figure  Natural Gas Import Price and
Domestic End-User Tariff,  Figure : Net Generation and Consumption,  Figure :
Forecast Gap between Installed Capacity and Winter Peak Demand Figure :
Renewable Energy Supply Curve for Armenia, Concessional Financing Assumptions,
LEC of Less Than US$10/kWh Figure : Renewable Energy Supply Curve for Armenia,
Commercial Financing Assumptions, LEC of Less than US$20/kWh Figure : Renewable
Energy Resources Supply Curve for Armenia, Commercial, Mixed Commercial/SREP and
Concessional Financing Figure : Renewable Energy Resources Average Supply Curve
for Armenia (Mixed Commercial/Concessional Financing) Figure : Comparative Cost
of Renewable and Non-Renewable Heating Technologies Figure : Solar Zones 80 10
11 15 17 17 19 19 27 28 29 30 31 74 Proposal Summary  This document contains the
Investment Plan (IP) for the Republic of Armenia The IP is the result of
extensive analysis led by the Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
(R2E2) and  wide-reaching internal and public consultation process, led by
government, to identify priorities in the development of renewable energy
technologies for electricity and heating The consultations included  wide range
of government agencies, as well as representatives from the private sector,
civil society, and academia The IP serves as an update and further elaboration
of the Renewable Energy Roadmap developed for Armenia in The Role of Renewable
Energy in Armenia  Armenia’ energy sector has made significant progress in the
last two decades The sector has moved from severe crisis—characterized by
crippling supply shortages, and near-financial bankruptcy of the sector—to
stability more characteristic of developed countries than emerging markets The
use and development of renewable energy has been an important part of the
transition from crisis to stability, and will remain important in the years to
come as demand grows and ageing thermal plants are retired The historic
importance of renewable energy in Armenia Armenia has no proven oil or natural
gas reserves and imports all of its fuel for thermal generation from Russia and
Iran The country relies on imported natural gas to generate roughly 30 percent
of its power and most of its heat Nuclear fuel, which is used to generate
another 30 percent of electricity in Armenia, is also imported The remaining
electricity is generated by  series of hydropower plants in the Sevan- Hrazdan
and Vorotan cascades, more than 130 small hydropower plants, and one small wind
farm Armenia’ dependence on imported fuels creates security of supply risks as
well as affordability problems for customers The sector is highly susceptible to
fuel supply interruptions and price volatility Between 1991 and 1996—because of
disruptions in gas supply—customers suffered through several of Armenia’ brutal
winters with little more than two hours of electricity supply per day Meanwhile,
the import price of natural gas has continued to increase The increases of the
price of imported gas meant steady increases in end-user tariffs for natural gas
and electricity Between 2005 and 2013, the end-user natural gas tariff increased
by 170 percent End-user residential tariffs for electricity increased 52 percent
during the same time period The Government of Armenia has worked for more than
decade to expand the use of renewable energy  2004 Law on Energy Savings and
Renewable Energy in 2004 provided for, among other things, the establishment of
the Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund (R2E2),  non-governmental
agency dedicated to promoting and facilitating renewable energy and energy
efficiency in Armenia R2E2, with the support of the World Bank and GEF,
implemented  Renewable Energy Program that helped to remove barriers to the
development of renewable energy generation, and create an enabling environment
for private investors The project was co-financed by EBRD and local private
financing institution  In 2007, the Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC)
set renewable energy feed-in tariffs for small hydropower plants (SHPPs), wind,
and biomass to stimulate private investment The feed-in tariff regime guarantees
purchase all of the power generated by renewable energy plants for 15 years
Tariffs are adjusted annually in line with changes in inflation and exchange
rates The feed-in tariff has been successful in attracting private investment in
more than 200 MW of small hydropower More recently, Government took steps to
streamline the process of developing renewable energy projects, including
relaxing tax obligations for some investments The future of renewable energy in
Armenia The historic threats to supply security and affordability are expected
to continue in Armenia Therefore, the Government’ commitment to developing
renewable energy remains as strong as before and there is now more urgency,
given  looming gap between supply and demand Demand grew at an average annual
rate of roughly  percent between 2004 and 2013, and is expected to continue to
grow at  rate of around  percent per year New supply will be needed since 50
percent of available capacity is more than 40 years old, and one of the largest
generating units in the system, the remaining nuclear unit at Metsamor, is in
urgent need of investments Metsamor’ retirement has been postponed twice, most
recently from 2021 until commissioning of the new nuclear power plant (expected
in 2026) because of the difficulty in securing financing for it If Metsamor is
retired in 2026, Armenia can expect  supply gap of roughly 830 MW, considering
the base-case forecast average annual peak demand growth of roughly  percent per
year Natural gas prices, too, are expected to increase Specifically, the import
price of natural gas could increase by more than 50 percent over the next 12
years depending on the domestic gas price increase in Russia and the US
inflation to which the Armenia border gas price is linked to This will affect
the cost of power generation The current average cost of generation in Armenia
is roughly US$ 035/kWh, but is set to increase to US$/kWh as gas prices
increase, and  new nuclear plant is brought online in The range reflects
different assumptions about the size of the new plant, and whether concessional
or commercial financing is used to finance it The above estimated range of
average generation cots suggest that geothermal power and utility-scale solar PV
may become cost-competitive options (see Figure ) for meeting forecast
electricity demand in Armenia The Government’ renewable energy strategy is
driven by the overarching goals of improving energy security, ensuring tariff
affordability, and maximizing the use of Armenia’ indigenous energy resources
2013 Decree of the President of Armenia approved an “Energy Security Concept”
for the country, which prioritizes the use of renewable energy resources The
Government’ Development Strategy for 2012- 2025 specifically calls for the
development of indigenous renewable energy resources Table  shows Government’
targets for various renewable energy technologies Excluding output from the
large hydroelectric plants, renewable energy generation represented roughly
percent of total generation in The Government’ target  is for such generation to
represent 21 percent of total generation by 2020, and 26 percent by Table :
Renewable Energy Generation Capacity and Production Targets 2020- 20301 Small
Hydro Wind Geothermal PV Total Capacity installed (MW) Generation (GWh) 2020
2025 2020 2025 377 50 50 40 492 397 100 100 80 677 ,049 ,106 117 373 88 232 745
176 ,627 ,259 The targets shown in Table  update the 2011 Renewable Energy
Roadmap for Armenia, developed in cooperation with R2E2, with the support of the
Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and the World Bank Targets have been updated
in this IP because  number of factors, global and local to Armenia, have changed
since the development of the Roadmap There is, for example, more information now
about the solar, geothermal, and wind resources in Armenia than there was when
the Roadmap was produced Wind resources, in particular, have shown to have lower
capacity factors than previously thought, making them more expensive on
levelized energy cost (LEC) basis Solar PV has, in contrast become more
attractive The capital costs of utility-scale solar PV projects have declined
substantially over the past few years, shifting more of the technically viable
solar potential toward financial viability As  consequence, Government’
priorities in the years to come are likely to shift away from wind and toward
solar PV  SREP’ Role in Removing the Barriers to Renewable Energy in Armenia
Armenia faces  number of barriers to the further development of renewable energy
SREP funding can be instrumental in helping to remove or at least weaken  number
of these barriers Barriers One of the most significant barriers to renewable
energy in Armenia is the high cost of investment relative to the currently low
cost electricity generation mix in the country Tariffs are low because many of
the thermal plants generating electricity are fully depreciated and need only to
recover variable costs This will change as new generation plants are brought
online and tariffs are raised to reflect their capital costs In the meantime,
however, the low cost of generation makes it difficult for consumers to
understand the need for higher-cost renewable energy generation which will
satisfy –at least initially—only  small portion of demand This is  barrier
Excludes generation from the large hydro cascades  of perception which, as
described below, Government can overcome with SREP’ assistance There are also
legitimate concerns about affordability The global economic crisis increased the
already high incidence of poverty in Armenia Between 2008 and 2010, the poverty
incidence increased from percent to percent of the population, and severe
poverty grew from percent to percent of the total population Energy poverty—in
which households spend more than 10 percent of their budgets on energy—affects
nearly 30 percent of Armenian households The poorest quintiles of the population
allocate  relatively higher share of their budgets to electricity than rural
households These households are likely to experience more significant pressures
on their budgets as  result of increased energy tariffs  recent World Bank study
has estimated that, when  new thermal plant is built, tariff increases could
result in increases in poverty of - percent, depending on the sources of
financing used, the gas price, and the technology (nuclear or gas) built first
Higher tariffs also have environmental consequences in Armenia The historical
experience in Armenia is that poorer, rural households have switched—at least
temporarily—to traditional fuels (mostly firewood, collected illegally) when
electricity and gas tariffs increase Armenia’ forests shrunk by roughly half
during the years of energy crisis, and now the forests cover only roughly 10
percent of total area of the country Another important barrier is the lack of
experience with many renewable energy technologies There is no experience
building and operating utility scale solar PV or geothermal in the country The
lack of experience creates, or reinforces several other barriers, namely: ; The
absence of regulatory incentives for certain technologies The Law on Energy
guarantees cost recovery through tariffs, but feed-in tariffs were never set for
some renewable energy technologies because of perceptions about cost and the
absence of long-term financing opportunities Solar PV, for example, was not
initially thought to be commercially viable, and so was not, until recent years,
priority in Armenia ; Limited capacity for equipment acquisition and
installation Limited experience with certain technologies limits the expansion
of solar PV and large scale geothermal It also substantially raises the costs of
doing first projects in these technologies ;  lack of technical capacity among
local financiers The success of the SHPP program is owed, in part, to the good
quality of technical assessments completed by local commercial banks in programs
supported by the World Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD) and Germany’ Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) Local commercial banks
do not, however, currently have capacity to assess other types of RE projects
The poor are defined as those with consumption per adult equivalent below the
upper general poverty line; the severely poor are defined as those with
consumption per adult equivalent below the lower general poverty line The
poverty line in 2010 was computed using the actual minimum food basket and the
estimated share of non- food consumption in ;  lack of confidence in certain
technologies The lack of experience with RE technologies makes potential
developers, property owners and energy users skeptical of these technologies and
uninclined to take the risk of being the first to use them ; Underdeveloped
local markets for certain technologies The lack of experience in certain
technologies also means that there are no markets for services or expertise
required to develop projects using certain technologies Whereas the technologies
themselves are typically imported, project development requires local expertise
in engineering design, procurement and installation The market for such services
is extremely thin in Armenia These barriers do not exist for all technologies,
nor do all of the barriers listed above affect any single technology There is
some experience, for example, with small hydro, wind, and biomass SREP’ Role in
removing barriers in this identified The Government is asking SREP for support
in facilitating the scaling-up of  subset Investment Plan The of renewable
energy technologies technologies were selected because they met  number of
criteria, identified through comprehensive analyses and stakeholder
consultations, which aligned well with SREP’ objectives Of these criteria, the
potential for scale-up of the technology, the cost-effectiveness of the
technology and the immaturity of the market were of key importance The
Government is not asking for support in markets, which are already developed
(such as small hydro), or technologies, which show limited scale- landfill gas)
The Government may seek to promote up potential (such as development of many of
these technologies on its own or through financing facilities already provided
through the multilateral development banks (MDBs), but has not requested SREP
support for them SREP support will be critical in reducing the cost of
technologies that lie at the threshold of competing with the expected future
cost of generation in Armenia As noted above, the next large thermal (gas or
nuclear) plants to be built in Armenia will be substantially higher cost than
current generating costs SREP funding can help overcome the perception that
high-cost renewable energy technologies are an unnecessary expense, as well as
concerns about affordability For technologies, such as geothermal power and
utility-scale solar PV, the initial projects will help to reduce resource and
performance risks, develop local markets and expertise, and provide Government
the impetus and opportunity to put in place reforms—in particular appropriate
tariffs—to support their development As experience with the new RE technologies
increases in Armenia, project development costs can be expected to decline, and
for some technologies, such as solar PV, local production may also emerge The
eventual development of service providers and, possibly, manufacturers of RE
technologies will have obvious follow-on benefits for Armenia’ economy as  whole
Finally, SREP support will be critical in creating  demonstration effect for
technologies that are relatively unknown in Armenia, and in funding directly—or
by attracting other donor funding for—capacity building  The Proposed Investment
Program for Armenia  The Government of Armenia, led by the Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources (MENR) and supported by the MDBs, has identified two areas
for strategic investment that would lead to scale-up The areas were identified
through comprehensive analysis of RE technologies and  participatory process
involving  wide range of government agencies, non-governmental organizations,
academic institutions, and the private sector The participatory process included
many one-on- one meetings,  workshop with the Government’ SREP working group, as
well as an open forum The technologies identified Each of the potential
renewable energy resources were evaluated against five criteria, and prioritized
accordingly The five criteria reflect the Government’ strategic objectives, and
the clear recognition that SREP funding should be used to overcome barriers to
technologies that will have the potential to have  transformative impact on the
energy sector The criteria considered were: cost- effectiveness of the
technology, the potential for scaling up the technology, the maturity of the
market, the potential for job creation, and the effect of each technology on the
stability of the grid Two investment priorities emerged from the analyses and
the discussions with stakeholders These are as follows:  Geothermal Power
Development SREP resources would be used for further exploration of Armenia’
most promising Karkar geothermal site (in the South- East), thereby, attempting
to demonstrate the viability of geothermal energy in Armenia if the exploratory
drilling at Karkar confirms availability and quality of resource for power
generation Of the known potential geothermal sites in Armenia, the Karkar site
has been the most comprehensively assessed through surface studies and was
assessed to be the highest-potential site to date, with possible output
estimated at around MW Exploratory drilling is required to confirm the
availability and quality of the resource for power generation By using SREP
grant funding for drilling, the Government can help reduce the risk of
developing the site If  geothermal resource exists at the site, this support can
help make geothermal power  financially attractive investment for private
investors and an affordable source of electricity This support will serve to
demonstrate the feasibility of geothermal power in Armenia and can catalyze
development of the other perspective geothermal sites  Development of Utility-
Scale Solar PV SREP resources would be used to develop roughly  MW of utility-
scale solar PV The rapid decline in solar PV costs in recent years has made
utility-scale solar PV more competitive with the other power generation options
available to Armenia Therefore, it is strategically  The exact commercial
arrangement will need to be developed through further consultation within
government, with donor partners, and with potential investors However, the
arrangement currently envisaged would involve  private operator having  BOT or
BOO agreement under which they finance, build and operate the power plants and
have  power purchase agreement with the transmission company, HVEN Government
would own the steam fields, thereby taking risk on the resource availability The
SREP funding would be used to hire  transaction advisor to help structure,
tender, and negotiate the BOT/BOO  beneficial for Armenia to develop its
capacity to scale-up this technology SREP support would help catalyze private
investment in first new plants, and show the potential for deploying solar PV on
commercial basis  utility-scale commercial project would not only enable the
country to take advantage of this technology in the future when its costs
decline even further, but reduce costs for future projects because of learning
effects Therefore, SREP support is sought to allow the Government to develop
solar projects The grant would be used for feasibility studies, including site
measurements and monitoring, and to develop projects itself Initial studies
indicate that the areas in the vicinity of Lake Sevan have some of the highest
solar irradiance in Armenia, and would be considered as  first potential area
for development, but more site-specific analyses will be needed to identify
specific projects Additional donor financing will be sought to complement the
SREP contribution, as well as private sector equity and commercial debt SREP
financing would be used in much the same way that MDB funds were used to
successfully jump-start the small hydropower industry in Armenia nearly  decade
ago The expectation is that, as with small hydropower, once the domestic
capacity to deploy solar PV is developed and the financial market is comfortable
with the technology, the market will take off The SREP contribution and donor
financing will also be essential to softening the effect on tariffs of the first
solar plants Table  presents  plan for financing the projects described in
Section  It shows the proposed contributions or grants from SREP as well as
estimates of the amounts anticipated from MDBs and the private sector As the
table shows, roughly US$40 million of SREP funding is expected to catalyze
nearly four times as much investment, most of it from the private sector (as
equity or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the MDBs  Table :
Financing Plan SREP Project Geothermal Development Project Preparation
Geothermal Resource Confirmation Transaction Advisory Services (structuring of
PPP for power plant) Investments in 28 MW plant Subtotal: Geothermal Development
Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV Grant for Project Preparation, Feasibility
studies, site measurement and monitoring Transaction Advisory Services
Investments in power plants (total of  MW) Subtotal: Development of Utility-
Scale Solar PV Grand Total SREP Leverage MDB Responsibl  Government of Armenia
SREP World Bank/ Asian Development Bank (Million US$) Private Sector (Equity)
Commercial / Private arms of MDBs - - - - - - - - tbd - - - - tbd tbd Total
1064 - - 00 00 00 - - 00 - - 50 00 50      tbd       00 00 00 50    WB (IBRD)
ADB   WB (IBRD)   Assuming Flash cycle design of the plant Source of capital
cost estimate: “Economic and Financial Appraisal of the Potential Geothermal
Power Plant at Karkar ,” Nov 2012; GeoFund : Armenia Geothermal Project  Scale-
up potential The scale-up potential of each RE technology in Armenia depends
ultimately on how much of  resource is available, how much of that resource is
commercially viable, and what the transmission grid can sustain Table  shows the
total estimated technical potential for renewable energy technologies in Armenia
Table : Renewable Energy Resource Potential in Armenia by Technology Technology
Capacity (MW) Generation (GWh/yr) Wind Utility scale solar PV Concentrating
solar power (CSP) Distributed solar PV Geothermal powerb Landfill gas Small
hydropower Biogas Biomass Total (electricity) Solar thermal hot water Geothermal
heat pumps Total (heat) 300 830 – ,200a ,200 ,300 650 ,700 – ,100a ,400 ,800 at
least 150 at least ,100  100  30 20 340 30 230 ,800 –,300 ,400 – ,700 / / 260
,430 ,690  The resource potential depends on which solar PV technology is
deployed: Fixed PV, Single-Axis Tracking PV or Concentrating PV  Assumes flash
technology is used The actual capacity cannot be known without exploratory
drilling The geothermal capacity estimates are based on results of estimates for
three potential sites, for which some geo-technical information was available
The potential can be significantly larger given several other potential sites,
which have not been explored at all  Solar PV and CSP were evaluated as options
for development in the same areas Therefore, the total resource potential
includes only the generating potential for one of these technologies (Solar PV)
For this reason, the total is not the same as the sum of the resource potential
listed for each technology Not all of this technical potential will be
ultimately commercially viable As noted above, the cost of generation in Armenia
is likely to increase substantially as new thermal or nuclear generation is
brought on line and older thermal plants are retired Figure  shows  supply curve
of the cost of renewable power resources in Armenia assuming concessional,
commercial and mixed financing assumptions By way of reference, Armenia’ average
cost of generation is expected to range from  USD$08/kWh – US$19/kWh when  new
nuclear plant is put into service in Solar is not yet cost competitive under
purely commercial financing assumptions, but the combination of several factors
could make it more so in the near future The factors include: () new, higher-
cost thermal plants being built to serve demand in Armenia; (ii) lower solar
installation costs that will result as  domestic industry develops around it;
(iii) lower financing costs as lenders become more comfortable with the
technology, and (iv) potential further reductions in the global costs of PV
panels SREP support can help Armenia nurture its solar industry so that, as
these factors converge, Armenia can look to utility-scale solar as  commercially
viable alternative to some thermal power generation Figure : Renewable Energy
Resources Supply Curve for Armenia, Commercial, Mixed Commercial/SREP and
Concessional Financing
___________________________________________________________________________  As
noted above, the cost depends on the size of the plant, and whether concessional
or commercial financing is used to finance it 10 Country Context  The Republic
of Armenia is  mountainous, landlocked country of 30 thousand km2 located in the
South Caucasus region of Eurasia Armenia borders Georgia in the North,
Azerbaijan in the East, Turkey in the West, and Iran in the South Prior to the
fall of the USSR, Armenia was  Soviet Republic for 70 years Armenia gained
independence in Armenia has  population of  million and  population density of
102 people per km2 It is one of the most densely populated countries in the
region The majority of the population lives in urban areas and approximately 38
percent of the population lives in the capital city, Yerevan From 2000 to 2010,
the population of Armenia decreased by an average of  percent annually and
increased by  percent from 2010 to Population growth is projected to remain flat
in coming years, and the World Bank projects population increase of less than
percent by Armenia experienced strong economic growth in , but was severely
affected by the global financial crisis Real GDP grew, on average, percent
annually from 2002 to 2008, but declined percent in Armenia has experienced
moderate growth since 2009, but, despite annual increases, growth rates have not
recovered to pre-crisis levels Figure  shows the annual change in real GDP from
2002 to Figure  Annual Change in Real GDP,  Source: The World Bank, “World
Development Indicators,” accessed  July The main drivers of economic growth in
Armenia include: construction, retail services, mining, manufacturing and
agriculture These sectors were some of the hardest hit by the financial crisis,
with construction and agriculture remaining  The Government of the Republic of
Armenia, “Geography,”   The Government of the Republic of Armenia,
“Demographics,”   The World Bank, “World Development Indicators Database,”
Accessed August The World Bank, “Health Nutrition and Population Statistics:
Population estimates and projections Database,” Accessed August 11 depressed in
the post-crisis period Poverty levels also increased as  result of the crisis,
with the percentage of the population living below the poverty line increasing
from percent in 2008 to 35 percent in 10 Urban areas other than Yerevan host the
largest share of the approximately  million poor in Armenia Targeted social
assistance, such as the Poverty Family Benefit Program (PFBP), has helped
mitigate the poverty impacts of the global crisis Poverty among FB recipients
increased by  percent in 2008 to 2010 compared to the 30 percent increase for
the population as  whole Energy poverty affects almost 30 percent of Armenian
households Energy poverty refers to households spending more than 10 percent of
their budgets on energy Armenia’ targeted social assistance program, known as
the Poverty Family Benefit Program (PFBP), helps to reduce poverty among
vulnerable households Government has also used the PFBP in conjunction with
other measures, to help alleviate energy poverty Beginning in 2011,  lifeline
tariff for natural gas consumption was introduced for PFBP beneficiaries11
Energy Sector Legal, Regulatory and Institutional Framework The energy sector is
expected to play  critical role in achieving the strategic objectives of the
Government of Armenia (GoA) in coming years Section  describes the GoA’
strategic objectives for the energy section and the importance of the energy
sector in achieving national development objectives Section  describes the
institutional and legal framework of the energy sector of Armenia  Strategic
Objectives of the Government of Armenia Energy security is  central concern of
several strategic planning documents in Armenia The 2013 National Energy
Security Concept outlines the GoA' strategies for achieving energy security
through fuel diversification, building up fuel reserves the promotion, and
development and investment in renewable energy technologies as critical to
Armenia diversifying its energy supply and achieving energy independence reserve
generation capacity The Concept identifies The Armenian Development Strategy
(ADS) and National Security Strategy (NSS) also emphasize the importance of
renewable energy and energy efficiency in addressing energy security The ADS and
the NSS outline the GoA strategic objectives for economic growth, poverty
reduction, and national security Both policies highlight the fundamental
importance of the energy sector in achieving these objectives Strategic
objectives of the ADS and NSS for the energy sector in the  time period are: ;
Increase of energy security; 10 National Statistical Service of the Republic of
Armenia, "Statistical Yearbook of Armenia, ,"  11 The poor covered by PFBP were
given discounts on their natural gas consumption From April , 2011 to March 31,
2013, the discount applied to the first 300 cubic meters consumed From April ,
2013 till July , 2013, the discount applied to the first 75 cubic meters
consumed From July , 2013 to December 31, 2014 the discount applied to the first
450 cubic meters 12 ; Development of renewable energy, including increased
efficiency of existing hydropower potential and creation of alternative sources
of energy supply; ; Improvement of system reliability; ; Development of regional
trade; ; Replacement of depreciated power plants; ; Promotion of energy
efficiency; ; Further development of nuclear energy Several energy sector
strategic documents identify concrete targets for achieving the GoA’ stated
objectives in the sector These documents include: () Energy Sector Development
Strategy within the Context of the Economic Development in Armenia, approved by
the GoA in 2005, (ii) the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy, approved in 2007, and (iii) the Action Plan of the MENR of the Republic
of Armenia in line with the National Security Strategy, approved in  The History
of Sector Reforms Armenia’ energy sector has made significant progress in the
last two decades The sector has moved from severe crisis—characterized by
crippling supply shortages, and near-financial bankruptcy of the sector—to
stability more characteristic of developed countries than emerging markets In
1992, customers had only - hours of electricity supply per day; most households
depended on firewood or electricity for heating Fiscal and quasi-fiscal
subsidies for the energy sector were  major drain on the state—about 11 percent
of gross domestic product (GDP) Collections were around 50 percent, and nearly
25 percent of all power produced disappeared before the meters as commercial
losses (mostly electricity theft) Since 1996, 24-hour electricity service has
been restored and gradually customers have switched to cheaper, more efficient
gas heating Meanwhile, tariff increases and operating efficiency improvements
have helped create commercially viable service providers, technical and non-
technical losses have decreased, and collections have increased Now the energy
sector is one of the largest taxpayers in Armenia Supply security has also
improved with new regional gas and electricity interconnections, thermal plant
construction and rehabilitation, and growth in renewable energy generating
capacity (primarily small hydro)  series of ambitious reforms made this
transition possible The principal reforms were: ; Unbundling and privatization
of the power sector By March 1995, efforts began on unbundling the power system
and privatizing the power sector; Armenergo, the state-owned vertically
integrated utility, was separated into generation and distribution entities In
March 1997,  Presidential Order and new Energy Law formalized separate
generation, distribution, transmission and dispatch During , ownership of
several major generating plants was transferred from the Government in exchange
for US$96 million in state debt forgiveness 13 ; Establishment of  sector
Regulator  Presidential Order and the Energy Law enacted in 1997 established an
independent energy sector regulator, the Armenian Energy Regulatory Commission
(AERC) The Law on the Regulatory Body for Public Services, enacted in 2004,
changed the name of the regulator to the Public Services Regulatory Commission
(PSRC) and expanded its authority including water, drainage and sewage,
telecommunications, and rail transport to other sectors, ; Supporting financial
sustainability Three steps were essential to increase collections, reduce
commercial losses and improve the overall financial sustainability of the sector
These included: – Installing meters Between 1997 and 1998, twelve thousand new
tamper- proof meters were installed throughout the power system at  variety of
voltage levels down to  kV Residential customer meters were relocated to public
areas An Automated Metering and Data Acquisition System (AMDAS) was installed in
2001 and linked to  settlement center to facilitate accurate meter reading at
the 110 kV and above – Bringing tariffs to cost recovery levels In 1994, Armenia
began  gradual transition to cost-based tariffs by bring household tariffs to
the average level of other retail tariffs  schedule was established for further
household tariff hikes Since 1999, household tariffs have generally remained
well above the overall average tariff – Increasing transparency in collections
and billing The Electricity Distribution Company (EDC) installed  computerized
customer information system to better track utilization and billing In 1999, the
EDC established  new collection scheme requiring bill payments at post offices
instead of cash payments at local EDC offices, which reduced opportunities for
collusion between customers and EDC inspectors The use and development of
renewable energy has also been an important part of the transition from crisis
to stability In 2007, the PSRC set renewable energy feed-in tariffs to stimulate
private investment in renewable energy The feed-in tariff, and MDB financing
through local banks, helped to jump-start  previously non-existent small
hydropower industry The framework for renewable energy feed-in tariffs is
described in more detail in Section  In 2004, Government passed the Law on
Energy Saving and Renewable Energy This is the main legal act on renewable
energy in Armenia Its main objectives were to: ; Strengthen the economic and
energy independence and security of Armenia ; Increase the reliability of energy
systems in Armenia ; Establish and develop industrial infrastructure and service
organizations for promoting energy saving and RE ; Reduce adverse impacts on the
environment and human health as  result of technological developments The Law
also provided for the establishment of the R2E2 Fund The R2E2 Fund was formed in
The role of the R2E2 Fund is discussed in more detail in Section  14
Institutional Framework in the Energy Sector The MENR and the PSRC are the key
entities regulating the energy sector The MENR is responsible for developing
primary legislation and main policy documents guiding energy sector activities,
including system planning and investment planning for state-owned entities The
Ministry of Finance approves allocation of financing for public and publicly-
guaranteed energy sector investments recommended by the MENR The PSRC regulates
the water, electricity and natural gas sectors, and as part of its
responsibilities, sets both end-user and supply-side power sector tariffs The
PSRC allows for recovery of power system investment costs through the tariff The
electricity sector consists of nine publicly and privately-owned generation
companies, one state-owned transmission company, one privately-owned
distribution company,  state-owned system operator and  state-owned settlement
center The gas sector remains vertically integrated ArmRusGazprom, the gas
company fully owned by the Russia’ Gazprom, imports gas from Russia and Iran,
and owns and operates the gas transmission and distribution networks in Armenia
Figure  shows the structure of the electricity sector in Armenia Figure
Structure of the Electricity Sector of Armenia Armenia’ market framework is
based on the “single buyer model” with regulated tariffs for generation,
transmission, and distribution Under this market framework, the Electricity
Networks of Armenia (ENA) acts as the single buyer of electricity through
contracts with generating companies at prices regulated by the PRSC The
Settlement Center monitors energy flows and ensures timely payment delivery
between all sector entities The System Operator dispatches generators taking
into account the economic dispatch order of plants as well as plants’
operational constraints In the renewable energy sector, the R2E2 Fund plays
critical role The R2E2 Fund is an independent organization which facilitates
investments in renewable energy by sponsoring renewable energy studies and
projects, and supporting local renewable 15 the project implemented energy
companies and stakeholders Among numerous other projects, the R2E2 Fund in
Armenia, comprehensive surface exploration at the Karkar geothermal site, as
well as the assessment of hydropower resource potential and the evaluation of
the potential for solar PV manufacturing and bioethanol production in Armenia,
and some other renewable energy related studies for development of SHPPs Energy
Supply and Demand  Armenia relies on electricity and gas to meet the majority of
its energy consumption needs The industrial, residential and transport sectors
account for 85 percent of final energy consumption in Armenia12 Industry relies
on  combination of electricity and gas to meet its energy needs Residential
households rely on  mix of electricity and gas for heating, cooking and hot
water and electricity for lighting and other household appliance The transport
sector relies on oil and gas with 75 percent of the automobile and truck fleet
using compressed natural gas (CNG) The following subsections describe energy
consumption in Armenia in further detail Sections  and  describe the supply and
demand characteristics of gas/heating and electricity, respectively  Gas and
Heating Armenia has no proven oil or natural gas reserves and imports most of
its fossil fuel resources from Russia and Iran ArmRusGazprom, 100% owned by
Gazprom, and the state-owned Yerevan TPP are the only companies import gas
ArmRusGazprom is the sole distributor of natural gas in Armenia The company
manages 10,483 km of gas pipelines and has approximately 640,000 consumers13 The
residential sector is the largest consumer of natural gas in Armenia, followed
by industry, electricity generating plants, and transportation Figure  shows the
breakdown of natural gas consumption in Armenia, by sector14 licensed to 12
Energy Institute of Armenia, Energy Consumption Data, 13 PSRC The Gas Sector of
Armenia  Gas system in Armenia-ENGLISHpdf 14  16 Figure : Natural Gas
Consumption by End-Use Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission The import
price of natural gas from Russia increased consistently in recent years, which
has resulted in steady increases in domestic end-user tariffs for natural gas
From 2005 to 2013, the end-user natural gas tariff increased by 164 percent15
Figure  shows the import price of natural gas and the natural gas tariff for
domestic end- users from 2005 to Figure  Natural Gas Import Price and Domestic
End-User Tariff,  Note: End-user represents low use customer consuming less than
10,000 cm per month Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission of the
Republic of Armenia (PSRC),  15 For end-user consuming less than 10,000 cm per
month 16 Fluctuations in the end-user tariff in USD that are not correlated with
fluctuations in the import price of natural gas are caused by annual AMD to USD
exchange-rate fluctuations 17 Armenian households heat primarily with natural
gas and electricity Armenia’ district heating network, which used to provide
heat supply for roughly 55 percent of Armenia households, has fallen into
disrepair Many heat supply companies went bankrupt and closed following the
economic and energy blockade that occurred during the early 1990s As  result,
many households switched to individual heating solutions using electricity and,
more recently, natural gas In , the share of natural gas in the heating fuel mix
has increased from 10 percent to 70 percent, displacing firewood, electricity
and other fuels, thanks to  rehabilitation and extension of the gas distribution
network  Electricity Armenia’ electricity system has ,319 MW of installed
capacity, and ,530 MW of available generating capacity Electricity is produced
by three generation sources: nuclear (roughly 30 percent), thermal (roughly 30
percent), and hydropower (nearly 40 percent) Available capacity is low compared
to installed capacity because due to the age and poor condition of many
generating plants, significant share of installed generating capacity is non-
operational Roughly 50 percent of available capacity is more than 40 years old17
Many of the largest generating assets will need to be retired soon The
Government has already discontinued operation of old and inefficient units at
Yerevan TPP and plans to retire the old units at the Hrazdan TPP by The nuclear
plant is scheduled to remain online until 2026 because of  lack of alternatives,
although it will require approximately US$300 million of investments to continue
functioning The share of thermal and hydropower plants in the capacity and
production mix has increased in recent years because new plants have been built
and Armenia has experienced good hydrological conditions over the past several
years The NPP provides baseload capacity Other HPPs, including the Vorotan
Cascade and several HPPs in the Sevan-Hrazdan Cascade, provide daily load
regulation, while thermal plants operate to meet shoulder peak especially in the
winter and to serve baseload for several weeks in autumn when the NPP goes
offline for maintenance The Hrazdan- and Yerevan CCGT plants also generate
electricity for export under the gas for electricity swap arrangement with Iran
Demand grew steadily over the past decade, but dropped in 2008 as  result of the
global financial crisis Electricity consumption in Armenia grew  percent
annually from 2004–2008, but consumption fell  percent in 2009 as  result of the
financial crisis Consumption has since increased, growing  percent and  percent
in 2012 and 2013, respectively18 Figure  shows Armenia’ electricity balance
including net generation, consumption, exports, imports and transmission and
distribution losses 17 Estimated based on available capacity of plants greater
than 10 MW 18 PSRC Main Characteristics Indicators 18 Figure : Net Generation
and Consumption,  Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission Given the growth
in demand and the need to retire ageing generating assets, Armenia will
potentially face  capacity gap to meet the peak At least 170 MW of new capacity
will be needed by 2018 to meet peak demand and maintain an adequate reserve
margin An additional 830 MW of new capacity will be needed starting from 2026
when the existing NPP is retired Figure  shows the expected gap between
generation and consumption Figure  shows the expected gap between available
capacity and winter peak demand Figure : Forecast Gap between Installed Capacity
and Winter Peak Demand Source: MENR 19 Electricity Cost and Pricing  The PSRC is
responsible for setting and reviewing tariffs in the electricity sector,
including tariffs for all companies in the sector as well as end-user tariffs
According to the Energy Law,  tariff should cover: ; Justified operation and
maintenance costs ; Loan service costs ; Costs related to environmental
standards ; Mothballing and preservation costs ; Technical and commercial losses
; Costs of the safe-keeping of the utilized nuclear fuel and requisite
allocations to the Nuclear Plant Decommissioning Fund ; Reasonable profit ;
Other justified costs as provided by Legislation The PSRC or the Licensee can
request  tariff review every six months Once requested,  tariff review request
must be submitted within 90 days The PSRC is authorized to set long-term tariffs
for more than six-months if it is considered necessary to provide investment
security Once  tariff is set, licensees cannot appeal the size of  tariff The
only recourse for altering an assigned tariff is to petition the PSRC’ tariff
methodology Table  shows power company tariffs in Armenia from 2009 to Table
Power Company Tariffs in Armenia,  (AMD/kWh) (excluding VAT) 2009 2010 2011 2012
2013 Hrazdan- Yerevan CCGT Hrazdan TPP Yerevan TPP / / 559 520 Sevan-Hrazdan 802
Vorotan ANPP 448 525 Generation / / 851 379 983 868 963 Transmission / 657 997 /
866 35 428 65 328 219 / 56 778 658 07 47 / 581 914 830 HVEN 891 710 827 3322
0657 Distribution ENA 134 200 152 338 786 Source: Public Services Regulatory
Commission of the Republic of Armenia (PSRC), “Calculation of Electricity
Tariffs,”  In 2007, the PSRC set renewable energy feed-in tariffs to stimulate
private investment in renewable energy New generating plants sign 15-year power
purchase agreement (PPA) under which ENA is obliged to pay the generator for all
the power produced According to the feed-in tariff methodology, the PSRC must
adjust feed-in tariffs annually in line with changes in inflation and the USD to
AMD exchange rate Table  shows current feed-in-tariffs for all renewable energy
systems in Armenia Table  Feed-in-Tariffs for Renewable Energy Systems, 2013
(excluding VAT) RE Technology Wind Biomass Small hydro-power built on “natural
water systems” Small hydro-power built on irrigation systems Small hydropower
built on “drinking water supply systems” Source: PSRC Feed-in Tariff AMD/kWh
US$/kWh 957 856 287 523 017 08 09 05 03 02 The PSRC also sets tariffs for end-
users End-user tariffs are time-differentiated tariffs in which users pay
different day-time and night-time rates In July of 2013, the PSRC increased end-
users tariffs for the first time since Table  shows current end-user tariffs in
Armenia Table : End-User Tariffs, VAT inclusive Residential  kV  (10) kV 35+ kV
Day 38 38 35 29 (AMD/kWh) Night 28 28 25 25 Source: Public Services Regulatory
Commission of the Republic of Armenia (PSRC), “Electric Power Tariffs,” accessed
July  21 Renewable Energy Sector Context  Armenia has significant indigenous
renewable energy resources, and an educated workforce with extensive scientific
and engineering expertise Furthermore, the Government has taken proactive steps
in recent years to craft laws and regulations designed to reform the power
sector to enable private sector involvement in renewable energy technology
development However, Armenia’ renewable energy sector faces  number of important
barriers to renewable energy deployment, primarily related to the availability
of financing, the regulatory framework for renewable energy, the high cost of
renewable energy technologies and public awareness of the potential benefits of
renewable energy technologies This section describes Armenia’ renewable energy
sector, and includes an assessment of the potential for different renewable
energy options,  description of Armenia’ business environment for renewable
energy, as well as  description of the barriers facing renewable energy
development in Armenia  Analysis of Renewable Energy Options An assessment of
available data on renewable energy resources in Armenia was carried out to
support the preparation of the IP This section details the results of that
assessment and describes progress to date on deploying renewable energy
technologies in Armenia Table  shows the total estimated technical potential for
renewable energy in Armenia Table : Renewable Energy Resource Potential in
Armenia by Technology Technology Capacity (MW) Generation (GWh/yr) Wind Utility
scale solar PV Concentrating solar power (CSP) Distributed solar PV Geothermal
powerb Landfill gas Small hydropower Biogas Biomass Total (electricity) Solar
thermal hot water Geothermal heat pumps Total (heat) 300 830 – ,200a ,200 ,300
650 ,700 – ,100a ,400 ,800 at least 150 at least ,100  100  30 20 340 30 230
,800 –,300 ,400 – ,700 / / 260 ,430 ,690  The resource potential depends on
which solar PV technology is deployed: Fixed PV, Single-Axis Tracking PV or
Concentrating PV 22  Assumes flash technology is used The actual capacity cannot
be known without exploratory drilling The geothermal capacity estimates are
based on results of estimates for three potential sites, for which some geo-
technical information was available The potential can be significantly larger
given several other potential sites, which have not been explored at all  Solar
PV and CSP were evaluated as options for development in the same areas
Therefore, the total resource potential includes only the generating potential
for one of these technologies (Solar PV) For this reason, the total is not the
same as the sum of the resource potential listed for each technology  Small
Hydropower Small hydropower is the most widespread renewable energy technology
deployed to date in Armenia except for large hydropower Small hydropower
contributes approximately  percent of Armenia’ annual electricity generation As
of April 2013, Armenia had 136 small hydropower plants (small HPPs) with  total
capacity of 221 MW and annual generation of 665 GWh Roughly 60 percent of this
capacity has been added since Additionally, the PSRC has licensed the
construction of 77 new projects, which could potentially add approximately 168
MW of small HPP capacity and 592 GWh of annual generation19 Over 90 MW of
undeveloped small hydropower projects with  potential for generating almost 300
GWh have been identified throughout Armenia in addition to the operating and
licensed projects  Wind Armenia has  number of areas with promising wind
resources The most promising areas that have been identified and characterized
to date are Zod Pass, Karakach Pass, Pushkin Pass, Sisian Pass and the Fontan
region Together these sites are estimated to have 150 MW of developable resource
potential, with estimated capacity factors ranging from 21 to 31 percent,
depending on the site20 The private companies Zodwind and Arenergy have
completed feasibility studies for wind plants in Armenia Two other private
companies, SolarEn and MVV-Decon, have conducted wind measurement projects
However, to date no private companies has moved forward with wind plant
development in Armenia Armenia’ only operating wind project is the 64 MW Lori
plant Lori- was built in in December 2005 under  grant from Iran The plant has
capacity factor of approximately 11 percent and generates  GWh per year21
Geothermal Power Armenia has no installed geothermal power plants, but
comprehensive geo-technical studies suggest that geothermal resources suitable
for power production may exist at  number of sites, including the most promising
Karkar, Jermaghbyur, and Grizor 19 Public Services Regulatory Commission of
Armenia, “Construction of small hydro companies operating indicators” and “Main
Indicators of Producing small hydroelectric power companies operating” April ,
2014 20 R2E2, “Renewable Energy Roadmap for Armenia Task  Report,” May 2011 21
USAID, “Wind Energy In Armenia: Overview of Potential and Development
Perspectives,” March 2010 23 confirmed sites, as well as along the Armenian-
Georgian border In , comprehensive surface investigation works were conducted
for Karkar site, including field scouting, magneto-telluric sounding (MT),
independent interpretation of MT results, three- dimensional (3D) MT sounding,
independent interpretation of the results of 3D MT sounding as well as early-
stage economic and financial appraisal Evidence from these activities indicates
that  geothermal resource exists at the site, and can only be conclusions and
recommendations of those studies were also reviewed by  third party – Iceland
Geosurvey (ISOR), which confirmed the robustness of the methodology for the
above studies and the key conclusion that exploratory drilling is needed to
confirm the resource and its characteristics The World Bank/ESMAP Global
Geothermal Development Plan TA Program supported the Government to prepare
drilling program for Karkar site, including test well options, drilling and
associated consulting services required, contracting arrangements, and costs
through exploratory drilling The key The Total geothermal resource potential of
three geothermal sites that were explored to some extend has been estimated to
be at least 150 MW However, it is important to note that because of the limited
exploratory activities and information about Armenia’ geothermal resources, this
is  very rough estimate, which relates only to three potential sites for which
information was available, and the actual geothermal resource potential could be
much larger  Solar PV Armenia has good solar PV resources, with annual average
global horizontal irradiation (GHI) ranging from ,490 kWh/m2 to over ,100 kWh/m2
By comparison, average annual GHI in Europe is ,000 kWh/ The total resource
potential for utility-scale solar PV is over ,500 MW Assuming polycrystalline
solar PV modules mounted at  fixed angle to the sun are deployed in ground-
mounted utility-scale plants, solar PV systems could achieve capacity factors of
20 to 24 in Armenia (dependent on location) If single-axis tracking solar PV
technology is deployed, capacity factors could be as high as 30 percent In
addition to utility-scale solar PV, distributed solar PV mounted on building
rooftops could also be deployed throughout Armenia, although these plants would
likely have higher costs and lower capacity factors than large-scale, ground-
mounted plants Solar PV deployment in Armenia to date has been limited to
relatively small-scale rooftop-based installations at schools, hospitals, office
buildings and municipal sites throughout Armenia22 It is estimated that less
than 100 kW of solar PV is currently operational23 22 USAAA/US
Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF, “Use of Renewable Energy Sources in the World and
Armenia Through Innovations to Clear Technologies,” 2010 23 Preparation of
Renewable Energy Development Roadmap for the Republic of Armenia Task  Report,”
February 2011 24  Concentrating Solar PV and Concentrating Solar Thermal Power
Although Armenia has good resources for solar PV, Armenia receives relatively
low direct normal locations where irradiation (DNI) compared to most of the
concentrating solar thermal power (CSP) is successfully deployed24 Armenia’
annual DNI ranges from ,410 kWh/m2 to ,453 kWh/m2 The minimum DNI level
threshold for viability for CSP plants that is generally accepted in the
industry is ,200 kWh/m2 Only one area in the South-Eastern corner of Lake Sevan
receives DNI above this threshold However, overall Armenia has rather poor
resources for CSP and for this reason this technology is not considered  viable
option for development Concentrating solar PV (CPV) also does not appear to be
favorable technology option in Armenia compared with the other available solar
PV technologies Like CSP, CPV also takes advantage of DNI resources An analysis
of the theoretical performance of CPV plants deployed in Armenia revealed that
CPV is expected to have lower capacity factors than flat-plate solar PV
installations (fixed axis or single- axis tracking), and CPV is also expected to
have higher capital costs than these technologies  Biomass Armenia’ biomass
resources that could potentially be used for power generation consist of
forestry residues (fallen wood and sanitary cuttings) and crop residues from
grain farming Dedicated energy crops have also been considered as  potential
biomass resource in Armenia, but preliminary estimates suggest that cultivating
crops for fuel would be very high-cost The biomass resource assessment suggests
that there are sufficient forestry residues to support   MW power plant in
Armenia and sufficient grain crop residues to support  25 MW power plant
However, it would be necessary to transport forestry and crop from all around
the country to central locations and there is currently no established
infrastructure to do this Therefore, it is expected that it would be
logistically difficult to collect biomass resources for power generation, and
that the collection costs from transporting the fuel would make fuel costs very
high  Biogas Armenia has the potential for biogas-based power production at
livestock farms, at the Nubarashen landfill (in the city of Yerevan) and at the
Aeratsia wastewater treatment plant (in the city of Yerevan) In 2010, the
GEF/UNDP identified three livestock farms as potential candidates for biogas-to-
energy projects, with  24 Direct Normal Insolation (DNI) is energy that travels
directly from the sun without interruption Rays of direct insolation are
parallel, and concentrating solar collectors (both concentrating PV and
concentrating solar power) collect the parallel rays onto  receiver Solar energy
which is not direct is called diffuse insolation, and it is carried by rays
which have been scattered or reflected Concentrating solar collectors are unable
to collect these oblique rays of diffuse insolation, but flat plate collectors
(solar PV) can absorb both DNI and diffuse insolation and convert them to usable
energy The DNI is relatively low in Armenia compared to other parts of the world
where concentrating solar is being deployed This means that in Armenia more of
the energy of the sun is scattered by clouds or haze before it can hit  solar
collector Additionally, Armenia’ latitude causes the sun to stay lower in the
sky than in other parts of the world The lower sun means that the direct
insolation must pass through more atmosphere and so the energy is ’diluted’ by
striking the solar collector at an angle 25 combined resource potential of  MW
These plants would be similar to the Lusakert biogas plant, which is Armenia’
only operating industrial-scale biogas-to- energy plant, located at the Lusakert
poultry farm In 2001,  consortium of Japanese companies began studying the
potential for  landfill gas-to-energy plant at the Nubarashen landfill Although
eventually the consortium installed  methane gas flare plant instead of an
energy project, more recent assessments have identified the potential for
building up to   MW landfill gas-to-energy plant at the facility The other
potential source of biogas energy in Armenia is the Aeratsia wastewater
treatment plant The plant is currently dilapidated and largely non-functioning,
but if the plant were to undergo significant rehabilitation and anaerobic
digesters are installed at the facility, it is expected that   MW cogeneration
plant could be constructed at the facility  Geothermal Heating/Cooling
Technologies Armenia has significant potential for geothermal heating and
cooling in residential buildings If land is available, geothermal heat pumps
could theoretically be deployed anywhere and could cover  large portion of
Armenia’ space heating and cooling load Furthermore, Armenia is estimated to
have high quality geothermal resources The coefficient of performance (COP) for
geothermal heating in Armenia is reportedly  to  By comparison, the average COP
in Russia is around 25 Only one existing large-scale geothermal heating project
has been implemented in Armenia In 2009, an 860 kW geothermal heat pump was
installed at  commercial building in Northern Avenue in Yerevan  Solar Thermal
Heating Technologies There is significant potential for solar thermal hot water
heating technologies in Armenia This technology has been deployed in  number of
demonstrations over the past decade, but the total penetration is small (less
than  MW of total installed capacity) and the technology has yet to gain
widespread commercial acceptance26 Recent solar thermal heating projects in
Armenia include the implementation of GEF-funded systems at  housing development
and  school in the Shirak region27  Costs of Renewable Energy The comparative
cost of renewable energy technologies is an important factor when determining
their viability and attractiveness for inclusion in Armenia’ energy portfolio
This section presents supply curves that show the levelized energy costs 25 The
coefficient of performance is the ratio of the amount of energy recovered from
geothermal heating system to the amount of energy input to the system to operate
it  higher coefficient of performance means that  geothermal system more
efficiently transfers heat from the ground to an indoor space 26 USAAA/US
Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF, “Use of Renewable Energy Sources in the World and
Armenia Through Innovations to Clear Technologies,” 2010 27 The GEF Small Grants
Programme, “SGP Armenia Supports the Use of Renewable Energy and Energy
Efficiency Practices,” 2010; The GEF Small Grants Programme, “Transferring
Experience on Practical Implementation of Low-Carbon Technologies in Basen
Community of Shirak Region,” 2013 26 (LECs) of the various renewable energy
technologies assessed in Armenia for the preparation of the Investment Plan
under different sets of financing assumptions The financing assumptions used are
shown in Table  Additional assumptions are shown in Annex  Table : Concessional,
Commercial and SREP/Commercial Financing Assumptions Concessional Commercial
SREP/Commercial Mixed Debt/equity split (%) Debt rate (%) Equity return (%) Debt
term (years) 100/ 00 / 20 70 69 18 20 70 72* 18 40 * Synthetic debt rate used to
model  financing structure in which 35 percent of project capital costs are
financed with commercial debt at 69 percent interest (and  15-year loan tenor),
and 35 percent of project capital costs are financed with SREP capital
contributions at 25 percent interest and with  40-year loan tenor and  10-year
grace period Figure  shows  supply curve of renewable power resources in Armenia
with LECs of less than US$10/kWh, assuming concessional financing assumptions
Figure : Renewable Energy Supply Curve for Armenia, Concessional Financing
Assumptions, LEC of Less Than US$10/kWh *Assumes Fixed PV Figure  shows  supply
curve of renewable power resources with LECs of less than US$20/kWh, assuming
commercial financing assumptions 27 Figure : Renewable Energy Supply Curve for
Armenia, Commercial Financing Assumptions, LEC of Less than US$20/kWh * Assumes
Fixed PV Figure  shows  supply curve of the cost of renewable power resources in
Armenia assuming concessional, commercial and  combination of SREP and
commercial financing assumptions28 This demonstrates the effect of different
financing assumptions on the levelized energy cost of renewable energy
resources, and the magnitude of the effect of SREP capital contributions on
levelized energy costs 28 Note that the relative position of certain renewable
energy options with respect to each other in the supply curve is different in
the commercial and concessional supply curves This is because the effect of
changes to financing assumptions is different for different technologies,
dependent on the proportion of each technology’ LEC that comes from capital
costs and the proportion that comes from operating costs When the capital cost
of  technology makes up  particularly large portion of that technology’ LEC,
increases in the cost of capital increases that technology’ LECs more than it
does the LECs of technologies for which operating costs are  higher proportion
of their LECs 28 Figure : Renewable Energy Resources Supply Curve for Armenia,
Commercial, Mixed Commercial/SREP and Concessional Financing * Assumes fixed PV
Figure  show the average LEC of renewable energy resources in Armenia over the
life of each energy project assuming mixed SREP/commercial financing
assumptions, as well as the range of estimates of the cost of generation in
2026, when the  new nuclear plant would need to come on line to replace the
Metsamor nuclear power plant 29 This figure is intended to provide  more general
picture of the comparative costs of different renewable power technologies in
Armenia 29 The range reflects different assumptions about the size of the new
nuclear plant, and whether concessional or commercial financing is used to
finance it 29 Figure : Renewable Energy Resources Average Supply Curve for
Armenia (Mixed Commercial/Concessional Financing) Note that there are several
uncertainties associated with the data presented in the figures The geothermal
energy resource potential shown in this supply curve has not yet been proven to
exist, and the size of the resource potential shown here is largely speculative
Furthermore, the potential for wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) energy is
contingent on the completion of upgrades to the Aeratsia WWTP, the costs of
which are not included here Finally, the cost of transportation for biomass
fuels is highly uncertain, and the costs provided above might not accurately
reflect this It is also important to note that only the fixed-axis PV technology
is shown in the supply curves above, but the potential for three other solar
technologies was also assessed: single-axis tracking solar PV, concentrating
solar PV and concentrating solar thermal power These technologies were assumed
to be deployable in the same areas—each solar technology was treated as
technology option that could be used to take advantage of  certain amount of
solar resource Fixed PV was the lowest cost of all these technologies, so it is
the only technology included in the supply curves above Table  shows the
comparative minimum, average and maximum levelized energy costs for each of the
utility-scale solar technologies assessed in Armenia 30 2012 average cost of
generation = US$04/kWhLower range of avggeneration cost = US$08/kWhHigher range
of avggeneration cost = US$19/kWh Table : Levelized Energy Cost Ranges of
Various Solar Power Technologies in Armenia, Assuming Mixed SREP/Commercial
Financing Technology Minimum Average Maximum Levelized Energy Cost, US$/kWh
Fixed PV Tracking PV Concentrating PV Concentrating solar thermal power 13 14 22
43 14 15 26 54 16 17 35 79 The LECs of each solar technology vary depending on
the location where the technology would be deployed, which determines the solar
resource and therefore each technology’ theoretical capacity factor Figure
shows the cost of renewable heating technologies in Armenia compared with the
cost of heating with electricity, natural gas, firewood and coal Figure :
Comparative Cost of Renewable and Non-Renewable Heating Technologies  Barriers
to Renewable Energy Projects Armenia faces numerous barriers to the further
development of renewable energy systems despite the country’ significant
renewable energy resource potential and history of past success in the
development of  robust domestic hydropower industry Table  describes some of the
most significant barriers hindering the 31 development of renewable energy in
Armenia For each barrier, there is also  corresponding discussion of possible
mitigation options 32 Table  Barriers to Renewable Energy Development and
Mitigation Options Barrier Mitigation Options Costs High costs of the first
utility-scale solar and geothermal projects in the-country will likely not be
cost-competitive with conventional energy generating technologies and Armenia’
current power generation mix Therefore, the implementation of renewable energy
technologies can make energy unaffordable for consumers in this environment if
the full cost of these technologies is passed on to consumers Support the
Armenian renewable energy industry for  short period of time with funding and
low-cost financing to help the domestic industry gain experience with these
technologies and thereby drive their costs down in Armenia in the long-term
Legal and Regulatory Poor coordination between authorities makes getting all
necessary permits for RE technologies cumbersome and results in little
transparency in procedures, long lead-times and high project costs Environmental
Regulation and Enforcement is not uniform for all RE technologies and
responsibilities for enforcing regulations is not clearly defined within the
Government ; Streamline procedures for issuing permits ; Improve coordination
between Government authorities ( PSRC and Ministry of Natural Protection (MoNP))
; PSRC and MoNP need to work out cooperative rules for uniform and effective
monitoring and enforcement Wind SHPPs Others Solar PV Geo- thermal Power    
     33 Barrier Mitigation Options ; Create  fast-track for smaller
projects, which will be especially important if smaller solar plants are to be
implemented Solar PV Geo- thermal Power Wind SHPPs Others   Some regulatory
approvals are the same for all sizes of plants, in particular, for licensing,
land use, EIAs, and water use Therefore, the cost and time required to obtain
approvals for  relatively small project can be large relative to that projects
cost and construction timeframe and disincentivize the development of small
projects Power Purchase Agreements (PPA) are not issued until construction of
SHPPs and wind plants are complete PPA terms are limited to 15 years, leaving
investors uncertain about the remaining - years of the plant life in the case of
wind, 10 years in the case of solar, and 15 years in the case of geothermal VAT
laws current legislation for wind plants allow payment of VAT to be postponed
for  years, but having to pay back VAT  years later is  cash-flow burden for
renewable energy projects, relatively early in the life of the project There is
currently no mechanism to guarantee remuneration for solar PV or geothermal
projects ; Move issuance of PPAs to the time that the development permit is
granted (this would require provisions in the PPA in case of major project
delays, cancellations, etc) ; Extend PPA terms to match the life of given RE
technologies (25 years for solar and geothermal projects, 20 years for wind
projects)     ; Extend the period by which the VAT must be paid back for all
renewable energy technologies  ; Use data from SREP analysis of renewable  
energy resources in Armenia to implement  FiT or other financial support
mechanism for solar 34 Barrier Mitigation Options Solar PV Geo- thermal Power
Wind SHPPs Others PV and geothermal power Inflation and exchange rate
adjustments in FiTs only happen once  year, and based on previous year’ data
Inflation based on CPI, which is not always same rate faced by investors in RE
projects, where  producer price index (PPI) may be more appropriate ; Make
currency and FX adjustments more frequent, and based on more recent data or
credible market forecasts ; Include “extraordinary adjustment” clauses in PPAs
if rates go beyond agreed range Availability of Financing   Local commercial
banks do not have technical capacity to assess non-SHPP RE projects The success
of the SHPP program is owed, in part, to good quality of technical assessments
by local commercial banks They do not currently have experts to assess other
types of RE projects ; Support domestic commercial banks with     technical
assistance to help educate them on appropriate underwriting criteria and due
diligence assessments for solar PV, geothermal power and solar/geothermal
heating technologies ; Project development facility/fund for RE projects to make
it easier for local commercial banks to assess technical aspects of projects
Domestic Project Development Capacity Lack of experience with renewable energy
technologies makes property owners and energy users skeptical of these
technologies ; Actively support demonstration projects and    outreach
campaigns to help market the benefits of renewable energy technologies to the
public 35 Barrier Mitigation Options Solar PV Geo- thermal Power Wind SHPPs
Others ; Support domestic commercial banks with technical assistance to help
educate them on appropriate underwriting criteria and due diligence assessments
for solar PV, geothermal power and solar/geothermal heating technologies ;
Project development facility/fund for RE projects to make it easier for local
commercial banks to assess technical aspects of projects Limited capacity for
equipment acquisition and installation limits the expansion of solar PV or hot
water, large scale geothermal, geothermal heat pumps, biomass or biogas There is
little experience with these technologies in Armenia There is  lack of
sufficient, good quality data on solar and geothermal resources Additional
studies will need to be done to accurately assess achievable potential ; Finance
pilots with the requirement that there    be knowledge transfer to local
partners ; Provide funding for training workshops for installers ; Fund the
preparation of more comprehensive resource assessments for these technologies 
 36  Government Strategy for the Renewable Energy Sector The Government’
renewable energy strategy is driven by the overarching goals of improving energy
security, ensuring affordable energy supply, and maximizing the use of Armenia’
indigenous energy resources As described in Section , several key strategic
documents—the 2013 National Energy Security Concept, the Armenian Development
Strategy, and the National Security Strategy—specifically call for the
development of indigenous renewable energy resources In the past few years the
Government has acted on its commitment to deploy renewable energy technologies
by implementing the Feed-In Tariff for certain technologies: wind, biomass, and
hydropower The Government has also undertaken regulatory reforms and amendments
to tax laws that have streamlined the renewable energy project development
process For instance, in recognition of the fact that Water Use Permits and PSRC
operating licenses had different durations and this was causing uncertainty
among developers,  process has been created to obtain  Water Use Permit with the
same duration as the PSRC permit30 The Government also enables wind energy
developers to postpone VAT payments for imported equipment for three years31
Table  shows Government’ targets for various renewable energy technologies
Excluding output from the large hydroelectric plants, renewable energy
generation represented roughly  percent of total generation in Government’
target is for such generation to represent 21 percent of total generation by
2020, and 26 percent by Table : Renewable Energy Generation Capacity and
Production Targets 2020- 202532 Small Hydro Wind Geothermal PV Total Capacity
installed (MW) Generation (GWh) 2020 2025 2020 2025 377 50 50 40 492 397 100 100
80 677 ,049 ,106 117 373 88 232 745 176 ,627 ,259 The targets shown in Table
update the 2011 Renewable Energy Roadmap for Armenia, developed in cooperation
with R2E2, with the support of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and the
World Bank Targets have been updated in this IP because  number of factors,
global and local to Armenia, have changed since the 30 USAID, “Small Hydropower
Sector Framework, Status, Development Barriers and Future Development 2012
Update,” March 2012 31 USAID, “Wind Energy Development in Armenia: Legal,
Regulatory, Tax and Customs Regulations,” April 2010 32 Excludes generation from
the large hydro cascades 37 development of the Roadmap There is, for example,
more information now about the solar, geothermal, and wind resources in Armenia
than there was when the Roadmap was produced Wind resources, in particular, have
shown to have lower capacity factors the previously thought, making them more
expensive on  levelized energy cost (LEC) basis Solar PV has, in contrast become
more attractive The capital costs of utility-scale solar PV projects have
declined substantially over the past few years, shifting more of the technically
viable solar potential toward financial viability As  consequence, Government’
priorities in the years to come are likely to shift away from wind and toward
solar PV  Role of the Private Sector Armenia has been successful in attracting
substantial private sector participation in the renewable energy sector For
renewable energy projects, this participation has primarily been through small
hydropower projects However, there are also  number of private companies that
manufacture and install solar thermal heaters, geothermal heating and cooling
equipment and distributed solar PV in Armenia There are also several examples of
successful private sector participation in non- hydropower renewable energy
projects The Lusakert biogas plant was developed by  consortium of
organizations, some of which were private Armenian companies The methane capture
and flare gas plant at the Nubarashen landfill was funded by foreign donors, but
it is currently operated by an Armenian company  number of small solar thermal
hot water and solar PV projects have been developed by private companies in
Armenia over the years Recently,  private company developed an 860 kW geothermal
heat pump system in  large commercial building on Northern Avenue in Yerevan
number of commercial banks support renewable energy projects in Armenia by
providing loans to project developers As mentioned above, the lack of long-term
financing at attractive interest rates is one major barrier to the development
of privately-owned renewable energy projects in Armenia and the expansion of
existing financing programs for renewable energy would encourage growth in the
sector  On-going and Planned Investments by Development Partners Several
multilateral and bilateral donors are actively in promoting renewable energy in
Armenia The following subsections describe these donors and their areas of
involvement involved European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)
EBRD is actively involved in Armenia’ energy sector promoting energy efficiency
and renewable energy Current and recent activities include: ; Rehabilitation of
Sevan-Hrazdan HPP EBRD is co-financing the rehabilitation of the Sevan-Hrazdan
cascade with ADB’ PSOD ; Development of small hydropower plants (HPPs) EBRD
provided US$ million to Cascade Bank (now America Bank) for on-lending to
Armenian companies developing SHPPs under the Renewable Energy Project These
funds, combined with  World Bank loan of US$ million, US$ million equity
investment from  private investor, and US$13 million co-financing from project
developers, which 38 enabled to develop 25 SHPPs with total installed capacity
of 45 MW33 The Renewable Energy Project included also US$ million GEF grant to
help create enabling environment for development of renewable energy
Specifically, the GEF grant helped to: () improve the regulatory environment for
renewables; () develop and adopt technical standards for renewable energy and
regulations for dispatching and load-regulation of grid-connected renewable
energy plants; and () remove information barriers to investments in renewable
energy, including creation of GIS database of RE resources, SHPP scheme,
feasibility studies and resource assessments ( competitive advantage of Armenia
in solar PV value chain, assessment of technical and economic viability of
biofuels, etc), ; Regulatory support to promote renewable energy EBRD provided
technical support to the PSRC on feed-in tariffs (FiT) and third party access
(TPA) regulations KfW KfW’ engagement in Armenia’ energy sector currently
focuses on developing and maintaining renewable energy resources and financing
transmission investments to support regional cooperation Specific areas of
recent and potential investment in the field of renewable energy include: ;
Construction and rehabilitation of SHPPs KfW provides financing and advisory
support for construction and rehabilitation of privately-owned SHPPs Under Phase
, KfW supported 14 SHPPs through several commercial banks Phase , currently
under implementation, is expected to finance up to 20 SHPPs with  total capacity
of 45 MW Phase , currently in the planning stage, will include up to EUR 40
million in financing and may be expanded to cover financing for wind projects
World Bank/International Finance Corporation (IFC) ; The World Bank Group has
two decades of engagement in supporting power sector reforms and clean energy
development in Armenia The World Bank’ and IFC’ recent engagements in Armenia’
energy sector have focused on development of renewable energy resources and
promoting energy efficiency through rehabilitation of transmission
infrastructure and, more recently, demand-side efficiency measures As mentioned
above, IFC provided US$15 million to Ameriabank CJSC, resulting in the
development of 12 SHPPs with over 40 MW capacity More recently, the World Bank
provided  US$  million to fund technical field investigation studies for
potential geothermal sites in Armenia Global Environment Facility (GEF) The GEF’
Small Grants Programme (SGP) provided grants for two solar thermal heating
projects in the Shirak region of Armenia ; Solar Thermal Heating System in
Housing Development In 2010, the GEF provided  grant for US$30,970 to complete
energy efficiency upgrades and 39 the installation of  solar thermal heating
system at  housing development In the first winter of its implementation the
project reduced natural gas consumption by 40 percent ; Solar Thermal Heating
System in  Kindergarten Starting in 2013, the GEF provided  grant for US$33,920
to develop  multi-purpose solar thermal hot water system to provide heated water
to  kindergarten As part of the project  solar thermal heating system will be
installed at  greenhouse next to the building The intention is that this project
will serve as  demonstration of the potential for using solar thermal
technologies to heat greenhouses 40  Prioritization of Renewable Energy
Technologies The Government of Armenia, led by the MENR and supported by the
MDBs, has identified four areas for strategic investment that would lead to
scale-up The areas were identified through  participatory process involving
wide range of government agencies, non-governmental organizations, academic
institutions, and the private sector The participatory process included many
one-on-one meetings,  workshop with the Government’ SREP working group, as well
as an open forum The subset of “technically viable” resources was selected from
those described in Section  These were geothermal and solar thermal heating,
utility-scale solar PV, geothermal power, small HPPs, agricultural biogas,
landfill gas, wind and distributed PV These resources were evaluated against
five criteria on  scale of  to , with  indicating that the resource met the
criteria best of all resources and  indicating that it met the criteria worst of
all resources The five criteria reflect the Government’ strategic objectives,
and the clear recognition that SREP funding should be used to have
transformative impact on the renewable energy sub-sector The criteria considered
were: ; Potential for scale-up of the technology The amount of developable
resource potential relative to the other technologies, as measured by production
potential (GWh) Resources with higher production potential were given higher
priority ; Market maturity/immaturity The extent to which the technology is used
or the resource is already exploited in Armenia, or there is financing already
available from other donor programs Resources or technologies which are already
well-known and well-developed in Armenia (such as small hydropower generation),
were given lower priority because they already had sufficient support or private
sector interest Resources or technologies which already have financing available
through other donor programs (such as geothermal heat pumps, solar thermal
heating and rooftop solar PV) were also given lower priority because there is
already financing available through other MDB programs (such as financing
available through local banks from EBRD and IFC) ; Cost-effectiveness The cost
of the electricity or heat generated by the technology, as measured by the
levelized energy cost (LEC)34 ; Potential for job-creation The extent to which
use of  technology or exploitation of  resource creates jobs ; Effect on power
grid stability The extent to which certain technologies had  negative or
positive impact on system operation and dispatch Technologies with no impact, or
positive impact on grid stability were prioritized over those with  negative
impact 34 The LEC is the present value of capital and operating costs for each
technology, on  kWh basis 41 Table  shows the quantitative rankings assigned to
each technology under each criterion The rankings were used as  rough guide for
discussion only, using the assumption that each criterion had an equal weight
Ultimately, some of the highest- ranking resources (geothermal heat pumps and
solar thermal, for example) were rejected because stakeholders recognized that
substantial financing for such technologies already existed under MDB-financed
programs or because (as is the case for SHPPs) substantial private sector
activity already exists) Table : Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against
Selection Criteria Technology Selection Criteria* Power grid stability Cost-
effectiveness Potential for job creation Scale-up potential** Market immaturity
Average score Geothermal heat pumps Utility-scale solar PV Geothermal power
Solar thermal heating Small HPPs Ag biogas Landfill biogas Wind Distributed
solar PV                                                       *  lower score
indicates that  technology is determined to be more suitable for SREP funding
according to the chosen selection criteria  score of  indicates that  technology
meets the criteria very well, and  score of  indicates that  technology meets
the criteria worst of all technologies ** Technologies were put scored on scale-
up potential as follows: 10,000+ GWh/yr = , ,,000 GWh/yr = , less than ,000
GWh/yr = , less than 100 GWh/yr =  Three investment priorities emerged from the
analyses and discussions with stakeholders These were: () geothermal power, )
utility-scale PV and ) geothermal heat pumps and solar heating Table  provides
brief explanations for why each technology received  particular ranking on each
criterion 42 Table : Ranking of Renewable Technologies Against Selection
Criteria Technology Selection Criteria Power grid stability Cost-effectiveness
Potential for job creation Scale-up potential Market immaturity Geothermal heat
pumps Can consume energy at peak times with pumps One of the lowest cost of
those assessed Potential for creation of an entire industry Very large Solar
thermal heating Can consume energy at peak times with pumps Relatively high-cost
Potential for Large creation of an entire industry Somewhat mature Only one
commercial- scale geothermal heating facility exists in Armenia, but financing
for such projects could is available through local banks under existing EBRD and
IFC-financed programs Somewhat mature There are  few operating STH facilities in
Armenia, and financing is available through local banks under existing EBRD and
IFC-financed programs Very immature No utility-scale solar PV plants operate in
Armenia Moderate cost Potential for creation of an entire industry Large
Utility-scale solar PV Geothermal power Can be used during daytime hours to
preserve stored hydropower for evening and morning peaks Provides stable, base-
load power Very low cost if resource is high- temperature Not labor intensive,
low potential Currently small; however several sites warrantee further
exploration Very immature No geothermal power plants operate in Armenia Small
HPPs Provides diurnally stable, but seasonally Very low cost Labor intensive,
but low potential Many of the best sites have already Very mature Most
widespread renewable energy technology deployed to date 43 Technology Selection
Criteria Ag biogas Landfill biogas Wind Power grid stability Cost-effectiveness
Potential for job creation Scale-up potential Market immaturity variable power
been developed, so potential is small Provides stable, base- load power Very low
cost Labor intensive, but low potential Very small Immature Only one commercial-
scale facility exists Provides stable, base- load power Lowest cost technology
assessed Labor intensive, but low potential Very small Very immature No LFG
power plants operate in Armenia  variable generation resource, therefore, it
must be managed Moderate cost Not labor intensive, moderate potential Moderate
Immature Only one commercial-scale facility exists Distributed solar PV
variable generation resource, therefore it must be managed Very high cost
Potential for creation of an entire industry Large Somewhat mature Just  few
small installations, but financing is available through local banks under
existing EBRD and IFC-financed programs 44 Program Description  The
prioritization exercise described in Section  has led to the selection of two
focus areas: geothermal power and utility-scale solar PV In order to overcome
existing barriers to renewable energy deployment and to catalyze future
investment and scale-up of the selected technologies in Armenia, the SREP
investment program is built around the following five objectives:  Provide the
Armenian renewable energy industry with  “window of opportunity” during which
renewable energy project costs can be reduced through first-projects without
significantly affecting the affordability of energy to consumers This will
enable future projects to be developed at lower cost without donor support
Build capacity among local banks to finance renewable energy technologies and
develop their abilities to do this in the future  Build capacity among local
industry to procure, deploy and make equity investments in renewable energy
technologies  Build public confidence in renewable energy technologies to create
market demand  Encourage further reforms among regulatory agencies to support
renewable energy scale-up after SREP funding/donor financing is gone This
section describes the proposed projects, the transformational impact of each
project, the activities envisioned for each, and the expected co-benefits and
environmental and social risks associated with each technology Program Objective
The objective of the SREP Armenia IP is to catalyze private investment in
technologies which, for lack of experience, high capital costs and  variety of
other reasons, have not previously been considered as options in the country
SREP funds will be used to do first-projects in utility-scale geothermal power
and utility-scale solar PV In the process of developing these first projects,
local capacity will be built in the financial and project development
communities that will be crucial for the is expended scale-up of these
technologies after SREP and donor funding Furthermore, the demonstration effect
of these first projects will serve to educate consumers on the benefits of
renewable energy technologies SREP support can help to gradually introduce
geothermal power and utility-scale solar PV by: () absorbing some of the project
development risk on geothermal power, through subsidization of exploratory
wells, and; (ii) helping the finance the country’ first utility-scale solar PV
projects to attract private investors while minimizing the tariff-impact
Expected Outcomes The main results expected from the SREP Armenia IP are as
follows: ; Better security of supply and reliability by increasing the
proportion of domestic renewable energy in the energy mix 45 ; The creation of
utility-scale solar sector and geothermal power sector attractive to private
investors ; Develop the first utility-scale solar PV projects, which through
gradual tariff increases (as the tariff levels in the country gradually increase
to reflect long- run supply costs) will eventually become commercially viable
without SREP/MDB support These first projects will be so small as to have only
very minor impact on the overall cost of generation in Armenia, but could have
catalytic effect on the market for solar PV through: – Lower solar installation
costs that will result as  domestic industry develops around it; – Lower
financing costs as lenders become more comfortable with the technology; and –
Potential further reductions in the global costs of PV panels The foreseen
increase in thermal generation costs in Armenia will move solar toward financial
viability Armenia’ new thermal plants will require substantially higher tariffs
than many of the existing plants, because they are fully (or near fully)
depreciated and no longer recover depreciation charges Moreover, existing plants
do not require debt service through their generation tariffs, whereas new plants
will require such provision ; Contribution to reduction of impending supply
capacity gap to meet forecast demand As noted above, Armenia will need roughly
170 MW of new capacity by 2018 and 830 MW of capacity when the nuclear plant is
retired in ; Improvement to the enabling environment for renewable energy
technologies The first utility-scale solar PV and geothermal projects will
provide an opportunity for PSRC to streamline administrative procedures and
fiscal policies to encourage investment in  wider range of renewable energy
technologies ; Creation of jobs related to the construction/installation,
operation and maintenance of renewable technologies Education of the workforce
in the deployment of these technologies An indication of possible job creation
in Armenia is provided in Annex  ; Promotion of local & in  technology which has
traditionally been  focus of researchers and academicians in Armenia ; Reduced
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as compared to the business-as- usual scenario,
under which Armenia will likely continue to expand the use of natural gas for
power generation and heating The details of the three projects to be carried out
are described in more detail below  Geothermal Power Exploration and Development
SREP resources would be used for further exploration of Armenia’ most promising
geothermal site - Karkar Prior studies suggest the existence of  geothermal
resource at the site, but it is necessary to carry out exploratory drilling to
confirm the 46 availability and quality of the potential geothermal resource for
power generation The typical signs of  high temperature geothermal area are not
present on the surface, however, the very low resistivity anomaly in the layer
between 500-,000 meters is an indication of  possible high temperature
hydrothermal alteration The real nature of the resource, whether high, low or
intermediate temperature and its potential for power generation can only be
confirmed through exploratory drillings By using SREP support for this activity,
the Government can help reduce the risk of developing the site for the private
sector If  geothermal resource exists at the site, this support can help make
geothermal power  financially attractive investment for private investors and an
affordable source of electricity for Armenia’ grid The support can also serve to
demonstrate the feasibility of geothermal power in Armenia  first successful
project can build domestic capacity in the development of additional geothermal
resources in Armenia at Armenia’ other prospective geothermal sites It will also
build investor confidence that geothermal is  viable and profitable investment
opportunity in Armenia  Priority activities The geothermal power project would
include the following activities: ; Exploratory Drilling at Karkar Geothermal
Site This step requires carrying out exploratory drilling at the site to
determine whether or not power could be produced from the resource ; Feasibility
Study for Karkar site If the presence of  resource is confirmed,  full
feasibility study will need to be prepared to recommend the type of geothermal
technology/plant to be constructed, reassess the economic and financial
viability, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and to complete
legal and regulatory due diligence The legal and regulatory due diligence will
include recommendations on the need for  feed-in tariff specific to geothermal
or  recommended structure and method for procuring as  public private
partnership in  way that determines the tariff through bidding (for example,
reverse auction) It will also be necessary to evaluate the potential for grid
interconnection at the chosen site, and whether or not grid upgrades will be
necessary for the potential geothermal power plant to be connected to the grid ;
Transaction Advisory Services The Government would procure the project as
Public Private Partnership (PPP) Therefore, advisory services will be needed to
help structure the PPP (for example, as  Build-Operate-Transfer or Build- Own-
Operate contract) and procure  private investor and operator The exact
commercial arrangement will need to be developed through further consultation
within government, with donor partners, and with potential investors However,
the arrangement currently envisaged would involve  private operator having  BOT
or BOO agreement under which they finance, build and operate the power plant and
have  power purchase agreement with the distribution company The Government
would own the steam fields, thereby taking risk on the resource availability 47
; Development of Geothermal Power Plant As noted above, it is expected that the
private sector will make the capital investment required for generation of
electricity (the power plant itself) This investment plan assumes  plant with
installed capacity of MW, based on the average size of geothermal plants
elsewhere The actual size of the plant will depend on the resource potential
identified in earlier activities  Parallel activities to be funded by other
parties It is expected that the World Bank (IBRD), ADB or the commercial lenders
within the MDBs (IFC in the World Bank Group, PSOD at ADB, or EBRD) as well as
other commercial financial institutions may be able to finance some of the
capital costs of the project as  way of making it more attractive to private
investors The Government contributions may include, for example, land or co-
financing of taxes The MDB support may also include concessional lending to the
Government for the transmission lines, or other infrastructure required at the
site  Environmental, social and gender co-benefits The development of
geothermal power project at the Karkar site in Armenia would have  number of
environmental, social and gender co-benefits These are likely to be somewhat
similar to the co-benefits of most of other renewable power generation
technologies, with some important exceptions For instance, geothermal power
provides base load generation, which does not require as much “back up”
generation as variable renewable energy sources The geothermal project is
expected to create the following environmental, social and gender co-benefits: ;
Minimized land-use for energy generation Compared with other renewable energy
generating technologies, such as solar and wind, geothermal power uses
relatively small land area ; Reduction of pollutant emissions  geothermal power
plant has the potential to reduce greenhouse gas as well as local particulate
matter emissions from gas-fired power generation in Armenia Although the
majority of Armenia’ energy generation is from nuclear and hydropower sources,
there is still the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from Armenia’
operating natural gas-fired power plants by offsetting their generation with
energy from  geothermal power plant ; Job creation Potential short-term job
creation during exploration of the geothermal site Potential for both short and
long-term job creation during the development and operations of  geothermal
plant Given the remote location of the Karkar site, the project could help
reduce rural unemployment in the surrounding areas ; Targeted job creation for
women Potential for operational agreements for the renewable energy projects to
target the encouragement of jobs for women For example, the concession contract
with the private operator could include set-asides for women to make up  certain
percentage of local staff 48 ; Energy security By replacing existing electricity
generation resources,  large portion of which relies on imported fuel that is
subject to price fluctuation, geothermal power could act as  hedge against
future natural gas and uranium price increases This could help minimize the
effect of these price fluctuations on domestic electricity tariffs and, thereby,
help keep electricity service affordable for all consumers  Environmental and
social risks The development of  utility-scale geothermal project at the Karkar
site in Armenia is expected to have relatively limited environmental and social
risks, especially compared with conventional and even other renewable energy
technologies However, significant gaps exist in the environmental and social
risk analyses that have been conducted to date and the site should be studied in
greater detail before the project implementation Having said that,  preliminary
review of available data related to the potential site and an analysis of the
generic risks that face this type of project development suggest that the
project will have relatively limited negative environmental and social risks The
impacts of this project are expected to be akin to those from any other large
infrastructure project that takes place in  rural area, although with some
notable exceptions Specifically, the geothermal project is expected to face the
following environmental and social risks: ; Environmental risks – Land
subsidence groundwater) (compaction of rock due to the withdrawal of – Increased
micro-seismic activity near the local area, including increased risk laying of
landslides though excavations for geothermal well and of associated
infrastructure and transmission networks – Altered groundwater
recharge/extraction regime if groundwater is used for energy generation (such as
for steam generation or emissions cleaning) and is not later returned to the
aquifer – Water use during operations, which causes surface water abstraction,
run- in river flows and localized changes leading to off and discharge
morphology – The potential for localized geological damage though excavations
for geothermal well and laying of associated infrastructure and transmission
networks – During the construction stage, the project is expected to produce
emissions due to material transportation and on-site plant movements ( vehicle
emissions, particulate matter and dust) – Construction activities have the
potential for causing soil erosion and compaction Localized erosion, compaction,
salinization, sealing and/or contamination from site alteration and project
activities could wash away fines and change the soil' properties Furthermore,
excavations for land- grading and foundations could mobilize previously
contaminated soils 49 – Localized land-take from footprint of energy generation
infrastructure This could have footprint impacts upon species due to
construction of power plant and related infrastructure – Transformation of
landscape ; Social risks – Lack of  local workforce with the knowledge and
skills capable to operate and maintain the plants This might mean that it is
necessary to import labor to the region to develop and operate the plant –
Impacts to traffic patterns during construction and operation (not expected near
the site, as there is limited road infrastructure, but rather expected on the
way to the site)  Utility-Scale Solar PV Project Development SREP resources
would be used to finance the development of  MW of utility- scale solar PV The
rapid decline in solar PV costs in recent years has made utility- scale solar PV
more affordable and more competitive with the other power generation options
available to Armenia SREP support would help catalyze private investment in
first new plant (or plants), and show the potential for deploying solar PV on
commercial basis Given recent trends in solar PV costs, solar PV is expected to
become even more cost-competitive in Armenia and  demonstration project would
enable the country to take advantage of this technology in the future when it
becomes more cost-competitive with other technologies SREP funds would be used
in much the same way that MDB funds were used to successfully jump-start the
small hydropower industry in Armenia nearly  decade ago  Priority activities The
utility-scale solar PV project would include the following activities: ; Project
preparation, feasibility studies, site measurement and monitoring SREP grant
funds would first be used to fund more detailed resource assessments, and
identification of possible sites and possible projects As described in Section ,
relatively coarse resolution solar data are publicly available for Armenia Given
the nature of solar energy resources, these coarse data are generally acceptable
for understanding the nature of the resource and conducting  high-level
financial analysis However,  feasibility study will be needed to characterize
the solar resource potential in the areas targeted for solar development in more
detail Furthermore, it will be necessary to evaluate the potential for grid
interconnection at the chosen site, and whether or not grid upgrades will be
necessary before the project is interconnected As for the geothermal power
project, the feasibility study will also reaffirm the economic and financial
viability, compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and to complete
legal and regulatory due diligence ; Transaction advisory Transaction advisors
would be hired to help government tender for the projects identified in the
feasibility studies Private operators would be procured through competitive
tender Bidders would be selected based on technical and financial criteria, the
financial criteria being the level of 50 tariff required or, alternatively, the
level of concessional support required35 Developers offering lower tariffs or
requiring less concessional support would receive higher scores ; Investment in
MW project or projects Government would on-lend SREP funds at concessional rates
to private operators bidding on the projects being tendered The private
operators would contribute equity and also source loans from commercial banks
and from the commercial lending arms of the MDBs Government estimates that,
given current capital costs for utility-scale solar PV, SREP funds could be used
with these other sources of financing to support roughly  MW of solar As noted
in Section , initial studies indicate that Gegharkunik Marz has some of the
highest solar PV potential in Armenia, and would be considered as  first
potential area for development This could be  single plant, or several plants
with  total capacity of  MW, as development of solar is often more effective if
there are multiple sites, in areas with different solar profiles (to provide
more stability by diversifying generation profiles)  Parallel activities to be
funded by other donors As noted above, it is foreseen that, in addition to SREP
support, the commercial lending arms of the MDBs will be willing to provide co-
financing for the solar projects As for the geothermal power project, Government
can also be expected to contribute in ways that reduce the overall capital
expenditure required for the project (by providing land, for example or waivers
of taxes)  Environmental, social and gender co-benefits The development of
utility-scale solar PV project could have  number of environmental, social and
gender co-benefits These are likely to be somewhat similar to the co-benefits of
other renewable power generation technologies The solar PV project is expected
to create the following social, environmental and gender co-benefits: ;
Reduction of pollutant emissions  solar PV plant has the potential to reduce
greenhouse gas as well as local particulate matter emissions from gas-fired
power generation in Armenia Although the majority of Armenia’ energy generation
is from nuclear and hydropower sources, there is still the potential to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions from Armenia’ operating natural gas- fired power plants
by offsetting their generation with energy from  solar PV power plant Solar PV
plants generate most of their energy during the middle of the day, during some
of the higher hours of energy consumption in Armenia Solar PV could be used to
offset the need to dispatch hydropower, saving hydropower generation to serve
peaks in the mornings and evenings when otherwise more expensive thermal plants
would be needed 35 Bidders will be offered, as part of the conditions of tender,
access to SREP capital contributions 51 ; Job creation Potential short-term job
creation during the development and operations of the plant More importantly,
there is considerably research and development (&) and interest in solar PV
within Armenia’ academic institutions  solar PV project could catalyze further
research and development and facilitate the transfer of capacity for
manufacturing, installation and operation to the local market ; Targeted job
creation for women Potential for operational agreements for the renewable energy
projects to target the encouragement of jobs for women ; Energy security By
replacing existing electricity generation resources, much of which relies on
imported fuel that is subject to uncontrollable price fluctuation, solar power
could act as  hedge against future natural gas and uranium price increases This
could help minimize the effect of these price fluctuations on energy tariffs and
thereby help keep electricity service affordable for all consumers ; Reduced
water resource use Solar PV does not require cooling water, which is required
for most combustion-based energy sources including thermal plants Unlike
hydropower resources, solar PV does not divert or interrupt the flow of natural
water courses In general, development of solar PV will result in less
disturbance and consumption of Armenia’ water resources than most other energy
technologies currently used in Armenia, and some other renewable energy
technologies  Environmental and social risks The development of  utility-scale
solar PV plant in Armenia is expected to have relatively limited environmental
and social risks, especially compared to conventional power generation
technologies For instance, the utility-scale solar PV projects are expected to
have negligible emissions compared with fossil-fuel-based generation However,
there are no site-specific feasibility studies or other documents that could
have been drawn up on to provide  more detailed description of environmental and
social impacts of potential solar PV project  detailed environmental and social
impact assessment, including mitigation measures, will be conducted as part of
the preparation of each site-specific project Many of the environmental and
social risks expected to arise from this project are site-specific But, unlike
the geothermal project, the site for this project has not yet been chosen The
fact that large swaths of Armenia’ land have reasonably high- quality solar
energy resources suggests that there are many locations where this project could
be implemented, and therefore it is expected that at least some of the
environmental and social risks detailed here could be avoided by choosing  site
where these risks would be minimized Based on an analysis of the generic risks
that are typically related to this type of projects, the solar PV project is
expected to face the following environmental and social risks: ; Environmental
risks – Construction-stage air emissions due to material transportation and on-
site plant movements ( vehicle emissions, particulate matter and dust) 52 –
Vegetation clearance during construction and placement of generating equipment
and ancillary facilities in floodplains could increase catchment flooding
potential – Impacts from construction of power transmission lines to evacuate
electricity generated by solar PV plants – Footprint/land-take for solar
generation infrastructure Limited habitat re- growth potential due to presence
of PVs Fragmentation of ecosystems from footprint, access roads and transmission
networks – Disturbance of habitat during construction Land-take footprint
impacts upon terrestrial species – Disposal of obsolete solar PV modules upon
their decommissioning is  significant environmental issue, largely due to the
presence of toxic chemicals in the discarded modules Recycling methods for PV
panels are in place within the industry and further developments are planned for
future PV panels However, if the used PV panels are not appropriately handled or
recycled, then their disposal could cause environmental pollution with toxic
waste and become  considerable risk in Armenia ; Social risks – Given that solar
PV is  new technology in Armenia, it is possible that there will be  lack of
local labor supply to deploy the technology, and workers and supplies might need
to be imported to the project site from outside If this happens, this would
minimize the economic and Armenia employment benefits of deploying this
technology – Solar PV plants have  large footprint relative to the amount of
energy they generate Thus, the deployment of  large-scale solar plant will
impact landscapes over large areas Local impacts on landscape character and
visual amenity might also be associated with ancillary development (buildings
and pylons) This might affect property values if the plant is built near
populated areas, or might have visual and land access impact on recreational
activities such as hiking, eco-tourism, fishing and hunting Impacts to landscape
character might also lead to the loss of aesthetic value for areas with tourism
potential and cause associated impacts on local tourism services – Potential
disruption due to noise and dust during construction, such as operational noise
and vibration – If the plant is built in an area where there is the potential
for other land uses such as mineral extraction, agriculture, or industry, then
these alternative land uses will not be able to occur or will need to be delayed
because of the presence of the solar facility – Transportation of people and
equipment might impact traffic patterns during construction near the project
site 53 Financing Plan and Instruments  Table  presents  plan for financing the
projects described in Section  It shows the proposed credits and grants from
SREP as well as estimates of the amounts anticipated from MDBs and the private
sector As the table shows, roughly US$ 40 million of SREP funding is expected to
catalyze roughly  times as much investment, most of it from the private sector
(as equity or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the MDBs The
financing modalities will be determined at the time of appraisal, but it is
expected that: ; The geothermal exploratory drilling project will be funded
through: () an SREP grant to government, or (ii)  guarantee to private sector
entities, which might want to undertake the drilling as part of early site
development If suitable resource potential is found, the site would be financed
by  private sector developer whose remuneration would be based on  feed-in-
tariff or on the terms of  power purchase agreement It is assumed that the
private sector would use  mix of debt and equity for the investment ; For the
utility-scale solar project, it is foreseen that Government would on-lend SREP
funds at concessional rates to private operators bidding on the projects being
tendered  reverse auction would be used to tender for bidders36 The private
operators would contribute equity and also source loans from commercial banks
and from the commercial lending arms of the MDBs Government estimates that,
given current capital costs for utility-scale solar PV, SREP funds could be used
with these other sources of financing to support roughly  MW of solar 36 In
reverse auction, the lowest tariff bid or lowest required subsidy bid (if the
tariff does not recover the full cost of service) is the principal deciding
factor in selecting the winning bidder 54 Table : Indicative Financing Plan SREP
Project Geothermal Development Project Preparation Geothermal Resource
Confirmation Transaction Advisory Services (structuring of PPP for power plant)
Investments in 28 MW plant Subtotal: Geothermal Development Development of
Utility-Scale Solar PV Grant for Project Preparation, Feasibility studies, site
measurement and monitoring Transaction Advisory Services Investments in power
plants (total of  MW) Subtotal: Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV Grand
Total SREP Leverage SREP MDB Responsible Government of Armenia World Bank/ Asian
Development Bank (Million US$) Private Sector (Equity) Commercial/ Private arms
of MDBs tbd - - - - - - tbd - - - - - - 00 50 Total   10637   00 50    tbd
tbd - - - - - - 00 00 00 00 00 00 50    WB (IBRD)   ADB WB (IBRD)  37 Assuming
Flash cycle design of the potential plant Source of capital cost estimate:
“Economic and Financial Appraisal of the Potential Geothermal Power Plant at
Karkar ,” Nov 2012; GeoFund : Armenia Geothermal Project 55 Responsiveness to
SREP Criteria  The Investment Plan developed for Armenia is responsive to most
of the SREP criteria One of the SREP criteria, related to energy access, is not
relevant to Armenia as nearly all Armenians have access to energy supply
(electricity and gas) Table : Summary of Projects’ Responsiveness to SREP
Criteria Criteria Geothermal Power Development Utility-Scale Solar PV
Development Increased installed capacity from renewable energy sources Increased
access to energy through renewable energy sources Low Emission Development
Affordability and competitiveness of renewable resources from Armenia plans to
increase geothermal installed capacity to  resource (pending availability) 100
MW by SREP-funded investments represent the first 25 MW, planned for Armenia
plans to increase installed solar capacity from  to 80 MW by SREP-funded
investments will represent the first 40- 50 MW Armenia is unique among other
SREP applicants in that it has nearly 100 percent access to electricity
Therefore, Armenia’ IP is not about access to modern energy services, but about
using renewables to improve energy security and reliability, and reduce the
future cost of supply In particular, Armenia has impending power capacity gap
Thus, geothermal power and utility-scale solar PV will help to reduce it
meanwhile improving energy security supply Geothermal plants produce negligible
carbon dioxide emissions and will displace some of the gas- electricity fired
generation The supply curves shown in Section  confirm that geothermal is with
competitive thermal Armenia’ alternatives generation power Solar PV produces no
carbon dioxide emissions and will displace some of the gas-fired electricity
generation The supply curves shown in Section  show that utility scale solar PV
is not yet cost competitive with thermal existing generation options in
Armenia38 SREP financing 38 As noted earlier in the paper, however, the
combination of several factors could make solar more cost- competitive in the
near future The factors include: () new, higher-cost thermal plants being built
to serve 56 Criteria Geothermal Power Development Utility-Scale Solar PV
Development (gas and nuclear) will help kick-start the industry, while limiting
the impact on tariffs of the since first plants auction reverse mechanism for
tariff will be used to select the winning bidder Productive use of energy
Geothermal provides base-load supply and will, therefore, enhance supply
adequacy and reliability, helping to reduce the risk with lost of significant
economic costs load PV Solar generates electricity during high- demand daytime
periods and will similarly enhance supply and reliability during the hours of
the day in which the value of is lost typically the highest adequacy load
Economic, social and environmental development impact The development of
geothermal power has  number of economic, social and environmental benefits,
which are described in detail for each technology in Section  Economic and
financial viability power The supply curves shown in Section  confirm that
geothermal is and economically financially viable, provided the resource is
confirmed The supply curves shown in Section  confirm that solar may be
economically and financially viable over time with the support of low-cost SREP
financing, and given future increase in the long-run in generation Armenia cost
the Leveraging of additional resources Investments from the private sector,
MDBs, and government are estimated to leverage  times the amount contributed by
SREP demand in Armenia; (ii) lower solar installation costs that will result as
domestic industry develops around it; (iii) lower financing costs as lenders
become more comfortable with the technology, and (iv) potential further
reductions in the global costs of PV panels SREP support can help Armenia
nurture its solar industry so that, as these factors converge, Armenia can look
to utility-scale solar as  commercially viable alternative to some thermal power
generation 57 Criteria Gender Geothermal Power Development Utility-Scale Solar
PV Development Women will equally benefit from better security and reliability
of supply Each project also offers possible opportunities for targeted job
creation for women (for example, requirements that the geothermal or solar plant
operators provide earmarked jobs for women Co-benefits of renewable energy
scale-up There are  number of co-benefits associated with each plant These are
described in more detail in Section  and Annex  Additional Development
Activities  The Government has carefully designed an IP that is complementary to
the other activities of the MDBs, private sector, financial institutions and
other donors The IP builds on Armenia’ successful commitment to introducing
high level of private sector participation in the energy sector, and uses SREP
resources to leverage further participation The geothermal power project builds
on the extensive preparatory work done by the Armenian government and the R2E2
Fund, much of it funded by the GEF/World Bank More specifically, the GEF/World
Bank provided  US$ million to finance technical field investigation studies for
two potential geothermal sites in Armenia The utility-scale solar PV project
recognizes the extensive research and development activities of Armenian
academics in the field of solar, and the move in the generation sector to
private financing and operation, rather than government ownership The modality
of financing the utility-scale solar project leaves open the possibility for
EBRD, IFC or ADB’ Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) as well as other
financial institutions to provide commercial debt financing that can be blended
with the private operator’ equity and other commercial financing Government can
rely on the R2E2 Fund to help manage the additional work required to identify
and prepare viable solar projects, and attract possible investors The modality
of procuring the geothermal and solar projects can further benefit from
additional technical advisory services, potentially financed by MDBs, to help
structure, tender, and negotiate the contracts with private investors and
operators Lastly, but not least important, the IP builds on the successful
sector reforms supported by donors over the past two decades It recognizes the
importance of scaling up renewable energy using commercial principles, and with
transparent regulation that ensures accountability of service providers 58
Implementation Potential with Risk Assessment The implementation risk of the IP
in Armenia is low to moderate The most serious risks are related to the fact
that the priority RE technologies in the IP are relatively new to Armenia, and
had not, until recently, been considered as options For example, utility-scale
solar PV only recently became an option because of the rapid decline in capital
costs (driven by changes in prices of raw materials as well as the dynamics of
supply and demand for the technology itself) Because the technologies had not
previously been seriously considered, there is some risk related to the legal
and regulatory environment, and the resource potential, as the data on
geothermal and solar resource potential are still being collected Table  lists
and describes the principal risks associated with Armenia’ IP, describes how to
mitigate those risks, and evaluates the residual level of risk after the
proposed mitigation measures are implemented Table : Risk Assessment of the SREP
Program in Armenia Risk Description Mitigation Residual Risk Moderate Legal
regulatory risks and Institutional capacity risks and other The regulatory
framework in Armenia is robust relative to many other countries in the region
SREP countries There is, however,  risk that the current or future Governments
will feel pressure to keep end-user tariffs low This could jeopardize efforts to
tariffs establish generation (either through FiTs or PPAs) for solar or
geothermal that are to private investors attractive the into Government clearly
The committed through formalized policy statements and strategies (Energy
Security Concept of its integrating 2013) to long-term energy strategy the
technologies SREP in program, namely: Utility-scale solar PV and geothermal
power MDB technical assistance will be the used to set Government efforts levels
generation investors attractive to private while vulnerable customers through
Armenia’ well-established social support mechanism, the Poverty Family Benefit
Program (PFBP) tariffs at protecting support and to energy Armenia’ sector
institutions (MENR, R2E2 Fund, PSRC, the Energy Institute, and commercial bank
partners, for example) have  long history experience of working with donors to
implement technical assistance and capital works projects effectively successful
Low The institutional capacity of specific implementing agencies will be
assessed before appraisal of identified specific projects and, where necessary,
SREP will contribute to capacity building Such capacity building may include
support in procurement, financial management, safeguards and technical aspects
of utility-scale solar PV and geothermal projects 59 Risk Description Mitigation
Residual Risk Low Technology risks Environmental risks Social risks solar
Utility-scale PV, geothermal exploratory drilling and generation technologies
are relatively well-established and well-known globally There is, however some
technical risk the associated technologies Armenia because they are not yet used
in the country In particular, exploratory geothermal drilling is novel to
Armenia with in risks industrial-scale Any assumes development environmental For
example, the selected projects construction- might have related air emissions,
limit land use, cause alternative alteration of land drainage the
characteristics, clearance of vegetation and soil, cause compaction of
vibrations downwash and during construction require in Armenia The social
impacts of the SREP are program limited There are some risks associated limiting
alternative land use, impacts traffic patterns during to construction, with
There is also the risk that, given their cost relative to in current generation
tariffs Armenia, the new RE plants will of the generation and ultimately, the
end-user tariff raise cost 60 the SREP supporting The technology risks will be
partially mitigated through the technical assistance targeted and capacity
building planned under program Moreover, the World Bank is the currently
Government with preparation of geothermal project, including recommendations on
types of exploratory wells to be drilled, determination of the precise location
of test wells, procurement and contracting civil structure, works required for
geothermal exploratory drilling project at Karkar preparatory drilling Low Low
comply of Site-specific environmental impact assessments will be carried out for
all projects implemented under SREP These assessments will ensure that the with
projects Government Armenia requirements as well as donor policies safeguards
Furthermore, by ensuring that projects are sited away from particularly
environmentally sensitive areas, environmental risks can be minimized This is
especially relevant for utility- scale solar PV projects, which provide more
flexibility in terms of siting social Site-specific impact assessments will be
carried out for all projects implemented under SREP These assessments will
ensure that the projects comply with Government of Armenia requirements as well
as donor safeguards policies The end-user tariff is not likely to increase
substantially as  result of the new projects given that average generation cost
for Armenia is significantly to estimated increase larger generation plants are
built to estimated new as Residual Risk Moderate Moderate Risk Description
Mitigation meet the forecast demand  refer Please measures for regulatory, and
resource risk to mitigation and legal to determine The exploratory drilling at
Karkar geothermal site is the final step required the existence and quality of
resource If the drilling shows no resource, or an insufficient or low quality
resource, remaining funds can be reallocated to other SREP the the exploratory
program drilling does show  resource worth exploiting, then  tender will be
launched to construct and operate  geothermal plant areas of If solar site-
specific higher- The insolation resolution measurements be conducted to confirm
the solar resources before launching any tender will Financial risks Renewable
resource uncertainty As described earlier in this document, Armenia’ energy
sector is largely privatized and therefore must operate on  full-cost recovery
basis There is some risk that Karkar geothermal site may not be suitable for
power generation despite comprehensive field investigation works conducted
advanced the considering international experience in comprehensive surface
studies for potential geothermal fields The assessment of potential for utility-
scale solar PV is based on fairly coarse resource data and very limited site
monitoring 61 10 Monitoring and Evaluation  monitoring and evaluation (&) system
will be established by the Government, in cooperation with the MDBs and other
donor partners, for the purpose of tracking and reporting on progress in
reaching SREP impacts and outcomes The & framework will be coordinated by the
R2E2 Fund and involve the participation of MENR, PSRC, the National Statistical
Service (Armstat), and commercial lenders with RE projects Table summarizes the
proposed monitoring and evaluation (&) framework for Armenia’ SREP IP39 Armenia
is unique among other SREP applicants in that it has nearly 100 percent access
to electricity Armenia’ IP is therefore not about access to modern energy
services but about using renewables to improve energy security and reliability,
and reduce the future cost of supply Whereas Armenia may not benefit from
substantially expanded access to modern energy services, it will however benefit
from the reduced use of hydrocarbons for electricity production 39 The
indicators in the results framework are based on the SREP Revised Results
Framework from June , 62 Table : Results Framework for the SREP Program in
Armenia Result Indicators Baseline Targets SREP Transformative Impacts Means of
Verification MENR, PSRC No output ,600 GWh by 2020; ,300 by 2025 Less than US$
million in annual investments US$45 million in annual investments R2E2 Fund,
MENR, PSRC Support low-carbon development pathways by increasing energy security
SREP Program Outcomes Increased supply of renewable energy Electricity output
from (non-large hydro) RE in GWh per year Increased annual public and private
investments (USD) in targeted subsector() per year Increased annual electricity
output (GWh) as  result of SREP interventions Geothermal electricity output:
GWh Utility-scale solar PV output:  GWh Geothermal electricity output: 373 GWh
by 2020; 745 GWh by 2025; Utility-scale solar PV output: 88 GWh by 2020; 176 GWh
by 2025  SREP Project’ & system SREP Project’ & system New and additional
resources for renewable energy projects (US$244 million)  Leverage factor: USD
financing from other sources compared to SREP funding 63 Annex : Project Concept
Briefs  Geothermal Power Project Problem Statement Armenia has no proven oil or
natural gas reserves and imports all of its fuel for thermal generation from
Russia and Iran The country relies on imported natural gas to generate roughly
30 percent of its power and most of its heat Nuclear fuel, which is used to
generate another 30 percent of electricity in Armenia, is also imported The
remaining electricity is generated by  series of hydropower plants in the Sevan-
Hrazdan and Vorotan cascades, more than 130 small hydropower plants, and one
small wind farm Armenia’ dependence on imported fuels creates security of supply
risks as well as affordability problems for customers The sector is highly
susceptible to fuel supply interruptions and price volatility Between 1991 and
1996—because of disruptions in gas supply—customers suffered through several of
Armenia’ brutal winters with little more than two hours of electricity supply
per day Meanwhile, the import price of natural gas has continued to increase The
increases of the price of imported gas meant steady increases in end-user
tariffs for natural gas and electricity Between 2005 and 2013, the end-user
natural gas tariff increased by 170 percent End-user residential tariffs for
electricity increased 52 percent during the same time period Therefore,
geothermal energy can become an affordable source of base-load electricity that
is generated utilizing indigenous resources, thus, contributing the country’
energy security Private investors are typically not willing to assume the
resource risk and do not finance exploratory drilling With SREP support, the
Government can confirm the resource and, if the resource is confirmed, pursue
development of the geothermal power plant with private sector involvement
Project Objective The overarching objective of the Geothermal Power Project is
to construct  geothermal power plant at Karkar site The specific objectives are
to: () confirm the availability of geothermal resource suitable for power
generation; () if the resource is confirmed, then support feasibility study for
the Karkar geothermal power plant and transaction advisory services to implement
PPP Scope of Work The geothermal power project would include the activities
described below The SREP resources will be used to support Tasks - below Task :
Exploratory Drilling at Karkar Geothermal Site: This step requires carrying out
exploratory drilling at the site to determine whether or not power could be
produced from the resource The exploratory drilling project involves the below
key steps: ; Confirming the test well locations: This will require additional
soil gas diffusion measurements and GeoRadar study to determine the precise
location of the test wells drawing on recommended approximate locations of two
test wells implemented following comprehensive geo-technical investigation works
64 under the GeoFund : Armenia Geothermal Technical Assistance Project The
Government plans to complete the above studies by September ; Environmental and
social impact assessment This will include assessment of including impacts of
the exploratory drilling, environmental and social development of mitigation
measures and management plan ; Preparatory civil works This includes
construction of an access road, preparation of the rig site, and securing access
to sufficient water supply ; Drilling This will include drilling of two
exploratory wells to depths of up to ,800 meters ; Well logging and mud logging
This will include analyses of the cuttings from the borehole, hole temperature
and pressure measurements and gathering of essential data (such as drilling
progress, circulation losses, changes in flow line temperatures, pump pressure
data, etc), both as the drilling progresses and at the end of each drilling
stage This is for the purpose of having the best information at hand for
decision making and problem-solving, as well as gathering all the information on
the formation being drilled and estimating rock/brine temperatures When the
drilling is finished, an injection test will be performed to estimate if the
permeability of the well is sufficient or not ; Flow testing, chemical sampling
and analysis: This will include an assessment of: () the possible power output
of the well, the ratio between brine and steam, and () enthalpy It will also
include sampling of the brine to analyze the resource as well as estimation of
possible problems during power production, such as scaling and/or corrosion This
will assist in deciding what kind of power conversion techniques should be used
and if any additional installation, such as inhibitors, will be needed ;
Technical supervision: This will include hiring of  technical expert to be on
site during the entire duration of the drilling to collaborating on daily basis
on the site to ensure adherence of the drilling contractor to the requirements
of the contract and making decisions on behalf of the Government in order to
prevent costly delays in the project Task : Feasibility Study for Karkar Site If
the presence of  resource is confirmed,  full feasibility study will need to be
prepared to recommend the type of geothermal technology/plant to be constructed,
reassess the economic and financial viability, compliance with environmental and
social safeguards, and to complete legal and regulatory due diligence The legal
and regulatory due diligence will include recommendations on the need for  feed-
in tariff specific to geothermal or  recommended structure and method for
procuring as  public private partnership in  way that determines the tariff
through bidding (for example,  reverse auction) It will also be necessary to
evaluate the potential for grid interconnection at the chosen site, and whether
or not grid upgrades will be necessary for the potential geothermal power plant
to be connected to the grid Task : Transaction Advisory Services The Government
would procure the project as  Public Private Partnership (PPP) Therefore,
advisory services will be needed to help structure the PPP (for example, 65 as
Build-Operate-Transfer or Build-Own-Operate contract) and procure  private
investor and operator The exact commercial arrangement will need to be developed
through further consultation within government, with donor partners, and with
potential investors However, the arrangement currently envisaged would involve
private operator having  BOT or BOO agreement under which they finance, build
and operate the power plant and have  power purchase agreement with the
distribution company The Government would own the steam fields, thereby taking
risk on the resource availability Task : Development of Geothermal Power Plant
As noted above, it is expected that the private sector will make the capital
investment required for generation of electricity (the power plant itself) This
investment plan assumes  plant with net installed capacity of MW, based on the
average size of geothermal plants elsewhere The actual size of the plant will
depend on the resource potential identified in earlier activities It is also
expected that the MDBs, including their private arms (IFC in the World Bank
Group, PSOD at ADB, or EBRD), may be able to provide financing to the project as
way of making it more attractive to other private investors Support from public
sector MDBs may include concessional lending to Government for the transmission
lines, roads or other infrastructure required at the site Implementation
Readiness Armenia has no installed geothermal power plants, but preliminary
surface studies suggest that geothermal resources suitable for power production
may exist at several sites, including the following four promising sites:
Karkar, Jermaghbyur, Grizor, and along the Armenian-Georgian border In ,
comprehensive surface investigation works were conducted for Karkar site,
including field scouting, magneto-telluric sounding, three-dimensional magneto-
telluric sounding as well as early-stage economic and financial appraisal
Evidence from these activities indicates that  geothermal resource may exist at
the site, and can only be confirmed by the drilling of an exploratory wells The
proposed geothermal power project has high level of implementation readiness
Specifically, the following activities are underway or completed: () the World
Bank is supporting the Government with preparation of  detailed exploratory
drilling program, including types of test wells; estimated cost of drilling and
associated services; identification of potential companies that may be
interested to bid for an exploratory drilling project; () the study to determine
the precise locations of test wells will be initiated in May 2014 and completed
by July 2014; () preparation of technical inputs for bidding documents for
procurement of drilling contractor; () implementing entity with experience in
implementation of donor-funded projects is designated, the R2E2 Fund Rationale
for SREP Financing SREP resources would be used for further exploration of
Armenia’ most promising geothermal site, thereby demonstrating how geothermal
power is  viable renewable energy resource in Armenia Of the known potential
geothermal sites in Armenia, the Karkar site has been the most comprehensively
assessed through comprehensive surface studies and is the most promising site to
date, with possible 66 output estimated at around MW Exploratory drilling is
required to confirm the availability and quality of the resource for power
generation By using SREP grant funding for drilling, the Government can help
reduce the risk of developing the site If  geothermal resource exists at the
site, this support can help make geothermal power  financially attractive
investment for private investors and an affordable source of electricity This
support will serve to demonstrate the feasibility of geothermal power in Armenia
The geothermal project is compliant with SREP criteria Table shows how the
project complies with SREP criteria Results Indicators The main results
indicators are expected to be the following: ; Resource confirmation for the
Karkar site ; Roughly MW of additional electricity generation resulting from the
project, depending on resource confirmation ; If the resource is confirmed,
adoption of  legal, and regulatory framework in to enable future private
investment in geothermal power generation, ; If the resource is confirmed,
formal government approval of the concept and PPP scheme for construction of
geothermal power plant The results indicators will be further specified during
preparation of the project Financing Plan Table presents  plan for financing of
the geothermal power project As the table shows, US$10 million of SREP funding
is expected to catalyze roughly 11 times as much investment, most of it from the
private sector (as equity or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the
MDBs The actual amounts financed by each will be determined once the resources
if confirmed and as the project moves head The financing modalities will be
determined at the time of appraisal, but it is expected that the geothermal
exploratory drilling project will be funded through: () an SREP grant to
government, or (ii)  guarantee to private sector entities who might want to
undertake the drilling as part of early site development If suitable resource
potential is found, the site would be financed by  private sector developer
whose remuneration would be based on  feed-in-tariff or on the terms of  power
purchase agreement It is assumed that the private sector would use  mixture of
debt and equity for the investment 67 Table : Indicative Financing Plan for
Geothermal Power Project MDB Responsible Govern-ment of Armenia SREP World Bank/
ADB Private Sector (Equity) Com- mercial / private arms of MDBs Total WB (IBRD)
30 00 70 00 (Million US$)    tbd - - - - - - - - - tbd tbd tbd   106  - - - SREP
Project Geothermal Development Project Preparation Geothermal Resource
Confirmation Transaction Advisory Services (structuring of PPP for power plant)
Investments in MW plant Subtotal: Geothermal Development SREP Leverage Lead
Implementing Agencies The project will be implemented by the World Bank as the
lead MDB The R2E2 Fund will be the implementing agency on behalf of the
Government Table shows an indicative timeline for the Geothermal Exploratory
Drilling Project This timeline has taken into account the “window of
opportunity” for accessing the site (mid-May to mid-September), indicating that
at least two seasons would be needed to complete the drilling program The
implementing entity should also initiate the necessary licensing processes as
early as possible, which would include carrying out the required environmental
and social assessment It is expected that the project will be negotiated with
the World Bank by January 2015 and will become effective by March The project
will be submitted to SREP Sub-committee no-objection by December Project
Preparation Grant The Government of Armenia is requesting  preparatory grant of
US$300,000 to prepare the project 68 Table : Timeline for Geothermal Exploratory
Drilling Project *Both for civil works and for drilling services (separate
tenders) Tender documents for mud logging and flow testing could also be
prepared at this time ** Well head 69 SREP INVESTMENT PROGRAMME Project
Preparation Grant Request Armenia/ Eastern Europe, Central Asia Geothermal Power
Project Grant: US$10 million  CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID)
Country/Region:  Project Title:  Tentative SREP Funding Request (in USD million
total) for Projecta at the time of Investment Plan submission (concept stage):
Preparation Grant Request (in USD):  National Project Focal Point: US$300,000
MDB: IBRD Ms Tamara Babayan Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
National Implementing Agency (project/programme): MDB SREP Focal Point:  MDB
SREP Focal Point and Gevorg Sargsyan, SREP Project/Programme Team Program
Manager Leader (TTL): Description of activities covered by the preparation
grant: Task TTL: Arthur Kochnakyan, Energy Economist, IBRD The grant will cover
activities related to the preparation of  Independent review of gas diffusion
and GeoRadar study to determine precise location of test wells  Environmental
and social impact assessment of the exploratory drilling operation; 
Finalization of bidding documents for exploratory drilling;  Detailed designs
for construction of access road and water supply infrastructure, and preparation
of rig site;  Bidding documents for construction of access road and water
supply infrastructure, and preparation of rig site; Incremental operating costs
of R2E2 Fund   Outputs: Policy Framework Deliverable Independent review of the
results of gas diffusion and GeoRadar study Report on Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment Detailed designs for access road, water supply infrastructure
and rig site Final set of bidding documents for preparatory civil works and
exploratory drilling Budget (indicative): Expendituresb Consultants/technical
assistance Equipment Workshops/seminars/trainings 70 Timeline October, 2014
November, 2014 December, 2014 January, 2015 Amount (USD) – estimates 270,000
,000 Travel/transportation Others (admin costs/operational costs) Contingencies
(max 10%) Total cost Other contributions:  Government  MDB 15,000 10,000
300,000 100,000 (Government expert’ staff time and taxes) 50,000 (World
Bank/ESMAP grant for GeoRadar and Gas Diffusion Studies)  Private sector  R2E2
Fund Timeframe (tentative): For World Bank: SREP Sub-committee approval by July
2014 World Bank approval/Board approval by August 2014 Other partners involved
in project design and implementationd: Geology Institute of the Republic of
Armenia - 20,000 (staff-time) If applicable, explanation for why the grant is
MDB executed: / Implementation Arrangements (including procurement of goods and
services): The R2E2 Fund will implement the project since it has adequate
capacity and significant experience in implementing Bank financed projects The
R2E2 Fund is  non-profit organization established by the Government in 2005 with
the mandate to promote the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency
markets in Armenia and to facilitate investments in these sectors The
implementation of the project as well as overall R2E2 Fund operations will be
supervised by the Board of Trustees (BOT), consisting of representatives of
government agencies, NGOs, and the private sector, thus, ensuring required
professional expertise The BOT is chaired by the Minister of Energy and Natural
Resources The most recent assessment conducted by the World Bank suggested that
the R2E2 Fund has satisfactory procurement and financial management capacity
Including the preparation grant request  These expenditure categories may be
adjusted during project preparation according to emerging needs  In some cases,
activities will not require approval of the MDB Board  Other local, national,
and international partners expected to be involved in project design and
implementation 71 MDB Request for Payment for Project Implementation Services
(MPIS) SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES World Bank
Request for Payment of Implementation Services Costs Armenia/Eastern Europe,
Central Asia Geothermal Power Project  CIF Project ID#:  Country/Region:
Project Title: (Trustee will assign ID)  Request for project funding (USDmill ):
At time of country program submission (tentative): Grant of US$10 million At
time of project approval:  Estimated costs for MDB project implementation
services (USDmill): Initial estimate - at time of Country program submission:
US$300,000 MDB: IBRD Final estimate - at time of project approval: Date: January
2015  Request for payment of MDB Implementation Services Costs (USDmill): 
First tranche: US$100,000  Second tranche: US$200,000  Project/program
financing category:  - Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project
- Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project  - Investment
financing - stand-alone  - Capacity building - stand alone  years     costs
Expected project duration (no of years):  Explanation of final estimate of MDB
implementation services: Justification for proposed stand-alone financing in
cases of above   or : /  lone financing in cases of above   or : for If final
estimate in  above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, 72  Utility-Scale Solar
PV Problem Statement Poor utilization of energy resources plagues an otherwise
robust and sustainable Armenian energy sector Armenia’ thermal power plants
operate at low efficiency, hydropower plants have low reliability and high
operation and maintenance costs, grid losses are high, and export potential is
not fully realized The sector relies on the old Metsamor nuclear power plant,
the decommissioning of which has been postponed twice, from 2016, to 2020, and
recently to When decommissioned, Metsamor will leave  substantial power supply
gap To address these concerns, Armenia plans to increase development of
indigenous energy resources, especially renewable energy Solar photovoltaic
(PV), with an estimated potential of over  GW, has the highest potential but is
not fully utilized due to high investment costs Armenia’ solar research and
technical experience is limited to solar water heaters, off-grid and small-scale
PV applications Utility-scale solar PV is now cost-competitive on  life-cycle
basis with the other power generation options available to Armenia, given the
technological and declines manufacturing internationally Armenia will benefit
from developing its capacity to scale-up PV technology and take advantage of
these cost reductions as these happen combined with advancements continued cost
Current Efforts Armenia has good solar PV resources, with annual average global
horizontal irradiation (GHI) ranging from ,490 kWh/m2 to over ,100 kWh/m2 By
comparison, average annual GHI is ,000 kWh/m2 in Europe The total resource
potential for utility-scale solar PV is over ,500 MW However, after accounting
for undevelopable areas, the developable resource potential is assumed to be
much lower Assuming polycrystalline solar PV modules mounted at  fixed angle to
the sun are deployed in ground-mounted utility-scale plants, solar PV systems
could theoretically achieve capacity factors of 20 to 24 in Armenia (dependent
on location) If single-axis tracking solar PV technology is deployed, capacity
factors could be as high as 30 percent As part of the preparation of the
Investment Plan, nine zones were identified where large-scale, ground-mounted
solar PV projects could be built Figure shows the solar zones identified as part
of the investment plan 73 Figure : Solar Zones Project Objective The objective
of the utility-scale solar project is to deploy the first of  series of utility-
scale solar PV projects which, through cost reductions and gradual tariff
increases will eventually become commercially viable without SREP/MDB support
These first projects will be so small as to have only  very minor impact on the
overall cost of generation in Armenia, but could have  catalytic effect on the
market for solar PV through: – Lower solar installation costs that will result
as  domestic industry develops around it; – Lower financing costs as lenders
become more comfortable with the technology, and The foreseen increase in
thermal generation costs in Armenia will move solar toward financial viability
Armenia’ new thermal plants will require substantially higher tariffs than many
of the existing plants, because they are fully (or near fully) depreciated and
no longer recover depreciation charges nor debt service through their generation
tariffs Scope of Work SREP resources would be used to develop roughly  MW of
utility-scale solar PV SREP support would help catalyze private investment in
first new plant (or plants), 74 123456789 and show the potential for deploying
solar PV on  commercial basis The utility- scale solar PV project would include
activities described below Task : Project Preparation, Feasibility Studies, Site
Measurement and Monitoring SREP grant funds would first be used to fund more
detailed resource assessments, and the identification of possible sites and
possible projects The activities in this task include: ; Additional site
measurement and monitoring Relatively coarse resolution solar data are publicly
available for Armenia Given the nature of solar energy resources, these coarse
data are generally acceptable for understanding the nature of the resource and
conducting  high-level financial analysis However, additional measurement and
monitoring will be needed to characterize the solar resource potential in the
areas targeted for solar development in more detail ; Evaluation of grid
interconnection requirements It will be necessary to evaluate the potential for
grid interconnection at the chosen site, and whether or not grid upgrades will
be necessary before the project is interconnected ; Feasibility study Once
potential site or sites have been identified,  full feasibility study will be
needed to reaffirm the economic and financial viability of the projects, assess
compliance with environmental and social safeguards, and complete the legal and
regulatory due diligence Task : Transaction Advisory Services Transaction
advisors would be hired to help government tender for the projects identified in
Task  Private operators would be procured through competitive tender Bidders
would be selected based on technical and financial criteria, the financial
criteria being the level of tariff required or, alternatively, the level of
concessional support required40 Developers offering lower tariffs or requiring
less concessional support would receive higher scores The activities in the
transaction advisory work include: ; The identification of specific structuring
options for the projects where “structuring” means arrangements related to: –
The detailed allocation of responsibilities between public and private partners
(design, construction, operations, and, if appropriate—financing); – The way in
which the private partner will be remunerated (for example, through availability
payments, tariffs payments, or some combination); – The allocation of risks
between public and private partners, and mechanisms for mitigating such risks; –
The length, or term of the PPP contract, and mechanisms during the term of the
contract for cost pass-through or indexation, revenue resets or adjustments; 40
Bidders will be offered, as part of the conditions of tender, access to SREP
capital contributions 75 –  strategy for procurement, including whether to
tender bundle or tender separately for design, construction, and operations ;
The development of model tender documents for the structures recommended, where
such model documents will include: –  project information memorandum: The
project information memorandum will present the project justifications,
objectives, scope, information about the structure of the PPP, the location of
the assets, land and other conditions, environment, sanitation and labor safety,
required permits and licenses, operational information on existing assets,
project output, demand, legal environment, contract management, monitoring of
private partner’ performance, etc –  request for qualifications (RFQ) or request
for expressions of interest (EoIs) –  Requests for Proposals (RFP) The RFP will
describe the project proposal, instructions to bidders, evaluation criteria for
the proposal, the timeline for instructions for the tender period preparation of
financial and technical proposals, the process and timing for opening of bids,
information about any bid security and guarantees, and clear procedures for
communication between the public authority and bidders including the proposal
deadlines, –  draft PPP agreement, including the necessary schedules to the
agreement Task : Power Generation Project Development SREP funds would be made
available to the Government of Armenia which would on-lend SREP funds at
concessional rates to private operators bidding on the projects being tendered
The private operators would contribute equity and also source loans from
commercial banks and from the commercial lending arms of the MDBs Government
estimates that, given current capital costs for utility-scale solar PV, SREP
funds could be used with these other sources of financing to support roughly  MW
of solar Initial studies indicate that Gegharkunik Marz has some of the highest
solar PV potential in Armenia, and would be considered as  first potential area
for development This could be  single plant, or several plants with  total
capacity of  MW, as development of solar is often more effective if there are
multiple sites, in areas with different solar profiles (to provide more
stability by diversifying generation profiles) Implementation Readiness Solar PV
deployment in Armenia to date has been limited to relatively small-scale
rooftop-based installations at schools, hospitals, office buildings and
municipal sites 76 throughout Armenia41 It is estimated that less than 100 kW of
solar PV is currently operational42 Utility-scale solar is non-existent because,
until recently, it was perceived as  high cost technology relative to Armenia’
alternatives Also, while solar PV power plants are quick to install,
considerable time is required to gather solar irradiation and weather data, to
develop energy yield models for simulation, prepare bankable projects for
financing, and to procure equipment and consulting services Solar PV has become
more attractive in recent years as the capital costs of utility- scale solar PV
projects have declined The Government has set  target of 40 MW of solar PV by
2020 and 80 MW of solar PV by There is, moreover, considerable research and
development (&) and interest in solar PV within Armenia’ academic institutions
solar PV project could catalyze further research and development and facilitate
the transfer of capacity for increased participation in solar PV value chain
Armenia’ development partners, ADB and the World Bank, have  solid track record
and experience in solar development in the region and have developed solar
insolation maps and atlases for several countries including Armenia Rationale
for SREP Financing One of the most significant barriers to renewable energy in
Armenia is the high cost of investment, therefore higher cost per kWh, relative
to the currently low-cost electricity generation mix The current low cost of
generation makes it difficult for consumers to understand the need for higher-
cost renewable energy generation over the medium to long term which will satisfy
–at least initially—only  small portion of demand There are also legitimate
concerns about affordability The poorest quintiles of the population allocate
relatively higher share of their budgets to electricity than other households
These households are likely to experience more significant pressures on their
budgets as  result of increased energy tariffs SREP support would help catalyze
private investment in  first new plant (or plants), and show the potential for
deploying solar PV on  commercial basis  utility-scale commercial project would
not only enable the country to take advantage of this technology in the future
when its costs decline even further, but reduce costs for future projects
because of learning effects, efficiency gains and competition Concessional SREP
financing brings down the cost of solar PV generation closer to grid parity and
addresses both viability concerns for developers and affordability concerns for
consumers Commercial financing is available but there is  shortage of qualified
developers, with enough risk appetite and willingness to invest despite the lack
of specific targets and specific feed-in-tariffs for solar PV Site-specific
solar resource assessments and institutional capacity are also non-existent
These concerns are addressed through technical and capacity building assistance
and concessional project financing 41 USAAA/US Embassy/EcoTeam/UNDP/GEF, “Use of
Renewable Energy Sources in the World and Armenia Through Innovations to Clear
Technologies,” 2010 42 Preparation of Renewable Energy Development Roadmap for
the Republic of Armenia Task  Report,” February 2011 77 Results Indicators The
main results indicators are expected to be the following: ; Roughly  MW of
additional electricity generation resulting from the project, depending on
resource confirmation ;  legal, and regulatory framework in place to enable
future private investment in utility-scale solar PV, including either: ()  feed-
in tariff for future utility- scale solar PV projects; or ()  framework for
procuring utility-scale solar PV on  Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis The
results indicators will be further specified during preparation of the project
Financing Plan As Table shows, roughly US$30 million of SREP funding is expected
to catalyze roughly  times as much investment in solar PV, most of it from the
private sector (as equity or debt), and the commercial lending windows of the
MDBs The SREP concessional funds will be used to finance private-sector led
utility scale solar PV power plants The SREP Utility Scale Solar PV Financing
Facility will blend SREP funds with ADB and World Bank public sector financing
to provide loans to cover up to 50 percent of the total investment cost for one
or two projects, the rest is expected to be mobilized from  combination of
equity from investors/developers and additional project financing, as
appropriate, from other financial institutions that may include EBRD, IFC, and
ADB’ Private Sector Operations Department In its Armenia Country Operations
Business Plan (COBP) , the ADB has allocated US$20 million from its Ordinary
Capital Resources for the project for approval in The World Bank may also
consider allocating US$10 million for the potential solar PV project The
combination of SREP financing of $million, IFI financing and project sponsors
will help to finance US$75 million investments in solar PV (potentially  MW
installed) The ADB may provide additional financing subject to receipt of formal
request from the Government The Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
will be the implementing agency (IA) and will act as financial intermediary and
project management office SREP will provide  technical assistance grant of US$
million for onsite solar irradiation and weather measurements, pre-feasibility
studies including up to  project feasibility studies and project preparation for
the first solar PV project/ to be auctioned ADB has also allocated US$ million
technical assistance grant in 2015 to prepare the Financial Intermediary Loan
for ADB approval in SREP grant funding of US$ million is also expected to
finance transaction advisors to assist the IA in structuring and developing the
PV project to be financed under the SREP Loan Facility Transaction advisors
provide advice on optimal commercial and financial structures, conduct due
diligence, prepare bidding documents and project contracts, marketing/roadshow,
assist in bid evaluation, auctioning, and financial closing  reverse auction,
instead of  feed-in-tariff mechanism, will be used for setting the solar PV
tariff The tariff for  predetermined maximum aggregate PV capacity will then be
based on the lowest qualifying bid An indicative tariff will be calculated 78
based on the financing terms offered under the SREP Loan Facility and used as
benchmark for evaluating bids This tariff is not set officially nor declared as
ceiling for the auction The auction will be announced for one or more high solar
potential sites as assessed and prioritized through the SREP technical
assistance Table : Indicative Financing Plan for Utility-Scale Solar Power
Project MDB Respon- sible Govern- ment of Armenia World Bank/ ADB Private Sector
(Equity) SREP Com- mercial / private arms of MDBs Total ADB WB (IBRD)        - -
- - - -    SREP Project Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV Grant for Project
Preparation, Feasibility studies, site measurement and monitoring Transaction
Advisory Services Investment in power plants (total of  MW of projects)
Subtotal: Development of Utility-Scale Solar PV SREP Leverage Lead Implementing
Agencies The project will be implemented as  joint operation by ADB and the
World Bank, and will be led by ADB The R2E2 Fund will be the implementing agency
on behalf of the Government It is expected that the project will be negotiated
with ADB and the World Bank by April 2016 and will become effective by June The
project will be submitted to SREP Sub-committee no-objection by January SREP
funding would be provided to Ministry of Finance, which would on-lend to
developers The R2E2 Fund, which has extensive experience implementing donor-
financed projects in renewable energy and energy efficiency, would be
responsible for implementation of the project Project Preparation Timetable The
estimated timetable for the Utility Scale Solar PV Development program is in the
table below The technical assistance may be proposed as one TA, but done in
phases, which could start with capacity development and feasibility studies
followed by project preparation 79 Table : Indicative Financing Plan for
Utility-Scale Solar Power Project Technical Assistance (TA) and Project
Processing Milestones Capacity Development and Project Preparation TA (CDTA)
Advanced Procurement of Consultants Approval of Armenia SREP IP Consultant
Mobilization Completion of solar resource mapping /modeling Screening of
potential sites Procurement of on-site measurement stations Selection of
priority solar project sites; Procurement of hourly time-series data for sites
Installation of Meteostations On-site measurements and data analysis Preparation
and submission of pre-feasibility studies Technical, Financial, Economic,
Governance, Environmental and Social Safeguards Due Diligence for priority sites
Submission of draft feasibility studies for sites (based on  months of
measurements) Feasibility studies SREP (US$ Million) June-July 2014 May 2014
July 2014 September 2014 September 2014 July 2014 October 2014 October-November
2014 November 2014 – November 2015 January-November 2015 January-November 2015
June 2015 Capacity Building Program March 2015-December 2015 November
2014-January 2016 ADB (US$ Million) Project Preparation TA (PPTA) February-May
2015 Concept Paper Preparation and ADB Review March –July 2015 Advanced
Procurement of PPTA Consultant July 2015 ADB Approval of PPTA August 2015
Consultant Mobilization Project preparation August 2015- February 2016 Advance
procurement of Project Implementation Consultant November 2015-March 2016
ADB/World Bank Loan Approval Transaction Advisory Services (February
2015-October 2016) Engagement of TAS Preliminary Structuring and Due Diligence
Roadshow Tender and Selection of Preferred Bidder Negotiation and Award February
2016 August - January 2016 January - March 2016 March – May 2016 June 2016 –
August 2016 SREP (US$ Million) April 2016 Project Preparation Grant The
Government of Armenia is requesting  preparatory grant of US$ million to prepare
the project 80 SREP INVESTMENT PROGRAMME Project Preparation Grant Request
Armenia/ Eastern Europe, Central Asia Utility-Scale Solar Power Project US$30
million  CIF Project ID#: (Trustee will assign ID) US$ million MDB: ADB
Country/Region:  Project Title:  Tentative SREP Funding Request (in USD million
total) for Projecta at the time of Investment Plan submission (concept stage):
Preparation Grant Request (in USD):  National Project Focal Point: Ms Tamara
Babayan  National Implementing Agency  MDB SREP Focal Point and
(project/programme): Project/Programme Task Team Leader (TTL): Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund MDB SREP Focal Point: Gevorg Sargsyan, SREP
Program Manager TTL from ADB: Cindy Tiangco (Energy Specialist) TTL from IBRD:
Arthur Kochnakyan (Energy Economist) Description of activities covered by the
preparation grant: The preparation grant will cover the following key
activities:  Solar resource mapping/modelling;  Screening of potential sites;
 Preparation of feasibility studies for identified highest-potential sites; 
Capacity building for R2E Fund, including organization of reverse auctions; 
Incremental operating costs of the R2E2 Fund  Outputs: Policy Framework
Deliverable Report on solar resource mapping/modelling Report on screening of
potential sites Feasibility study for identified sites Budget (indicative):
Expendituresb Consultants/technical assistance Equipment (meteo-stations,
computers, data) Workshops/seminars/trainings Vehicle/transportation Others
(admin costs/operational costs) Contingencies (max 10%) Total cost Other
contributions: 81 Timeline September 2014 September 2014 March-December 2015
Amount (USD) – estimates ,458,000 355,000 20,000 10,000 80,000 77,000 ,000,0000
 Government 400,000 (Government experts’ time and taxes)  MDB  Private sector
Timeframe (tentative): For ADB and World Bank: SREP Sub-committee approval of
the project: June 2014 ADB approval: July 2014 Other partners involved in
project design and implementationd: National Academy of Sciences - - If
applicable, explanation for why the grant is MDB executed: / Implementation
Arrangements (including procurement of goods and services): The R2E2 Fund will
implement the project since it has adequate capacity and significant experience
in implementing Bank financed projects The R2E2 Fund is  non-profit organization
established by the Government in 2005 with the mandate to promote the
development of renewable energy and energy efficiency markets in Armenia and to
facilitate investments in these sectors The implementation of the project as
well as overall R2E2 Fund operations will be supervised by the Board of Trustees
(BOT), consisting of representatives of government agencies, NGOs, and the
private sector, thus, ensuring required professional expertise The BOT is
chaired by the Minister of Energy and Natural Resources The most recent
assessment conducted by the World Bank suggested that the R2E2 Fund has
satisfactory procurement and financial management capacity  Including the
preparation grant request  These expenditure categories may be adjusted during
project preparation according to emerging needs  In some cases, activities will
not require approval of the MDB Board  Other local, national, and international
partners expected to be involved in project design and 87 implementation 82 MDB
Request for Payment for Project Implementation Services (MPIS) SCALING UP
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES ADB Request for Payment of
Implementation Services Costs  Country/Region:  Project Title: Armenia/Eastern
Europe, Central Asia Utility-Scale Solar Power Project  CIF Project ID#:
(Trustee will assign ID)  Request for project funding (USDmill ): At time of
country program submission (tentative): ADB: US$20 million At time of project
approval:  Estimated costs for MDB project implementation services (USDmill):
Initial estimate - at time of Country program submission: ADB: US$320,000 Final
estimate - at time of project approval: MDB: ADB Date:  Request for payment of
MDB Implementation Services Costs (USDmill): First tranche: ADB: US$100,000 
Second tranche: ADB: US$220,000  Project/program financing category:  -
Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project   - Investment
financing - blended with proposed MDB project   - Investment financing - stand-
alone   - Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project   -
Investment financing - stand-alone   - Capacity building - stand-alone     
costs  Expected project duration (no of years):  Explanation of final estimate
of MDB implementation services: Justification for proposed stand-alone financing
in cases of above   or : /  lone financing in cases of above   or : for the
exceptional circumstances and reasons: Not Applicable If final estimate in
above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, 83 SCALING UP RENEWABLE ENERGY
PROGRAM IN LOW-INCOME COUNTRIES World Bank Request for Payment of Implementation
Services Costs Armenia/Eastern Europe, Central Asia Utility-Scale Solar Power
Project  CIF Project ID#:  Country/Region:  Project Title: (Trustee will assign
ID)  Request for project funding (USDmill ): At time of country program
submission (tentative): IBRD: US$10 million At time of project approval:
Estimated costs for MDB project implementation services (USDmill): Initial
estimate - at time of Country program submission: IBRD: US$320,000 Final
estimate - at time of project approval: MDB: IBRD Date:  Request for payment of
MDB Implementation Services Costs (USDmill): First tranche: IBRD: US$100,000 
Second tranche: IBRD: US$220,000  Project/program financing category:  -
Investment financing - additional to ongoing MDB project   - Investment
financing - blended with proposed MDB project   - Investment financing - stand-
alone   - Investment financing - blended with proposed MDB project   -
Investment financing - stand-alone   - Capacity building - stand-alone     
costs  Expected project duration (no of years):  Explanation of final estimate
of implementation MDB services: Justification for proposed stand-alone financing
in cases of above   or : /  lone financing in cases of above   or : for the
exceptional circumstances and reasons: Not Applicable If final estimate in
above exceeds the relevant benchmark range, Annex : Assessment of Absorptive
Capacity Armenia has sufficient absorptive capacity to implement the projects
identified in the IP This Appendix describes the macroeconomic; regulatory and
institutional, technical and managerial dimensions of the country’ absorptive
capacity  Macroeconomic Outlook Armenia continues to recover from the impact of
the global financial crisis After  contraction of 14 percent in 2009, GDP has
grown steadily GDP grew at  rate of  84 percent in 2010,  percent in 2011, and
percent in GDP grew  percent in the first quarter of Armenia’ total external
debt is estimated at percent of GDP by the end of 2012,  large share of which is
owed by the public sector Public external debt has increased substantially since
2008, but does not yet breach indicative thresholds Public external debt was
about 16 percent of GDP at end-2008, reaching 35 percent of GDP at end-
Government efforts at fiscal consolidation have been showing results and with
continued GDP growth, are projected to lead to  gradual reduction in the debt-
to-GDP ratio Gross external financing (debt service payments) has remained
around  percent of GDP over the last decade During the recent IDA-16 Mid-Term
Review, Armenia and  few similar countries were deemed ineligible for
concessional financing under IDA- 43 However, Armenia applied for deferral of
its graduation More recently, inflation has become  problem for Armenia, due
largely to higher energy and food prices The 12-month inflation was  percent in
December 2012, well within the central bank’ target range of ± percent However,
in July 2013, the PSRC increased domestic natural gas and electricity tariffs to
reflect an increase in the cost of gas imports from Russia End-user natural gas
and electricity tariffs were increased by 18 percent and 27 percent,
respectively Legal, Regulatory and Institutional   combination of policy, legal,
regulatory and institutional reforms has helped to achieve remarkable results in
the energy sector Government has made  consistent—if often difficult—effort to
create  legal, regulatory and institutional environment which provides good
quality, reliable electricity supply that is affordable for end-users, and
conducive to private sector investment Overview of Reforms Armenia undertook
major power sector reforms after the severe electricity crisis that followed
independence Between 1992 and 1996, customers suffered through brutal winters
with little more than two hours of electricity per day By 1995, fiscal and
quasi-fiscal subsidies to the power sector had reached  level of roughly 11
percent of Armenia’ GDP Cash collections were around 50 percent, and nearly 25
and nearly 25 percent of all power produced disappeared before the meters as
commercial losses (mostly electricity theft) The power sector included the
following ; Unbundling and privatizing the power system Efforts began in 1995 to
unbundle the power system and privatize the power sector Armenergo, the state-
owned vertically integrated utility, was separated into generation and
distribution entities In March 1997,  Presidential Order and new Energy Law
formalized separate generation, distribution, transmission and dispatch During
43 IDA (2012), “IDA16 Mid-Term Review Graduation Paper”, Concessional Finance
and Global Partnership (CFP), World Bank, September 85 , ownership of several
major generating plants was transferred from the Government in exchange for
state debt forgiveness ; Establishing an independent regulator The Presidential
Order and the Energy Law enacted in 1997 established an independent energy
sector regulator, the Armenian Energy Regulatory Commission (AERC) The Law on
the Regulatory Body for Public Services, enacted in 2004, changed the name of
the regulator to the Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC) and expanded
its authority to other sectors, including water, drainage and sewage, and
telecom ; Achieving sectoral financial sustainability Three steps were essential
to increase collections, reducing commercial losses and improving the overall
financial sustainability of the sector The steps were: – Installing meters
Between 1997 and 1998, twelve thousand new tamper- proof meters were installed
throughout the power system at  variety of voltage levels down to  kV
Residential customer meters were relocated to public areas An Automated Metering
and Data Acquisition System (AMDAS) was installed in 2001 and linked to
settlement center to facilitate accurate meter reading at the 110 kV and above –
Bringing tariffs to cost recovery levels In 1994, Armenia began  gradual
transition to cost-based tariffs by bring household tariffs to the average level
of other retail tariffs  schedule was established for further household tariff
hikes Since 1999, household tariffs have remained well above the overall average
tariff – Increasing transparency in collections and billing The Electricity
Distribution Company (EDC) installed  computerized customer information system
to better track utilization and billing In 1999, the EDC established  new
collection scheme requiring bill payments at post offices instead of cash
payments at local EDC offices, which reduced opportunities for collusion between
customers and EDC inspectors The result of the reforms are clear Since 1996,
24-hour electricity service has been restored and gradually customers have
switched to cheaper, more efficient gas heating Meanwhile, tariff increases and
operating efficiency improvements have helped create commercially viable service
providers, technical and non-technical losses have decreased, and collections
have increased The energy sector is now one of the largest taxpayers in Armenia
Reforms targeting renewable energy The reform efforts have included the
development of domestic energy resources that have helped to improve Armenia’
security of energy supply Energy security is  central concern of the Armenian
Development Strategy (ADS) and National Security Strategy (NSS) These documents
emphasize the importance of renewable energy and energy efficiency in addressing
this concern In 2007, the PSRC set renewable energy feed-in tariffs to stimulate
private investment in renewable energy ENA is obliged to off-take all of the
power generated by the new plants under the 15-year power purchase agreements
mandated by the legislation According to the feed-in tariff methodology, the
PSRC 86 must adjust feed-in tariffs annually in line with changes in inflation
and the USD to AMD exchange rate fluctuations (USD/AMD for SHPPs, USD/EUR for
wind) The feed- in tariff regime has been successful in attracting private
investment in more than 200 MW of small hydropower  Technical and Managerial
Public and private entities in Armenia have extensive experience working with
MDBs and implementing MDB-financed projects ; MENR has excellent technical staff
with long-standing experience in the power sector reform process MENR also
enjoys the support of the Energy Institute CJSC,  research entity with extensive
experience in Armenia’ energy sector ; The R2E2 Fund is  non-profit organization
established by the Government in 2005 with the mandate to promote the
development of renewable energy and energy efficiency markets in Armenia and to
facilitate investments in these sectors The implementation of the project as
well as overall R2E2 Fund operations will be supervised by the Board of Trustees
(BOT), consisting of representatives of government agencies, NGOs, and the
private sector, thus, ensuring required professional expertise The BOT is
chaired by the Minister of Energy and Natural Resources implementing donor-
financed The R2E2 Fund has strong experience projects For the World Bank it is
currently implementing the GeoFund : Armenia Geothermal Project, and in the past
has implemented several World Bank-financed projects including the Urban Heating
Project, Renewable Energy Project and an Electricity Supply Reliability Project
in ; Private banks As describe elsewhere in this document, there are  number of
commercial banks in Armenia (Ameria Bank, Analik Bank, HSBC, Byblos Bank and
others) who have experience on-lending donor funds for renewable energy projects
87 Annex : Stakeholder Consultations Armenia’ SREP Investment Plan is the result
of an extensive internal and public consultation process, led by the Government
of Armenia and represented by the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, to
identify priorities in the development of renewable energy technologies for
electricity and heating The consultations included  wide range of government
agencies, as well as representatives from the private sector, civil society, and
academia Discussions were informed by the analysis of the Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency (R2E2) Fund and its consultants44 Feedback was sought
through many one-on-one meetings,  workshop with the Government’ SREP working
group, as well as an open forum Scoping Mission (July -12, 2012) The purpose of
the scoping mission was to explore potential areas of engagement for SREP, and
discuss plans for preparing the investment plan The scoping mission included
discussions with MENR, PSRC, donors and bilateral agencies (KfW, USAID, UNDP,
JICA, UNIDO), R2E2 Fund, the Energy Institute of the Republic of Armenia,
commercial banks and several private sector entities engaged in renewable energy
projects  consultative workshop was also held and attended by 60 participants
from the Government, private sector, donors, and academia In addition, the MDB
team also conducted site visits to two small hydro power plants,  biogas power
plant, and  solar water heating installation First Joint Technical Mission (June
-, 2013) The purpose of the first joint technical mission was to get feedback on
the set of criteria to be used to evaluate and prioritize projects for the IP,
and to collect data for use in evaluating each technology or resource against
the criteria The first joint technical mission included discussions between
MENR, Ministry of Finance, R2E2 Fund, its consultants, and the MDB team working
on SREP R2E2 Fund and its consultants also met with HVEN, the Armenian Power
System Operator,  private geothermal heat pump developer, the Armenian
Scientific Research Institute of Energy, the Institute of Geological Sciences at
the National Academy of Sciences of Armenia, commercial banks, Yerevan Municipal
Government, and various technical experts in geothermal, solar and other
technologies being considered Second Joint Technical Mission (August
28-September , 2013 The purpose of the second joint technical mission was to
solicit feedback from stakeholders on substantive portions of the draft IP The
second joint technical mission included discussions between MENR, Ministry of
Finance, R2E2 Fund, its consultants, the MDB team working on SREP, and other key
stakeholders 44 Lists of stakeholders consulted during the joint missions are
also available in various Aide-Memoire posted on website the ( Investment
Climate Funds (CIF) 88 The analytical work completed in preparing the IP
included  comprehensive assessment of renewable energy technologies identified
during the first technical mission The technologies included: wind: utility-
scale solar PV; concentrating solar PV, distributed solar PV, small hydropower,
pumped storage hydropower, wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) biogas-to-power,
agricultural biogas-to-power, landfill biogas-to-power, biomass (wood/grain),
geothermal power, solar thermal water heating, geothermal district heating and
geothermal heat pumps The mission included two stakeholder consultation
workshops to get feedback on the analysis: ; On August 30, 2013, the proposed
priority RE technologies to be developed in Armenia were presented to the multi-
sectoral task force established in 2011 for review/discussion of issues
pertaining to development of renewable energy and energy efficiency in the
country The task force approved the priority RE technologies proposed to be
supported under the SREP IP ; On September , 2013, the Government also organized
open public consultations with representatives of civil society, NGOs, private
sector, project developers, research institutions, academia, and donor
organizations The participants were overall supportive of main findings,
conclusions and recommendations regarding priority RE technologies to be
supported in Armenia There was unanimous support for development of utility-
scale PV, given consensus on the estimated large potential and increasingly
attractive unit costs of energy given significant reduction in module costs over
the last several years The participants also suggested to include in the
priority list some RE technologies, which had low levelized energy costs (LEC)
and other benefits, such as biogas, however, the Government noted the limited
potential for scaling up those technologies in the country In addition to the
two workshops, the main findings of the analysis and proposed RE priorities were
posted on the web-site of the R2E2 Fund for public comments45 45 On August 24,
89 Annex : Co-Benefits Section  highlighted some of the environmental, social
and gender co-benefits likely to result from Armenia’ SREP IP This section
focuses specifically on the co-benefits tracked under SREP’ Revised Results
Framework (as of June , 2012) Annex Table  lists the co-benefits considered
under SREP’ Revised Results Framework, and describes how those co-benefits will
be achieved in Armenia Annex Table : Co-Benefits Associated with SREP Impacts
and Outcomes Results Co-benefits Description SREP Transformative Impact Avoided
GHG emissions Support low- carbon development pathways by increasing energy
security Employment opportunities SREP Program Outcomes Increased reliability
Increased supply of renewable energy (RE) New and additional resources for
renewable energy projects/programs ; As described in Section , all of the
technologies in Armenia’ SREP IP could be used to offset thermal generation
during daily dispatch, and ultimately forestall the need for additional thermal
(nuclear or gas) generation The generation government has targeted for new solar
and geothermal plants promises to offset roughly 83,000 tonnes of CO2 by 2020
and 234,000 tonnes of CO2 by 46 ; Potential short-term job creation during
exploration of the geothermal site Potential for both short and long-term job
creation during the development and operations of  geothermal and utility-scale
solar PV plant Estimates from one study suggest that geothermal project funded
by SREP could generate as many as 850 job-years, and the solar project could
generation 237 job-years47 ; Given the remote location and rural nature of the
Karkar geothermal site and the Gegharkunic Marz solar site, the projects could
also help reduce rural unemployment in the surrounding areas ; All of the
technologies in Armenia’ SREP IP would ultimately improve long-term reliability
of supply, by strengthening energy security and reducing the risk that fuel
supply interruptions could lead to reliability problems The technologies are
effectively  hedge against future gas import price hikes ; The geothermal power
project could, in particular, improve supply reliability because it represents
potential source of baseload generation, rather than interruptible supply ; Grid
enhancements required to connect the solar PV and 46 Given Armenia’ estimated
Grid Emissions Factor of 181  CO2/kWh, based on estimate by the Climate Registry
( Factorspdf) 47 Job-years are calculated instead of just calculating “jobs”
because each technology creates both short-term and long-term jobs In order to
compare each technology using just  single metric, “job-years” created over the
life of the project are calculated These are estimated using the costs estimated
for each technology in this project and data from Wei , Patadia , Kammen  (2008)
‘Putting renewables and energy efficiency to work: how many jobs can the clean
energy industry generate in the US?’Note that job creation estimates presented
here are somewhat uncertain because estimates of the job creation potential of
renewable technologies are only available for developed countries 90 Reduced
costs of RE geothermal projects may also offer improvements in grid reliability
; SREP support for exploratory drilling at Karkar will reduce the generation
tariff required by private investors because the grants (or insurance) will be
used to absorb the cost of the riskiest stage of development of  geothermal site
; SREP capital contributions for utility-scale solar PV will reduce the
generation tariff required by the first plant() More importantly, SREP support
will pave the way for more competitive solar PV plants in the future, by giving
Armenia some experience in utility-scale solar PV This early experience will
help to bring down the costs of future plants and improve investors’ perceptions
of the risk of utility- scale solar in Armenia 91 Annex : Existing Activities in
the Field of Renewable Energy Existing activities in the field of renewable
energy in Armenia involve the continued development of private small HPPs, the
rehabilitation of existing large HPPs and the development of some new large
HPPs, the exploration of the Karkar geothermal site, and the implementation of
some small pilot renewable heating projects This Annex describes each of these
activities Hydropower Project Rehabilitation and Development Small HPPs make up
the vast majority of Armenia’ renewable energy industry (excluding from large
HPPs) As of May 2013, 221 MW of small HPPs are operating, and 168 MW of SHPPs
have received licenses for development from the PSRC Small HPP development has
been supported by both private, commercial banks in Armenia, as well as
international development banks KfW has been supporting the development and
rehabilitation of small HPPs through America Bank and other commercial banks in
Armenia Through this program, domestic commercial banks have been able to offer
relatively low-cost, long-term capital for small HPP development There has also
been activity in the large hydropower industry EBRD is financing the
rehabilitation of the Sevan-Hrazdan HPP and KfW is financing the rehabilitation
of the Vorotan cascade Iran is allegedly providing financing for the
construction of the Meghri hydropower project, which is scheduled to come online
in The energy from the Meghri plant is expected to go to Iran for the first 15
years of its operation before ownership of the plant is given to Armenia
Geothermal The World Bank has financed ongoing assessments of the Karkar
geothermal site, including an economic and financial appraisal of  potential
plant at the site In September 2013,  team of World Bank staff and consultants
traveled to the Karkar site to identify next steps for surface studies and
exploratory drilling at the site Renewable Heating Recently, two solar thermal
heating projects have been implemented in the Shirak region of Armenia, through
the GEF Small Grants Programme One of these projects involved the implementation
of solar thermal heating at  housing complex, and reduced natural gas
consumption by approximately 40 percent The other project was implemented at
kindergarten, and there are plans to expand the project to  nearby greenhouse
Greenhouses are major consumers of heat energy in Armenia and this project could
provide valuable demonstration benefits for this particular implementation of
renewable heat technologies 92 Annex : Assumptions Used in Estimating Levelized
Energy Costs Annex Table : Commercial Financing Assumptions Assumption Debt
percentage Equity percentage Debt interest rate Equity return Income tax rate
Loan term Inflation Annex Table : Concessional Financing Assumptions Assumption
Debt percentage Equity percentage Debt interest rate Equity return Income tax
rate Loan term Inflation Units Value % % % % % Years % Units % % % % % Years %
70% 30% 69% 00% 00% 20 % 100% % % % 00% 20 % Value 93 Annex Table : Plant-
Specific Assumptions Resource ID Technology Net capacity Capacity factor Heat
rate Fuel type Asset life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation of construction cost
Non-fuel variable & Output degradation / year (MW) (%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years)
(US$/MW net capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) North
Karakhach Wind Karakhach Pass Wind Eastern Karakhach Wind Pushkin Pass Wind
Pambak mountains Semyonovka Pass Areguni mountains Sotk Pass Fontan Sisian Pass
Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Western Goris Wind South Shamb Wind South Harjis
Wind FPV- FPV- Fixed PV Fixed PV 80 100 40 25 60 35 50 50 75 100 50 60 50 20 35
23 27 21 23 20 20 19 31 21 30 19 23 21 21 25                50 50 50 50 50 50 50
50 50 50 50 50 50 25 25 20 ,200,000 20 20 20 20 ,200,000 ,200,000 ,200,000
,200,000 20 ,200,000 20 ,200,000 ,200,000 ,200,000 ,200,000 ,200,000 ,200,000
,200,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 20 20 20 20 20 20 25 25 94                % 33 33 33
% 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 %
33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 33 33 33 % 100 % 100
Resource ID Technology Net capacity Capacity factor Heat rate Fuel type Asset
life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation of construction cost       Non-fuel
variable & Output degradation / year (MW) (%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years) (US$/MW net
capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) FPV- FPV- FPV- FPV-
FPV- FPV- FPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- TPV- CPV- CPV- Fixed PV
Fixed PV Fixed PV Fixed PV Fixed PV Fixed PV Fixed PV Tracking PV Tracking PV
Tracking PV Tracking PV Tracking PV Tracking PV Tracking PV Tracking PV Tracking
PV Concentrating PV Concentrating PV 193 200 59 94 74 79 82 20 35 193 200 59 94
74 79 82 52 91 CPV- Concentrating 193 23 25 24 25 25 24 23 25 30 28 30 29 31 30
28 27 12 18 16                    25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
25 25 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,375,000
,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,375,000 ,250,000
25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 95 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 35 35
35                    % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 %
100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100
Resource ID Technology Net capacity Capacity factor Heat rate Fuel type Asset
life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation of construction cost       Non-fuel
variable & Output degradation / year (MW) (%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years) (US$/MW net
capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) CPV- CPV- CPV- CPV-
CPV- CPV- CSP- CSP- CSP- CSP- CSP- PV Concentrating PV Concentrating PV
Concentrating PV Concentrating PV Concentrating PV Concentrating PV
Concentrating solar power Concentrating solar power Concentrating solar power
Concentrating solar power Concentrating solar power CSP- Concentrating 225 264
109 74 79 82 52 91 193 225 264 109 18 17 20 19 17 16 15 25 20 25 23 27
25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 25 ,250,000 35 35 35
35 35 35 25 ,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100 25
,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100 96             % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100
% 25 25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25
% 25 25 25 25   Resource ID Technology Net capacity Capacity factor Heat rate
Fuel type Asset life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation of construction cost
Non-fuel variable & Output degradation / year (MW) (%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years)
(US$/MW net capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) CSP- CSP-
CSP- solar power Concentrating solar power Concentrating solar power
Concentrating solar power Dist PV-Yerevan Rooftop PV Dist PV- Aragatsotn Rooftop
PV Dist PV-Ararat Rooftop PV Dist PV-Armavir Rooftop PV Dist PV- Gegharquniq
Rooftop PV Dist PV-Lori Rooftop PV Dist PV-Kotayq Rooftop PV Dist PV-Shirak
Rooftop PV Dist PV-Syniq Rooftop PV Dist PV-Vayots Dzor Rooftop PV Dist PV-
Tavush Rooftop PV 74 79 82 64 56  56 68 76 76  64 92 26 22 20 16 16 16 16 17 13
16 17 16 17 16               25 ,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100 25 ,500,000 100
25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 ,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000
,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000 ,875,000 25 ,875,000 97               % 25
25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25   % 25 25 25 25   % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 %
100 % 100 % 100 % 100 % 100 %
Resource ID Technology Net capacity Capacity factor Heat rate Fuel type Asset
life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation of construction cost       Non-fuel
variable & Output degradation / year (MW) (%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years) (US$/MW net
capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) ,750,000 ,750,000   036
036 % 32% 51 17 % 32% 51 17 Jermaghbyur Geothermal Georgian border Geothermal
Karkar - Kalex Geothermal Karkar - ORC Geothermal Karkar - Flash Geothermal
Ararat HPPs Small HPP Aratsotn HPPs Small HPP Gegharkunik HPPs Small HPP Kotaik
HPPs Small HPP Lori HPPs Small HPP Shirak HPPs Small HPP Syunik HPPs Small HPP
Tavush HPPs Small HPP Vayuts Dzor HPPs Small HPP Wood biomass Biomass Grain
biomass Biomass 25 25         25 89 89 84 84 96 41 41 47 32 45 51 42 45 32
85 16,500 Wood biomass 85 13,648 Grain biomass 25 25 25 25 25 30 30 30 30 30 30
30 30 30 20 20 15,906,000 13 11,687,000 13 ,723,000 18 ,000,000 $48 ,000,000 $99
,000,000 $79 ,000,000 $69 ,000,000 $16 ,000,000 $24 ,000,000 $77 ,000,000 $15
,000,000 $16 ,000,000 $,000,000 $% 15% 55 30 % 13% 54 32 % 32% 51 17 % 33% 33 33
% 33% 33 33 % 33% 33 33 % 33% 33 33 % 33% 33 33 % 33% 33 33 % 33% 33 33 % 33% 33
33 % 33% 33 33              % 25% 25 25 25   005 % 25% 25 25 25   Araks Biogas
90  20 ,876,000 $00  % 33% 33 33    98 Resource ID Technology Net capacity
Capacity factor Heat rate Fuel type Asset life Capital cost Fixed & Allocation
of construction cost       Non-fuel variable & Output degradation / year (MW)
(%) (BTU/ kWh) (Years) (US$/MW net capacity) (US$/ -yr) (US$/kWh) % (%) (%) (%)
(%) (%) (%) Trchnafabrika CJSC Arzni Pedigree PBS OJSC Biogas Armavir Poultry
Farm Biogas Nubarashen landfill LFG Yerevan WWTP WWTP Aghbyurak HPS Pumped
storage Tolors HPS Shamb HPS hydro Pumped storage hydro Pumped storage hydro
150 150 150 90 90 90 90 57 57 57        20 ,997,000 $00 20 ,665,000 $00   % 33%
33 33 % 33% 33 33 20 ,500,000 $00 01 % 50% 50  20 30 ,680,000 $00  % 33% 33 33
,800,000 $33 0523 % 33% 33 33 30 ,800,000 $33 00523 % 33% 33 33 30 ,800,000 $33
00523 % 33% 33 33                      99 Annex : Comments from Independent
Technical Reviewer Mr Mike Allen provided an independent technical review of the
investment plan He reviewed two drafts of the Investment Plan, one from
September 2013, and  revised draft from April His comments on each of the
drafts, and the Government of Armenia’ replies, are included below Independent
Technical Reviewer: Mike Allen Comments delivered on September 30th, 2013
Introduction The review of the Investment Plan for Armenia has been undertaken
ahead of the submission of the plan to the SREP Sub-Committee of the Strategic
Climate Funds, within the Climate Investment Funds at the World Bank These notes
are based on  review of the draft plan of 18th September 2013; it should be
noted that the reviewer has not visited Armenia nor been involved in the
preparation of this plan The lack of  visit to Armenia and direct contact with
the ministries, agencies, institutions and various stakeholders has an impact on
some of the interpretations that have been drawn in this review; the reviewer
has not been involved with energy opportunities in Armenia so has limited
familiarity with the energy situation in the region It is recognised that, as
stated in the IP, “Armenia’ population has nearly universal access to
electricity and natural gas energy resources, therefore Armenia’ IP is not about
access to modern energy services but about using renewables to improve energy
security and reliability, and reduce the future cost of supply Energy security,
reliability and cost are challenges that investments in renewable energy can
help overcome given Armenia’ unique energy context” and it is in this context
that this review has been undertaken Given the specific areas of focus under the
Plan, geothermal, utility scale solar and development of geothermal heat pump
and solar-thermal projects, the review first considers each of the sectors then
summarises the overall compliance under SREP criteria  Specific Comments on
Investment Plan  Geothermal Power Development Current Situation Based on the
information presented in the report, independent background work and brief
correspondence with those who have prepared the IP, there does not appear to be
strong case to support the use of SREP funds for geothermal exploration It is
acknowledged that geothermal exploration finance is difficult to source but the
IP and background suggest that: The Karkar geothermal prospect is not well
understood and exploration data gathered to date does not appear to provide
convincing model of  resource at  stage where drilling should be immediately
contemplated; Response: The Karkar geothermal field was thoroughly studied
through  number of comprehensive surface studies: () field scouting; () magneto-
telluric investigation study (MT); () independent interpretation of the results
of MT study; () 3D MT study; and () independent interpretation of the 100
results of 3D MT study Those studies were led by reputable international
consulting firms specializing on geothermal energy Moreover, the recommendations
and key findings of those studies were reviewed by the Iceland Geosurvey (ISOR),
which confirmed that the methodology employed for the surface studies was
robust, the key results indeed confirm that the Karkar is  geothermal site, and
that the only way to confirm the suitability of resource for power generation is
to conduct exploratory drilling Assumptions in giving geothermal  high ranking
in terms of potential and cost are not substantiated in the IP nor by background
documents; Response: Geothermal power is assigned the second lowest ranking in
terms of “scale-up potential” However, this is partially because of the fact
that Armenia’ geothermal resources have not been well-explored (except for
Karkar site) and it is possible that there is more resource potential than has
been quantified here Indications are that any resource at Karkar will be of
modest temperatures; all analyses and cost comparisons in the IP assume  high
temperature resource; lower temperatures resources are acknowledged in the IP as
non-competitive; Response: The temperature of the resource cannot be known for
sure until the exploratory drilling is conducted and flow testing, chemical
sampling and analyses is completed The surface studies that were conducted for
Karkar site and are described in the IP concluded that two conceptual geothermal
models or their combination might exist for the Karkar site: Model : Model
assumes that low resistance is not present in the geothermal zones of interest
In such  case, Model  would provide only for  diffuse source of heat and
characterizes the field as  reservoir of moderately warm waters (less than
100оС) Model : Model  assumes that low resistance may be present in geothermal
zones of interest In such  case, Model  would provide for  localized high-
temperature source of heat Along with this, some of the layers could be
characterized as  reservoir of high-temperature water (more than 250оС) The
definitive answer on the characteristics of the geothermal resource can be
obtained only after exploratory drilling The costs are presented in the IP for
high-temperature resource because it is assumed that project development will
only occur if  high-temperature resource is identified at the site through the
exploratory well drilling The assumption that with this background that an IPP
can be attracted to contribute as indicated is probably unrealistic meaning that
additional public funds would be required to move any successful project forward
Response: It is recommended that SREP funding supports these exploration
activities and IPP investment is assumed to follow if successful exploration is
carried out Therefore, it is assumed that an IPP will not be attracted with the
background information available in the IP, but rather with  confirmed
geothermal resource that has been identified through exploratory drilling 101
Near Term Consideration of Geothermal Accepting that the geothermal potential
may be limited, if there is  consensus that the case for further investment is
unclear, the use of limited funds from SREP to convene  focused peer review of
current status could be considered It is not suggested that the allocation of
larger portion of SREP funds be predicated on the outcome of such  review but
more that it may be reasonable to use funds (less than suggested for the
feasibility study) to attempt to provide  more definitive assessment of the
Karkar resource If the review were to provide  convincing argument to consider
the next stage of exploration at Karkar then it could be used to seek
alternative funding Response: We are confident that any additional study for
Karkar site will generate marginal amount of useful information and data
Therefore, we are convinced that exploratory drilling is the warranted next step
to be undertaken to confirm the resource As mentioned above, all of the above
studies conducted for Karkar concluded that exploratory drilling is warranted
The need for and the justification for exploratory drilling was also confirmed
by the independent reviewers (ISOR from Iceland) of the key conclusions and
recommendations of the geo-technical studies conducted for Karkar Recommendation
on Geothermal Power At this stage it is not recommended that SREP funds be
directed into geothermal power development, other than in supporting  review as
outlined above Response: We do not think that the level of knowledge about the
Karkar site will benefit from further reviews as outlined above  Utility Scale
Solar General compliance While there is limited solar PV experience at any large
scale, the potential has been identified and the construction of commercial,
grid connected units reflects international experience It is noted that there
are nationally based companies engaged in this field and that there is  strong &
background in the field within Armenian academia It is understood that to
encourage private sector participation that part of the SREP funds may be made
available to help buy down the initial capital costs, Help is being sought to
develop an acceptable FIT and also to work with the government in agreeing how
private sector participation will be structured Capacity to execute and
technical assessment of proposed approach There are  number of barriers that
have been recognised as hampering the growth in the sector and these have been
identified within the Plan It is suggested that these are manageable; the
technology risk is largely one of lack of familiarity coupled with  lack of
education amongst the population about the benefits they can bring Although the
market has been opened up, and success in attracting IPPs noted in the small
hydro power sector, it is also noted that there are administrative and
regulatory issues that may hamper quick uptake by the private sector of other
technologies 102 The Plan is non-specific about which institutions will address
these issues but it paints  positive picture of government activities in the
sector and its privatisation over recent years It is noted that at all stages
SREP will be consulted as strategies, structures and plans are being prepared
and adequate monitoring and evaluation will be mutually important to ensure
success Impact The plan outlines the use of funds to provide support to  broader
MDB and donor funded programme which is envisaged will provide utility solar
electricity of some 30 MW in total capacity This is based on obtaining  total of
$75m (SREP $5m; MDBs $5m and $21m from private sector / commercial banking
sources) The securing of these additional funds and the active engagement of the
private sector is obviously critical to the level of impact that will be
achieved Use of investment; capturing and dissemination of lessons learned;
stakeholder engagement This is all  new venture and so there is no real history
of such development in Armenia to draw on It will be important that there be an
open and transparent sharing of information and experiences as the project is
planned and implemented Social considerations It is recognised that the
challenge for Armenia is to build security of supply as all have access to
energy but the geo-political and energy supply dependency of the country are the
key issues to be addressed with the focus on renewables The normal benefits of
renewables in terms of emission reductions will of course apply Attraction of
additional investment The programme proposed for the utility solar project is
heavily dependent on access to investment from  number of groups as noted above
It is unclear what the level of commitments from other sources is at this stage
There is however  provision for support with transaction services that should
help overcome recognised bottlenecks but project implementation will only be
achieved to the level that available funds allow Overall Summary The utility
solar programme is aggressive but appears to offer one of the better options for
Armenia in looking towards growth in renewables Tackling solar PV on  larger
scale basis should offer quicker growth in this sector and the combination of
SREP, MDB and private financing provides  potentially balanced scenario for this
growth The project is  mix of public demonstration of commercial viability of
this opportunity and then the securing of financing from MDB and private sector
sources; increasing the scale of activities and drawing all the elements of the
programme together, while addressing the issues that have been seen as
bottlenecks in the past, will require strong strategic planning and on-going
review to ensure that the anticipated growth target can be met  Geothermal Heat
Pump and Solar-Thermal Projects General compliance To date there have been
limited developments utilising geothermal heat pumps and/or solar thermal
installations However given the heating needs within Armenia and the opportunity
that these approaches may give to displace the use of gas, this programme
appears appropriate Small scale projects (supported by GEF) have helped begin to
demonstrate the viability of solar thermal installations The structure of this
project suggests that the intention is to hold this largely within the public
sector with financing predominantly from MDB resources It is noted that there
are nationally based companies engaged in these fields 103 Capacity to execute
and technical assessment of proposed approach As with solar PV, there are
number of barriers that have been recognised as hampering the growth in the
sector and these have been identified within the Plan It is suggested that these
are manageable; the technology risk is largely one of lack of familiarity
coupled with  lack of education amongst the population about the benefits they
can bring Impact The plan outlines the use of funds to prepare proposals to gain
support from MDBs It is suggested that obtaining  total of $45m from MDBs would
allow dissemination of these technologies in public buildings ($15m) and private
facilities ($30m) The securing of these funds and an active programme outside
the public sector is obviously critical to the level of impact that will be
achieved Use of investment; capturing and dissemination of lessons learned;
stakeholder engagement This is all  new venture and so there is no real history
of such development in Armenia to draw on As with the solar PV, it will be
important that there be an open and transparent sharing of information and
experiences as the projects are planned and implemented Social considerations It
is recognised that the challenge for Armenia is to build security of supply as
all have access to energy but the geo-political and energy supply dependency of
the country are the key issues to be addressed with the focus on renewables The
normal benefits of renewables in terms of emission reductions will of course
apply Attraction of additional investment The programme proposed for the
geothermal heat pump and solar thermal project is heavily dependent on access to
investment from MDBs as noted above It is unclear what the level of commitments
from these sources is at this stage Overall Summary The geothermal heat pump and
solar thermal programme is aggressive but appears to offer  constructive option
for Armenia in looking towards growth in the non-electric use of renewables
Developing both technologies on  larger scale basis should offer quicker growth
in this sector but access to MDB financing is clearly critical  Compliance with
SREP Key focuses within the SREP programme can be summarised under the following
headings; the response of the Plan to each of these aspects is noted in the
following comments The exception to use of funds for geothermal is noted again
Catalyse increased investments in renewable energy: The plan outlines how it is
anticipated that SREP investments and programme support will help attract other
public and private funding This is explained in some detail What is less clear
is which government agencies will provide the leadership during implementation
Overall there is no information on the governance of the SREP programme as such
Response: This comment is well-noted Additional description of implementation
modalities will follow in  subsequent draft Enabling environment The plan
acknowledges that there are  number of remaining hurdles to renewable
implementation; there are however no clear strategies or allocation of
responsibilities to particular agencies to address these It is assumed that
more definitive strategy will be developed ahead of the release of SREP 104
funding The proposal to assist with transactional services in the solar sector
should offer additional encouragement for private sector participation Response:
This comment is well-noted Additional description of strategies for improving
the enabling environment in specific agencies will follow in  subsequent draft
Increase energy access: As noted, access to energy is not an issue for Armenia;
the focus of SREP supported activities is the development of  reliable, cost
effective and secure supply of national energy going forward Implementation
capacity: The IP explains that the entity responsible for facilitating renewable
energy development in Armenia is the R2E2 Fund The R2E2 Fund was formed in 2006
as part of the Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy It is an
independent organization that facilitates investments in renewable energy by
sponsoring renewable energy studies and projects, and supporting local renewable
energy companies and stakeholders Its role in hydro, geothermal and solar is
briefly described but no additional information is provided It is assumed that
it would be  key organisation in proving the governance over the SREP activities
Improve the long-term economic viability of the renewable energy sector: The
renewable energy sector in Armenia appears to be in  nascent stage The existing
sources of energy do provide  relatively low cost source of electricity and heat
and so the growth in renewable sector and the national benefits that it may
offer, in terms of energy security, may require subsidisation to some extent It
is noted that there are  number of existing businesses supporting the industry
and the SREP activities should be managed to ensure that the national benefits
are maximised wherever possible Transformative impact: The targeted nature of
the proposed SREP investments is seen as  pragmatic approach As noted above, the
renewable sector is relatively immature so it is unlikely that there will be
major transformations in the market through SREP alone but, well managed,
focused programme around will add to the emerging strengths within the sector
Recommendations With the exception of the concerns around the geothermal power
developments, the Investment Plan as presented is well prepared There is limited
detail on how SREP funds would be managed, by whom and under what governance
structure, and it is suggested that clarification on these points be sought If
it is agreed that funding proposed for geothermal power development not be
offered as requested then there is  clear opportunity to revisit the priorities
under the Plan; this might provide for an extension of the other programme areas
or the introduction of an additional sector This decision needs consideration by
those closer to the preparation of the Plan Overall the Plan responds to the
SREP criteria This report and these recommendations have not been discussed with
those who prepared the Plan, and so should be treated as interim comments; it is
hoped that  discussion can be arranged in due course 105 ADDENDUM Summary
Drilling Proposal of Comments re Inclusion of Geothermal Comments As raised in
various communications earlier, there is  concern about the emphasis given to
committing almost 50% of the SREP funds to geothermal exploration drilling
review of the various reports provided and the IP itself do not substantiate
that geothermal should be of high priority This viewed is based on the
following: The ranking of options in Table  shows that geothermal (power
generation) is considered to rank  “” for Scale Up Potential and yet all other
data suggests that the anticipated geothermal potential is minimal in comparison
to other sources – even if this were  “”, the geothermal average would drop to
Costs effectiveness (“”) assumes  high temperature resource (flash technology)
which is not able to be demonstrated with confidence Response: It appears there
is  misunderstanding of the scoring system that has been put forth in the IP The
scoring system has caused confusion for several reviewers, so it is clear that
we should change it to be more intuitive, or explain it more explicitly
According to the current scoring system,  score of “” for “Scale-up potential”
actually indicates relatively low scale-up potential Table : Ranking of
Renewable Technologies Against Selection Criteria Technology Selection Criteria
Power grid stability Cost- effectiveness Potential for Scale-up potential Market
immaturity Average score job creation Geothermal heat pumps  Solar heating
thermal Utility-scale solar PV Geothermal power Small HPPs Ag biogas Landfill
biogas Wind Distributed solar PV
106    report “Economic and Financial Appraisal of the Potential Geothermal
Power Plant at Karkar Final Report, November 2012, by Denzel Hankinson” makes
number of assumptions and is essentially  generic review of geothermal costs
Comments in the report on likely production temperatures, the understood
geological setting in Karkar and notes in response to earlier queries, tend to
suggest that  conservative view would be that the temperatures will be modest
However all support for geothermal is based on  costing that utilises  flash
technology – implying high geothermal fluid temperatures By the analysis in
Hankinson’ report it is acknowledged that if flash technology cannot be used the
geothermal utilising ORC would be non-competitive with other alternatives Based
on the assumption that the KarKar resource may be of modest temperature, it
would therefore not rank as competitive Acknowledging that there is no
geothermal development background in Armenia, the IP does not demonstrate  full
understanding of the challenges of geothermal development While it is accepted
that drilling will in the end be required to prove the quality of any resource,
moving to  drilling programme would not normally be considered until many of the
uncertainties expressed in the geothermal studies to date have been addressed
Specific geothermal studies have not been reviewed; it is not known what depth
of practical geothermal experience those who have undertaken the various studies
have had, but it may be that engaging  peer review by groups with extensive
practical exploration and development experience would allow  more concrete
decision on the geothermal viability Geothermal exploration and development is
by its very nature  capital intensive exercise There is  concern that, without
clear upside and identified resources to take any geothermal development forward
should exploration drilling confirm an exploitable resource, the investment into
an exploration drilling programme at this stage may be wasted Available tariffs,
the small scale of any project and the conservative assumption that resource
temperatures will be modest, suggest that it may be difficult to attract private
investment into geothermal This would then imply that adequate public funding
would have to be found to take any project through to completion Response: the
reviewer’ comments are noted and his expertise is useful and appreciated for
this process Summary of Correspondence and Responses: In working through the IP
am having  fundamental problem understanding why the priorities have been chosen
as they have In looking at Table  it appears that the estimates suggest that the
most significant potential contributions are from geothermal heat pumps, solar
PV and wind in that order? Geothermal power generation is less than % and
limited likely upside potential? Response: The total resource potential was one
of the criteria used to choose RE projects for inclusion in the SREP IP (see
table  for the full set and scoring by technology) You are correct that
geothermal power has significantly lower assessed resource potential than wind
and solar resources But this technology scored relatively high on the other
criteria used to prioritize technologies for inclusion in the SREP IP, and for
this reason it was included Furthermore, geothermal is  relatively unexplored
resource in Armenia, and there very well might be more potential that is not
known about Because of the way that geothermal resource potential is evaluated
(compared with wind and solar) only  small amount has been assessed at this
point, but there could be more potential that is not yet known about By funding
exploration, SREP can help kick-start the process of identifying geothermal
resources in Armenia 107  can’ find much reference to the geothermal sources in
Armenia (have requested your recent info/report); what  have found implied that
the resources may be very deep (6000m?) and modest temperature hot water – is
this what is currently understood? The cost / kWh for geothermal at full (LEC)
rates is shown as around US$ Cents  (?) which looks low given the plant is
small, first project, potentially lower temperature etc The report mentions that
this assumes  flash plant which would imply  high temperature (volcanic source)
resource If  binary unit is considered then typically the costs will be higher
It may work with SREP underwriting for 40 years but this won’ open up follow on
IPP engagement unless heavy subsidisation is continued? Response: The emperature
of the geothermal resource at Karkar site cannot be known for sure until
exploratory drilling is done The comprehensive surface investigation works
suggest that there is geological anomaly, the site is geothermal in nature, and,
thus, test drilling is warranted Please note that the geological studies suggest
that test wells with the depth of   are needed and not 6000  The resource could
be either  high-temperature resource ( at which  Flash plant could be deployed)
OR  low temperature resource ( at which  binary plant could be deployed) If the
Karkar site has  high temperature resource, then, according to an assessment
conducted in 2012 (see the report attached), the Flash plant could have an LEC
of around US$0864/kWh (under commercial financing terms) This assessment also
evaluated the cost of  binary cycle plant, the LEC of energy will be
significantly higher The only way to really find out the nature of the resource
is to do test drilling, and this is why the first stage of the proposed
geothermal project under SREP involves exploratory drilling In looking at
comparative costs the Hzardan TPP is referenced; Table  shows that it has an
exceptionally high tariff, between   and   of the average (incl/excl Hzaradan)
Can you please explain why this has been chosen as the reference? If the current
average cots were the reference the picture for RE could look rather different
Response: The Hrazdan TPP is the marginal cost plant on the Armenian system, and
it was included in the supply curves for comparison purposes, not as  threshold
below which resources would be considered viable Also, please note that in
Figure  we compare the cost of all renewable energy options to the 2012 average
cost of generation (US$03/kWh), as you suggest To be clear: we did not use the
Hrazdan TPP to analyze the best renewable energy options, but rather show the
cost of that resource just to demonstrate that many renewable energy options are
cheaper than the current highest cost generating plant on the system Perhaps we
should add as reference points the lower-cost and more frequently used
generation plants ( the new, efficient CCGTs) to the charts in the next draft of
the plan As before,  acknowledge  am coming in without the background on in-
country visits and meetings and familiarity with the market but would expect
others to challenge the IP on this basis Overall the report appears to document
the situation quite well; however there is repeated reference to the difficulty
in attracting IPP engagement in RE due to low pricing and this is not really
addressed this? What (other expectations potential around risk) than the are as
108 109 Independent Technical Reviewer: Mike Allen Comments delivered on April
15th, 2014 (on  later draft of the Investment Plan) There are  number of issues
which are obviously very pertinent to the potential of renewables in Armenia and
that should perhaps be reiterated:  The current cost for electricity is very low
– “average cost of generation in Armenia is roughly US$ 035/kWh” This is noted
as having  significant impact on the opportunity to introduce new generation
capacity, whether renewable or conventional Response: The current cost of
electricity reflects that fact that several of Armenia’ major power plants are
fully depreciated and therefore do not have fixed charge in the tariff
associated with their capacity (in other words, the tariff reflects operating
and maintenance costs only) As noted in the revised investment plan, this is
going to change soon, as investment in  new thermal plant (nuclear or gas), and
rehabilitation of existing plants, will increase tariffs substantially Gas
import prices are also forecast to continue to increase substantially, which
will drive up the cost of gas-fired generation in Armenia  The cost of renewable
options remain relatively expensive given the current cost/tariff structure for
electricity Response: As noted above, the average cost of generation in Armenia
is likely to increase substantially in the coming years  The renewable options
are important but not  significant portion of likely future generation capacity
Medium term targets suggest small hydro has the most potential (380 MW) with
wind, geothermal and PV offering only  combined 140MW The revised IP suggests
that the wind potential may be lower than earlier anticipated Response: The
current operational SHPP capacity is around 240 MW, so the SHPP capacity is
expected to increase by 140 MW by The Government targets for solar, geothermal
and wind by 2020 are only 140 MW combined because: () the scale-up potential for
wind is estimated to be lower than for solar and geothermal; thus, not much of
wind capacity is expected to be developed; and () construction of geothermal
power plant() is not likely to begin earlier than 2016 given the time needed for
exploratory drilling to confirm the resource  It appears that geothermal heat
pump options have been removed from the IP; it is not clear why this has
occurred Response: The geothermal heat pump, solar thermal and distributed
thermal investments have been removed after government reconsidered, in
discussion with development partners, its priorities and the likely availability
of financing for such priorities Geothermal heat pumps, solar thermal heating
and rooftop solar PV already have financing available through existing donor
programs and, therefore, were given lower priority than technologies, which did
not yet benefit from support  There is no additional information provided on the
geothermal status / recent reviews; on this basis my original recommendation
would stand that no drilling should be contemplated until an independent peer
review, by those who have significant geothermal 110 experience, has been
undertaken There is mention of  review / planning for drilling but no detail has
been provided Response: The IP was revised to clearly indicate that under the
World Bank/GEF funded GeoFund : Armenia Geothermal Project several geo-technical
investigation works were conducted for Karkar geothermal site and the
results/recommendations of those studies were independently reviewed  Table
appears quite optimistic in terms of longer term scale up given the very limited
experience with most technologies to date in Armenia Response: It is true that
the targets reflect  faster pace of capacity growth than in the past, but
Government has also now placed greater priority on the expansion of RE capacity
than in the past, highlighted by the recently adopted “Concept on National
Energy Security” for Armenia  As noted earlier, costs for new generation appear
low given the limited experience or first development situation with many of
them For geothermal the assumption of  high temperature resource appears
contrary to much of the dialogue in the report Response: The exact temperature
of the resource at Karkar site cannot be known until the exploratory drilling is
conducted and flow testing, chemical sampling and analyses is completed The
surface studies that were conducted for Karkar site and are described in the IP
concluded that two conceptual geothermal models or their combination might exist
for the Karkar site: Model : Model  assumes that low resistance is not present
in the geothermal zones of interest In such  case, Model  would provide only for
diffuse source of heat and characterizes the field as  reservoir of moderately
warm waters (less than 100оС) Model : Model  assumes that low resistance may be
present in geothermal zones of interest In such  case, Model  would provide for
localized high-temperature source of heat Along with this, some of the layers
could be characterized as  reservoir of high- temperature water (more than
250оС)  The use of FITs needs to be very carefully considered as it implies
ongoing subsidy that has to be funded from central government if not passed in
part or total to consumers Response: Agreed As noted in the revised investment
plan, the Government is also considering—for utility scale solar PV, in
particular— reverse auction approach to determining the appropriate level of
tariff in order to minimize the cost to government and customers  The success of
small scale hydro should be encouraged and supported as needed to ensure that
this sector does not suffer where other RE resources are being considered
Response: Agreed, but substantial financing already exists for small scale hydro
from private banks (under-written by financing from development partners) In
sum, the industry is already commercially viable It is the Government’ view that
small hydro capacity can continue to grow without additional concessional
financing 111