 Appendix  RA Government Decision  2021 Republic of Armenia Energy Sector
Development Strategic Program to 2040 YEREVAN 2020 Table of Contents:  VISION OF
THE RA GOVERNMENT FOR ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT: Page:  II MAIN PRIORITIES FOR
THE ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT: Page:  III DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATING CAPACITY :
Page:  IV HIGH-VOLTAGE ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION NETWORK DEVELOPMENT : Page:
DEVELOPMENT OF THE DISTRIBUTION NETWORK: Page: 10 VI ELECTRICITY MARKET : Page:
11 VII REGIONAL ENERGY COOPERATION: Page: 12 VIII HEAT SUPPLY: Page: 15 IX GAS
SUPPLY : Page: 16  ENERGY EFFICIENCY : Page: 16 X1 DIGITAL ENERGY : Page: 18 XII
SCIENCE-BASED ENERGY : Page: 18 XIII MANAGEMENT OF STATE-OWNED COMPANIES: Page:
20  VISION OF THE RA GOVERNMENT FOR ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT Free, competitive
and non-discriminatory, Inclusive and diversified, energy independence at the
highest level, Clean and energy efficient: sustainable developing, Of regional
significance, Reliable and safe, Digitized and Innovated, science-based, high
technological, Foreseeable and transparent, Accessible and fair to everyone,
sufficiently available to the vulnerable group, as well as attractive to
investors This is the RoA Government’ vision of the Energy Sector development
This vision will be  basis for making all energy- related decisions, building
relationships with neighboring countries regarding the energy sector,
integrating into more global electricity markets and for further developing
relationships with key partners The RoA Government shall implement the balanced
social, environmental and economic policy in the energy sector, involving all
the stakeholders to the most extent for achieving the objectives of this
Strategic Program This Program has served as  basis for the development of the
Action Plan that ensures the implementation of the energy sector development
strategic program, wherein  set of separated target indicators and list of
actions have been determined for the period until 2040 to ensure the
implementation of this Strategic Program (Appendix)  Maximum use of renewable
energy II MAIN PRIORITIES FOR THE ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT potential The
maximum use of renewable energy potential, considering it as  part of the Least
Cost Energy Development Plan, is one of the key priorities of the Energy Sector
development  Considering the available domestic resources and development
tendencies of this technology throughout the world, the construction of solar
power plants, will prevail over the rest of types, given the limitations of the
system reliability and safety indicators  Possible realization of energy-
efficiency potential All the sectors of the economy of Armenia have great
potential in the energy efficiency including transport, industry, multi-
apartment buildings, public sector budgeting, fuel system, etc The Government of
the Republic of Armenia will be consistent in terms of creating  new culture of
energy efficiency, therefore will implement institutional reforms by promoting
investments in the alternative energy sources, that may result in energy
efficiency, security, environmental regulation and promotion of energy
efficiency in all the spheres of economy  Life extension of the ANPP Unit  The
extension of operational lifetime of ANPP Unit  after 2026 is on the main
priorities of the RoA Government and the construction of  new nuclear power
plant upon the expiration of the term is the main objective The availability of
the nuclear power plant in the power system will allow to diversify more the
energy resources, not to increase reliance on the imported natural gas as well
as the volume of emissions  North- South Road Corridor construction program The
full implementation of the North- South Road Corridor construction program, its
Armenia-Iran and Armenia-Georgia power transmission lines and infrastructures
play  decisive role in terms of having power system of regional significance
This program provides an opportunity to Armenia to be  bridge for being engaged
into the more global electricity markets as well as for using opportunities of
mutually beneficial electricity trade with Iran and Georgia Meanwhile the full
implementation of the Program will increase the reliability and security of the
Armenia’ power system   Gradual liberalization of the electricity market The
current model of Armenia’ electricity market has been applied since Electricity
markets of  number of developed and developing countries are already liberalized
Armenia has also commenced this process and will transit to  new liberalized
model in the coming years which will still be  subject to limited competition
but will have precise milestones towards the full liberalization given the
creation process of EAEU Common energy market and the EU Comprehensive and
Enhanced Partnership Agreement III DEVELOPMENT OF GENERATING CAPACITY In the
Republic of Armenia in 2016, 2017, 2018 , 2019, , ,  and  billion kWh of
electricity has been generated respectively, of which ,  ,  and 25 billion kWh
of electricity respectively has been exported and the own needs and the total
consumption in terms of losses of generating units have made 03, 02, 96 and 88
billion kWh respectively In Armenia, electricity is mainly generated by nuclear,
hydro and thermal plants whereof 39% is generated by the nuclear power plant
while the remaining 60% is almost generated equally by hydro and thermal plants
The share of all the other plants in the power system is quite low - up to % The
Government aims to have 12 billion kWh output by 2030, whereof about  billion
kWh will be export based In accordance with the statistics of the last  years
the winter peak in the Armenia’ power system is 1300 MW, and in summer it is
1040 MW The variation between winter and summer peaks recently has significantly
declined The following plants with  total installed capacity of MW as of July ,
2020 are currently operating in the power system • ANPP - MW • Hrazdan TPP- 410
MW • Hrazdan Unit  - 467 MW • Yerevan CCGT - - MW • Vorotan Cascade of
Hydroelectric Power Plants - MW • Sevan-Hrazdan Cascade of Hydroelectric Power
Plants - MW • Renewable small power plants (under 30 MW )about 400 MW, whereof
about 380 MW are small HPP Due to low efficiency of the above mentioned Hrazdan
TPP it is envisaged to take the plant out of service after putting Iran-Armenia
400 kV transmission line and the Yerevan CCGT- which is being constructed into
service The following generating capacities are currently under construction: •
Yerevan CCGT-- 250 MW, by July, 2022 (USD 250 million investment), • Masrik-
Solar Photovoltaic Power Plant- 55 MW, by July, 2022 (USD 60 million
investment), • Small HPPs 23 power plants, 50 MW, commissioning by 2023 (USD 60
million investment),  • Small Solar Plants - 48 plants, 197 MW, by Moreover, it
is envisaged that the total installed capacity of such plants will comprise 210
MW in • Wind Power Plant-  MW, by In the near future new tenders for
construction of seven more solar photovoltaic power plants with total installed
capacity of about 520 MW will be conducted, whereof capacity of two plants will
comprise 200 MW each As of July , 2020, 2669 autonomous solar power plants with
capacity up to 500 kW, with the total installed capacity of MW are connected to
the network The current development rates allow to anticipate that the total
installed capacity of the above-mentioned plants will reach to 100 MW for the
next three years The Republic of Armenia government aims to increase the share
of solar power generation at least to 15% or  billion kWh by For that purpose,
solar power plants with total installed capacity of 1000 MW including autonomous
plants will be constructed It is worthwhile to mention that in the coming years
the prospective changes in the world market can enable not only solar but also
renewable energy power plants with storages to compete with the traditional base
plants As for Public-Private Partnership (PPP) agreements, the RoA Government
will conclude such agreements for the utility scale generation units
construction by means of attracting investors exclusively on  competitive basis,
where their access to the electricity market cannot be granted without
additional guarantees from the state The fact that the solar and wind
technologies are considered as part of the least cost solution for new
generation under all scenarios stresses the importance to Armenia of ensuring
policy and institutional environment that supports development of these
technologies to the maximum extent possible, not only to ensure the lowest cost
generation but also to minimize reliance on other imported energy sources and to
strengthen Armenia’ energy security and competitiveness The Least Cost Energy
Development Plan is developed with application of the TIMES- Armenia model,
which provides  platform for the integrated power system modelling and envisages
to guide policy formulation over  wide range of energy, economic and
environmental planning as well as climate change issues The TIMES Armenia
platform allows to: • encompass the entire power system from resources through
to end-use demands; • employ least-cost optimization to identify the most
effective pattern of resource use and technology deployment over time; •
evaluate medium and long-term policies and programs that can impact the
evolution of the power system; • quantify the expected costs and technology
choices that result from imposing those policies and program Within the baseline
scenarios modelling, through the TIMES-Armenia platform, the following was
considered: the construction costs of different power generating capacities,
imported fuel prices, anticipated economic growth rate and the associated
changes in demand, as well as potential technological development and other
required inputs that may affect power generating capacities in terms of choosing
the least cost development option The outcomes show that the possible
development of the solar and wind technologies ensure the least cost in the
power system Moreover, the sensitivity analyses revealed that the results of
model calculations on new generating capacities required to meet the electricity
demands don’ essentially differ in all the considered GDP growth scenarios The
Government will stay committed to the policy to maintain nuclear power plant in
the country’ generation mix In this context, it is worthwhile to mention that
the possibility of the nuclear plant’ life extension will guarantee development
of the system on the basis of least cost The investment program focused on the
ANPP Unit  design lifetime extension will be completed by 2023, resulting in USD
330 million investment, and the nuclear power plant will be extended to In the
event that  safe operation of the ANPP Unit  is justified after 2026 in
accordance with the respective studies, the Government intends to operate it at
least until 2036 which according to forecasts will require an additional USD 150
million investment Moreover, the lowest level of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
can only be reached in the case of availability of the nuclear power plant
compared to other scenarios, which is consonant with the implementation of the
Government’ long-term development purposes with the low level of greenhouse gas
emission After the expiration of the existing nuclear power plant’ operational
lifetime (including its life extensions), the construction of new nuclear unit
with replacing capacity on the existing ANPP site is considered, which will
prevent an increase in the country’ reliance on the imported natural gas
Meantime, regardless of the construction of Meghri, Shnogh and Lori-Berd HPPs
has not been considered by the least cost development scenarios, they will
remain relevant projects and will be constructed as utility scale plants when
the construction of such power plants will be needed in the power system With
regard to the wind plants, the RoA Government will be consistent in development
of such technology as well and is planning to construct utility scale wind power
plants with total installed capacity of 500 MW, in 2025 – 2040, but the
implementation of Public-Private Partnership programs focused on the
construction of such plants will be driven exclusively by the fact that the
prices of electricity delivered from the wind plants are competitive It is
worthwhile to mention that if the price of imported natural gas changes by 2040
the maximum utilization of solar and wind power plants will reduce the power
system total costs In any case, the natural gas will remain one of the main
consumed fuel sources, as it is used not only for enterprises but also for the
residential heating, household and transportation needs Meanwhile the gradual
market penetration of electric cars can also be implemented solely on the basis
of the solar and wind power by reducing the volume of imported natural gas To
summarize the above mentioned, it can be stated that in the coming seven years
about USD  billion will be invested in electricity generation Forecasts and
assessments presented within the framework of the Least Cost Energy Development
Plan, based on global warming, change in water resources as well as other
significant circumstances that might impact on the power system, shall be
biennially revised  IV HIGH-VOLTAGE ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION NETWORK DEVELOPMENT
High voltage electricity transmission networks are state-owned, and their
natural development is one of the strategic issues of the energy sector The
development of the high-voltage transmission network includes two sets of
actions aimed at modernization of the existing infrastructures and the expansion
of the transmission network The first set of actions are aimed at modernization
of substations of the high-voltage transmission network and overhead
transmission lines, while the second set of actions are focused on installation
of monitoring system for transmission capacity, automation (SCADA system
expansion) as well as electricity system reliability and safety indicators and
development of new infrastructures for the regional integration In the high-
voltage transmission network 13 substations of 220 kV, two substations of 110 kV
and one switching point on the border with Iran as well as 1960 km electrical
transmission lines with 5600 towers are currently being operated Five above
mentioned substations (220 kV “Haghtanak”, 220 kV “Kamo”, 220 kV “Gyumri-’, 220
kV “Vanadzor-” and 220 kV “Alaverdi ”) have been completely reconstructed Five
more substations are currently under reconstruction, in particular: • With the
support of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , which
provided USD 36 million within the scope of the loan agreement “Electricity
Supply Reliability Project - Additional Financing”, 220kV substation “Haghtanak”
was reconstructed in 2019; the reconstruction of 110kV substations
“Charentsavan-”, “Vanadzor-” and 220kV substation “Zovuni” is envisaged • With
the support of the Asian Development Bank, which provided about 02 million SDR
within the scope of the loan agreement «Power Transmission Rehabilitation
Project», the reconstruction of 220 kV “Agarak- ” switching point to the
substation, and reconstruction of “Shinahayr” substation are planned to be
implemented, along with the second stage of SCADA communication and automation
system investment program • With the support of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, which provided USD 86 million within the scope
of the Loan Agreement“Power Transmission Network Improvement”,  new 220 kV
substation of Yerevan TPP was constructed and commissioned replacing the
previous substation of 110 kV The reconstruction of 220 kV “Ashnak” substation
is underway as well as reconstruction of the “Ararat-” substation is envisaged
to be implemented • With the support of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, which provided about USD million within the
scope of the loan agreement “Electricity Supply Reliability”, the modernization
of the 230 kilometer 220 kV overhead transmission line along Noraduz- Lichq-
Vardenis- Vayq-Vorotan- between Hrazdan TPP and 220 kV “Shinuhayr” substation is
carried out, which has increased the export capacity to Iran by about 50 MW
Within the scope of the savings made as  result of the concluded agreements
aimed at reconstruction of the above mentioned overhead transmission line,  the
reconstruction of about 50 kilometer overhead transmission line “Larvar” and
“Noyemberyan” of 110 kV is being conducted The lines, having been in operation
since 1962 under the influence of severe chemical substances, have been corroded
and have  negative impact on ensuring ofthe reliable and uninterrupted power
supply to consumers The following programs are being implemented for regional
integration process • With support of Export Development Bank of Iran and “Sanir
FZE”, which provided EUR million, 400 kV Iran-Armenia double-circuit overhead
transmission line and 400 kV “Noravan” substation are under construction The
construction of the power transmission line and the substation will enable to
increase the electricity exchange capacity between both countries’ power systems
from 350 MW to 1200 MW also by improving reliability of the power systems’
parallel operation and energy security of the Republic of Armenia • The
construction of the “Caucasus Electricity Transmission Network” (transmission
line / substations) is aimed at connection of Armenian and Georgian power
systems by 500 kV overhead transmission line ensuring the reliability of
asynchronous-parallel operation of the two countries’ systems by constructing
500 kV HVDC back-to-back station of 350 MW capacity, 500 kV overhead line with
the length of  km from the station to Georgian border in Ayrum at the first
stage , new substation of 400 kV in Ddmashen equipped with two 440 kV
autotransformers and 400 kV single-circuit overhead transmission line from
Ddmashen to Ayrum substation with double- circuit supports Implementation of the
project will ensure power exchange of electricity with 350 MW capacity Within
the scope of this stage of the project, investments will amount to about EUR
million and the transmission capacity with Georgia will be 350 MW, which is
intended to be increased to 1000 MW during the next two stages depending on
power flows volume In addition to the above mentioned, another substation (220
kV “Litchq”) will be reconstructed at the company’ expense, and the financing
options and dates of investment projects for the reconstruction of the remaining
three substations (220 kV “Shahumyan-”, 220 kV “Marash” and 220 kV
“Yeghegnadzor”), for will be considered In addition to the above-mentioned,
along with the construction of solar plants, it will be necessary to invest
additionally about USD 70 million in the transmission network Investments aimed
at system automation in the high-voltage electric network are being conducted,
in addition to the infrastructure investments SCADA Automated control system
will be installed by 2023 which will ensure  new level of dispatch and
technological dispatch With  view to considering the changing requirements of
the power system of Armenia, the system will have scalable modular structure and
possibility to select operating characteristics As  result, accident elimination
time in the power system will be significantly reduced and the level of
reliability of power supply to consumers will increase It is worthwhile to
mention that Electricity System Transmission Network Development plan () was
developed in 2019, which, based on the international experience and up-to date
models considered the possible developments of the energy sector within that
period and the volume of necessary investments for the least cost development of
the respective transmission network  including the investments which will be
aimed at reconstruction of high-voltage power transmission lines and expansion
of the Transmission network This will be continuous work and the development
plan will be reviewed in 2022 including the period for the next ten years, and
afterwards will be biennially updated Investments in the Transmission Network
will reach about USD 550 million by  DEVELOPMENT OF THE DISTRIBUTION NETWORK The
distribution networks were privatized in 2002 as  united company with the
purpose of distribution and, for  while, supply of electricity throughout the
Republic of Armenia As  wholly private company, its activity is regulated by the
Public Services Regulatory Commission Currently, the Electricity Networks of
Armenia CJSC operates the distribution networks for  seven-year period until
2026 and also fulfils  function of Universal Supplier The company is currently
distributing and supplying electricity to about one million consumers including
residents, commercial organizations and industrial enterprises operating the
lines of 110 kV and under After privatization, the Electricity Networks of
Armenia is implementing its first investment program at the cost of USD 750
billion, which will be completed by The investment program is designed to reduce
the number and duration of the power outages as  result of reconstruction of the
distribution networks, reduce technical losses and exclude the risks of
commercial losses, reduce the operation and maintenance cost, expand the
distribution network for connection of new capacities and meeting additional
needs, modernize completely the metering system, creating electronic map for the
existing infrastructures, implement environmental international standards,
management information system (MIS) and ISO management system standards As
result of the implementation of the investment program the following are
expected: • The system average interruption duration index (SAIDI) and frequency
index (SAIFI) will significantly decrease by 2028 to 55% of the 2021 baseline
indicator At the same time, the customer average interruption duration index
(CAIDI) in both urban and rural areas will be reduced by 50% • Long-term voltage
deviations beyond the permissible limits for consumers will be excluded •
Technical losses in the Distribution Networks will decrease to % in 2021 and %
in • Material and maintenance costs will decrease by 30% in 2021, by 20 % in
2025, and by 15% in Other costs will decrease by 10% in 2025 and by another 10%
in • The list of employees will be reduced by about 1100 positions in 2021 and
by 560 positions in • All consumers shall be connected to the Automated System
of the Electrical Energy Metering which will enable the consumers to receive
data of commercial metering devices on the basis of remote operation, ensuring
10 availability of the data in real time for consumers and new suppliers in the
Retail Electricity Market as well as for the Market Operator, creating
favorable environment for liberalization of the Retail Market It should be noted
that the electricity market distribution network code was approved by the Public
Services Regulatory Commission decision  523 on December 25, 2019, which
stipulates additional requirements in terms of the Ten- Year Network Development
Plan and its further regular update The Development Plan will be designed with
the use of up-to-date models considering the possible developments in the energy
sector within that period and the volume of investments required for the
distribution network development on the basis of least cost The program will
complete the development programs of power generation and the transmission
network accomplishing the Least Cost Energy Development Plan VI ELECTRICITY
MARKET The current model of the Armenian electricity market was introduced in
The market is fully regulated both in the wholesale and retail sectors The
electricity market is solely based on the forecasted annual amount of
electricity generation and consumption and it doesn’ impose responsibility on
the Market Participants in the event of deviations from that amount Hence, the
risks resulted from differences between the forecasted and actual amounts of
electricity generation are balanced by tariffs of electricity delivered to
consumers including the cost of such risks balancing of the electricity
distribution licensee In many developed and developing countries, the
electricity markets are already liberalized and operate under perfect
competition The liberalization of the electricity market requires the transition
to  new model which will improve efficiency of the wholesale and retail
electricity markets, while the promotion of the interstate commerce will enable
to have new elements of competition in the domestic market This process has
already commenced, and activities aimed at development of bylaws are currently
underway The transition to the new market model will be carried out in the
coming years with  long-term target of  full market liberalization The market’
new model already at this stage will be based on the current electricity trading
rules, will operate on the basis of balancing demand and supply as well as will
define the responsibility mechanisms of the Market Participants during trade The
first stage of reforms will be followed by the development of  new RoA Law on
Electricity, which will consider the EU directives requirements, that will be
start of the second stage of reforms At that stage of reforms, opportunities for
perfectly competitive market design will be taken into account At the first
stage of the market reforms, issues related to improving the efficiency of the
tariff policy, in particular the feasibility of future use of night-time and
day-time tariffs and its alternatives, implementation of new tariff adjustment
mechanisms for reactive energy, necessity to fix monthly service fee, etc will
be considered In this context, the improvement of protection mechanisms of
vulnerable consumers will constantly remain in the focus of the Government’
attention 11 Meanwhile, it is envisaged to initiate changes in the laws on
“Energy” and “Energy Saving and Renewable Energy”, as  result of which the
renewable energy power plants will be entitled to sell electricity in new
electricity market exclusively under competitive terms without providing  power
purchase guarantee and signing Public Private Partnership аagreement, as well as
to generate and consume at different metering points of the power system
Moreover, the current mechanisms for implementation of autonomous generators
technical power flows will be improved, enabling the latter to generate and
consume electricity at different metering points of the power system and to form
groups involving residents and organizations VII REGIONAL ENERGY COOPERATION The
Armenian Power System is currently connected to the power systems of Iran and
Georgia Through these countries the natural gas is being imported to Armenia In
this respect, the current energy relationships with Iran and Georgia are of
strategic importance As  member of EAEU, Armenia is involved in  process of
establishing EAEU common energy market Meanwhile, Armenia has signed
Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with EU which envisages
gradual implementation of the EU energy related directives In this context,
scientific and technical cooperation is envisaged, including exchange of
experience regarding development and improvement of technologies in electricity
generation, transmission, supply and utilization, with  particular focus on
energy efficiency and environmentally friendly technologies It is highly
important to assess regional development trends in the energy sector so that
Armenia’ competitive advantages are effectively realized for mutually beneficial
cooperation with other countries of the region ) EAEU common electricity market
Armenia is actively involved in the process of establishing the Eurasian common
electricity market, which is planned to be launched in 2025 in accordance with
the Action plan approved by the decree  31 of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council
dated December 20, The plan also stipulates the adoption of the following five
key regulatory documents: • Access rules for cross border transmission service
of electricity (capacity) within the framework of the EAEU common electricity
market • Mutual electricity trade rules • Rules for determination and
distribution of cross border power lines transmission capacity • Rules for
exchange of information • Regulation of cross-border networks development
Currently the drafts of the above-mentioned documents are developed and under
discussion 12 ) EAEU common natural gas market The common gas market of the
Eurasian Economic Union is to be launched in In this regard, the concept of the
common gas market formation and its implementation plan have been adopted
pursuant to the decree   of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council dated May 31, The
member-states have to sign an international agreement on forming the common gas
market The following regulatory documents related to the common gas market’ full
launch will be adopted: • The procedure for the conduct of exchange trading
sessions • Common rules for access to gas transportation system in the member-
states • Protocol on the completion of complex measures which are preconditions
for ensuring access to gas transportation system in the member-states • Trading
rules for the common gas market • Definition of communication documents in the
information exchange system ) EAEU technical regulation The Section  of the
Treaty of Eurasian Economic Union stipulates the procedures of the technical
regulations and standards of the Union, general principles of technical
regulations, circulation of products and accreditation In accordance with the
Decision  526 of the Customs Union Commission of January 28, 2011, the unified
list of products was approved for which mandatory requirements are to be
established In accordance with the Decision  79 of Eurasian Economic Council of
October , 2014, the Action plan of adoption and modification of the technical
regulations according to which the procedures of development, adoption and
modification of the EAEU technical regulations are continuing The Drafts of
Technical Regulation of the Eurasian Economic Union "On the Safety of High
Voltage Equipment" and "On Requirements to Pipelines for Transportation of
Liquid and Gaseous Hydrocarbons" are under discussion Within the scope of the
Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement signed on November 24, 2017
between the Republic of Armenia and the European Union and the European Atomic
Energy Community and their member-states, the Republic of Armenia has undertaken
commitment to implement large-scale 13 reforms in the energy sector to bring the
RoA legal framework into compliance with the European one With the purpose of
fulfilment of the agreement’ provisions, according to the RoA Prime Minister
decision  666- dated June , 2019,  road map was adopted, which clearly
stipulates the completion period and the responsible authorities Within the
scope of the CEPA, the cooperation shall cover the following areas: energy
policy, energy security, diversity of energy sources, diversification of
transmission path, competitive electricity markets, use of renewable energy
sources, promotion of energy efficiency and energy saving, regional energy
cooperation, technological and scientific-technical cooperation etc Bringing EU
directives and regulations into compliance will result in harmonization of the
RoA energy sector regulations with the European standards which will make the
investment environment of the energy sector more attractive, promote trade in
the energy sector with the neighboring countries and increase the level of
energy security and diversification New incentives will be introduced for the
use of renewable energy sources, which will bring new players to the market The
level of nuclear safety will also increase in terms of radwaste and spent fuel
management and control New criteria for energy efficiency including energy
labelling and eco design shall be determined The power system of Armenia
operates in conjunction with the power system of Islamic Republic of Iran which
significantly increases the reliability of the Armenian power system Besides,
the gas pipeline connecting the two countries is an alternative way for natural
gas supply In this regard, in the energy sector Armenia-Iran relationship is
strategic and that will be ongoing in the long-term outlook Possible extension
of terms of Armenia-Iran gas- electricity exchange program and increase in
exchange volume under the mutually beneficial conditions is the key for further
development of this relationship For this reason,  new Armenia-Iran 400 kV
voltage transmission line and the Caucasus transmission line projects are being
implemented Within the framework of the gas- electricity exchange program, the
exploitation of new infrastructures will raise the electricity export at least
14 up to 0billion kWh The export of electricity will reach the maximum level by
the end of The Armenian power system is also connected to the Georgian power
system, which is strategically important for Armenia Nevertheless, that is
subject to various technical constraints considering synchronous-parallel
operation between Armenia and Iran and between Georgia with Russia The Caucasus
Transmission Network Project (Armenia-Georgia power transmission
line/substations) is being implemented for removing the current constraints as
well as increasing transmission capacity, which will enable to stimulate the
energy cooperation between the two countries In parallel to the above-mentioned
investment program, the Agreement on the principles of Armenia-Georgia
electricity trade is envisaged to be developed, which will lead to creation of
prerequisites for regular electricity trade between the two countries that will
rely, to the greatest extent possible, on the requirements of the EU directives
The relations with Georgia are also of great importance as  natural gas transit
country, currently transiting gas from Russia in terms of supply of natural gas
from Russia to Armenia VIII HEAT SUPPLY The centralized heat supply system in
Armenia ceased to exist back in the early 2000’ for  variety of reasons Recently
the construction of smaller systems has begun to meet the heating and hot water
demands of individuals or group of new multiapartment buildings, which, however,
are not significant in the overall demand pattern Currently the production of
heating and hot water is mainly carried out by means of individual natural gas
heating boilers which is the result of the large-scale gasification in Armenia
The effectiveness of this approach as an orienting point for the future
development needs to be reassessed First, it should be taken into account that
the population should regularly make investments in the replacement of the
individual heating boilers and pay more for the consumed natural gas due to the
maintenance of additional infrastructure to supply gas to the household, than it
would have paid in the presence of centralized gas supply system Moreover, the
availability of natural gas in apartments will always be  challenge in terms of
ensuring safety of people’ lives and property In terms of heat supply and hot
water production, other individual systems using renewable energy sources for
the production of solar water heaters and their own 15 energy needs are the
alternative to the individual heating boilers  number of projects are already
being implemented to install such systems, in particular, with the involvement
of the Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund, “Energy
efficient” loan project is being carried out in the non-gasified communities of
Armenia Within the framework of the project, as of July , 2020, 3042 water
heaters have already been installed in different communities The RoA Government
shall gradually expand the implementation of such projects that will enable use
of individual heating and hot water generation systems based on the renewable
resources To formulate  new vision of this sector, the Government will initiate
development of new law on Heat Supply by the end of IX GAS SUPPLY Natural gas is
the main fuel consumed in the country, about 60% of primary energy, about 85% of
fossil fuel consumption and more than 83% of CO2 emissions from fossil fuels
combustion are natural gas The level of gasification of the RoA communities is
96%, natural gas is also widely used in the road transport The natural gas
transportation and distribution systems are available in Armenia, which are
managed by “Gazprom Armenia” CJSC The latter is the only natural gas supplier
The natural gas transportation system is connected to the gas transportation
systems of Georgia and Iran Moreover, there is  gas storage facility in Armenia,
which is available, significantly increases the reliability of the gas supply to
consumers while being connected to the two neighboring countries The price of
the natural gas currently imported to Armenia is determined based on the
agreement between the RoA Government and Russian Federation Government signed on
December , 2013 in Yerevan regarding purchase and sale of shares of
“ArmRosGazprom” CJSC and the further operational conditions as well as the
agreement between RoA Government and RF Government on pricing procedure for the
natural gas supply Meanwhile the common gas market of the Eurasian Economic
Union is to be launched in In view of this, the concept of the common gas market
formation and its implementation program have already been adopted An
international agreement will be singed between the member-states for  full
launch of the common market The gas sector regulations in Armenia were developed
back in the early 2000’ and need to be updated In view of this the Government of
Armenia will commence the process of developing  new law based on  separate and
current principles on “Gas supply” by 2022 and by the end of 2024 bylaws
including the regulatory framework will be thoroughly reviewed Meanwhile, for
the purpose of gas transportation and gas distribution systems development
prospects and clarification of investment priorities, in case of both energy
sector and gas supply system,  ten-year least cost development plans for gas
transportation and gas distribution networks will be implemented which shall be
periodically updated  ENERGY EFFICIENCY 16 The energy efficiency is  legal,
organizational, scientific, productive, technical and economic targeted activity
aimed at reducing the specific cost of energy sources In the last decades of the
last century, the world leading energy efficiency experience showed that the
energy efficiency potential for current technologies amounts to 30% - 40% of
electricity materials and fuel saving is - times cheaper than extraction and
supply of equivalent amount of fuel to consumers Thus, energy efficiency as  new
energy source is more cost-effective than other sources to meet the increasing
demand In accordance with the data of the International Energy Agency each AMD
spent on energy efficiency measures provides more “clean” energy than the needed
amount spent on other energy sources for generating the same energy It should be
emphasized that the significant amount of the conserved energy is generated in
the consumption sector and that energy is ecologically clean as its generation
is free of emissions The RoA Government prioritizes the energy efficiency as
measure for the country’ energy security, increasing economic competitiveness
and reducing  negative impact on the environment as well as global climate
warming The RoA Government’ policy is to promote the energy efficiency in all
the sectors of economy which is stipulated in the Law on “Energy Saving and
Renewable Energy” and in National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy
According to the official energy balance in 2018, the largest domestic energy
consumer is the household which accounts for 21% of total final energy
consumption It is followed by the transport sector with  share of about 81% % of
energy has been consumed in the industry which is significantly less than the
share of the Soviet-era industry Commercial and public services consumed about %
and agriculture - about % The share of the housing sector varies depending on
the weather The studies show that the additional capital investments aimed at
energy efficiency in public and residential buildings can reach 15% and energy
saving up to 40% The overwhelming majority of about 19,000 multi-apartment
buildings in Armenia were built during the Soviet period  years ago without
energy efficiency measures Energy consumption in that buildings per square meter
is about  or  times higher than in the developed countries and varies from 200
to 320 kWh/m2 annually In accordance with the preliminary studies, energy
consumption for heating can be reduced at least by 40% by means of effective
thermal insulation of residential and public buildings The average cost per unit
of energy conserved in buildings is  to  US cents per kWh meanwhile the average
cost of energy generated by the Armenian power system is about  US cents Heating
and cooling systems in buildings as well as the use of different appliances are
the biggest consumers in buildings Along with the improving the energy
efficiency of the appliances, the consumer effective behavior in this sector
will have greater saving potential -about 60%  Within the framework of the
international integration procedures, Armenia, by joining the Treaty on “Eurasia
economic union” and as part of EAEU, accepted technical regulation on “energy
efficiency requirements for energy consuming equipment” Based on Comprehensive
and Extended Partnership Agreement signed between the European Union and the
Republic of Armenia, Armenia is obliged to adapt 65 regulations, instructions
and guidelines (buildings and facilities, energy consuming equipment and means
of transport) to the RoA legislation in the nearest 17 period which are aimed at
promotion of energy efficiency thereby enhancing the state policy in terms of
energy conservation and energy efficiency development The process of development
of National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy  has already commenced
taking into consideration increasing economic and energy security, power system
reliability, strengthening economic and energy independence, promoting energy
efficiency and renewable energy development based on new production and services
organization, as well as reducing man-made impact on environment and human
health X1 DIGITAL ENERGY Information technology and new related opportunities
are continuously transforming markets by offering completely new business models
and lifestyles based on data management and the energy is  part of that
transformation throughout the world Sustainable and smart energy is one of the
most important conditions for dynamic development of the economy aimed at
improving human lives and their living standards The Information Technology
sector of Armenia, which is competitive in the global market, shall be widely
used in order to solve different energy sector-related issues In this regard,
the organization of trade in the wholesale electricity market will be primary
and this will be completely carried out through the electronic platform in the
next few years Along with the wholesale market electronic trading platform, it
is planned to develop the unified information system for remotely transmitting
and managing the information on the consumption and other necessary indicators
from the electricity metering system of the consumers connected to the
Distribution Network, which will promote the liberalization process of the
Retail Electricity Market Meanwhile the SCADA management system will be
installed in the power system which will enable the System Operator not only to
collect the necessary data but also to carry out automatic remote control of the
network equipment In this context, new cyber-security challenges will emerge and
to ensure the digital transformation of the energy sector, it’ important to
consider the implementation of the information security management international
standards, whereof the implementation of ISO/IEC 27000" Security Management
Systems (ISMS) standards" and NIST SP  “Security and Privacy Controls for
Information Systems and Organizations” standards is high-priority, which include
the description of organizational and technical requirements for ensuring
information security and developing  comprehensive management system The
Government of Armenia will pursue continuous implementation of such tools, so
that the procedures in the energy sector related to generation and consumption
can be fully digitally manageable in the shortest possible time through the
concept of the smart consumption systems XII SCIENCE-BASED ENERGY Research and
innovations are of fundamental significance in terms of the energy sector
development The RoA Government will implement continuous programs 18 aimed at
science-based energy, supporting new educational programs, new researches and
innovations In this regard, the Institute of Energy, Electrical Engineering,
which is part of the National Polytechnic University of Armenia Foundation is
the main higher education institution for training young specialists in the
energy sector This university ensures the demand for labor in the energy sector
and the development of its relationship with the energy sector companies will be
essential for supply of more skilled workers The Scientific Research Institute
of Energy (SRIE) should be  major asset to the further retraining of personnel
in the energy sector Over 70-years of its activity, the SRIE has supported for
the implementation of numerous reform programs in the power system of Armenia
aimed at enhancing the country’ energy independence and security, implementing
the development plans and strategy, conducting research on renewable energy
sources as well as providing scientific and technical guidance on different
issues The SRIE has the necessary experience to design development programs on
power generation and the transmission network on the basis of least cost and
equipped with the software tools of international importance to perform such
activities In this context, the further development of the SRIE as  scientific
center of the world’ best practice in the Armenian energy sector is essential,
and it will render services not only in Armenia but also outside the country
Armenian Scientific Research Institute for Nuclear Plant Operation CJSC
(“Armatom” CJSC) is science-based in the nuclear energy sector “Armatom” CJSC,
which was founded in 1973 in the process of ANPP construction The latter is the
only organization in Armenia that provides scientific and technical support to
nuclear power plant, which conducts activities towards development and
implementation of measures aimed at enhancing security and reliability of ANPP,
personnel training, technical documentation development as well as design,
development and implementation of necessary devices, equipment and systems
“Armatom” CJSC also has the wide range of the international world-known partners
and  recognition The research organization in the field of nuclear safety
regulation is "Nuclear and Radiation Safety Technical Scientific Center" CJSC
(NRSC) The NRSC is  licensed organization providing scientific and technical
assistance to the RA Nuclear Safety Regulation Committee (ANRA) It specializes
in nuclear and radiation safety analysis, nuclear facility safety assessment,
independent expertise, risk assessment of the nuclear and radiation safety,
legislation development for the nuclear and radiation safety including laws,
regulations and guidelines, emergency response procedures, emergency simulation
scenarios development, development of the programs/tools related to radiation
safety assessment, radiology and dose measurements, software tools used in the
field of nuclear safety, as well as capacity building to prepare nuclear energy
specialists The RoA Government will continue supporting the further development
of these scientific institutions, also considering the possibility of
consolidating some of them into  single structure, for the purpose of
strengthening direct connection with companies operating in the sector and,
expanding the international cooperation and availability of energy sector
enriched with modern scientific solutions In this context, it is envisaged to
establish unified institution for implementation of climate change, energy and
energy efficiency projects with  purpose to increase efficiency and reduce
management cost for implementation of such projects 19 XIII MANAGEMENT OF STATE-
OWNED COMPANIES The Government of the Republic of Armenia will significantly
improve the management of the state-owned energy companies by implementing new
tools in compliance with the international standards Currently, five entirely
state-owned companies are operating in the energy sector, as follows: •
“Armenian Nuclear Power Plant” CJSC, electricity generation • “Yerevan TPP”
CJSC, electricity generation • “High Voltage Electric Networks” CJSC, provision
of electricity transmission service • “Electricity System Operator” CJSC,
provision of dispatch services to the power system • “Settlement Center” CJSC,
provision of the Market Operator services to the power system With  view to
improve the management efficiency of the above-mentioned five state-owned
companies, the activity of the companies for the next four years will comply
with the international standards requirements Meanwhile, in order to increase
the efficiency of companies, it is required to change the tools of their tariff
regulation, switching from annual tariff regulation to multiyear cycle by
introducing also incentive regulatory measures Such an approach is already used
in case of the private companies operating in the energy sector and enables the
companies to improve both the quality of services provided and the level of
profitability as  result of increasing their efficiency Moreover, profit rate
defined by the Public Services Regulatory Commission for the state-owned
companies need to be reviewed for the purpose of tariff regulation, since, at
their current level, among other restrictions, the attraction of private
investments is impossible and the RoA Government shall raise funds necessary for
the realization of these investments by providing  state guarantee In the
context of the above-mentioned during , the following activities shall be
carried out: • Revision of the rules currently applied to profit rate for
calculation of electricity tariff of companies with state participation, to
involve commercial capital without state guarantee; • Fixing operation and
maintenance costs of companies with state participation and establishment of
approaches for its annual revision for the next ten years; Implementation of the
international standards such as ISO 9001: 2015 Quality Management, ISO 37001:
Anti-Bribery Management Systems, ISO 50001: 2018 Energy Management Systems, and
ISO14001: 2015 Environmental Management Systems and ISO 31000: Risk Management •
SUMMARY Information technologies and new related opportunities are constantly
transforming markets by offering completely new business models and lifestyles
based on the data management and the energy is  part of that transportation
throughout the world 20 Sustainable and smart energy is one of the most
important conditions for dynamic development of the economy aimed at improving
human lives and their living standards Hence, until 2040 the RoA power system
will have the following description: • Self-sufficient and export-oriented high
reliability and equipped with state- of-the-art technology, modern
infrastructures generating annually around 12 billion kWh The large regional
power center linking the neighboring power systems and the Common Electricity
Market of the Eurasian Economic Union Liberalized electricity market based on
the best international models Cost-effective and rational use of renewable
energy sources in compliance with all environmental standards Ensuring the
highest possible increase of the renewable energy share in the country’ energy
balance at least by 15% of solar energy in Extensive conducting of energy
efficiency measures, implementation of energy efficient technologies in the
transition to  green and science-based economy Peaceful development of nuclear
energy, in particular the construction of new nuclear power generating unit in
Armenia Balanced and predictable tariffs for reliable, uninterrupted, high-
quality supply of electricity to consumers and reliable operation of the power
system Diversification of the primary energy resources, in particular natural
gas supply routes to Armenia and types, by guarantying availability of at least
two pipelines entry to the country • • • • • • • Taking into account the
activities envisaged by the Action Plan, the given strategy will be developed
and the revised version for  will be presented by July , This will also include
the regulatory, social and environmental impact assessments of the strategy as
well as will introduce new target indicators in terms of energy efficiency and
renewable energy Meanwhile, the effectiveness and impact of the strategy will be
evaluated once every three years 21 ACTION PLAN TO ENSURE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIC PROGRAM (TILL 2040) NN
Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source  Development of
Electricity Generation Capacity  Implementation of the ANPP Unit  Upgrade and
Design Lifetime Extension until 2026 Efficient and safe operation of the ANPP
Unit  until 2026 Clean electricity generation of about  billion kWh per year (as
result of upgrade, annual generation will increase 300 million kWh) ANPP ANRA
December 2022 USD 189million USD million, of which USD 170 million loan, and USD
19 million grant, under the agreement with the Russian Federation billion AMD
investment under the 22 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact
Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing
Source budget loan of the RA state budget  Preparation of the studies justifying
safe operation of the ANPP after 2026 Development of safety and reliability
measures with implementation timetable for ANPP operation until 2036 Clean
electricity generation of about  billion kWh per year Justification of the
efficient and safe operation of the ANPP Unit  until 2036 ANPP ANRA December
2022  Implementation of the ANPP Unit  Design Lifetime Extension for 2026 - 2036
Efficient and safe operation of the ANPP Unit  until 2036 ANPP ANRA December
2026 USD 150 million, Financing not prohibited by Law Financing not prohibited
by Law  Construction of New Nuclear Unit with Replacing Capacity on the ANPP
Site after the Expiration of the ANPP Unit  Design Lifetime (including its
extensions) Ensure energy independence, diversification of electricity
generation Timetable for the Unit decommissioning measures, including
identification of realistic potential financing sources for construction of new
unit RA MTAI ANRA December 2035 23 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected
Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source USD 250 million investment from private and international
institutions USD 60 million Private investment  Construction of Yerevan CCGT –
with installed capacity of about 254 MW Highly efficient and clean electricity
generation of about  billion kWh per year Increased reliability of electricity
supply Potential decrease of electricity price in the wholesale market RA MTAI
ANRA July 2022  Construction of Masrik - Solar PV Plant with installed capacity
of 55 MW Clean electricity generation of about 11 billion kWh per year Increased
energy independence through increased share of solar generation to 15% or 1000
MW by Increased energy independence through increased share of solar generation
to 15% or 1000 MW by Increased energy independence through increased share of
solar generation to 15% or 1000 MW by RA MTAI RA PSRC July 2022  Implementation
of the projects for construction of five Solar PV Plants with total installed
capacity of about 120 MW Clean electricity generation of about 192 billion kWh
per year RA MTAI RA PSRC December 2024 Private investment through tenders based
on the lowest price offer  Construction of Ayg –  Solar PV Plant with installed
capacity of 200 MW Clean electricity generation of about 32 billion kWh per year
RA PSRC December 2023 USD 170 million private investment RA MTAI 24 NN Action
Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source USD 150 million private
investment  Construction of Ayg –  Solar PV Plant with installed capacity of 200
MW Increased energy independence through increased share of solar generation to
15% or 1000 MW by Increased energy independence through increased share of solar
generation to 15% or 1000 MW by Increased energy independence through increased
share of solar generation to 15% or 1000 MW by Increased energy independence
Clean electricity generation of about 32 billion kWh per year RA PSRC December
2024 RA MTAI 10 Construction of Small Solar Plants (up to  MW) with total
installed capacity of 315 MW, out of which Clean electricity generation of about
326 billion kWh per year RA MTAI RA PSRC December 2029 USD 340 million Private
investment within the tariffs set by the PSRC USD 80 million Private investment
11 Construction of Autonomous Solar Power Plants increasing total installed
capacity from 40 MW to 100 MW Clean electricity generation of about 16 billion
kWh per year Private companies, individuals RA PSRC December 2023 12
Construction of Small Hydropower Plants increasing total installed capacity from
380 MW to 430 MW Increase in clean electricity generation of about  billion kWh
per year Private company RA PSRC December 2023 USD 100 million Private
investment 25 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source Private
investment 13 Construction of small and utility scale Wind Power Plants with
capacity of up to 500 MW, if competitive tariff offers exist Development of the
Least Cost Energy Generation Plan, and its periodic review once in two years
Increased energy independence Clean electricity generation RA MTAI RA PSRC 2025
- 2040 RA MTAI ESO December 2022 Financing not prohibited by Law Planning of
development of the electricity system’ generating capacities To provide the
Government of Armenia with the visions of potential developments in the
electricity system aiming at implementation of the measures in appropriate
direction 14  Development of the High-Voltage Electriicty Transmission Network
Reconstruction of 110 kV Substation “Charentsavan-” Increased reliability of the
electricity supply Increased reliability of the electricity supply Reduced
emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2023 USD 36 million, IBRD
under the loan agreement  Reconstruction of 110 kV Substation “Vanadzor-”
Reduced emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2021 26 NN Action
Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source  Reconstruction of 220
kV Substation “Zovuni” Increased reliability of the electricity supply Increased
reliability of the electricity supply Increased reliability of the electricity
supply Increased reliability of the electricity supply Increased reliability of
the electricity supply Reduced emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO
December 2024  Reconstruction of 220 kV Switching point “Agarak – ” Reduced
emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2021 SDR 02 million, ADB
under the loan agreement  Reconstruction of 220 kV Substation “Shinahayr”
Reduced emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2022
Reconstruction of 220 kV Substation “Ashnak” Reduced emergency in the
electricity system HVEN ESO December 2020 USD 86 million, IBRD under the loan
agreement  Reconstruction of 220 kV Substations “Ararat – ” Reduced emergency in
the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2024  Reconstruction of 110 kV overhead
transmission line “Larvar” Reconstruction of 110 kV overhead transmission line
“Noyemberyan” Increased reliability of the electricity supply Increased
reliability of the electricity supply Reduced emergency in the electricity
system Reduced emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2020 USD
million, IBRD under the loan agreement  HVEN ESO 10 Reconstruction of 220 kV
Substation “Litchk” Increased reliability of the electricity supply Reduced
emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2022 27 NN Action Expected
Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer()
Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source State Guarantee Loans Increased
reliability of the electricity supply Assessment of the financing options and
dates for investment project to reconstruct 220 kV Substation “Shahumyan-”
Assessment of the financing options and dates of investment project for
reconstruction of 220 kV Substation “Marash” Assessment of the financing options
and dates for investment project to reconstruct 220 kV Substation “Yeghegnadzor”
Implementation of the second stage of SCADA communication and automation system
investment program 11 Reduced emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO
December 2030 Increased reliability of the electricity supply 12 Reduced
emergency in the electricity system HVEN ESO December 2030 State Guarantee Loans
Increased reliability of the electricity supply 13 Reduced emergency in the
electricity system HVEN ESO December 2030 State Guarantee Loans 14 ESO June 2022
Included in SDR 02 million loan of ADB 15 RA MTAI ESO, HVEN December 2021
Implementation of the project for construction of Iran-Armenia 400 kV double-
circuit overhead transmission line, and 400 kV Substation “Noravan” Construction
of Construction of the transmission line and substation will enable increase of
the electricity exchange capacity Increased reliability and operation safety of
the electricity system EUR 107․ million, EDBI Sunir FZE, under the loan
agreement 28 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source Iran-
Armenia 400 kV double- circuit overhead transmission line Construction of 400 kV
Substation “Noravan” between two countries’ energy systems from 350 MW to 1200
MW, meantime will improve reliability of parallel operation of the energy
systems and enhance Armenia energy security Implementation of the project will
result in significant promotion of the mutually beneficial regional cooperation
in the energy sector, and in increase of transmission capacity of parallel
operation with Georgia from the existing 200 MW to 350 MW 16 Caucasus
Electricity Transmission Network (Armenia – Georgia power transmission
line/substations) RA MTAI ESO, HVEN December 2025 Increased reliability and
operation safety of the electricity system; transient flows, as well as
favorable conditions for operational regimes are ensured EUR million , KfW, EIB,
NIF under the loan and grant agreements Construction of Substation “Ddmashen”
Construction of transmission lines 29 NN Action Expected Immediate Result
Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source Construction of the Back- to Back HVDC station 17 Development
of the Ten-Year Transmission Network Development Plan, and its periodic review
once in two years Optimization of the Electricity Sysytem Transmission Network
Development December 2022 ESO financing ESO EMO HVEN ENA (by agreement) ANPP
Yerevan TPP Hrazdan TPP (by agreement)  Development of the Electricity
Distribution Network Increased reliability and quality of customers electricity
supply ENA (by agreement) December 2027 AMD 750 million ENA investment
Implementation of the Investment Program of the Electric Networks of Armenia As
result it is expected to reduce the average duration and frequency of the
interruptions by 2028 to 55% of the 2021 baseline indicator, reduce maximum
duration for an interruption by 50%, exclude 30 NN Action Expected Immediate
Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action
Cost and Financing Source long-term voltage deviations beyond the permissible
limits for customers, reduce technical losses to % in 2021 and % in 2028,
exclude the risks of commercial losses, reduce the operational and maintenance
cost, expand the distribution network, modernize completely the metering system,
complete the works related to geo- informational elements of infrastructures
(linear infrastructures), implement ISO standards for environmental, 31 NN
Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source management system and
management information system (MIS) ENA (by agreement) December 2022 ENA
Development of the Ten-Year Distribution Network Development Plan, and its
periodic review once in two years  Electricity Market  Pilot -Transition to the
new Wholesale Electricity Market Model with application of the pilot version of
the Market Management System Software without financial liabilities to market
participants Verification of the proposed model for wholesale electricity and
capacity market Experience gained in competitive market, reveal potential
deficiencies and make adjustments EMO ESO HVEN ENA (by agreement) ANPP Yerevan
TPP Hrazdan  (by agreement) ContourGlobal (by agreement) IEC (by agreement) REPP
HVEN ENA ANPP Yerevan TPP February 2021 In the framework of USAID assistance
Full Transition to the new Wholesale Electricity Market Model Actual
introduction of the wholesale electricity and capacity market Increased
efficiency of the system, introduction of responsibility tools EMO ESO February
2022 In the framework of USAID assistance 32 NN Action Expected Immediate Result
Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source Hrazdan  (by agreement) ContourGlobal (by agreement) IEC (by
agreement) REPP RA MTAI EMO ESO ENA (by agreement)  Development of regulations
to increase efficiency of the current tariff policy  Feasibility for future use
of night-time and day-time tariff currently established for electricity
customers, establishment of monthly fixed service fee for electricity customers
Introducing tariff for reactive energy for the electricity customers  Adoption
of the Methodology and Procedure for Setting (Revision) of Tariffs in the
Electricity System of Armenia Improvement of protection mechanisms for
vulnerable customers December 2022 Financing not prohibited by Law Ensure
efficient tariff policy RA PSRC Increased level of transparent tariff setting
Improved economic indicators of the system Application of flexible tariff
systems  Ensure efficient tariff policy Poverty reduction RA MTAI RA MLSA RA
PSRC December 2022 Financing not prohibited by Law 33 NN Action Expected
Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer()
Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source No financing is required  Development
of the draft law on making changes in the RoA Laws “on Energy” and “on Energy
Saving and Renewable Energy”, according to which: Improvement of the legislative
framework of the electricity market Increased level of the commercial
competition in the electricity market RA MTAI RA PSRC July 2021  the renewable
energy power plants will be entitled to sell electricity in new electricity
market exclusively under competitive terms without providing  power purchase
guarantee and signing Public Private Partnership аgreement, as well as to
generate and consume at different metering points of the power system  the
current mechanisms for implementation of autonomous generators technical power
flows will be improved, enabling the latter to 34 NN Action Expected Immediate
Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action
Cost and Financing Source generate and consume electricity at different metering
points of the power system and to form groups involving residents and
organizations Development of the new RoA Law on Electricity taking into
consideration international best practices, as well as issues revealed during
implementation of Electricity Market Model and Electricity Trade Mechanisms
Ensure regulatory and normative framework of the electricity and capacity
liberalized market Harmonization of the legal framework with application of the
international practice RA MTAI RA PSRC December 2022 In the framework of USAID
assistance  Regional Energy Cooperation  Participation in the EAEU common
electricity market in accordance with the Action plan approved by the decree  31
of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council dated December 20, Development and adoption
of the regulatory documents Interstate flow access rules Electricity interstate
trading rules Identification of interstate sections and distribution rules
Information exchange rules RA MTAI RA PSRC  Financing not prohibited by Law 35
NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source Interstate networks
development procedure Rules for trading in the gas exchange Unified rules for
access to the gas transportation system of the Member States Protocol on
completion of the complex measures as pre-conditions required for ensuring
access to the gas transportation system of the Member States Trading rules in
the common gas market Identification of documents for informational cooperation
in the information exchange system Promotion of the investment  Participation in
the EAEU common natural gas market in accordance with the Action Plan approved
by the decree   of Supreme Eurasian Economic Council dated May 31, Development
and adoption of the regulatory documents RA MTAI RA PSRC  Financing not
prohibited by Law  EU-Armenia Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement
(CEPA): Implementation of the EU-Armenia Comprehensive and RA MTAI RA PSRC
Financing not prohibited by Law 36 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected
Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source Implementation of the reforms in the Energy Sector in
accordance with the Road Map adopted by the RoA Prime Minister decision  666-
dated June , 2019 that clearly stipulates the completion period and the
responsible authorities Implementation of measures focused on the expansion of
Armenia - Iran Energy Cooperation and conclusion of agreements Enhanced
Partnership Agreement (CEPA) environment of the energy sector Development of
energy trading with neighboring countries Increased level of energy security and
diversification Electricity export of  billion kWh  Implementation of Armenia –
Iran gas - for - electricity exchange program RA MTAI ESO EMO Yerevan TPP
Included in the cost for construction of Iran - Armenia electricity transmission
line Included in the cost for construction of Armenia – Georgia electricity
transmission line In the framework of USAID assistance  Implementation of
measures focused on the expansion of Armenia - Georgia Energy Cooperation and
conclusion of agreements As  result, prerequisites will be established for
regular electricity trade between the two countries based on the EU directives
to the extent possible Regular electricity trade between the two countries RA
MTAI  RA PSRC ESO EMO HVEN  Conduct Armenia – Georgia Joint Working Group
meetings to ensure electricity trade between Armenia and Regular electricity
trade between the two countries RA MTAI  RA PSRC ESO EMO HVEN 37 NN Action
Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source Georgia and development
of the Agreement on the Principles for Electricity Trade  Conclusion of Armenia
- Georgia Agreement on the Principles for Electricity Trade Regular electricity
trade between the two countries RA MTAI 2023 RA PSRC ESO EMO HVEN In the
framework of USAID assistance  Heat Supply  Gradual expansion of implementation
of such projects that will enable the use of individual heating and hot water
generation systems based on the renewable resources Installation of solar water
heating systems, 1500 – 7500 AMD/litre, (600C – 700C) Large-scale use of
renewable energy sources, Increased level of energy security and independence RA
MTAI Private sector Continuously until 2040 Financing not prohibited by Law
Development of  new law on heat supply Regulation of heat supply sector and
ensuring legal framework Harmonization of the legislation with implementation of
international practice RA MTAI December 2022 International donor organizations
Gas Supply  Development of  new law on gas supply based on the modern principles
Clarification of the sector management principles based on Reforms in the
sector, efficient protection of consumers rights RA MTAI RA PSRC December 2023
International donor organizations 38 NN Action Expected Immediate Result
Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source the international best practice Clarification of the sector
activities and application of the modern principles  Comprehensive review of the
regulatory framework for the gas supply sector Ensure requirements for having
full transparency of applicable tariffs, and requirements for reliability and
security Ensure reliable and safe gas supply of the customers RA MTAI RA PSRC
December 2024 International donor organizations  Development of the Least Cost
Gas Transportation and Gas Distribution Networks Development Ten-year Plans, and
its review once in two years Optimal development of the gas supply sector
according to the long-term plan Gasprom Armenia CJSC (by agreement) December
2022 No financing is required  Energy Efficiency 39 NN Action Expected Immediate
Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action
Cost and Financing Source International donor organizations Reduced specific
cost of energy resources RA MTAI RA ME RA UDC December 2027  In the framework of
Comprehensive and Extended Partnership Agreement signed between the European
Union and the Republic of Armenia, adapt 65 regulations, instructions and
guidelines (buildings and facilities, energy consuming equipment and means of
transport) to the RoA legislation which are aimed at promotion of energy
efficiency Development of the National Program on Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy for 2021- As  result, new standards for energy efficiency and
energy saving will be established including for energy labeling and eco design
National Program will define new measures and targets for 2021- 2030 that will
facilitate future formation of the policy for Armenia Energy Efficiency and
identification of specific actions for its implementation Reduced specific cost
of energy resources RA MTAI June 2021 International donor organizations 40 NN
Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source International donor
organizations  Implement regular annual energy statistics in the RA Support to
implementation of the energy policy RA MTAI RA SC Annually Annual energy balance
development in compliance with the standards of the International Energy
Commission Energy efficiency and energy saving new national standards for
product and services Establish new parameters for energy efficiency and energy
saving, and develop and adopt national standards ensuring their implementation
Reduction of specific cost for energy resources RA ME RA MTAI RA UDC
Continuously International donor organizations  Information Technology in the
Energy Sector  Installation of the electronic platform for trading in the
wholesale electricity market Application of the digital systems for transactions
Ensuring impartial and transparent decision making for the market participants
Ensuring absolute level of transparency RA MTAI EMO ESO RA MHTI December 2022
International donor organizations  Installation of the unified information
system for remotely transmitting and managing the information on the consumption
and other necessary indicators from the electricity metering system of the
customers Ensuring full awareness of customers ENA (by agreement) RA MHTI
December 2027 ENA financing 41 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected
Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and
Financing Source connected to the distribution network Installation of the SCADA
system in the wholesale electricity market which will enable the ESO not only to
collect the necessary data but also to carry out automatic remote control of the
network equipment Implementation of the information security management
international standards at ANPP, as provided in  –   ISO/IEC 27000" Security
Management Systems (ISMS) standards"  NIST SP  “Security and Privacy Controls
for Information Systems and Organizations” Implementation of the information
security international standards at Yerevan TPP, as provided in  –   Ensuring
reliable and uninterrupted operation of the system Increased quality of the
electricity supply HVEN, ESO RA MHTI ADB loan December 2022  Ensuring Cyber-
security, digital transformation of the energy sector at ANPP Ensuring required
level of reliability and safety of ANPP operation ANPP RA MHTI December 2023
ANPP financing and other financing not prohibited by Law  Ensuring Cyber-
security, digital transformation of the energy sector at Yerevan TPP Ensuring
required level of reliability and safety of Yerevan TPP operation Yerevan TPP RA
MHTI December 2023 Yerevan TPP financing and other financing not 42 NN Action
Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source prohibited by Law
ISO/IEC 27000" Security Management Systems (ISMS) standards"  NIST SP  “Security
and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations” Implementation
of the information security international standards at HVEN, as provided in  –
ISO/IEC 27000" Security Management Systems (ISMS) standards"  NIST SP  “Security
and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations” Implementation
of the information security international standards at ESO, as provided in  –
ISO/IEC 27000" Security Management Systems (ISMS) standards"  NIST SP  “Security
and Privacy Controls for  Ensuring Cyber- security, digital transformation of
the energy sector at HVEN Ensuring required level of reliability and safety of
HVEN operation HVEN RA MHTI December 2023 HVEN financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law  Ensuring Cyber- security, digital transformation of the
energy sector at ESO Ensuring required level of reliability and safety of ESO
operation ESO RA MHTI December 2023 ESO financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law 43 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact
Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing
Source Information Systems and Organizations” Implementation of the information
security international standards at EMO, as provided in  –   ISO/IEC 27000"
Security Management Systems (ISMS) standards"  NIST SP  “Security and Privacy
Controls for Information Systems and Organizations”  Ensuring Cyber- security,
digital transformation of the energy sector at EMO Ensuring required level of
reliability and safety of EMO operation EMO RA MHTI December 2023 EMO financing
other financing not prohibited by Law Scientific Advancement in the Energy
Sector National Polytechnic University- Fund of Armenia Providing highly
qualified science- based professionals for the safe and reliable operation and
development of the energy system Application of scientific- research studies in
different Increased quality of the system operation NPUA Continuously State
budget, Contracts with companies of the system Scientific Research Institute of
Energy CJSC Increased quality of the system operation SRIE Continuously State
budget, Contracts with 44 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact
Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing
Source companies of the system State budget, Contracts with companies of the
system No financing is required subareas of the energy system Application of
scientific- research studies in nuclear energy sector “Armatom” CJSC Increased
quality of the system operation Armatom Continuously Establishment of climate
change, energy and energy efficiency projects implementation unified institution
Increased efficiency for projects implementation Management cost reduction RA
MTAI RA MEnv October 2021 Management of State - Owned Companies ANPP management
improvement and implementation of international standards, in accordance with  –
Ensuring efficient management at ANPP, in compliance with the international
standards Improvement of management efficiency of state-owned energy companies
2021 - 2024  Revision of the rules applied to profit rate for calculation of
ANPP electricity RA MTAI ANPP RA PSRC January 2021 No financing is required 45
NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source tariff, to involve
commercial capital without state guarantee  Fixing ANPP operation and
maintenance costs and establishment of approaches for its annual revision for
the next 10 years  ISO 9001: 2015 Quality Management RA MTAI ANPP RA PSRC
December 2021 No financing is required RA MTAI ANPP December 2024 ANPP Financing
and other financing not prohibited by Law ANPP Financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law ANPP Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law ANPP
Financing and other  ISO 37001: 2016 Anti-Bribery Management Systems RA MTAI
ANPP December 2024  ISO 50001: 2018 Energy Management Systems RA MTAI ANPP
December 2024  ISO14001: 2015 Environmental Management Systems RA MTAI ANPP
December 2024 46 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source financing
not prohibited by Law ANPP Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law
ISO 31000: Risk Management RA MTAI ANPP December 2024 Ensuring efficient
management at Yerevan TPP, in compliance with the international standards
Improvement of management efficiency of state-owned energy companies Yerevan TPP
management improvement and implementation of international standards, in
accordance with  –   Revision of the rules applied to profit rate for
calculation of Yerevan TPP electricity tariff, to involve commercial capital
without state guarantee  Fixing Yerevan TPP operation and maintenance costs and
establishment of approaches for its annual revision for the next 10 years  ISO
9001: 2015 Quality Management 2021 - 2024 RA MTAI Yerevan TPP RA PSRC January
2021 No financing is required RA MTAI Yerevan TPP RA PSRC December 2021 No
financing is required RA MTAI Yerevan TPP December 2024 Yerevan TPP Financing
and other 47 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source financing
not prohibited by Law Yerevan TPP Financing and other financing not prohibited
by Law Yerevan TPP Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law Yerevan
TPP Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law Yerevan TPP Financing
and other financing not prohibited by Law  ISO 37001: 2016 Anti-Bribery
Management Systems RA MTAI Yerevan TPP December 2024  ISO 50001: 2018 Energy
Management Systems RA MTAI Yerevan TPP December 2024  ISO14001: 2015
Environmental Management Systems RA MTAI Yerevan TPP December 2024  ISO 31000:
Risk Management RA MTAI Yerevan TPP December 2024 48 NN Action Expected
Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co- implementer()
Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source HVEN management improvement and
implementation of international standards, in accordance with  –   Revision of
the rules applied to profit rate for calculation of HVEN electricity tariff, to
involve commercial capital without state guarantee  Fixing HVEN operation and
maintenance costs and establishment of approaches for its annual revision for
the next 10 years Ensuring efficient management at HVEN, in compliance with the
international standards Improvement of management efficiency of state- owned
energy companies 2021 - 2024 RA MTAI HVEN RA PSRC January 2021 No financing is
required RA MTAI HVEN RA PSRC December 2021 No financing is required  ISO 9001:
2015 Quality Management RA MTAI HVEN December 2024 HVEN Financing and other
financing not prohibited by Law HVEN Financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law  ISO 37001: 2016 Anti-Bribery Management Systems RA MTAI HVEN
December 2024 49 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source HVEN
Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law HVEN Financing and other
financing not prohibited by Law HVEN Financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law  ISO 50001: 2018 Energy Management Systems RA MTAI HVEN
December 2024  ISO14001: 2015 Environmental Management Systems RA MTAI HVEN
December 2024  ISO 31000: Risk Management RA MTAI HVEN December 2024 ESO
management improvement and implementation of international standards, in
accordance with  –   Revision of the rules applied to profit rate for
calculation of ESO electricity tariff, to involve commercial capital without
state guarantee Ensuring efficient management at ESO, in compliance with the
international standards Improvement of management efficiency of state- owned
energy companies 2021 - 2024 RA MTAI ESO RA PSRC January 2021 No financing is
required 50 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible
Body(ies) Co- implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source No
financing is required  Fixing ESO operation and maintenance costs and
establishment of approaches for its annual revision for the next 10 years RA
MTAI ESO RA PSRC December 2021  ISO 9001: 2015 Quality Management RA MTAI ESO
December 2024 ESO Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law ESO
Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law ESO Financing and other
financing not prohibited by Law ESO Financing and other financing not prohibited
by Law ESO Financing and other  ISO 37001: 2016 Anti-Bribery Management Systems
RA MTAI ESO December 2024  ISO 50001: 2018 Energy Management Systems RA MTAI ESO
December 2024  ISO14001: 2015 Environmental Management Systems RA MTAI ESO
December 2024  ISO 31000: Risk Management RA MTAI ESO December 2024 51 NN Action
Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source financing not prohibited
by Law EMO management improvement and implementation of international standards,
in accordance with  –   Revision of the rules applied to profit rate for
calculation of EMO electricity tariff, to involve commercial capital without
state guarantee  Fixing EMO operation and maintenance costs and establishment of
approaches for its annual revision for the next 10 years Ensuring efficient
management at EMO, in compliance with the international standards Improvement of
management efficiency of state- owned energy companies 2021 - 2024 RA MTAI EMO
RA PSRC January 2021 No financing is required RA MTAI EMO RA PSRC December 2021
No financing is required  ISO 9001: 2015 Quality Management RA MTAI EMO December
2024 EMO Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law EMO Financing and
other  ISO 37001: 2016 Anti-Bribery Management Systems RA MTAI EMO December 2024
52 NN Action Expected Immediate Result Expected Impact Responsible Body(ies) Co-
implementer() Deadline Action Cost and Financing Source financing not prohibited
by Law EMO Financing and other financing not prohibited by Law EMO Financing and
other financing not prohibited by Law EMO Financing and other financing not
prohibited by Law  ISO 50001: 2018 Energy Management Systems RA MTAI EMO
December 2024  ISO14001: 2015 Environmental Management Systems RA MTAI EMO
December 2024  ISO 31000: Risk Management RA MTAI EMO December 2024 53 Acronyms
RA Republic of Armenia RF Russian Federation RA MTAI RA MLSA RA ME RA MEnv RA
MHTI RA Ministry of High-Tech Industry RA UDC RA PSRC RA Public Services
Regulatory Commission ANRA RA Nuclear Safety Regulation Committee RA SC ESO EMO
HVEN ENA ANPP Yerevan TPP Hrazdan  IEC ContourGlobal REPP SRIE Armatom NPUA
"National Polytechnic University of Armenia" Foundation ADB USAID EIB IBRD KfW
NIF RA Ministry of Territorial Administration and Infrastructure RA Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs RA Ministry of Economy RA Ministry of Environment RA
Urban Development Committee RA Statistics Committee “Electric Power System
Operator” CJSC “Settlement Center” CJSC/Electricity Market Operator “High
Voltage Electric Networks” CJSC “Electric Networks of Armenia” CJSC “Armenian
Nuclear Power Plant” CJSC “Yerevan TPP” CJSC Unit of “Gasprom Armenia” CJSC
"International Energy Corporation" CJSC "ContourGlobal Hydro Cascade" CJSC
Renewable Energy Power Plant “Scientific Research Institute of Energy” CJSC
“Armatom” CJSC Asian Development Bank United States Agency for International
Development European Investment Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development German development bank Neighborhood Investment Fund 54 SDR EDBI PPP
USD US dollar Special Drawing Right Export Development Bank of Iran Public
Private Partnership 55