DRAFT 2ND NATIONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN FOR THE REPUBLIC OF ARMENIA
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund World Bank / Global Environmental
Facility Government of Armenia Astghine Pasoyan, Team Leader ,708 ,000 Energy
Efficiency – why care? • / of all energy resources imported • Emerging supply
gap: TPES TFEC     ,000 ,475 ,000 ,681 ,000 ,139 • Demand grew and forecasted to
grow further, ,000 ,518 ,286 ,378 existing supply capacities insufficient to
meet the growing demand ,991 ,977 ,738 ,000 ,512 ,134 ,106 ,964 ,858 ,858 ,905
,015 ,998 ,901 ,714 ,000 • Future demand supplied by aging capacities to ,107
,000 require - times more TPES • Energy price hike in the last decade - 1990
2000 2005 2010 2011 2012 2014 2015 2017 2018 2020 poses affordability and
competitiveness problems 300% %    %    %    Energy price increases: Gas &
Electricity 250% Day-time electricity Tariff %    %    %    %    %    %    •
Electricity price rose by % • Natural gas price rose by % Night-time electricity
tariff %    200% %    %    %    Retail Gas Tariff Wholesale gas tariff •
Armenia’ economic indicators dragging: • Global competitiveness index dropped
from 117 150% %    %    %   %   %   %   %   %   100% %   %   %   %   to 85
during  (WEF) %   %   %   %   %   50% %   %   %   %   %   • GDP growth dropped
from % to % during %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %   (WB) % 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Why is Energy Efficiency Important for Armenia?
create conditions for economic growth while improving the country’ energy
security reduce the energy intensity of the national economic output, improve
cost-effectiveness & competitiveness maintain  safe, sustainable and affordable
energy supply, while mitigating climate change help meet increasing energy
demand, capturing “lost opportunities” for saving energy in new construction
Improve the quality of life for the Armenian population, create jobs and help
local economy Energy Efficiency can: reduces utility bills for all consumer
groups reduces use of limited natural resources and pressure on endangered
forest resources Under conditions of extreme energy import dependence, energy
that Armenia’ citizens, businesses, and infrastructure do not use is the
cheapest, cleanest, and most secure energy resource Quantifying Energy
Efficiency for Armenia’ Economy Realizing full economic potential of energy
saving, can rise Armenia’ domestic energy supply may rise by % (reduced energy
imports) Economic gain from energy saving equivalent to % of GNP, or 80% of
state budget deficit 1m3 of imported natural gas costs twice more than
investments to reduce 1m3 natural gas consumption Building 1kW new capacity
costs  times more than saving 1kW energy on demand side  NEEAP Process
Introduction • NEEAPs in Southeast European Countries (West Balkans, Moldova,
Ukraine, pending Georgia) • focus on documenting ongoing efforts, • identify
cost-effective and/or low-cost/no-cost measures to promote energy efficiency, •
under conditions of limited availability of funds from state budget, rely on IFI
lending and private sector participation • 1st National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan (NEEAP) • developed in 2010 for , assessed for  • Set energy saving target
for % by 2013; • 2nd NEEAP • Assesses the 1st NEEAP progress () • Sets forth
targets for the next -year period () • Sets indicative targets for 2018 and 2020
• Outlines the allocation of institutional roles and monitoring duties NEEAP
also includes The 2nd NEEAP must contain Analysis and report on the
implementation of measures and activities from 1st NEEAP (2010- 2014) • Primary
energy savings (separate section), which will include description of measures
addressing the primary energy saving potential and primary energy savings
targets (in production, transmission and distribution of energy,  electricity,
thermal energy); this may include gas and electricity tariff structure
improvement, other DSM measures, EEI Measures and activities for  with
indicative targets for 2018 and 2020 Holders of separate activities • National
target for nearly zero energy buildings – not quantitative; 2nd NEEAP elements •
Possible improvements of the primary and secondary legislation necessary for
achieving the energy efficiency targets; this may include mechanisms for energy
efficient public procurement, new regulations and standards for enforcement of
new energy efficiency technologies, etc, and Education and promotion activities
aimed to encourage rational energy use Funds required for the implementation of
anticipated activities and sources thereof Deadlines for implementation of
energy efficiency activities • Other data as proposed in the template, as well
as data that are not required in the template but are deemed to be necessary and
important to be included such as the financial aspects and savings Sectoral
Scope Buildings Public sector Industry • Residential: existing building • Public
Buildings • Services: Municipal Street- • Power sector: generation,
transmission, distribution retrofitting • New construction: lighting, etc •
Heavy industry/large Regulatory framework enterprises • SME Horizontal measures
• policy measures (energy audits, SEAPs, public procurement, codes/standards,
BATs, etc), Agriculture Mobility (transport) • Irrigation, • Aquacultures, •
Greenhouses, etc • Electric transport, • Road infrastructure, • Fuel switching,
• grants/subsidies, • TA (audit templates, EE calculators, guidebooks, sample
RFPs/contracts, • ESCO development) and • information (training, awareness, info
centers) Scope of Assessment  International Best Practices :         Assessed
and revised targets  EE Policies,                                 2017 EE
Improvement Measures  Programs,                       Cost-effective additional
solutions 2018                 Recommendatio ns for Capacity Building,
Institutional Roles and Implementation               Financing Market
development 2020 New plans by IFIs and legislative initiatives
Presentation material Review of Policies, Strategies, Regulations in EE • Energy
Sector Development Strategy of 2005 • Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy
• National Program on Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency • 1st National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan •  Long-Term Strategic Development Program •
National Energy Security Concept • Least Cost Generation Plan • RE Roadmap &
SREP Investment Plan 2014 Energy policies and instruments and their
implementation • Resolution 1504 on Mandatory EE In State Investment Programs •
Draft Technical Regulation on “Buildings and structures/premises, construction
materials and Secondary Legislation & products Safety” Regulatory • Draft
Technical Regulation on “Building Energy Efficiency” • Normative-technical
documentation Framework • Energy Charter Treaty • Observer Status in Energy
Community • United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change • EU Covenant
of Mayors • Eurasian Economic Union documentation International Treaties
Assessed IFI & Donor activities in Energy Efficiency World Bank/GEF United
Nations Development Program (UNDP) / Global Environment Facility (GEF):
•Public/Municipal/Social Building Energy Efficiency Credit Line Via ESA Scheme
•Green Urban Lighting Project •Improvement of EE in buildings Project •EE in
Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply Project International Finance Corporation
(IFC) •Sustainable Energy Finance Project on-lending through banks for corporate
and residential EE through  PFIs United States Agency for International
Development (USAID): European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD):
•Residential Energy Efficiency for Low-Income Households (REELIH) Program
•Energy & Water Program, •LEDS Project and least cost generation planning •STIP
initiative and plans for water and energy efficiency solutions in fisheries
•Caucasus Sustainable Energy Financing Facility in Armenia providing corporate &
residential energy efficiency loans through  PFIs with free TA & LEMA, and %
grant investment incentives •Direct loans with sovereign guarantees •Leveraged
funding from EIB Eastern European Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership
(E5P) KfW lending activities and planned initiatives in the field of energy
efficiency: •Pipeline of municipal infrastructure EE projects: •District
Heating; • Water and Wastewater; • Solid Waste Management; • Street Lighting; •
Insulation of public buildings or residential housing; • Urban Transport •EE-
integrated reinforcement of schools (may leverage ADB) •Financing solar water
heaters •Housing EE (conceptualizing) •EE in SMEs Green for Growth Fund European
Commission •EE & RE Loans through PFIs •SUDEP EE & RE for Spitak & Vayq
Communities •INOGATE Technical Secretariat •NIF grant co-financing for selected
IFI loan products French Development Agency •Residential EE Loans to low-to-
middle income HH with -10% grant incentive through NMC Operated data • IFI
survey up to 2014, no projection for future • Energy Balance for , which
contradicts PSRC and customs data • Data provided by Municipality of Yerevan on
transportation • National Statistical Reporting Background Conditions Economic
Growth and Energy Use in Armenia WB 2014 Final energy consumption & Electricity
Generation Electricity generation by fuel (in GWh) Final energy consumption in
Armenia by sector Source: USAID, Reference scenario for 2015-*Data for 2000 and
2005 are from IEA, Statistics Source: Annual Report of the Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources of RA 1st NEEAP Assessment Baseline Final Energy
Consumption Estimated annual savings SECTOR TARGET based on 2010 baseline (% and
ktoe) Sector target in 2014 (ktoe) Sector/Measure Cumulative 1st NEEAP TARGET
set for 2014 (in ktoe) 2010 (in ktoe) ACHIEVED Annual savings NO TARGET
Horizontal Measures (Cross-cutting investments in AGIND, RES) no target
Cumulative (ktoe) %  % %  % % 13 % % %  % % %  % Cumulative (%) Building Sector
(Residential) II Cumulative (ktoe) Cumulative (%) Public Buildings & Services
III Cumulative (ktoe) Cumulative (%) Industry Sector IV Cumulative (ktoe)
Cumulative (%) Transport Sector  Cumulative (ktoe) Cumulative (%) Agricultural
Sector/ Forestry VI Cumulative (ktoe) Total Cumulative (%) VII Cumulative (ktoe)
1st NEEAP Analysis: Lessons learnt EE credit lines for various borrower groups
operating through banks on commercial terms – successful! • Due to the mixed
reporting on lending, impossible to separate sectoral impacts The lending for
public building energy efficiency very successful! Efficiency upgrades in
transport sector successful both in public and private sectors Energy Tariff
increase has had  direct impact on curtailing consumption • Not only through
efficiency, but also through sacrificed comfort, hence utility affordability is
an issue Despite crisis, slow economic growth, lending and EE investments grew
Need aggressive policy reform to accelerate EE In other sectors, where progress
has lagged Achievements Legislation, programming, strategic documents, planning,
technical regulations for promoting energy saving and energy efficiency
Significant expansion of RES utilization, including EE-integrated renewables
Combined heat & power development (Yerevan TPP, Hrazdan TPP 5th unit, Avan DH)
Establishment & successful operation of R2E2, public sector EE lending and ESCOs
Populated donor & IFI community: WB,IFC,EBRD,GGF,USAID,ADB,AFD,KFW,UN, GEF,E5P
Detailed energy balance for  Initial steps in direction of modernizing EE
standards and norms Positive Steps & Successes to Date and Remaining Issues
Policy reform initiated (ES&RE Law, ES&RE Program, EPBD, 1st NEEAP, etc) 70%
Typical Energy Saving Results of Pilot Projects More drafting needed,
Enforcement lags, institutional capacity insufficient 60% 63% 62% Standard &
norms being updated to meet international best practices Only small part, done
with donor-funding, Enforcement lags 50% 52% 50% Several studies assessed the
potential for energy saving at % of overall national use 40% Potential largely
remained untapped 30% Donor-funded pilot projects demonstrated  sufficient set
of technical solutions for EE Not always found administrative models & financing
mechanisms for replication 20% Credit lines functional for corporate, SME,
households and municipal EE 10% Grant-funding for potentially bankable
investments, duplication in some cases Multi-apartment housing EE underserved %
Average Energy Saving in Multiapart ment residential Building Average Energy
Saving in Municipal Building Local authorities slowly taking the lead
(CoM/SEAPs) Streetlighti ng efficiency Gains CO2 emission reduction
Municipalities lack skills and resources for energy planning and project
development The public awareness and outreach not adequate Column1 52% 62% 63%
50% Gaps for Energy efficiency The latest Government decree on mandatory
compliance with EE requirements in state investment projects and residential
construction The lack of enforcement in the existing EE regulations, including
enforcement procedures for Energy auditing regulations Standards & Codes for all
sectors Labeling of appliances and buildings Energy performance in buildings
Technical regulations on building safety and energy performance, Associated
legislative initiatives have been put forward, but adoption and/or enforcement
lags Amendments to the Law on Urban Development, Law on Yerevan City Center
Amendments proposed to housing legislation, need  holistic policy reform Failed
enforcement of the voluntary provisions of the Law on Energy Saving and
Renewable Energy No financial incentives for EE Introduction of benchmarking
through best available technologies also requires strong legal provisions
coupled with incentives Not all EE credit lines have financing terms adequate
for energy efficiency borrowers Not all sectors adequately covered by financiers
Some sectors have multiple credit lines serving ( public buildings, households,
corporate), multi-apartment building niche not covered by any LFIs lack skills
and knowledge to adequately partner with private sector for EE investment
financing ESCOs lack skills for bankable project preparation and negotiations
with LFIs Industrial enterprises lack knowledge and understanding of EE and its
true costs & benefits Multi-apartment buildings’ capacities to serve as  lending
partner for EE investments Municipalities lack capacities in energy planning and
project development Central Government lack capacities in monitoring and
reporting on EE Plans Lack of capacities Lack of information dissemination about
the opportunities and benefits of EE, RE, technical and financing solutions,
service & material vendors Imperfect information and lack of awareness among all
user groups Lack of information on subsectoral energy consumption patterns,
utilized technologies, energy saving potential Lack of MRV on the effectiveness
of various policy, capacity-building, and financing efforts Ways to Eliminate
Gaps and Move Forward… • Amendment of the Law on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy • Adoption/ enforcement of bylaws on energy auditing and EE in public
procurement • Development/ enforcement of EE standards, codes and labeling for
all uses Continued reform: • Continued operation and expansion of R2E2 Fund
operations • Smooth integration of E5P grant co-financing for non-bankable
projects • Leveraging IFIs & LFIs resources to address underserved segments of
EE financing market EE funding: New/improved housing legislation: • Create
favorable investment environment in multi-apartment buildings • Introduce
private sector participation through private maintenance companies & ESCOs •
Revise tariffs to incentivize energy efficiency • Low-income assistance for
implementation of energy efficiency measures Tariff reform: EE-integrated
renewables: • Incentives for wider combined energy efficiency-integrated
renewable energy application • Improvement of energy efficiency data collection
and periodic energy balance calculation • Development and provision of technical
assistance in best available energy efficiency Information and outreach:
technologies for the industrial and agricultural sectors (, greenhouses and
aquaculture) • Strengthen capacities among HOAs, SMEs, ESCOs, municipalities to
plan and implement EE • Strengthening the institutional capacity of the State to
develop and implement EE policy • Create/assign capacities to oversee NEEAP
implementation, conduct MRV Capacity Building: New Baseline & Target: TPES,
TFEC, energy intensity 2010 ,991 ,901 2011 ,286 ,134 2012 Baseline (-year
average) ,378 ,106 Total Primary Energy Sources (ktoe) Final energy consumption
(ktoe) Source: USAID "Enhancing Capacity for Low Emission Development Strategies
(EC-LEDS) Program in Armenia" Implemented by Tetra Tech, Preliminary Results of
National Energy Balance Calculation for Armenia for  ,218 ,047 Population Total
area of housing stock, ths km² population *1000 Electricity consumed by
population Natural gas consumed by population TOE per capita 2010 88,,138,442,58
2011 92,,155,452,70 2012 93,,163,445,57 Average 58 2010 2011 2012 Energy
Intensity (ktoe/bln AMD) ktoe energy use in sector/ subsector Energy Intensity
(ktoe/bln AMD) ktoe energy use in sector/ subsector Energy Intensity (ktoe/bln
AMD) ktoe energy use in sector/ subsector Sectoral GDP (AMD bln) 40 53 70
Sectoral GDP (AMD bln) 00 42 00 Sectoral GDP (AMD bln) 72 ,90 83 60 11 50 -year
ave-rages 37 29 19 Sectors Industry Transport Agriculture 27 62 15 43 29 22 43
76 94 36 46 18 33 13 18 Cross-cutting & Horizontal Measures • Implementation of
regular national “ Energy Statistic” (with annual updates) • Implementation of
“National EE&RE • Financing for Energy Efficiency: GGF • Financing for Energy
Efficiency: IFC EE loans for households and SMEs Energy Agency” • Financing for
Energy Efficiency: EE loans • Financial Support for Energy Efficiency for
residential and business clients, EBRD ArmSEFF measures in all Sectors •
Information campaigns, • training, education in EE • improvements • General
Regulatory demand-side • Financing for EE: Eastern European Energy Efficiency
and Environment Partnership (E5P) • Removing inadequate gas tariff structure to
encourage energy savings measures • Support to Armenian Municipalities in
Sustainable Energy Action Planning • Removing inadequate gas & electricity
tariff structure to encourage EE Cross-cutting Measures: as set forth in the 1st
NEEAP and progress End- use target Horizontal Regulatory measures Duratio
Description of the energy saving measure  horizon tal 2010- 2012  Implementation
of  regul ar national “Energy Statisti ” (with annual updates) USAID LEDS
Program supported development of national energy balance according to IEA and
Eurostat requirements for years 2010-The National Statistical Service, Ministry
of Energy and Natural Resources and INOGATE Technical Secretariat have signed
memorandum on "Cooperation in the field of statistics" including an action plan
related to actions necessary the energy balance However, no regular procedure
for routine preparation of energy balances for following years was put in place
The National Agency was not established, instead the R2E2 has been tasked with
many of the functions that traditionally national agencies perform    horizon
tal  Implementation of  “Nati onal EE&RE Energy Agency”    horizon tal 2010-
ongoin   Financial Support for EE  easures in all Sectors Over $86 million has
been committed to EE and EE-integrated renewable energy investment during  via
various donors and IFIs, such as WB, IFC, GEF, EBRD, IFC, GGF, EIB, KfW, and
UNDP In addition, these donor and IFI funds have had  market transformation
impact on the financial services sector According to Econoler experts'
estimations, the local financial institutions and universal credit organizations
have also tapped into this market and financed EE & RE investments from own
resources in addition to on-lending portfolio with the IFIs By expert
assessment, over $420 million has been invested by LFIs and UCOs in diverse
loans, with average equity financing of % which leverages approximately $89
million in equity participation Overall, it can be concluded that approximately
$595 million has been invested in EE and EE-integrated RE solutions during
2010-Awareness raising campaigns by UNDP/GEF, R2E2, INOGATE        horizon tal
horizon tal horizon tal horizon tal 2012- 2015 2012- 2015 2012- 2015 2013- 2015
Information campaigns, training, education in EE improvements    Professional
trainings by UNDP/GEF, R2E2, INOGATE, EBRD          demand-side measures   The
draft RA Law “On making an addition into the RA law “On urban development”
submitted to the Ministry of    General Regulatory Amendments to the Law on
Energy Saving and Renewable Energy   Urban Development dated July 13, 2013
Revise tariff structure: Remove perverse tariff incentives that are accelerating
winter electricity consumption and unnecessary gas consumption by public
facilities and commercial establishments   horizon tal not implem ented
Removing inadequate gas & electricity tariff structur  to encourage EE    Cross-
cutting Measures (Investment and Planning) No Title of the energy saving measure
End-use targeted Duration Achieved/Expected energy savings in Status in relation
to 1st EEAP target year (MWh) 2014 2017 2018 2020 partially implemented
Financing for Energy Efficiency: EE and RE solutions for households space heat
and lighting efficiency (windows, doors, heat supply, lighting, distribution
systems) and SMEs residential energy end-use, SME EE of production processes,
space heat conservation EE loans for residential and business clients (corporate
energy efficiency, sustainable energy financing facilities, cleaner energy
production, municipal infrastructure EE) facilitation of EE finance in municipal
infrastructure with grant co-financing Start:2014 End:: 2020 (ongoing)
Start:2009 End: 2015 35,792 Start:2006 End: 2015 341,655 519,614 597,556 790,268
GGF 35,069 53,336 61,336 81,117 partially implemented  Financing for EE: EE
loans for households and SMEs, IFC 54,435 62,600 82,789 partially implemented
Financing for EE: Energy efficiency loans for residential and business clients,
EBRD ArmSEFF initializing  Financing for EE: Eastern Start: 2015 End: ongoing
Start:2016, ongoing tracked as part of other measures due to leveraging effect
European Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P) not implemented
Removing inadequate gas tariff  tructure to encourage energy sav ings Support to
Armenian Municipalities in Sustainable Energy Action Planning Total (MWh) Total
(KTOE) Developing  revised tariff structure which would not penalize SMEs and
autonomous heating systems municipal infrastructures, building sector,
households 59,365 59,365 59,365 new measure  Start 2015; End 2020 ,056 22,811
31,961 51,083 415,572 709,560 812,818 ,064,621 73 01 54 89 Cross-cutting /
Financing EE Investments: EE&RE Lending Portfolio Analysis 36,211,872 , 20%
,879,780 , % 18,965,000 , 10% 30,046,573 , 17% - RE Portfolio (EE-integrated)
Residential Buildings Public&Service Buildings Municipal Infrastructure
Industrial Power Sector/generation 31,050,928 , 17% SME 35,019,840 , 19%
11,970,296 , % Other 90,000,000 15,300,000 , %         , 80,000,000
About 150 thousand TOE was saved in  through EE lending, and more than 30 mln
TOE would be saved in , due to the cumulative effect of savings from past
investments GGF is going to be  main player in this activity with its estimated
share in total savings expected to be about % This may potentially be due to the
fact, that majority of IFIs has failed to provide reasonable forecast of lending
plans beyond , 70,000,000 , ,         ,         , , 60,000,000 , , ,         ,
50,000,000         , , , 40,000,000 ,               , 30,000,000        , ,
, 20,000,000 , , , , 10,000,000 - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2015 2014 IFIs LFIs EE /
RE LOANS PROVIDED BY LFIs and IFIs IN 2010 - 2015, USD 90,000,000
80,000,000 , 87,958,03  , 19%                         , 70,000,000 383,179, 39 ,
81% , , ,         60,000,000 , ,         , , , 50,000,000 ,         ,         ,
40,000,000 , ,        , 30,000,000        ,        , 20,000,000       , , , IFIs
LFIs , , 10,000,000 - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 IFIs LFIs Amount of EE / RE
Loans provided by LFIs, including International Financial Institutions’ (IFI)
funds, increased from $74 mln in 2010 to $78mln in 2015,  71% per year, which is
about 72 times less than the annual GDP growth rate So, Armenia had about $340
mln unutilized EE investment potential in 2010-Covenant of Mayors: Sustainable
Energy Action Planning 10 signatories already,  SEAPs ready, Recommend:
supporting CoM & SEAP development Energy efficiency of measures in SEAPs Sector
Unit Tsaghkadzor 435, 17, 847, 34, 651, 26, - - 541, 21, 2475, Vayk 313, , 5065,
68, 346, , 1483, 19, 227, , 7435, Spitak 157, , 7967, 82, 817, , - - 669, ,
9612, Hrazdan Aparan 500, 4303, 15, 15, 2047, 19682, 63, 69, 513, 1909, 16, , -
1168, - , 147, 1286, , , 3209, 28350, Municipal sector * MWh/year % MWh/year %
Residential Renewable energy MWh/year % MWh/year % Transport Awareness raising
MWh/year % MWh/year Total Buildings Sector/ Existing Residential Buildings 900
Growth dynamics and forecast for residential and public building stock
800 public residential 700 600 40% ,000 40%     500 Residential Energy Use Share
in Overall Energy Use 37% 900 847 35% 34% 756 800 32% 400 696 709 30% 30% 29%
29% 664 29% 28% 700 609 25% 564 300 27% 600 556 543 533 20% 500 200 400 15% 300
100 10% 200  % 100 % - years 2010 2012 2015 Energy Use in Residential Sector,
2011 2014 2017 2018 2020 2030 300% %    %    %    Energy price increases: Gas &
Electricity 900 156 250%    Day-time electricity Tariff     %    %    %    156 %
%    %    156 200 800 Night-time electricity tariff 132 132 132 %    700 200%
160 %    %    %    Retail Gas Tariff 600 Wholesale gas tariff 500 120 150% %
%    400 %   %   %   80 %   300 %   %   86 93 100% 08 %   200 %   %   08 08 08
40 %   100 %   %   %   %   years %   50% %   %   %   %   - - %   2010 2011 2012
2013 2014 2015* %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  %  Residential Natural Gas Consumption
(ktoe) Other Energy Sources (ktoe) Average Electricity Tariff for Population
(AMD/kWh) Residential Electricty Consumption (ktoe) Natural Gas Tariff - Retail
(AMD/m3) % 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Energy tariffs
and Energy Consumption in Residential Sector,  EE Improvement Measures planned
(1st NEEAP) II National Building Code considering energy performance of
buildings Building Sector: II Standards and calculation methodology to assess
energy performance in buildings Horizontal Regulatory Measures II Institutional
capacity‐building for implementing and enforcing new standards II QA/QC
standards for certification of key building materials II Methodology for
assessment of energy performance for pilot buildings II Training and education
on building energy performance II Pilot Project: Design competition &
construction of several “best‐practice” buildings No 1st NEEAP Measure II
National Building Code con Title of the energy saving measure Development and
adoption of the new building codes: • MSN “Thermal Protection of Buildings”; MSN
“Thermal Networks”; MSN “Thermal Insulation of Equipment and Pipelines” No II
Buildings Sector: regulatory measures (progress from 1st NEEAP) sidering EPC II
Standards and calculation II Development and adoption of the National standard
AST  “Energy efficiency Building energy passport Main provisions Typical forms”
II Adoption of EPBD based technical regulation “On Building Energy Performance”
II Harmonization of  EN and ISO standards in relation of energy efficiency
methodology to assess ene rgy performance in buildin gs II Development of the
technical regulation on the building safety, including provisions on building EE
II Amendments to the Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy II The draft RA
Law “On making an addition into the RA law “On urban development” submitted to
the Ministry of Urban Development dated July 13, 2013 II Institutional
capacity‐buildi ng for implementing and  nforcing new standards II The decision
of RA Government “On implementation of energy saving and energy efficiency
improvement measures in facilities being constructed (reconstructed, renovated)
under the state funding" II Changes to the GovDecision on Energy Audits II - The
energy efficiency and energy saving related tasks and functions were added in
the MUD charter in 2013 by the Government decision N225- (13 March 2013)
According to the 2014 Action Plan, the MUD is currently elaborating  draft
government decision “On application of measures directed towards increasing of
energy saving and energy efficiency in objects constructed (reconstructed,
renovated) by the state means” Workplan for 2015 includes new Housing Code
development  laboratories were established for testing thermal-physical
parameters of construction materials in Armenia Over 14 materials were tested
and certified II QA/QC standards for II certification of building materials II
Methodology for assessme nt of energy performance  or pilot buildings II
“Advisory Handbook on Technical Solutions for Thermal Insulation of Envelopes of
Residential, Public and Industrial Buildings in Construction and Reconstruction
in the Republic of Armenia” II Development of “Database of construction
insulation materials and pre-fabricates” II Changes to the GovDecision on Energy
Audits II Black Sea Basin  Energy Efficiency Program strengthening the
administrative capacity of local authorities and exchange good practice
knowledge in II Training and education on building energy performance energy
efficiency in buildings, Black Sea Join Operational Program Trainings including:
- Study Tour on Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy and Other Eco Solutions in
Buildings in Armenia; -  Public Seminar on Energy Efficiency in AUA; etc II
UNDP/GEF Improving EE in Buildings Program held multiple trainings and seminars
aimed at building experts' capacity II II II Pilot Project: Design comp etition
and construction of several “best‐practice” buil dings Pilots on energy
efficiency in residential buildings, UNDP/GEF BEEI project Pilots on energy
efficiency in public buildings through energy saving agreement scheme,
R2E2/GEF/WB INOGATE/ESIB & HFHA REELIH II incentive scheme to promote  Not
implemented  residential (re)construction II Financing for EE & Pilot projects
(UNDP/GEF BEEI project) Residential Buildings: Program- matic & New measures II
Financing for EE: Household energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans
(NMC/AFD) II Financing for EE: Residential energy efficiency bank-based
commercial loan through HFHA Condo, REELIH and SUDEP Projects II Financing for
EE: KfW Urban & Rural Housing EE credit line IIMitigating Tariff Increase with
Low-income Energy Efficiency Program IIEE Retrofits in existing residential
buildings: National Program and Action Plan for MAB Renovation & EE
[potentially: UNDP/GEF/EIB De- risking EE investments in Residential Housing of
Armenia] IIAppliance Energy Labeling Awareness Campaign Energy Efficiency
Improvement Measures in Residential Buildings Achieved / estimated energy
savings in target year (MWh) Status in relation to 1st EEAP No Title of the
energy saving measure End-use targeted Duration 2014 2017 2018 2020 Legal
Support, Financing and Information: Improvement of Energy Efficiency in
Buildings; development of secondary legislation for EE in buildings, as well as
funding for the first pilot thermal modernization of  residential multi-
apartment building in Avan district of Yerevan and social housing in Goris and
Akhouryan towns (UNDP/GEF BEEI project) Residential multi-apartment buildings,
social housing, significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary
legislation for EE in buildings Start: 2013; End: 2017 partially implemented II
,200 ,200 ,200 ,200 Household EE loans and EE mortgage loans ; residential
buildings and private homes' space heating, hot water preparation residential
energy end-use in space heating and hot-water preparation Residential energy end
use, heating, hot water preparation, lighting Residential energy end use,
lighting efficiency Existing residential buildings, space heating Residential
energy end use, lighting efficiency Financing for Energy Efficiency: Household
energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans (NMC/AFD) Start:2014 End: 2020
partially implemented II 136 141 164 211 Financing for Energy Efficiency:
Residential energy efficiency bank- based commercial loan through HFHA Condo,
REELIH and SUDEP Projects Start: 2013; End: 2018 partially implemented II 30
,914 ,067 ,067 Start:2016 End: 2020 new measure Inception March 2016 II
Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW Housing EE credit line TBD TBD TBD
Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low-income Energy Efficiency Program EE
Retrofits in existing residential buildings: National Program and Action Plan
for MAB Renovation & EE Start:2015 End: 2016 Start:2016 End: 2020 Start:2015
End: 2020 MWh KTOE new measure new II10 116,159 116,159 116,159 new measure II11
65,00 65,00 new measure measure 65,00 new measure ,366 II12 Appliance Energy
Labeling Awareness Campaign 176,704 209,369 409,635 new measure Sum of savings:
Sum of savings: 364,118 396,959 597,272 12 31 13 36 Public Buildings & Services:
Programmati  & New measures III municipal and social public facilities
(R2E2/GEF/WB) Public Building EE: Implementation of energy saving activities in
III municipal and social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Public Building EE:
Implementation of energy saving activities in III NAMA project to Support EE in
Public Buildings and Social Housing Financing for EE & Public Procurement for
EE: UNDP Green Urban III Lighting Project GHG Emission reduction by increasing
EE in municipal lighting in the cities of Armenia III integrated reinforcement
of Schools by KfW Financing for Energy Efficiency & Public Procurement for EE:
EE- III EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan streetlighting USAID Clean Energy and Water
Program for EE & RE solutions in III community energy and water use III Yerevan
- Jur Rehabilitation and Modernization Public Buildings and Services Energy
Saving Potential in Public Buildings Total Area of public buildings in Armenia
(m2) Total energy consumption in Public Buildings (MWh/year)* Annual Energy
Saving Potential (MWh/year)* * - based on R2E2 experience with 56 projects
13,787,397 ,764,787 896,181 Average energy consumption prior to EE in public
buildings Average energy consumption after EE Average energy saving rate 128
kWh/yr 63 kWh/yr 51% 115,814,134,238 $244,850,178 $ 27,270,296 Investment need
(AMD) at average of AMD 8400/m2 for typical ESMs Investment need (USD) -
exchange rate 473 Total Financing currently available (GEF and KfW) EEIMs in
Public Buildings & Services – Part  Achieved / expected energy savings per year
(MWh) Status in relation to 1st EEAP No Title of the energy saving measure End-
use targeted Duration 2014 2017 2018 2020 Implement energy saving activities in
public facilities to reduce the level of energy consumption by social and other
public facilities under energy saving agreement (ESA) scheme with ESCO
participation Public Building EE: Implementation of energy saving activities in
municipal and social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Start: 2012 End: 2017
partially completed III 48,941 84,570 101,484 146,137 Expand the current R2E2
lending facility to implement energy saving activities in public facilities to
reduce the level of energy consumption by social and other public facilities,
which have suboptimal comfort levels in status quo New construction and capital
renovation of public buildings and social housing, significant reconstruction of
existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE in buildings Public Building
EE: Grant- cofinanced Implementation of energy saving activities in municipal
and social public facilities (E5P/R2E2/GEF/WB) new measur  Start: 2016; End:
2020 new measure III 10,113 16,855 ,742 NAMA project to Support Energy
efficiency in Public Buildings and Social Housing Start: 2016 End: 2020
(ongoing) new measur  carbon financing sought III 11,442 14,653 21,037 Financing
for EE & Public Procurement for EE: UNDP Green Urban Lighting Project GHG
Emission reduction by increasing energy efficiency of municipal lighting in the
cities of Armenia new Start:2013 measur End: 2017  Municipal lighting
electricity use in the cities of Armenia partially completed III 103 103 103
EEIMs in Public Buildings & Services – part  Status in relation to 1st EEAP
Achieved / expected energy savings per year (MWh) Title of the energy saving
measure No End-use targeted Duration 2014 2017 2018 2020 EE-integrated
reinforcement of Schools by KfW Public & service buildings (schools) Reduced
electricity use on 28 streets of Yerevan, Armenia rural communities,
agricultural water users, community organizations, municipalities Start:2016;
End: 2020 new measure III 39,897 39,897 39,897 pending EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan
streetlighting Start: 2015; End 2017 new pending launch III measure ,554 ,554
,277 USAID Clean Energy and Water Program for EE & RE solutions in community
energy and water use III Start: 2012 19 19 19 19 complet ed partially complet ed
Yerevan - Jur Rehabilitation and Modernization Municipal water & wastewater
Start 2013* End - 2017 III 71,160 75,400 75,400 75,400 Sum of savings: MWh
120,120 220,727 244,223 300,724 Sum of savings: KTOE 33 98 00 86 Industry, SMEs
and Power (Generation, Transmission, Distribution)) Industrial Energy Use by
Sub-sector,  Industrial Energy Intensity Trend,  Electricity Consumption by
Industry Sub-Sector,  2011 2012 2013 2014 Share in TFEC Structure of Natural Gas
Consumption by Sectors () Quantity of Imported Gas 500 Waste collection,
treatment and disposal activities; materials recovery Sewerage 450 400        05
(%) Water collection, treatment and supply 350 92 92 Gas distributed through
Networks, including to 82% Water supply, sewerage, waste management and
remedlation activities Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply 300
75 542 93 Population 26% 250 91 29 Power Sector % Manufacture of machinery and
equipment  200 04 261 Industry % Manufacture of electrical equipment 36 418 96
Vehicle Fueling Stations (CNG) 24% 150 Manufacture of computer, electronic and
optical products Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and
equipment Manufacture of basic metals 45 89 Public Sector % 100 42 250 Other
Consumers % 50 8214 Average calorific value of natural gas (kCal/m3)  years 2010
2011 2012 2013 Considering EE aspects during approval and construction of new
industrial facilities EEIMs in Industry, SME & Power Sector Increasing the
efficiency of the central heating plants and suppliers: Avan DH - cogeneration
EE Financing Facility for Industry & SME Natural gas savings through improvement
of transmission pipelines and substations, and optimization of existing boiler
houses in TPPs Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: WB
Electricity Supply reliability Reduction of energy losses in distribution
networks: EBRD Power Supply Reliability Electricity savings through improvements
of existing network, compensation of reacti ve power, transformer improvement
Reduction of Electricity Losses in Low-voltage networks, ArmElNet Wider
Application of Renewable Energy: SWHs Geothermal Heat Pumps for Central Heating
Utilization of animal waste for biogas energy production Development of
distributed solar PV generation through implementation of Net metering provision
EEIMs in Industry, Power & SMEs Title of the energy saving measure end-use
targeted Duration Achieved / Expected energy savings (MWh) in respective target
year Status in relation to  NEEAP st No 2014 2017 2018 2020 not impemented
Considering EE aspects during approval and construction   new industrial
facilities Increasing the efficiency of the central heating plants and
suppliers: Avan DH - cogeneration Industry & SME: ISO 50001 users, RECP, BAT,
benchmarking, ecodesign Developed model of an efficient energy cogeneration and
supply Start: End: 2020 (ongoing) Start: 2005 End: ongoing 2015 IV - 271,969
397,132 718,979 11,753 partially ,673 ,213 10,060 IV implemented Implementation
of EE Financing Facility for Industrial Enterprises Natural gas savings through
improvement of transmission pipelines and substations, and optimization of
existing boil er houses in TPPs Natural gas savings through improvement of
transmission pipelines and substations, and optimization of existing boil er
houses in TPPs IV reported in cross-cutting section Start: 2016 End: 2020
Natural gas savings through improvement of tr ansmission pipelines and
substations Not implemented IV - 12,362 18,543 30,905 TPP 250 MW proposed by the
WB to cover peaks and reserve margin, after the decommissioning of blocks - of
Hrazdan TPP Start: 2018 End: 2020 not implemented IV ,369,980 Reduction of
energy losses in distribution networks: WB Electricity Supply reliability
Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: EBRD Power Supply
Reliability Electricity savings through improvements of existing electr icity
network, compensation of reactive power and impro vement of transformers
Reduction of Electricity Losses in Low-voltage networks, ArmElNet Wider
Application of Renewable Energy: SWHs energy generation, distribution Start:
2015 End: 2060 reduced energy losses in distribution networksStart: 2016 End:
2020 Start: 2012 End: 2017 not implemented not implemented not implemented IV -
- - IV - ,311 ,311 Improved energy efficiency and energy savings of power sector
IV5c 18,000 18,000 reduced energy losses in distribution networksStart: 2016
End: 2020 Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and beyond) not implemented new measure IV
62,072 62,072 62,072 The measure is designed on the basis of realized best
practices and experiences IV ,623 17,256 18,401 25,356 Geothermal Heat Pumps for
Central Heating space heating, EE, renewables, PPP Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and
beyond) new measure IV 705 705 705 Promotion of Biogas Utilization from Animal
Waste space heating, EE, renewables, PPP Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and beyond) new
measure IV 57,922 86,883 144,806 development of distributed RE generation
through implementation of Net metering provision Distributed generation, solar
energy, autonomous electricity production, net metering Start: 2016 End: ongoing
new measure IV7 701 ,781 ,141 ,861 15,997 433,280 617,249 ,391,288 Total
Industry & Power (MWh) Total Industry & Power (ktoe) 38 37 53 292 Agriculture
Dynamics of energy consumption in agricultural sector Energy Intensity of Gross
Agricultural Output,  % 00 40 50 17% 00 % 00 15% 35 34 00 13% 70 30 00 11% 25 %
00 % 22 20 00 % 18 % % % 15 % % 00 10 11 % 00 94 15 05 % 00  -% 00 00 2010 2011
2012 2014 2010 2011 2012 Energy Use in Agriculture & Forestry Share in Total
Final Energy Consumption % increase GAP ktoe energy use in agriculture
ktoe/output in national currency 93% of existing agricultural machinery produced
in Soviet Union () Dynamics of energy consumption in commercial greenhouses
Existing Unit Working Order Load Level % % % % % 700 Tractors Trucks Combine-
Harvester Tractor Trailer Tractor Mowing Machines Forage Harvester Grain
Cleaning Machines Row Sowing Machines Tractor Plows Cultivators Square Baler
15,025 15,063 ,356 ,130 ,031 11,862 11,383 ,007 ,337 ,714 600 634 541 500 448
400 300 405 425 ,863 ,903 ,279 ,664 295 362 ,597 ,447 ,926 ,397 % % % % % % 200
100 12 114 16 47  - 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 GH
Hectares Gas consumption - EE GHs (mln m3) VI Rural development program: high
efficiency agricultural machinery import EEIMs in Agriculture VI Importing high
efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA VI Irrigation rehabilitation emergency
project, WB VI Municipal water project, WB VI USAID Clean Energy & Water Program
VI10 Irrigation System Modernization and Institutional Capacity Building, WB
VI12 Science technology innovation partnership (STIP) VI13 Energy efficient
greenhouse VI15 Grading agricultural products based on quality VI16 Renewing the
agricultural machinery park VI18 Install gravity irrigation EEIMs in Agriculture
Sector Title Achieved energy savings in target year (MWH)   Target end-use Time-
frame 2014 2017 2018 2020 VI Rural development program: high efficiency
agricultural 2013-ongoing Farmers     machinery import VI  Farmers ,267 ,267
,267 ,267 Importing high efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA VI Rural irrigation
users;  Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB 78 150 73 150 73 150 73
150 VI USAID Clean Energy & Water Program VI10 Irrigation System Modernization
and Institutional Capacity  Rural communities Future plans Rural irrigation
users; farmers 19,000 19,000 19,000 Building, WB VI12 Science technology
innovation partnership (STIP)  Fish farms VI13 Start: 2011 End: 2020 Private
greenhouse sector Processors, farmers Farmers 425 480 591 Energy efficient
greenhouses VI15 Grading agricultural products based on quality VI16 Start: ASAP
8620 25900 51700 269 201 Start: ASAP End: 2020 Start: ASAP 134 Renewing the
agricultural machinery park VI18 Install gravity irrigation 172000 17200 34500
51700 Farmers Total MWH Total ktoe ,508 19,223 19,223 19,223 65 13 65 65
Transport/Mobility Electricity Consumption (Million kWh) 130      127 125 123
120 120 120 119 119 119 120 116 115 115 113 110 years 105 2003 2004 2005 2006
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Motor Fuel Consumed by Armenian Road
Transport,  Annual Growth of Motor Fuel Consumption by RT, , (in ,000 tons)
Transport/Mobility Road Transport Fleet (Number) in Running in 2010, by Main
Category and Motor Fuel Burned Passenger Turnover (Million Passenger Kilometers
Travelled) railroad lines air transport rope-ways motor vehicles trolley-bus
pessenger taxi underground lines 4500 RT Fleet Category Passenger Cars Total RT
by Category Gasoline Diesel CNG 4000 3500 80,99  ,521 165,171 ,409 247,579 3000
Buses and Minibuses Trucks ,962 ,902 11,385 2500 2000 12,55  15,86  14,84  101,
68 13,434 40,832 1500 1000 Total RT by motor fuel 182,567 299,796 500  2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 Motor Fuel Consumed by Armenian Road Transport ,  Energy
Intensity of Transport Sector Investments Needed, Million US$ $,$$$Roads and
road transport Railways Urban transport Civil aviation V1 Development of
legislative background on fuel efficiency and emission norms EEIMs in Mobility/
Transport V2 Dissemination of information on technologies and ES V3 Continuous
exchange of mini buses by larger passenger buses V4 Expansion and modernization
of the electrified public transport V5 Expansion and modernization of rail
transport network (passenger and freight) V6 Continuous switching of road
vehicles from gasoline to CNG V7 cover unsatisfied demand in public
transportation services in the greater Yerevan area Development of an integrated
electro-transport network and public services to V8 Electric vehicles deployment
strategy Overview of Individual Measures in the Transport Sector -
Achieved/expected energy savings in target year (MWh) Status in relation to 1st
NEEAP  Transport sector No end-use targeted Duration 2014 2017 2018 2020
Development of legislative ba ckground regarding fuel effici ency and emission
norms of  ehicles Dissemination of information on technologies and approac hes
for EE in transport Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger bus es
regulatory measure, feasibility studies Start: 2008 End: ongoing partially
implemented  not implemented  information Start:2012 End: ongoing partially
implemented  road transport 821,022 ,045,391 ,118,245 ,267,202 electric
transport (metro) Start:2015 End: 2020 Expansion and modernization of the
electrified public trans port system in the City of Yer evan ,294 partially ,294
,294 implemented  Start:2016 End: 2020 Start: 2010 End: Ongoing (trolley) / / /
/ pre-feasibility Expansion and modernization of rail transport network (pas
senger and freight) rail road transport ,206 partially  582 862 972 implemented
Overview of Individual Measures in the Transport Sector- Status in relation to
1st NEEAP Achieved/expected energy savings in target year (MWh) end-use targeted
Transport sector No Duration 2017 2018 2014 2020 Start: 2008; End: ongoing
Continuous switching of road vehicles from gasoline to compressed natural gas
(CNG) partially implemente  road transport Financial & CO2 savings only
Development of Integrated Electro-Transport Network and services to cover
unsatisfied demand in public transportation services in Yerevan agglomeration
Start: 2016; End: ongoing information, planning new measure  / / / / Start: 2016
End: continuous Electric vehicles (BEV, PHEV) deployment in Armenia road
transport new measure  / 238 238 342 MWh 821,604 ,051,785 ,124,749 ,274,044
Total energy savings in transport / mobility ktoe 65 44 71 55 V3 Direct energy
savings due to Public Transport fleet & route optimization V5 Rail expansion &
modernization (seasonal Yerevan-Shorja-Yerevan electric train) V8 Electric
vehicles deployment strategy Sectoral breakdown of annual and cumulative energy
savings for  (GWh) Title of the energy saving measure Aggrega te Savings (GWh)
No Achieved or expected energy savings in target year (GWh ) 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Horizontal & Cross Cutting 413 619 988 ,452
,148 ,192 ,758 13,568  ,987 II Buildings Public Buildings and Services
Industrial Processes and Power Sector   146 364 397 479 597 11,323 III 862 757
,446 ,667 ,904 ,183 ,504 ,448 IV    10 16 19 151 433 617 801 ,391 ,492
Transport/Mobility 390 480 536 742 822 897 979 ,052 ,125 ,195 ,274 318 VI
Agriculture    47 82 61 125 39,969 VII, GWh KTO  ,115 ,297 ,711 ,014 ,272 ,911
12,650 Grand Total ,437 182 197 319 431 539 680 ,088 Achieved (expected) annual
energy savings  Progress against NEEAP  targets and New (Revised) Targets 00%
Armenia’ Progress against NEEAP  targets and New Targets 60% 00% 00% 00% 00% 70%
18% 00% 00% 60% 00% 2014 2017 2018 2020 00% National Energy Saving Targets Tons
of CO2 emission avoided by target year based on Sectoral Measures Sectors Tons
of CO2 emission avoided by target year 2014 2017 2018 2020 Horizontal and CC
Buildings (Residential) Public Buildings and Services Industry Transport
Agriculture Total GHG Avoided (tons CO2) 183,157 ,366 186 311 31 - 185,650
209,515 28,860 25,493 791 40 ,637 282,464 222,694 28,860 27,293 951 43 15,318
309,349 271,732 28,860 31,250 ,270 49 22,955 356,116 Weighted average cost of
kWh energy GENERATED & SAVED Average weighted long-term electricity generation
cost (US cents) Weighted average cost of reduction of  kWh energy by sectors
(USD) [over NEEAP lifetime ] Meghri HPP 88 Sevan-Hrazdan HPP cascade 31 77
Agriculture Vorotan HPP cascade 42 Armenian NPP 26 New Small HPPs 56 01 Total
system Average weighted long-term electricity generation cost = US$ 74
Transport/Mobility TOTAL System 44 Small HPPs 19 Shnokh HPP 20 18 Industrial
Processes and Power Sector Life extension of existing plant 46 Loriberd HPP 70
Hrazdan  74 02 Public Buildings and Services Yerevan CC 76 Geothermal power
plant 11 New VVER 1000 11 04 Buildings/Residential Lori Wind Farm 16 New Wind
Farms 31 New CCGT 400 01 55 Horizontal & Cross Cutting New CCGT 220 13 Hrazdan
TPP 96 - 20 40 60 80 00 20 Solar PV 67 - 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 Cost of the
NEEAP: Investments over  time horizon $,05 million NEEAP FUNDING OVER 10 YEAR
HORIZON (US$ MILLION) Obligated Funding Funding needed: Hardware Investments
Funding needed: Soft Cost (Market Opening) $ 1668 mln, 81% $381 mln, 19% $85
mln, % $296 mln, 15% Comparative Analysis of 2nd NEEAP implementation scenario
with the existing scenarios of energy sector development of the Republic of
Armenia 140 ,000 ,831 ,580 ,565 ,316 ,000 120 Weighted Average cost of
electricity generation, $/MWh ,987 ,000 Investments, Million $ 100 ,000 80 ,021
,000 $ $            / $ $ ,566 ,179 ,097 ,000 60 ,000 40 ,203 ,074 ,050 ,000 20
,000 68 Reference Scenario (Russian Gas price) Import CANDU nuclear reactor
ACP-600 CANDU+no gas- elect barter ACP-600+no gas- electr Barter Without new NPP
Without gas- Without barter, with VVER -1000 NPP No extension of Medzamor NPP
Reference Scenario (European Gas price) NEEAP electricity barter The Economic
Gains from the NEEAP Implementation 35,000,000 Monetarizing the NEEAP Costs &
Benefits (Million US$) $,30,000,000 $,$,25,000,000 $,20,000,000 $,$,15,000,000
$,10,000,000 $,$,,000,000 $- NEEAP investments Annual savings Cummulative for
Cummulative savings for  Avoided Generation cost Avoided Gas transmission
Pipeline cost - Gas Electricity Gas Electricity Annual Savings Since 2020
Cummulative Savings for  Tasks associated with 2nd NEEAP Oversight • Develop and
maintain appropriate and transparent data bases on energy efficiency and
renewable energy sources (monitoring and reporting services) • Monitoring,
verification of savings and preparing reports on realized energy audits in
building sector • Organize and monitor training courses for energy auditors •
Cooperate with non-governmental sector in developing the awareness of the need
of EE and RES • Encourage innovative approaches for investment including third
party financing or co-financing • Undertake measures for raising the awareness
of consumers on end-use heat efficiency and increasing the efficiency of MABs,
insulation, efficiency of pumps, flow regulation and other distribution
efficiencies can occur Thank you Astghine Pasoyan Team Leader, Econoler &
Alliance to Save Energy Consortium astghine@gmailcom apasoyan@aseorg