United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project
Services DP/DCP/ARM/ Distr: General  April 2021 Original: English Annual session
2021 –11 June 2021, New York Item  of the provisional agenda Country programmes
and related matters Country programme document for Armenia (2021–2025) Contents
UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework………………… II Programme priorities and
partnerships…………………………………………………………………… III Programme and risk
management……………………………………………………………………… IV Monitoring and evaluation
……………………………………………………………………………… Page     Annex Results and resources framework
for Armenia (2021–2025)…………………………………………… 10 21-04748X () 140421 *2104748*
DP/DCP/ARM/  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework  The Republic of Armenia is  landlocked country in the Southern
Caucasus with  population of 97 million It is an upper middle-income country1
with  Human Development Index (HDI) score of 760, putting Armenia in the high
human development category  Despite an increase in HDI of more than 20 per cent
since 1991, per cent of the population still lived below the poverty line in
2019, with  per cent classified as vulnerable to multidimensional poverty
Disparities between urban and rural areas, gender inequality, outward migration
and high climate change exposure further impact the country’ resilience,
competitiveness and well-being These pre-existing inequalities and
vulnerabilities were amplified by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
driven by extensive disruption of businesses, income insecurity/loss and the
deterioration of people’ health and well-being, disproportionately affecting
women, children, youth, older persons, persons with disabilities, people living
in poverty, labour migrants, informal workers, entrepreneurs and remittance-
dependent households  The recent large-scale military hostilities in the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict area caused  massive displacement from Nagorno-
Karabakh to Armenia Among an estimated 90,000 displaced people, 88 per cent were
women and children who were housed in host communities and collective shelters
significant number of the arrivals from Nagorno- Karabakh may not be able to
return safely even now with the ceasefire in place, particularly residents of
territories currently under control of Azerbaijan Tens of thousands of them lost
their homes and productive assets The escalation has also left  significant
impact on border communities, particularly in Syunik and Tavush regions of
Armenia The needs of people displaced and affected by the recent escalation, war
veterans, wounded, newly disabled and their families, and families who lost
productive assets or  breadwinner, need to be prioritized on the basis of the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
The negotiated, comprehensive and sustainable settlement of all remaining core
substantive issues of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, in line with the basic
principles and elements within the framework of the internationally agreed
format of the Co-Chairs of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, continues to shape the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus for the region, including Armenia  Armenia has undergone  profound
transformation since independence, including after the peaceful transition of
power in 2018 which triggered renewed commitments to  human- centred governance
system, investments in human capital and the realization of the human rights
agenda These commitments will be operationalized through the  Programme of the
Government, sectoral strategies and the Armenia Transformation Strategy 2050,
with support from the re-established Intergovernmental Sustainable Development
Goals Council, headed by the Deputy Prime Minister with the mandate to lead and
monitor the country’ processes for nationalization and implementation of the
Goals  UNDP plays  key role in ensuring  coherent United Nations strategy for
collective impact, under the overall leadership and coordination of the Resident
Coordinator As part of its integrator function, UNDP works with  wide range of
public, private and civil stakeholders to facilitate recovery along the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus and __________________        DP/DCP/ARM/
more inclusive development solutions, at upstream policy level, advising on
legal and policy frameworks, and at downstream level, turning projects into
policies and policies into actions  The development challenges facing Armenia
are complex and require ‘out of the box’ solutions The UNDP national innovation
platforms and the UNDP global networks (including the Global Policy Network and
the accelerator labs) serve as important venues to leverage innovations, know-
how and international expertise to achieve development breakthroughs  During the
preceding programme cycle, the UNDP activities and results in Armenia were
highly relevant to the Government’ agenda as evidenced by the 2019 independent
country programme evaluation5 and stakeholder consultations In particular, UNDP
was recognized as  valued partner in local economic development and community
mobilization; natural resource management; enhancement of legal, policy and
institutional frameworks in the environmental sector; disaster risk reduction;
organization of transparent parliamentary elections; management of
infrastructure investments and technical capacities of customs and other
agencies; coordination of issue-based coalitions; women and youth empowerment;
and citizen engagement  UNDP underwent  sense-making review in 2020 to identify
coherent cross-portfolio areas for action Examples include the nexus of
education, technology, inclusion and jobs, particularly for women in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics; innovative approaches to public service
delivery; and participatory democracy, active citizenship, youth empowerment and
citizen engagement The country programme will support all three pillars of the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF): ()
people’ well-being and capabilities; () green, sustainable and inclusive
economic development; and () responsive and effective governance Particularly,
UNDP will address multidimensional poverty by building  deeper and more holistic
understanding of what poverty and vulnerability mean in the post- COVID-19,
conflict reality and work across sectors to address the deprivations that leave
people behind Regular human development snapshots will unpack emerging
priorities, drawing attention of policymakers through white papers and provoking
public discourse through awareness-raising UNDP will support the Government’
future-proof strategic planning by embedding foresight and scenario design at
national and subnational levels, including in crisis preparedness key direction
of the UNSDCF is to address the socioeconomic impacts of the compound crisis
Building on the socioeconomic/early recovery efforts of the United Nations,
technically led by UNDP and coordinated by the Resident Coordinator, UNDP will
work hand in hand with the Government, United Nations agencies, international
financial institutions (IFIs) and other development partners to bring various
mandates and experiences into coherent actions that will help the country’
recovery to be more resilient, more people- centred and greener The comparative
advantages of UNDP include the ability to collect, manage and analyse data and
leverage digital solutions and innovative approaches to help the country
transition towards risk-informed and evidence-based development UNDP plays an
important role in joint programming and implementation in Armenia In the period
, UNDP will work to create an integrated innovation platform as part of shifting
to the next-generation UNDP, using its innovation platforms as internal service
providers to United Nations agencies and for exploratory and catalytic joint
programming with the Government and other partners The platforms have influenced
the UNDP approach __________________   armeniahtml  DP/DCP/ARM/ to innovation
globally and efforts to scale this approach will be further explored during this
programme cycle through South-South and/or triangular cooperation UNDP is well
positioned to facilitate  stronger engagement between the United Nations and the
private sector and to leverage the wealth of human capital in the country
priority is to deploy new and innovative development financing options enabled
through public- private partnerships and better alignment between financial
market incentives and long-term development II Programme priorities and
partnerships The vision for the country programme is for Armenia to become  more
cohesive, inclusive, just and resilient society supported by governance systems
that use evidence, citizen-centred innovation and partnerships to ensure social,
economic and environmental sustainability and prosperity for all Important sub-
elements of the vision are: () people are healthy, skilled and resilient to
poverty, external shocks and disasters; () people enjoy equal rights and
opportunities regardless of their personal characteristics; () natural resources
are managed sustainably with respect for the needs of future generations; ()
governance systems are people-centred and effective, ensuring political
stability, transparency and social cohesion; and () the economy is knowledge-
based, green and competitive, thus capable of attracting investments, creating
jobs and facilitating the return of migrants The compound crisis has exacerbated
issues in Armenian society that limit potential, competitiveness and
capabilities at both individual and institutional levels UNDP will focus on
more future-oriented and integrated way of helping to shape and realize  new
narrative for Armenia This means an increased focus on understanding and
tackling pre-existing and emerging vulnerabilities and risks in the crisis
setting and an upper-middle-income context, many of which were revealed by the
socioeconomic impact assessment of COVID-It will also entail support for
renewed social contract between citizens and the State; rebuilding social
cohesion and trust; investing in science and developing national research and
development capacities; supporting the private sector to adopt sustainable
models for  green recovery; and helping the Government build its strategic view
of territorial development, linked to addressing depopulation in remote rural
areas and secondary towns UNDP will support Armenia to reimagine and evolve its
governance systems, making them more agile, effective, service-oriented and
shock-resilient, underpinned by  strong civic culture and linked to real
investments in human capital development Moreover, as  result of the escalation,
the number of border communities within Armenia has doubled These communities
are vulnerable also due to the proximity of foreign military forces and the
absence of adequate infrastructure The implementation of programmes aimed at the
development of border communities, including the creation and rehabilitation of
infrastructure, particularly in the southern regions of Armenia, is  priority
The country programme is firmly grounded in  human-rights-based and risk-
informed approach to development, guided by national priorities, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the UNSDCF and the UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-To
ensure that the programme effectively tackles the interconnected nature and root
causes of development challenges, systems thinking and participatory approaches
are being applied The country programme aims to achieve results across four key
areas: () sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development; () environmental
sustainability and resilience; () democratic governance and gender equality; and
() evidence-based policy, financing and innovation aligned to the Sustainable
Development Goals __________________   outbreak-in-armhtml  DP/DCP/ARM/ The
pathway to sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development will entail
initiatives that promote early recovery and community resilience, including in
border communities, targeting the most vulnerable groups such as war veterans,
persons affected by conflict, women and children Efforts will be directed
towards risk-informed and sustainable urban and rural planning; income and
employment generation for vulnerable groups, including in agriculture;
infrastructure rehabilitation and development, including housing solutions; and
the realization of the country’ human capital potential UNDP will contribute to
increasing competitiveness and connectivity in Armenia, thus helping to mitigate
negative migration trends Solutions that use participatory approaches at local
level will be pursued, with  focus on fostering  culture of active citizenry
where women and men enjoy equal rights and opportunities to influence and
benefit from proportional territorial development UNDP will further expand its
work to strengthen livelihoods, promote  predictable, fair and competitive
business environment and build social cohesion and resilience in areas affected
by the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Support will include: () improving preparedness
for socioeconomic and environmental shocks in rural communities and secondary
cities; () the transition from subsistence agriculture to value addition,
processing and precise agriculture using climate-smart, green and digital
technologies, including irrigation systems; () investments in small and medium-
sized enterprises, local start-up initiatives and tourism development; ()
boosting entrepreneurship, especially for women, and facilitation of trade,
investment and exports; () income-generation and employment initiatives,
including rehabilitation and integration into social and economic life for war
veterans, wounded and disabled during the recent military escalation in the
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict area; and () the development of  future-proof labour
market This will be enabled through the promotion of technology-based education,
including improved literacy in information and communication technology;
professional exchanges without discrimination by age or disability status;
inclusive and active labour-market policies with focus on new skills, new jobs
and talent management; lifelong learning and re/up-skilling, including through
vocational education and training; and protection of labour rights To strengthen
social protection, UNDP will work with the Government to upgrade public service
models and strengthen local capacities to deliver people-centred and shock-
responsive services, including through digital and innovative modalities These
approaches are necessary to foster sustainable connectivity, including
transport, which in turn will improve the services and assistance available to
the regions The pathway to environmental sustainability and resilience will
comprise efforts to mainstream environmental issues into national and regional
development processes, thus helping the country to transition into  low-carbon,
resource-efficient, resilient and socially-inclusive green economy that is able
to adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change UNDP interventions will
be geared towards identifying, piloting and scaling up data-driven and tech-
based smart policies and solutions that are environmentally and climate-
friendly, risk-informed and long lasting UNDP will work on: () improving the
institutional and regulatory frameworks governing the environmental sector; ()
providing technical and financial support, including through small grants, for
promotion of community engagement in co-management and monitoring to increase
local ownership, improve livelihoods and reduce poverty; and () mainstreaming
ecosystem-based approaches into sectoral policymaking, community development and
landscape restoration UNDP will advocate for  new social contract, turning
people, particularly women and youth, and businesses into actively contributing
development partners This will require all-of-society engagement, environmental
education, behavioural changes, new types of economic and fiscal instruments and
public-private partnerships, including tapping the potential of the country’
tech sector UNDP will address energy poverty and insecurity by investing in
energy infrastructure, unlocking retrofit markets for energy-efficient and
renewable sources and facilitate access to international climate  DP/DCP/ARM/
financing mechanisms for mitigation and adaptation, including through climate
budgeting frameworks In light of the compound crisis,  green and resilient
recovery will be boosted by promoting sustainable city concepts through low-
emission and circular-economy models; helping to design and translate nationally
determined contributions; and including climate adaptation into sectoral
strategies and action plans in line with the Paris Agreement Stimulus packages
will be developed to protect and promote nature-based/green jobs and livelihood
opportunities in communities, specifically for the rural poor and other
vulnerable groups such as war veterans, the newly disabled and the widowed and
their families National capacities for resilience-building will be strengthened
and gender-responsive public and private investments in disaster risk management
will be stimulated UNDP will pay particular attention to the environment-health
nexus by mainstreaming  ‘one-health approach’ into cross-sectoral policies,
financing and actions This encompasses reducing risks to human health through
sound management of waste, chemicals, air and water pollution and green
transformation of urban mobility and industry The pathway to democratic
governance and gender equality includes efforts that will help strengthen trust
in governance systems and service delivery capacity in Armenia The focus will be
on building democratic, effective and accountable institutions capable of
upholding human rights and the rule of law; preventing discriminatory practices
and violence; and strengthening the public administration system to ensure
effective and human- centred service delivery for all UNDP will work to improve
the transparency and accountability of decision-making and service delivery;
strengthen access to justice and combat corruption; address inequalities and
protect human rights; reinforce the legislative and electoral systems; improve
service orientation and promote excellence in the public sector, including the
customs service and the police; and support the development of  new generation
of smart public services for improved fairness and accountability at national
and local levels UNDP will promote participatory decision-making; strengthen the
notion of the citizen as the ‘client’ of public institutions; support access to
education, learning and self-realization; support ambitious future-proof
strategies which build on people’ collective aspirations; and build social
cohesion and help to foster  new social contract The work will be based on the
principles of inclusiveness and address emerging vulnerabilities with  human-
centred approach This includes the creation of psychosocial and economic support
mechanisms and the provision of medical care, particularly for war veterans UNDP
will also promote transformation (including digital) of the Parliament and other
institutions to enhance checks and balances and ensure  ‘whole-of-government’
approach, strengthened separation of powers and cross-party work UNDP continues
to be  key partner to the Government and Parliament in the design,
implementation and promotion of open governance policies The Parliament will
play  key role, serving as an important platform for evidence-based policymaking
and citizen engagement UNDP will seek to eliminate gender inequalities through
targeted gender- focused initiatives that consider the unique experiences,
potential, needs and contributions of women, girls, men and boys This will
include efforts to dismantle structural barriers and promote the leadership and
wide participation of women and youth in decision-making and help the Government
to ensure that its strategies, plans and programmes are gender- responsive The
programme will continue to focus on implementation and oversight of the Human
Rights Strategy and Action Plan; enhancing accountability of law-enforcement
bodies, efficiency and public trust in the judiciary; promoting non-
discrimination; and strengthening capacities of the office of the Human Rights
Defender of the Republic of Armenia  DP/DCP/ARM/ The pathway to evidence-based
policy, financing and innovation aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals
builds on the UNDP integrator and convening roles and on established platforms
for innovation, collaboration and financing/impact investments In line with the
reform of the United Nations development system, UNDP will provide integrated
policy and programme solutions; support the development of an integrated
ecosystem for collection and analysis of data on the Goals; support the
development of evidence-based policies and frameworks aligned to the Goals using
state-of-the-art tools for data collection, modelling and forecasting; and
transfer knowledge, behavioural insights and innovation to help pioneer new ways
of ‘doing development’” Specifically, UNDP will pioneer an innovative portfolio
approach to the development of the country’ secondary cities, using innovative
practices for reimagined urban development UNDP will also work closely with the
Government to create links between policies, planning and budgeting processes
and the Goals, and deploy innovative mechanisms to leverage partnerships and
multiple sources of development finance The programme will prioritize co-
designing  road map for an integrated national financing framework to help the
Government mobilize the resources needed to realize development priorities UNDP
will initiate dialogues between the Government, the private sector and investors
to provide  common understanding of financing and investments for the Goals;
stimulate innovative solutions through the implementation of impact acceleration
programmes; and provide platforms for developing and piloting innovative
financing tools such as ‘pay for success’ mechanisms or impact bonds National
and local ownership, diverse partnerships and deployment of local capacities
will be priorities UNDP will expand its collaboration with all branches of the
Government, including through exploring government co-funding modalities, and
seeking to enlarge its network of civil society and development organizations,
media, innovation centres, think tanks, universities, the private sector,
diaspora organizations and others UNDP will strive to strengthen partnerships
with multiple bilateral donors, international organizations and other emerging
partners UNDP will partner with IFIs, with  focus on scaling up key development
accelerators related to regional and urban development, social protection and
data Other key priorities are scaled-up partnerships with the private sector and
diaspora organizations to catalyse development financing and the design of new
solutions that will help Armenia leapfrog, development wise The Adaptation Fund,
the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund and other vertical
multilateral funds will remain critical partners, with  vision to scale up
existing and introduce new programming areas in line with government priorities
In line with the reform agenda of the United Nations, UNDP will expand its
portfolio of inter-agency partnerships, especially around the issue-based
coalitions on social protection, food security and environmental sustainability,
with  focus on supporting cohesive and integrated United Nations action, under
the leadership of the Resident Coordinator UNDP will champion South-South and
triangular exchange, facilitating sharing of knowledge and experience on such
topics as disaster risk reduction, innovation and private sector development III
Programme and risk management The UNSDCF and this country programme were
developed through an inclusive virtual consultation process with public, private
and civil society stakeholders National priorities were jointly determined
within the United Nations country team, building on the Common Country Analysis,
national strategies, the COVID-19 socioeconomic impact assessment and feedback
received through online surveys The findings of the independent country
programme evaluation served as  basis for both programme orientation and
anticipating and mitigating programmatic risks  DP/DCP/ARM/ UNDP will focus on
portfolio/cross-sectoral programming and overcoming siloes, through  new
generation of policy and programmatic initiatives being designed at the
intersection of the four outcomes Systems thinking will underpin this work,
ensuring holistic approaches to complex problems Projects will be clustered and
interlinked across portfolios for dense knowledge flows and spillovers and for
risk diversification To ensure sustainability and maximum impact, programmes
will be designed with scaling-up and national ownership in mind To ensure
agility and an effective response to underlying programmatic risks in Armenia,
including the complex regional context, socioeconomic disparities, climate
change and vulnerability to natural disasters such as earthquakes, UNDP will
strengthen its procedures for risk recognition, mitigation and diversification
This will include applying  cross- practice/portfolio approach to programming
and resource mobilization through partnerships, joint projects and dialogues
with international and national stakeholders and United Nations agencies Early
warning and risk management will be enhanced through  risk dashboard and
grievance-reporting mechanism In line with global priorities, UNDP will enhance
its focus on thought leadership, strengthening capabilities related to data and
research, digital solutions, policy analysis and innovative financial tools UNDP
will tap the potential of volunteering, local and diaspora- based expert
networks, the private sector and inter-office exchanges as sources of skills and
expertise This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to
national results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the
Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at
country level Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the
organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures and internal
control framework The programme will be nationally executed If necessary,
national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the
programme to enable response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash
transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects IV Monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and evaluation of the country
programme are aligned with monitoring, reporting and evaluation of the UNSDCF
UNDP will contribute to annual reviews of the UNSDCF and the joint evaluation of
outcomes to validate progress in relation to envisaged short-term and long-term
results Drawing lessons from the independent country programme evaluation and
country office evaluations, UNDP has strengthened its learning and adaptive
management policies, thus becoming  more agile and effective partner of choice
In addition to the results and resources framework and project result frameworks
to monitor outputs and outcomes, the UNDP social and environmental standards and
accountability mechanism will be used to identify, monitor and mitigate risks
Annual reviews will assess and validate progress towards results with special
attention to multidimensional challenges UNDP, in collaboration with other
United Nations agencies, will continue to support the Statistical Committee of
Armenia (ArmStat) and other counterparts to upgrade government statistical
capacities, support the development of evidence-based policies and strategies
and strengthen analysis for tracking progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals and  DP/DCP/ARM/ transformative changes on the ground, with
particular emphasis on gender-disaggregated statistics In line with the
recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation, UNDP has
enhanced its monitoring and evaluation frameworks and staff capabilities and
will aim for higher-quality evaluations to inform programming and decision-
making and promote learning UNDP uses specific, measurable, achievable, relevant
and time-bound indicators to monitor outputs and results Stronger together with
communication and outreach, will ensure more effective reporting on impact and
partnership achievements results-based management,  DP/DCP/ARM/ Annex Results
and resources framework for Armenia () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  Government
Programme and Action Plan, Section  Armenia Transformation Strategy COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : People, communities and
regions benefit from equitable economic opportunities, decent work and
sustainable livelihoods, enabled through competitiveness and inclusive green
growth RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  - Advance poverty eradication in
all its forms and dimensions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines targets) MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME ($) Indicator: Poverty rate decreased Baseline (2018): % Target (2024):
20% Indicator (SDG ): Unemployment rate decreased Baseline (2018): 19% Women: %
Men: % Youth: % Rural: % Urban: % Target (2024): 17 Women:18% Men: 17% Youth:
22% Rural: 10% Urban: 23% Indicator: Rural population per capita average monthly
gross income level increased Baseline (2018): 63,338 Target (2024): 75,000
Indicator (SDG ): Proportion of youth (aged 15–24 years) not in education,
employment or training Baseline (2018): % Target (2024): 10% Regular: $ 832,000
Other: $19,615,981 • ArmStat, annually • SDG National Reporting Tool (ArmSDG),
annually • Social Snapshot Report in Armenia, annually • MESCS, MTAI, MLSA and
Labour Inspectorate, annually • Reports, assessments, surveys, media analytics,
United Nations/UNDP data, annually Output  Marginalized groups are empowered to
gain universal access to basic services and financial and non-financial assets
to build productive capacities and benefit from sustainable livelihoods and jobs
(IRRF7 ) • Indicator : Number of jobs created in communities Baseline (2020):
,500 (805 men; 695 women) Target (2025): ,000 (,050 men; 950 women) 10% increase
women entrepreneurs, UNDP, annually • Indicator : Number of persons with
improved livelihoods Baseline (2020): 28,000 (12,000 men; 16,000 women) Target
(2025): 40,000 (18,000 men; 22,000 women), UNDP, annually Ministries: of
Territorial Administration and Infrastructure (MTAI); of Finance (MF); of
Economy (MEc); of Labour and Social Affairs (MLSA); of Education, Science,
Culture and Sport (MESCS); of Health (MoH), Local self-government bodies,
Educational institutions Community-based organizations, Private sector
organizations, UNICEF, FAO, WFP, ILO • Indicator : Number of economic actors
benefiting from improved productive capacities and strengthened value chains
Baseline (2020): 240 Target (2025): 390 (25% women-led), UNDP, annually Output
Capacities at national and subnational levels strengthened to promote inclusive
local economic development and deliver inclusive public services (IRRF )
__________________  IRRF = UNDP integrated results and resources framework 10 •
Indicator : Number of inclusive local economic development plans/strategies and
policies/frameworks in place Baseline (2020): 45 plans/strategies;  policies/
mechanisms Target (2025): 60 plans/strategies;  policies/ mechanisms, UNDP,
annually • Indicator : Number of improved public service models Baseline (2020):
Target (2025): , UNDP, annually (UNSDCF-) Output  Competitive labour force
developed through promotion of innovative practices of skills-building and human
capital development with focus on youth • Indicator : Number of new labour
market- responsive Vocational Education and Training models supported Baseline
(2020):  Target (2025): , MESCS, annually • Indicator : Number of
partnerships/mechanisms in place to bridge the education and labour-market gap
Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): , MESCS, annually (UNSDCF-) Output  Capacities
developed for progressive expansion of inclusive social protection systems •
Indicator : Number of improved social protection services provided Baseline
(2020):  Target (2025): , MLSA, MoH, annually DP/DCP/ARM/ 11 DP/DCP/ARM/
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  Government Programme and Action Plan, Section
Armenia Transformation Strategy COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #:
UNSDCF Outcome : Ecosystems are managed sustainably and people benefit from
participatory and resilient development and climate-smart solutions RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  - Accelerate structural transformations for
sustainable development • National greenhouse gas inventory, Biennial-annual
update, MoE, biennially • National greenhouse gas inventory reports, MTAI,
Yerevan Municipality, Reports to the Green Climate Fund, UNFCCC, Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC) • ArmSDG, ArmStat, Energy balance, annually •
MES, National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (NPDRR), annually • Reports,
assessments, surveys, media analytics (United Nations/UNDP) Indicator: CO2
emissions per GDP (in purchasing power parities) Baseline (2017): 22 tons/US$
thousand Target (2025): 21 tons/US$ thousand Indicator: Share of renewables in
the gross final energy consumption Baseline (2017): % Target (2025): % Indicator
(SP8  revised): Number of sectors that increased ability to adapt/mitigate to
the adverse impacts of climate change, and foster carbon- neutral, climate-
resilient development Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):  Indicator (SP , SDG
revised): Hectares of important sites for terrestrial and freshwater
biodiversity under improved management Baseline (2020): 250,000 hectares Target
(2025): 380,000 hectares Indicator (SP , SDG  revised): Number of people
benefited from affordable/clean energy technologies (disaggregated by sex)
Baseline (2020): ,000 Target (2025): ,000 (55% women) Indicator (SDG revised):
Number of funded strategies in place to strengthen resilience/adaptive capacity
to climate-related hazards, natural disasters Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):
( sectoral,  regional) __________________  SP=UNDP Strategic Plan 12 Output
Low-emission and climate-resilient objectives addressed in development
plans/policies on economic diversification and green growth (SP ) • Indicator :
Number of development plans/strategies with targets for low-emission and
climate-resilient development adopted, including NDC, National Adaptation Plan
and Low-Emission Development Strategy Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): , MEc,
annually Ministries: of Environment (MoE); of Emergency Situations (MES); of
Foreign Affairs (MFA); MTAI, MEc, MF Urban Development Committee, Local self-
government bodies, UNICEF, IOM, UNFPA, UNIDO, WFP, OCHA, WHO Regular: $440,000
Other: $36,695,971 • Indicator : Number of institutional coordination mechanisms
in place and operational in line with multilateral agreements Baseline (2020):
Target (2025): , MEc, MES, annually • Indicator  Number of cities with
resilient/green development plans and financial commitments in place Baseline
(2020):  Target (2024): , MTAI, annually Output  Low-emission measures,
renewables and energy efficiency advanced and scaled • Indicator : Number of
public and residential buildings benefiting from energy efficiency improvements
Baseline (2019):  public,  residential Target (2024): 200 public, 300
residential, MTAI, annually • Indicator : Number of households benefiting from
energy efficiency measures Baseline (2019): 88 (10% women-headed) Target (2024):
45,000 (15% women-headed), • Evaluations, Local self-governing bodies, annually
• Indicator : Number of communities benefiting from renewable energy sources
Baseline (2020): 80 Target (2024): 100, Local self-governing bodies, annually
Output : Improved national and local governments capacities to introduce
environmentally sound management practices for ecosystems, waste and chemicals •
Indicator : Amount of chemicals and waste reduced and/or safely disposed
Baseline (2020):  Target (2024): ,100 tons of persistent organic pollutant waste
is prevented from release through elimination/secure storage, MoE, biennially •
Indicator : Hectares of ecosystems/lands rehabilitated or sustainably managed,
including through innovative spatial/urban plans and rural community-based
solutions Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 130,000, Line ministries, local self-
government bodies, annually • Indicator : Number of innovative mechanisms and
tools used by the Government for participatory decision-making for conservation
and sustainable use of natural resources Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): , MoE,
annually • Indicator : Number of improved policies and frameworks adopted on the
conservation and sustainable use of natural resources in place Baseline (2020):
Target (2025): 10, DP/DCP/ARM/ 13 DP/DCP/ARM/ MoE, annually Output  Improved
national and local capacities to integrate resilience to climate change and
disasters into development plans and practices • Indicator : Number of
communities with funded disaster risk management frameworks, gender-responsive
disaster risk management/adaptation plans, and coordination and monitoring
mechanisms in place Baseline (2016): 109 Target (2025): 200, Armenian Rescue
Service (ARS), NPDRR, MES, annually • Indicator : Number of health institutions
with Hospital Safety Index modules in place, including gender-responsive
contingency plans Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 25, MoH, ARS, annually •
Indicator : Innovative digital platforms and reports in practice for risk-
informed, evidence-based, gender-disaggregated policymaking Baseline (2020):
Target (2025): , MoE, annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  Government Programme
and Action Plan Section  Armenia Transformation Strategy COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : People benefit from effective and
accountable governance systems and institutions that safeguard human rights,
uphold the rule of law, and public administration that ensures effective and
human-centred service delivery for all RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome
- Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development Indicator:
Government effectiveness, transparency and accountability Baseline (2018):
Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGIs): Voice and Accountability: 39 Government
effectiveness: 44 Control of corruption: 79 • ArmStat, ArmSDG, annually • WGI,
annually; Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index, OGP, annually
• Caucasus Barometer, biennially Output : Constitution-making, electoral,
parliamentary processes/institutions strengthened to promote inclusion,
transparency and accountability (IRRF ) • Indicator : Electoral management
bodies capacities strengthened to conduct inclusive and credible elections
Baseline (2019): 53% trust in Central Electoral Commission (CEC); fairness 63%
Parliament, Electoral management bodies Prime Minister Office Deputy Prime
Minister Offices; Ministry of Justice (MoJ); MTAI, Ombudsman, Regular: $430,000
Other: $13,349,919 14 Open Government Partnership (OGP):  Action Plan
implementation: 60% Target (2025): WGI: Voice and Accountability: 42 Government
Effectiveness: Control of Corruption: OGP  Action Plan implementation: 80%
Indicator: Independence, accountability, professionalism of judicial system
Baseline (2020): WGI Rule of Law: 56 Target (2025): WGI Rule of Law: 50
Indicator (SDG  revised): Availability of platforms/tools to measure the
proportion of the population satisfied with their last experience with public
services; and (SDG ) who believe decision- making is inclusive Baseline (2020):
ArmStat collects data in the health and education sectors Target 2025):  public
service data platforms/tools established Indicator (SDG ,): Women’
representation in Parliament, Government, Local self-government bodies,
increased Baseline (2020): Parliament: 24% Ministries: 24%; Local self-
government bodies:10% Target (2025): Parliament: 30% Local self-government
bodies: 30% Ministries: 27% • Reports, assessments, surveys, media Target
(2025): 10 % increase (trust 63%; analytics fairness 73%), CEC, IRI, Caucasus
Barometer, biennially • Universal Periodic Review (UPR) 2024, International
Republican Institute (IRI) (biennially; Judicial Reform Strategy Action Plan
reporting, annually • Gender Inequality Index, Gender Development Index, Gender
Global Gap Report and other gender indicators, annually • • • Indicator :
Parliament capacity improved to undertake inclusive, effective and accountable
law-making, oversight and representation Baseline (2019): 33% public trust
Target (2024): 43% public trust UNDP, Caucasus Barometer, Public Opinion Poll,
biennially Indicator  Number of citizen-centric scalable innovative solutions
introduced aimed at democratic processes Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 23,
Government, annually Indicator  Number of initiatives to promote connectivity
Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): , Government, biennially Output  Capacities,
functions and financing of rule of law, national human rights
institutions/systems strengthened to protect human rights, expand access to
justice and combat discrimination, with  focus on women and marginalized groups
(IRRF ) • Indicator : Number of non- discriminatory policies and laws in place
Baseline (2019): no stand-alone law on equality Target (2024):  law and  policy
adopted, Parliament, annually • Indicator : Strengthened institutions/systems to
implement human rights obligations: Baseline (2020): Human Rights Action Plan
adopted Target (2025): 80% implemented, UPR, MoJ, Human Right Defender’ Office,
annually DP/DCP/ARM/ Civil society, UNICEF, UNFPA, IOM, OHCHR, UN-Women, UNHCR,
UNODC 15 DP/DCP/ARM/ • Indicator : Number of digital transparency/accountability
mechanisms co- established with the Government and/or citizens Baseline (2020):
Target (2024): 20, UNDP, Government, annually (UNSDCF-) Output  Systems/
mechanisms to ensure equal opportunities/rights to participate in decision-
making • Indicator : Number of gender-responsive laws, policies, programmes and
practices at national and local levels Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 30,
MTAI, MLSA, local self-government bodies, annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Government Programme and Action Plan Sections - Armenia Transformation Strategy
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: UNSDCF Outcome : People benefit
from evidence-based, human-centric and Sustainable Development Goals-aligned
policies supported by diversified sources of financing, innovation and
partnerships for sustainable development for all RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Outcome  - Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Indicator (SDG revised): Number of policies, frameworks and mechanisms aligned
to the Sustainable Development Goals in place to enhance policy coherence for
sustainable development Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):  • ArmStat, ArmSDG,
annually • Voluntary national review, United Nations/UNDP, Government,
Development Assistance Database, Development Foundation of Armenia Regular:
$430,000 Other: $,035,428 Prime Minister Office Deputy Prime Minister Offices,
Line ministries, Civil society, Private sector, UNICEF, WFP, UN- Women, UNIDO
Output  New mechanism and partnerships established to support impact-driven
innovation ecosystems for the Goals • Indicator  Number of innovative Goals-
aligned mechanisms and partnerships developed Baseline (2020): 10 mechanisms;
partnerships Target (2025): 20 mechanisms, 10 partnerships, Government, annually
Output  Enabling environment/institutional capacities developed to leverage
public and private financing for the  Goals • Indicator : Number of mechanisms
developed to realign/catalyse public and/or private financing Baseline (2020):
Target (2025): , UNDP, annually 16 DP/DCP/ARM/ Output  National and local
governments use innovative, impact-oriented and data-driven solutions for
policymaking • Indicator  Number of innovative, impact- oriented and data-driven
tools developed Baseline (2020):  Target (2025): 10, UNDP, annually 17