 SECOND NATIONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY ACTION PLAN FOR ARMENIA ARMENIA RENEWABLE
RESOURCES AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY FUND FIRST DRAFT 20 JULY 2015 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table of Contents Table of Contents  ii
ABBREVIATIONS   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   INTRODUCTION    OVERALL CONTEXT OF THE
SECOND NEEAP   Highlights of the Second NEEAP    National context of energy
savings    Setting the Target  11  MEASURES FOR THE PRIMARY ENERGY SAVINGS  22
Reducing high-voltage network losses and Enhancing reliability of Power Supply
in Armenia  22  Reducing low-voltage electric network losses  23  Promotion of
EE-integrated renewable energy applications  24  Enforcing Net Metering for
Independent Solar Electricity Producers  25  Greater Use of Solar Thermal Energy
26  Piloting Geothermal Heat Pumps for Scalable Centralized Heating Solutions
26  FINAL ENERGY SAVINGS IN THE END USE SECTORS  28  Review of final energy
saving targets and final energy saving achievements  28  National overall end-
use energy savings targets and progress towards them  29  National targets for
nearly zero energy buildings  33  Horizontal Measures 34  Financial Support for
Energy Efficiency in All Sectors  45 Capacity Building for Financial
Institutions and Supporting the Market for Energy Services  57 ) Establishing
and operating  EE business information centre  58 ) Combined Study tour and
Capacity Building Workshop on EE Awareness Raising  59  Promotion of the
Covenant of Mayors  59  ALL INDIVIDUAL MEASURES  69  Buildings Sector  69
Project No 5995 ii Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Regulatory
Measures  70 Technical Regulations for Building Energy Performance  75  New
Construction  75  Residential Buildings  87  Public Buildings and Services  104
Public Buildings  104  Street-lighting  108  Agricultural Sector  111  INDUSTRY,
SMEs and POWER  161  Power Sector  164  Energy Management and Clean Production
Industrial and SME  165  Financing of Industrial and SME Energy Efficiency  166
EE-Integrated Renewable Energy Sources  168  Transport/Mobility  187 COMPETENT
BODIES AND ASSIGNED ORGANIZATIONS  212 Project No 5995 iii Table of Contents:
forecast : Page:  Table of Contents: : Page: 192 Table of Contents: Burned :
Page: 189 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT ABBREVIATIONS BAU BEP
BU CDM CHP CoM E5P EBRD ECU EE EEAP EED EMS EPBD ESCO ESD EU GEF GGF GWh GHP IFI
ITS KfW Ktoe kWh LEDS LFI MWh MoENR MUD MoE MoT NBU / NEEAP NGO NSSD RES SEAP
Business as Usual Building Energy Performance Bottom Up Clean Development
Mechanism Combined Heat and Power Covenant of Mayors Eastern European Energy
Efficiency and Environment Partnership European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development Eurasian Customs Union Energy Efficiency Energy Efficiency Action
Plan Energy Efficiency Directive Energy Management System Energy Performance in
Buildings Directive Energy Services Company Energy Services Directive European
Union Global Environmental Facility Green for Growth Fund Gigawatt hour
Geothermal Heat Pumps International Financial Institutions Inogate Technical
Secretariat (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau) German Development Bank Kilotons of
oil equivalent kilowatt hour Low Emissions Development Strategies local
financial institution Megawatt hour Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources
Ministry of Urban Development Ministry of Economy Ministry of Communication and
Transport National Bottom-Up No data National Energy Efficiency Action Plan Non-
Governmental Organization National Strategy for Sustainable Development
Renewable Energy Sources Sustainable Energy Action Plan  Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT SWH TD Toe TPP UNDP USAID WB Solar Water Heater
collectors Top-Down tons of oil equivalent Thermal Power Plant United Nations
Development Program United State Agency for International Development World Bank
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Energy
efficiency policy has  pivotal role to play in Armenia’ economy: It is essential
for creating conditions for economic growth while improving energy security By
reducing the energy intensity of the national economic output, energy efficiency
holds the key to maintaining  safe, sustainable and affordable energy supply,
while meeting increasing energy demand and improving quality of life for the
Armenian population Under conditions of extreme import dependence for fossil
fuels, energy that Armenia’ citizens, businesses, and infrastructure do not use
is the cheapest, cleanest, and most secure energy resource The potential for
energy efficiency in all sectors has been assessed repeatedly and remains high,
despite the relatively low energy intensity of the economy The Armenian
Government has taken legal action to promote efficiency through various programs
and policies, but the potential for efficiency improvement still remains largely
untapped With energy prices rising, the urgency of accelerating the uptake of
energy efficiency throughout Armenia’ economy has increased The goal of the
second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) is to assess the
effectiveness of ongoing efforts by the Government, donors, international
financial institutions and the private sector to improve the efficiency of
energy use since 2010, when Armenia’ first NEEAP was developed The second NEEAP
also identifies barriers to more extensive efforts in this direction, proposes
measures to help overcome these barriers, and offers additional energy
efficiency improvement measures for the period covering 2015–The key pillars of
the second NEEAP are:  Reducing energy demand by improving the efficiency of
energy end use;  Improving national energy security by reducing the need for
imported energy resources;  Decreasing the energy content of the key economic
outputs to reduce costs and raise the competitiveness of output;  Addressing
growing energy affordability concerns through energy efficiency solutions
(instead of relying on social aid); and  Providing impetus for behavioral
change by decoupling growth from energy use, and thus enhancing the quality and
sustainability of development through the introduction of knowledge and
traditions for resource efficiency and smart growth The development and adoption
of the Second NEEAP for the Republic of Armenia is one of the steps on the
pathway upon which the Government of Armenia embarked  decade ago, by adopting
Armenia’ first Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy The Republic of Armenia
developed its first NEEAP in 2010 to accelerate the implementation of its
national energy efficiency policy The first NEEAP set forth  set of programmatic
and policy measures for energy efficiency improvement for all economic sectors
of the country The first NEEAP, adopted by Government Resolution #43 on
November 2010, set the country on track for  ten-year process with intermediate
targets and interim evaluations Because adequate data  Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT were not available at the time for developing
targets based on statistics, the first NEEAP provided rough estimates of the
potential impact of the proposed measures as fractions of the overall target up
to The 2010 energy balance was prepared shortly after the completion of the
first NEEAP The indicative target for the end of the first NEEAP was thus later
quantified by the team developing the second NEEAP using the energy balance data
for Since the second NEEAP was prepared in 2015, the first period was assumed to
cover 2011-The energy saving target for the first period of the first NEEAP was
baseline energy consumption of 2010 (ktoe) The second NEEAP sets an interim
target of %, equivalent to ktoe The assessment of the first NEEAP revealed that
this target has been outperformed: The overall energy saving reached by 2014 was
% (ktoe) The second NEEAP continues the relevant measures from the first NEEAP,
and in addition proposes an updated bundle of measures and energy saving targets
for the second period, covering 2015-The second NEEAP tracks both the indicative
milestone year 2018, as well as  long-term plan until The document was prepared
based on the template recommended by the Energy Community, in which the Republic
of Armenia has had observer status since In accordance with the NEEAP
methodology, the baseline used in the second NEEAP is the average energy
consumption from three consecutive years (2010, 2011 and 2012), in this case
,047 ktoe Based on the assessed progress under the first NEEAP and the expected
impact of the ongoing and new energy efficiency improvement measures, the second
NEEAP proposes  new set of targets for 2017 (% instead of the % proposed in the
first NEEAP),  EC-LEDS Program In Armenia  Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT for 2018 (% instead of %), and  higher overall target for 2020 (%
instead of %) Table   National Indicative Targets under the Second NEEAP
National indicative target in 2020 (ktoe) National indicative target in 2018
(ktoe) National intermediate target in 2017 (ktoe) National intermediate
indicative target in 2014 (ktoe ) Sector target In 2014 (ktoe) Revised estimated
energy saving target (ktoe) Sector division of target Target Achieved 2017 2018
2020 Horizontal and CC - Residential  Services      Industry Transport
Agriculture Total: Percentage (%)(compared to reference consumption)      % % %
% % It is noteworthy that some of the ongoing energy efficiency programs in
Armenia, particularly those financed by international financial institutions and
the banking sector, have been assessed in depth for past performance, but were
reluctant to provide any projections of future  Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT lending due to market volatility For this reason,
the reduced targets of the second NEEAP may be outperformed when energy
efficiency financing is quantified in the third NEEAP Table   Overview of
targets and achieved/projected energy savings both in respect of primary and
final energy Final energy saving target Primary Energy Saving Target in absolute
terms Percentage (%)(compared to reference final consumption) in absolute terms
(toe) Percentage (%) (compared to reference primary energy consumption) (toe) %
16% 2014(interim period) % 04% 2017(interim period) % 05% 2018 (overall period)
% 46% 2020 (extended period) Table   Overview of targets and achieved/projected
energy savings in respect TO BOTH final AND primary energy Final energy saving
target Primary Energy Saving Target absolute in terms Percentage (%)(compared
reference consumption) % in absolute (toe) terms (%) Percentage to (compared
reference primary energy consumption) 16% to final (toe)  2014 (interim period)
% 04% 2017 (interim period) % 05% 2018 (overall period) 2020 (extended period) %
46% The second NEEAP introduces new measures for all sectors The broad range of
measures includes enforcing new regulations, integrating energy efficiency into
public procurement, encouraging improved energy performance of industrial and
small and medium enterprise (SME) energy consumers, and introducing
comprehensive monitoring and planning approach for the transport sector In
addition, the measures include promoting end-use distributed generation of
renewable electricity and thermal energy by energy end-users This—primarily
includes the increased use of solar energy for hot water preparation and the
application of heat pumps and increased use of solar photovoltaic technology via
net metering These proposed measures are based on and  Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT closely related to existing strategic documents,
action plans and programs to promote renewable energy The national intermediate
indicative targets for 2017 and onward were calculated on the basis of the
average final consumption of energy during the realization of first NEEAP Table
National indicative targets for 2017 Indicative target in 2017 (ktoe) Realized
savings in 2014 (ktoe) 10% % Sector target Sector 2017 (ktoe)   % 17% 84% 55%
67% 13% 94% 06 00% Horizontal Residential Public sector Industry Transport
Agriculture Total:  significant number of strategic documents and regulations
related to the implementation of energy efficiency measures have been adopted in
the Republic of Armenia The impacts of these individual actions are difficult to
evaluate separately due to their synergistic natures and overlapping results --
particularly in the case of horizontal and cross-sectoral measures For this
reason,  combination of top- down and bottom-up methodologies was used to
estimate the achieved (2014) and potential (through 2020) energy saving impacts
of these programs (see Table )  Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Table   Tons of CO2 emission avoided by target year based on Sectoral Measures
Sectors Tons of CO2 emission avoided by target year 2014 183,88 ,26 32 2017
209,79 28,00 25,02 2018 222,74 28,00 27,80 2020 Horizontal and CC Buildings
(Residential) Public Buildings and Services Industry Transport Agriculture Total
GHG Avoided (tons CO2) 249,65 28,00 31,79 36 37 - 183,93 13 15 ,80 271,88 ,54 93
15,00 295,02 ,54 63 22,80 334,40 In order to achieve these estimated savings
through implementation of the energy efficiency measures proposed in the second
NEEAP, it is necessary to strengthen Armenia’ institutional framework,
especially related to buildings Several steps forward have already been taken in
this regard: For example, the newly adopted Housing Legislation stipulates that
every multi- apartment facility must operate as  legal entity, requiring
residents to form  community of building tenants or delegate the housing
maintenance function to  professional organization This legislation, combined
with the enforcement of the amended Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy
and the related secondary legislation, will enable faster renovation of multi-
apartment buildings In addition, the increased establishment of Home-Owners
Associations will ensure  higher quality of housing maintenance and,
potentially, increased efforts at thermal modernization of buildings This is an
expected outcome of the establishment of private maintenance companies and the
enhanced development of energy services companies (ESCOs) The Ministry of Energy
and Natural Resources (MoENR) is responsible for monitoring the implementation
of the second NEEAP and reporting results based on measurement and verification
of energy savings As  first step, the MoENR will need to establish an
information system for tracking all energy efficiency activities and assessing
the energy savings; this will help avoid measurement and verification problems
stemming from the current lack of data (apparent during the preparation of this
NEEAP) needed to calculate the savings from individual measures This task may be
assigned (outsourced), if necessary, to expert teams outside MoENR The
implementation of the second NEEAP will also require identification of stable
funding sources to support the measures that depend on extra-budgetary sources
of financing;   Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT number of
measures outlined in the second NEEAP still do not have committed funding  small
part of the budgetary resources (Central and Local) are still available to be
allocated for the drafting of the policies, development of tariff reform, and
preparation of programs within the specific measures; however, significant
additional funding necessary for the implementation of the energy efficiency
investments will be required from donors and IFIs Table  summarizes all of the
energy efficiency measures in the sectors of final energy consumption that are
outlined in the proposed second NEEAP, as well as the assigned responsibilities
for implementation and the estimated funds required  more precise assessment of
necessary financial resources, as well as proposed sources of financing, will be
elaborated in the programs and plans for the implementation of specific energy
efficiency measures identified in this NEEAP Table   Summary of energy
efficiency measures in the sectors of final energy consumption  Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving measure Expected
Energy Saving (MWh) Required financing (US $) 2017 2018 Financing for Energy
Efficiency: GGF Financing for EE: IFC EE loans for households and SMEs Financing
for EE: for residential and business clients, EBRD ArmSEFF Financing for EE:
EastEur EE and Environment Partnership (E5P) Removing inadequate gas tariff
structure to encourage energy savings Support to Armenian municipalities in SEAP
Implementation Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings (UNDP/GEF BEEI project)
Financing for EE in Housing: Jerm Ojakh (NMC/AFD) 35,069 35,792 341,655 / 59,365
,200 141 35,069 35,792 341,655 / 89,047 ,200 164 15,354,000 40,000,000
28,000,000 22,470,000 / 11,000,000 ,200,000 13,000,000 ,629,507       II II
Financing for Energy Efficiency: Residential energy efficiency bank-based
commercial loan through HFHA Condo, REELIH and SUDEP Projects Financing for
Energy Efficiency: KfW Housing EE credit line Mitigating Tariff Increase with
Low-income Energy Efficiency Program EE Retrofits in existing residential
buildings: National Program and Action Plan for MAB Renovation & EE Appliance
Energy Labeling Awareness Campaign Public Building EE: Implementation of energy
saving activities in municipal and social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) NAMA
project to Support EE in Public Buildings and Social Housing Green Urban
Lighting Project GHG , UNDP ,914 TBD 116,159 ,067 TBD 116,159 II 22,898,000
,092,687 25,000,000 II II10 65,000 176,704 65,000 209,369 II11 ,000,000
10,700,000 II12 521 11,442 47 521 14,653 47 III 24,000,000 452,670 15,000,000
III III Financing for Energy Efficiency & Public Procurement for EE: EE-
integrated reinforcement of Schools by KfW EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan street-
lighting 39,897 ,277 39,897 ,277 III ,000,000 76,237 III USAID Clean Energy and
Water Program for EE & RE solutions in community energy and water use 19 19 III
,000,000 Considering energy efficiency aspects during approval and construction
of  ew industrial facilities Increasing the efficiency of the central heating
plants and suppliers: Avan DH - cogeneration Implementation of EE Financing
Facility for Industrial Enterprises Natural gas savings through improvement of
transmission pipelines and subs tations, and optimisation of existing boiler
houses inTPPs Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: WB
Electricity Supply reliability Reduction of energy losses in distribution
networks: EBRD Power Supply Reliability Electricity savings through improvements
of existing electricity network, com pensation of reactive power and improvement
of transformers 7775 5729 IV 12,000,000 67,327 70,693 Tracked as part of cross-
cutting IV IV 515,000,000 - - IV 41,550,000 - - IV 70,000,000 - ,311 IV
25,000,000 - 62,072 10 705 608 18,000 62,072 12 705 ,729 IV5c IV Reduction of
Electricity Losses in Low-voltage networks, ArmElNet IV IV Geothermal Heat Pumps
for Central Heating IV7 22,768,434 - 68,251 66,000,000 Wider Application of
Renewable Energy: SWHs Distributed RE generation: PV promotion through net
metering 10 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Development of
legislative background regarding fuel efficiency and emission norms of vehicles
Dissemination of information on technologies and approaches for reducing energy
consumption effectively Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger
buses Expansion and modernisation of the electrified public transport: City of
Yerevan Expansion and modernisation of rail transport network ,066,200,000 - -
- - ,045,391 ,294 / 862 - ,118,245 ,294 / 972  34,200,000 37,000,000 - Mixed PS,
uncontrolled    Continuous switching of road vehicles from gasoline to
compressed natural gas (CNG) Development of Integrated Electro-Transport Network
and services to cover unmet demand for public transport in Yerevan agglomeration
Rural development program: EE agricultural machinery import Importing high
efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA Irrigation system enhancement project, WB
Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB USAID Clean Energy & Water
Program Irrigation System Modernization and Institutional Capacity Building, WB
Energy efficiency for greenhouse industry Grading agricultural products based on
quality Renewing the agricultural machinery park Install gravity irrigation / /
TBD -   ,267 73 150 19,000 425 ,620 134 17,200 ,366,267 39,674 -   ,267 73 150
19,000 480 25,900 201 34,500 ,655,651 52,918  VI / 33,100,000 36,220,000 265,803
44,000,000 - / / - ,372,465,588 KTOE VI VI VI VI VI10 VI13 VI15 VI16 VI18 Grant
Total The successfull achievement of the envisaged measures entails the full
commitment of all participants in this process The second NEEAP was prepared
using the following control list of measures necessary for effective
realization:  Continued reform and eventually amendment of the Law on Energy
Saving and Renewable Energy and associated bylaws on energy auditing and energy
efficiency in public procurement  Continued operation of the Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund  Smooth integration of Eastern Europe
Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P) funds to leverage lending
with grant co-financing  Development of new/improved housing legislation 
Building codes enforcement  Tariff reform  Incentives application for wider
combined energy efficiency-integrated renewable energy  Improvement of energy
efficiency data collection and periodic energy balance calculation 11 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Low-income assistance for
implementation of energy efficiency measures  Development and provision of
technical assistance in best available energy efficiency technologies for the
industrial and agricultural sectors (, greenhouses and aquaculture) 
Strengthening the institutional capacity of the State to develop and implement
energy efficiency policy One of the highest priorities is to urgently develop an
efficient information system for monitoring and verification of activities and
energy savings associated with the implementation of energy efficiency measures
The success of the proposed measures largely depends on systematic and timely
oversight of implementation of the measures set out in this NEEAP Table
Summary of first NEEAP Targets, Achievements, and Revised Second NEEAP Targets
at  glance 12 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table   Summary of
first NEEAP Targets, Achievements, and Revised Second NEEAP Targets  Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT INTRODUCTION The Armenian Government has
taken ambitious steps to reform the energy sector, improve the economic
efficiency of energy use and promote the greter use of renewables Several policy
documents, such as the Energy Sector Development Strategy, the Law on Energy
Saving and Renewable Energy, the National Program on Energy Saving and
Renewables, the first National Energy Efficiency Action Plan and the Energy
Security Concept have all clearly voiced the priotity that the Government of
Armenia attributes to development of renewable energy, energy efficiency and
energy saving programs, diversification by primary energy sources and supply
routes, regional integration, as well as development of nuclear energy The
Republic of Armenia has developed its first National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan (NEEAP) in 2010 for the period 2010 – 2014 as part of the overall attempts
to accelerate the implementation of the national energy efficiency policy The
first NEEAP set forth  set of programmatic and policy measures for energy
efficiency improvement for all relevant economic sectors in the country
According to the European best practices, development of NEEAP is  regular
process and targets at  ten-year period The first NEEAP was developed without
adequate statistical basis, but provided rough estimates of the potential impact
of the proposed bundle of measures as fractions of the overall target up to 2020
(adopted by Goevrnment Resolution #43 from  November The present document is the
second NEEAP in this series and provides the Government of Armenia with an
assessment of progress against these targets during the period of  using the
estimated baseline energy consumption for Due to the experienced delay in the
preparation of the second NEEAP, the first NEEAP assessment goes beyond the
reported timeframe for the first period and tracks programs and measures
implemented up to 2014, inclusive The second EEAP uses the 1st NEEAP assessment
conducted by the R2E2 for horizontal/cross-cutting measures, newly conducted
assessment of implemented sectoral programs as foundation to, where necessary,
revise the current measures and establish  new sectoral measures in order to
ensure the achievement of objectives by year 2017, 2018 and Then the second
NEEAP continues the relevant measures from the first NEEAP, as well as proposes
an updated bundle of measures and energy saving targets for the second period
covering , tracking both the indicative milestone year 2018, as well as  long-
term plan until The document was prepared based on the template recommended by
the Energy Community which the Republic of Armenia holds an observer status
since The NEEAP provides  framework for the development of measures to enhance
energy efficiency improvement, with  stronger focus on the energy end-use, and
platform to evaluate the energy savingsresulting from the implementation of
these measures in the long run The method and specific features of the
assessment of the total and intermediate indicative targets are described in
this documentAggregate and individual data on energy consumption have been used
to set the targets  Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT based on the
energy balance data Where possible, total primary sources and final energy
consuption was roughly assessed beyond 2012 to allow for adequate assessment of
the impact of the first NEEAP measures The updates in the second NEEAP are
largely aimed at documenting  diverse package of measures that have been
undertaken by various players in all sectors of the economy, new initiatives
that have been introduced after the first NEEAP was developed, as well as
refreshing the data on timing for implementation of energy efficiency (EE)
improvement measures in the light of growing energy prices and emerging energy
supply sufficiency concerns The legal ground for preparation of EEAP is
determined in the Government Decree adopting the 1st NEEAPThe second EEAP for
the period , considering targeted energy efficiency savings by 2018 and 2020,
prescribes the energy savings objectives and prescribes measures and activities
for achieving intermediate energy savings target for The 2nd NEEAP will provide
framework for the development of measures to enhance energy efficiency
improvement, in particular for end-use energy consumers, and platform to
evaluate the energy savings resulting from the implementation of these measures
Enhancing Capacity for Low Emission Development Strategies (EC-LEDS) Program in
Armenia Available at   Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  OVERALL
CONTEXT OF THE SECOND NEEAP The Armenian Government has developed and adopted
several major national policies, strategies and programs, secondary legislations
and regulatory frameworks as well as international treaties related to the
implementation of energy efficiency policies The chart below lists the acting
policies, programs, regulations and treaties governing the scope of NEEAP
implementation Figure  Energy Efficiency Policies, Strategies and Regulations
The review of the above policy framework is attached to the Second NEEAP with
consideration of accomplished energy savings as well as expected savings from
continued policy efforts in market transformation in the consequent chapters, as
well as further reform recommendations The desk study revealed the gaps in the
policies, including:  The lack of financial incentives for energy efficiency to
support the enforcement of the voluntary provisions of the Law on Energy Saving
and Renewable Energy  The lack of enforcement in the existing energy efficiency
regulations, including enforcement procedures for the latest Government decree
on mandatory compliance with EE requirements in state investment projects and
residential construction  Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT 
number of legislative initiatives have been put forward (technical regulations
on building safety and energy performance, amendments to the Law on Urban
Development, draft amendments to the Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy,
draft regulation on appliance labeling), which are still pending adoption or on
hold Their status as well as impact on national energy saving targets must be
reassessed to conclude on recommended further steps in these reform directions
Furthermore, the present legal initiatives, particularly those related to
appliance labeling, must be revisited to adjust the provisions of the earlier
draft regulation on appliance labeling targeted at EU Labeling directive
transposition to comply with the EEU  Many donor- and IFI-funded initiatives
have already tested  number of  successful and promising technical and financial
solutions for promotion of energy efficiency in various sectors of the economy
These have also provided solid empirical evidences on the expected impact of
particular energy efficiency measures, as well as potential barriers which can
hamper the successful implementation of specific energy efficiency measures The
second NEEAP seeks to propose scaling these up to national efforts Similarly,
the assessment of the first NEEAP and the work on thesecond NEEAP revealed
limited attention to other types of EE Investments, hence the second NEEAP seeks
to propose  new set of EE improvement measures and programs addressing the
market barriers and utilizing the untapped energy saving potential in other
sectors  Highlights of the Second NEEAP The second NEEAP assesses the progress
made in the directions outlined by the first NEEAP The intention was to use the
average energy demand for  as the reference, but since the energy balance was
only calculated for 2010 and further two years, 2010 was the only reference for
baseline But since the first NEEAP, the 2010, 2011 and 2012 energy balances were
prepared, and the following target yeras (2017, 2018 and 2020) use the average
of these three consecutive years as  reference baseline for the consequent
energy saving targets  Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  National
context of energy savings Armenia’ energy consumption currently represents only
small fraction of the level prior to collapse of the Soviet Union Figure  Total
primary and final energy sources used in Armenia since 1990, statistics and
forecast ,000 TPES TFEC ,708 ,000 ,000 ,475 ,000 ,681 ,000   ,139   ,000 ,518
,378 ,286 ,991 ,977 ,738 ,000 ,512 ,134 ,106 ,015 ,998 ,964 ,905 ,901 ,858 ,858
,714 ,000 ,107 ,000 - 1990 2000 2005 2010 2011 2012 2014 2015 2017 2018 2020
Since independence, Armenia has struggled to recover the level of economic
output and the economy has grown at  steady rate, and so did the energy use The
restructuring of the economy with more focus on services and away from heavy
industry has helped reduce the energy intensity of economic growth and decouple
energy from growth which is  major step towards  sustainable energy pathway and
green economy (See Error! Reference source ot found) final energy consumption
has Nevertheless, increased in recent decade The residential sector was the the
largest consumer, responsible for  Figure  Economic Growth and Energy Use in
Armenia WB 2014 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT over one
third of total final energy, followed by the transport sector with  share of 25%
in Nevertheless, both sectors make only insignificant contributions to GDP
Industry used only 18% of energy, which is far beyond the industry’ share in the
soviet era Commercial and public services accounted for about 16% and
agriculture - for about % The share of the residential sector fluctuates
depending on weather conditions Only the commercial and the public service
sector showed steady increase of energy consumption over the last years Figure
Final energy consumption in Armenia by sector (in ktoe)* 5000     4500 Coal and
peat Crude oil Oil products Natural gas** Nuclear Hydro 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000
1500 1000 500  2010 2011 2012 2014 2015 2017 2018 2020 years Source: USAID,
Reference scenario for 2015-*Data for 2000 and 2005 are from IEA, Statistics
Source: Annual Report of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of RA
Currently available projections3 are based on 2006 data and assume an increase
of the share of industry in overall final energy consumption until 2030, as well
as  slight increase of the share of transport The share of all other sectors was
expected to decrease Practice seems to develop differently The Long- Term
Strategic Development Program of the Armenian Government  plans an annual
economic growth of up to -% and  doubling of GDP by Highly qualified jobs
ensuring high labour productivity is considered as the main directions The
Program, in fact, may become  straightforward strategy for  country poor in
natural resources The envisaged work places indeed may be less energy-intensive
Therefore, in  reference scenario, one would expect an increase in energy
consumption in commercial and public services After the deep fuel crisis in 1992
when consumers had only - hours of electricity per day and most households
depended on firewood or electricity for heating (World Bank, 2011), the
electricity system 3Although the projections are not compatible with current
development and need to be adjusted there was no other projection to rely on Say
explicitly that  new study is needed here  Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT has been restored Electricity generation in Armenia relies mainly on
natural gas (54% of total installed capacity) followed by hydropower (22% of
installed capacity) The nuclear power plant built in the Soviet period is still
in operation and contributes 19% of total installed capacity Table  Electricity
consumption by major customers (unit: MWh) 2005 2010 2011 2012 2013 GWh % GWh %
GWh % GWh % GWh % Industry ,020 24 ,047 23 ,083 22 ,180 23 ,209 23 Transport 113
119  120  127  124  Residential ,498 36 ,611 36 ,808 37 ,902 37 ,950 38
Commercial and public services Agriculture/forestry 197  207  233  227  228  421
10 263  226  226  130  Other non-specified 930 22 ,260 28 ,400 29 ,458 28 ,526
30 Total: 100 Source: Annual Report of the Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources of RA ,508 ,180 ,870 100 100 ,120 100 ,167 100 More than half of
facilities producing  GW of total installed capacity of operating power plants
are older than 40 years, and thus are at the end of their lifecycle; moreover
many units operate far below  Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT their
installed capacity They need replacement or substantial investment into
refurbishment to extend their life span The same is true for the electricity
grid which requires comprehensive rehabilitation Efforts on modernization of
power plants had been undertaken and two new modern gas-fired thermal power
generation capacities were constructed (the Yerevan CCGT Unit with an installed
capacity of MW commissioned in 2010 and the Hrazdan Unit N5 with an installed
capacity of 480 MW commissioned in 2011)  steadily growing electricity demand
(see Figure ) and the necessary shut-down under-maintained infrastructure,
including about ,300 operable power generation facilities, have resulted in the
need for new power-generating capacities to be to meet an in order constructed
envisaged supply gap in 2017 (World Bank, 2011) The operable capacity of the
current Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) cannot be increased and hydro energy is
dependent on weather conditions Discharges from the Sevan Lake to the Sevan-
Hrazdan cascade are limited and strongly depend on the irrigation regime The
working capacity of the Vorotan cascade power plants is also limited due to the
water flow in in the river Therefore the load of Vorotan cascade is highest
during the spring-summer months and lowest during the autumn-winter months The
assessment of the gap has shown different results ranging from 800 to1,100 MW of
new, operable generation capacity in order to meet peak load and to maintain
25% reserve margin (World Bank, 2011) Substantial export capacities will remain
75% of the capacity of the new Yerevan CCGT and of unit  at Hrazdan TPP, as well
as full capacity of the Meghri HPP (to be operational in 2019) are dedicated to
electricity exportThe 39 00 26 58 69 Coal and peat Crude oil Oil products 33
Natural gas Nuclear Hydro ,79 Renewables of Figure  Total Primary Energy Sources
by Fuel, 2012  At Hrazdan TPP 800 MW are operable out of 1050 MW installed, and
at Yerevan TPP only less than 10% of installed capacity Efficiency is very low
(370g of fuel per kWh)compared to new gas fired blocks at Hrazdan ( /kWh) and to
the new Yerevan CCGT (170g/kWh) (World Bank, 2011) 5The IMF assumed  % annual
GDP growth rate during 2011-(World Bank, 2011, 11)  Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT current and forecasted structure of electricity
generation is presented in Figure  below 14,000 12,000 Renewables Hydro Nuclear
Natural gas 10,000 ,000 ,000 ,000 ,000  2005 2010 2011 2012 2013 2015 2020 2030
Figure  Electricity generation by fuel (in GWh) Aside from electricity
generation, natural gas is consumed in all other sectors Gasification reached
96% of the country, being competitive against electricity prices, despite the
continuously growing prices The dynamics of gas prices is presented in the
Chapter  Table  Natural Gas Consumption Structure million m3 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 Imported Natural Gas - 05 Supplied through distribution network, of which
Population - 92 92 - 75 542 93 Energy - 91 29 Industry - 04 261 Pressurized Gas
filling stattions Public Sector - 36 418 96 - 45 89 Other Consumers - 42 250
Average Calorifi Value (kCal/m3) 8214  Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT The energy consumption is still strongly correlated with greenhouse gas
emissions, nonetheless some decoupling trend has been observed due to
introduction of more renewables into the energy mix, particularly the small
hydro power capacities 30,000 25,000 CO2 Total GHG emission 20,000      15,000
10,000 ,000  Years 1990 1995 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2010 Figure
GHG Emissions in Armenia until 2010 (in Gt CO2eq excluding LULUCF) Source: RoA
3rd National Communication to UNFCCC As an indicator of efficiency of energy use
studies usually compare energy intensity of GDP But another illustrative
indicator is the per capita energy use For both indicators Armenia remains one
of the lowest the lowest if compared with counties in the region, the Energy
Commnunity and the EU Member States 50 20 Energy consumption per capital
(kgoe/ca) Energy intensity of GDP (kgoe/US$) 00 42 50 25 16 12 91 84 00 72 70 65
57 57 52 41 33 33 29 50 26 24 20 17 10 00 Figure  Comparison of Energy
Consumption per Capita and Energy Intensity by Countries 10 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Armenia’ first National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan (NEEAP) was developed in 2010 when there was no detailed energy balance in
the country and the latest bottom-up data collection was conducted in 2005 for
the development of the National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy,
adopted in The lack of statistical data limited the possibility of assessing the
energy saving potential adequately, as well as quantifying the indicative energy
saving targets  Setting the Target As  best-practice strategy for NEEAPs, the
baseline is selected based on the average of the three consecutive years for
which adequate statistics were available Given the availability of detailed
energy balance for  in Armenia, the present NEEAP uses the average of these
three years to set the baseline This NEEAP also uses the energy intensity of
GDP, sectoral energy intensities, as well as primary or final energy use per
capita Similarly, the targets set by the Government for national programs and
strategies aimed at energy efficiency usually use primary or final energy
sources used by  target year The NEEAP is no exception Energy efficiency targets
for the NEEAPs can be set based on: › primary or final energy consumption; ›
primary or final energy savings; › energy intensity Considering that the energy
system losses are estimated by various studies at approximately 30%, and that
the second NEEAP also focuses on supply-side energy efficiency measures, which
will also deliver substantial primary energy saving  TPES target will be better
for Armenia’ economy with consideration of the resource efficiency, economic
competitiveness and energy security considerations As recommended by the
European best practices, and for the ease of use and monitoring, Armenia’ second
NEEAP also expresses those targets in terms of an absolute level of primary
energy consumption and final energy consumption in 2020 and shall explain how,
and on the basis of which data, this must be calculated The comparison of total
primary energy consumption in the CIS countries—among them Armenia and Georgia
acting as observers to the EnC Treaty and Ukraine and Moldova acting as
contracting parties— shows that TPES consumption in Armenia is the second lowest
in the region (See) As noted above, this does not necessarily act as an
indicator of efficiency, but rather shows  lack of technological advancement and
economic development, as well as heavy reliance on service sectors These factors
allowed Armenia’ GDP to grow faster than its energy consumption 11 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The below table presents the total
primary energy sources and final energy consumption for the three latest years
for which adequate statistics was available and their average as the baseline
for the second NEEAP energy saving target Table  Total Primary and Final Energy
Sources (ktoe) in  2011 2012 Baseline (- 2010 year average) Total Primary Energy
Sources (ktoe) ,218 Final energy consumption (ktoe) ,047 Source: USAID
"Enhancing Capacity for Low Emission Development Startegies (EC-LEDS) Program in
Armenia" Implemented by Tetra Tech,Preliminary Results of National Energy
Balance Calculation for Armenia for  ,378 ,286 ,134 ,106 ,991 ,901 An absolute
energy consumption limit for  country is adequate if it needs to meet  certain
quantitative target ( need to cut national energy use by 20% to cope with the
deficit in Ukraine in 1990, or the EU countries bound by the -20 target of the
Union6) Since Armenia is not expected to contribute to any absolute target,
cost-effectiveness and alignment with national economic development objectives
are the applicable decision criteria, and the size of the target is based on the
remaining cost-effective energy savings potential and its ability to pay for the
necessary investments, , their current GDP and its future changes Hence,
Armenia’ target is decoupled from any absolute quantitative target and  linkage
is proposed to the enforcement and effectiveness of national policies, energy
efficiency financing, promotion of energy services and the provision of
information Such  target is tied to quality of growth, reducing the energy
content of the output without geopardizing the economic development of the
country As the graph below indicates, Armenia has already made some progress in
this direction in the past decade  Bertoldi, , EU 2020 and 2030 Energy Saving
Targets and the role of National Energy Efficiency Actions Plans, Presentation,
ACEEE, 2014 12 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Figure  Energy
Intensity (TPES/GDP) in CIS countries,  13 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Figure Energy Intensities of the CIS Countries7 Table  Energy
intensity indicators for different sectors of energy consumption 2010 2011 2012
Energy Intensity (ktoe/ bln AMD) Sectoral GDP (AMD bln) Energy Intensity
(ktoe/bln AMD) Energy use in sector (ktoe) Sectoral GDP (AMD bln) Energy
Intensity (ktoe/bl  AMD) Energy use in sector (ktoe) Sectoral GDP (AMD bln)
Energy use in sector (ktoe) Industry 27 40 43 00 43 36 72 ,90 33 Transport 62 76
83 27 84 Agriculture 15 70 94 00 22 18 11 50 18 Since the building sector is
very mixed in purpose of use and is not universally contributing to creation of
value towards the national economy, the usual energy intensity of GDP does not
adequately characterize the building sector Energy consumption per capita and/or
per heated space area are the common indicators used to charachterize the energy
performance of the building sector Table  Energy and Population Dynamics,  2010
88,,138,442,58 2011 92,,155,452,70 2012 93,,163,445,57 Average Population Total
area of housing stock, ths km² population *1000 Electricity consumed by
population Natural gas consumed by population TOE per capita 58 Based on the
analysis of the above indicators and sector-specific opportunities, the second
NEEAP of the Republic of Armenia has assessed the energy saving impact of  range
of ongoing, planned or proposed activities This assessment allowed measuring
progress against first NEEAP targets as well as revise those targets to match
the new developments  van der Hoeven, , Energy Policies Beyond IEA Countries:
Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia, IEA, 2015 publication launch, 2015 14
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table  Summary Overview of
firts NEEAP Targets and Accomplishments, Revised Targets for second NEEAP
Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy savings in target year (MWh ) Title
of the energy saving measure End-use targeted Duration No Status in Relation to
the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018 2020 Horizontal & Cross Cutting EE and RE solutions
for households space heat and lighting efficiency (windows, doors,heat supply,
lighting, distribution systems) and SMEs residential energy end-use, SME EE of
production processes, space heat conservation EE loans for residential and
business clients (corporate energy efficiency, sustainable energy financing
facilities, cleaner energy production, municipal infrastructure energy
efficiency) 35,069 35,069 35,069 35,069 Start: 2014 End:: 2020 (ongoing)
partially implemented  Financing for Energy Efficiency: GGF Financing for Energy
Efficiency: IFC EE loans for households and SMEs Start:2009 End: 2015 35,792
35,792 35,792 35,792 partially implemented  341,655 341,655 341,655 341,655
Financing for Energy Efficiency: Energy efficiency loans for residential and
business clients, EBRD ArmSEFF Start:2006 End: 2015 partially implemented
initializing, tracked as part of other measures  / / / / Financing for Energy
Efficiency: Eastern European Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P)
faclitation of energy efficiency finance in municipal infrasturcture with grant
co- financing Start: 2015 End: ongoing  Removing inadequate gas tariff structur
to encourage energy savings Developing  revised tariff structure which would not
penalize SMEs and autonomous heating systems Start: 2016, ongoing Start: 2015;
End 2020 - 59,365 89,047 148,412 not implemented  Support to Armenian
Municipalities in Sustainable Energy Action Planning municipal infrastructures,
building sector, households    new measure Sectoral Subtotal MWh 412,516 471,880
501,562 560,927 Sectoral Subtotal KTOE 35 41 43 48 15 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving measure End-use
targeted Duration Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy savings in target
year (MWh ) Status in Relation to the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018 2020
Buildings/Residential UNDP/GEF Improvement of Energy Efficiency in Buildings
Project Residential multi-apartment buildings, social housing, significant
reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE in buildings
Household EE loans and EE mortgage loans ; residential buildings and private
homes' space heating, hot water preparation residential energy end-use in space
heating and hot-water preparation Start: 2013; End: 2017 partially implemented
,200 ,200 ,200 ,200 II Financing for Energy Efficiency: Household energy
efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans (NMC/AFD) Start:2014 End: 2020 partially
implemented 136 141 164 211 II Financing for Energy Efficiency: Residential
energy efficiency bank- based commercial loan through HFHA Condo, REELIH and
SUDEP Projects Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW Housing EE credit line
Start: 2013; End: 2018 partially implemented 30 ,914 ,067 ,067 II Residential
energy end use, heating, hot water preparation, lighting Start:2016 End: 2020
TBD TBD TBD pending II Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low- income Energy
Efficiency Program Residential energy end use, lighting efficiency Start: 2015;
End: 2016 Start: 2016; End: 2020 Start: 2015 End: 2020 new measure new measure
116,159 116,159 116,159 II10 EE Retrofits in existing residential buildings:
National Program and Action Plan for MAB Renovation & EE Appliance Energy
Labeling Awareness Campaign Existing residential buildings, space heating new
measure new measure 65,000 65,000 65,000 II11 Residential energy end use,
lighting efficiency new measure new measure 176,704 209,369 409,635 II12 MWh
,366 364,118 396,959 597,272 KTOE  31 34 51 16 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving measure End-use targeted Duration
Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy savings in target year (MWh ) Status
in Relation to the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018 2020 Public Buildings and Services
Public Building EE: Implementation of energy saving activities in municipal and
social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Implement EE in public facilities to
reduce the level of energy consumption by social and other public facilities
under energy saving agreement (ESA) scheme with ESCO participation New
construction and capital renovation of public buildings and social housing,
significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE
in buildings Municipal lighting electricity use in the cities of Armenia Start:
2012 End: 2017 partially completed 401 521 521 521 III NAMA project to Support
Energy Efficinecy in Public Buildings and Social Housing Start: 2016 End: 2020
(ongoing) new measure partially completed 11,442 14,653 21,037 III Financing for
EE & Public Procurement for EE: UNDP Green Urban Lighting Project GHG Emission
reduction by increasing energy efficiency of municipal lighting in the cities of
Armenia Financing for Energy Efficiency & Public Procurement for EE: EE-
integrated reinforcement of Schools by KfW EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan
streetlighting USAID Clean Energy and Water Program for EE & RE solutions in
community energy and water use Start:2013 End: 2017 new measure partially
completed 47 47 47 III Public & service buildings (schools) Start:2016; End:
2020 none, new measure pending 39,897 39,897 39,897 III Municipal lighting
electricity use in 49 streets of Yerevan, Armenia rural communities,
agricultural water users, community organizations, municipalities Start: 2015;
End 2017 Start: 2012 new measure pending launch III ,277 ,277 ,277 completed 19
19 19 19 III Total MWH 420 57,417 61,470 70,382 Total TOE 36 ,937 ,285 ,052 17
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving
measure End-use targeted Duration Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy
savings in target year (MWh ) Status in Relation to the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018
2020 Industrial Processes and Power Sector IV Considering energy Industry & SME:
ISO 50001 users, RECP, Start: 2015 - not impemented efficinecy aspects during
approval and BAT, benchmarking End: 2020 271,969 397,132 718,979 construction of
new industrial facilities (ongoing) IV Increasing the efficiency Developed model
of an efficient energy Start: 2005 partially of the central heating plants and
suppli cogeneration and supply End: 57,228 67,327 70,693 77,426 implemented ers:
Avan DH – cogeneration ongoing IV Implementation of EE reported as part of
scross sectoral Financing Facility for Industrial Enterpri measures ses IV
Natural gas savings through improvem TPP 500 MW proposed by the WB to Start:
2018 not impemented ent of transmission pipelines and subst cover peaks and
reserve margin, after the End: 2020 - - - ,739,961 ations, and optimisation of
existing boil decommissioning of blocks - of er houses in TPPs Hrazdan TPP IV
Reduction of energy losses in energy generation, distribution Start: 2015 not
impemented distribution networks: WB Electricity End: 2060 - - - ,560 Supply
reliability 18 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the
energy saving measure End-use targeted Duration Achieved (for 2014 only) or
expected energy savings in target year (MWh ) Status in Relation to the 1st
NEEAP 2014 2017 2018 2020 IV Reduction of energy losses in reduced energy losses
in distribution not impemented distribution networks: EBRD Power networks - - -
,311 ,311 Supply Reliability IV5c Electricity savings through improvemen
Improved energy efficiency and energy Start: 2012 not impemented ts of existing
electricity network, compe savings of power sector End: 2017 - - 18,000 18,000
nsation of reactive power and improve ment of transformers IV Reduction of
Electricity Losses in Low- 62,072 62,072 62,072 not impemented voltage networks,
ArmElNet reduced energy losses in distribution Start: 2016 networks End: 2020
Wider Application of Renewable The measure is designed on the basis of Start:
2016 new measure Energy: SWHs realized best practices and experiences End: 2020
10 12 16 and beyond IV Geothermal Heat Pumps for Central Heating Development of
distributed RE generation through implementation of Net metering provision space
heating, energy efficiency, renewables, PPP Start: 2016 End: 2020 - 705 705 705
new measure IV Distributed generation, solar energy, autonomous electricity
production, net metering Start: 2016 End:ongoin  Total MWH 357 608 ,729 ,094 -
IV7 57,233 402,082 551,925 ,623,030 Total TOE ,921 34,573 47,457 483,494 19
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving
measure End-use targeted Duration Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy
savings in target year (MWh ) Status in Relation to the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018
2020 Transport/Mobility partially implemented Development of legislative
background regarding fuel efficiency and emission  orms of vehicles Start: 2008
End: ogoing regulatory measure, feasibility studies - - - -  not implemented
Dissemination of information on technol ogies and approaches for reducing ene
rgy consumption effectively Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger
passenger buses information - Start: 2012; End: 2017 Start: 2015 End: 2020
Start: 2016 End: 2020 Start: 2010 End: Ongoing Start: 2008; End: ongoing - - - -
partially implemented partially implemented pre-feasibility stage partially
implemented road transport 821,022 ,045,391 ,118,245 ,267,202  electric
transport (metro) - / ,294 / ,294 / ,294 / Expansion and modernisation of the
ele ctrified public transport system in the Ci ty of Yerevan  electric transport
(metro) Expansion and modernisation of rail tra nsport network (passenger and
freight) Continuous switching of road vehicles from gasoline to compressed
natural gas (CNG) Development of Integrated Electro- Transport Network and
services to cover unmet demand in public transportation services in Yerevan 582
862 972 ,206 rail road transpot  partially implemented / / / / road transport  -
Start: 2016; End: ongoing Total MWH - - - - information, planning  821,604
,051,547 ,124,511 ,273,702 Total TOE 71 90 97 110 20 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No Title of the energy saving measure End-use
targeted Duration Achieved (for 2014 only) or expected energy savings in target
year (MWh ) Status in Relation to the 1st NEEAP 2014 2017 2018 2020 Agriculture
VI Rural development program: high efficiency agricultural machinery import
Importing high efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA Irrigation system enhancement
project, wb Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB USAID Clean Energy &
Water Program Irrigation System Modernizaiton and Institutional Capacity
Building, WB Energy efficient greenhouse Farmers Start: 2013 End: 2020 Start:
2010 End: 2012 Start: 2013 End: 2017 Start: 2009 End: 2013 Start: 2013 End:2015
Start: 2016 End: 2020 Start: 2011 End: 2020 Start: 2016 End: 2020 Start: 2016
End: 2020 Start: 2016 End: 2020     partially completed implemented as planned
partially completed implemented as planned implemented as planned VI Farmers
VI Rural irrigation users; ,267 ,267 ,267 ,267 VI Rural irrigation users; 78 73
73 73 VI Rural communities 150 - 150 19,000 150 19,000 150 19,000 VI10 Rural
irrigation users; farmers new measure partially completed VI13 Private
greenhouse sector - 425 480 591 VI15 Grading agricultural products based on
quality Renewing the agricultural machinary park Install gravity irrigation
Processors, farmers - ,620 25,900 51,700 new measure VI16 Farmers - 134 201 269
new measure VI18 Farmers - 17,200 34,500 51,700 new measure ,508  19,223  19,223
19,223  Subtotal (MWH) Subtotal (KTOE) MWH ,294,646 ,366,267 ,655,651 ,144,536
Grant Total KTOE ,064 39,674 52,918 489,756 21 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT  MEASURES FOR THE PRIMARY ENERGY SAVINGS Except for certain hydro-
energy resources and  small amount of other renewables (including some fire-
wood, the consumption of which led to severe deforestation), Armenia does not
possess any own conventional (fossil and nuclear) fuel resources and is not
transit country for oil and gas as well Thus, the country is heavily dependent
on energy imports, which has placed an increasing burden on the current account
In 2012 energy imports amounted to 90% of the total of 377 Mtoe primary energy
supplied The share of energy imports in TPES fluctuates slightly depending on
the hydro potential In dry years, imports increase Although reduced during the
recent years, overall energy losses are still high About 30% of the total
primary energy supplied was lost through transformation, transmission and
distribution (USAID, 2014) This underlines the importance of energy
infrastructure improvement and EE development This is the reason why the IFI
support requested by the Armenian Government in the energy sector also largely
focuses on loss reduction, reliability and increased effectiveness of the
distribution networks All EE measures that are provided by this program are
measures for reduction of energy consumption among end users The same applies
and for EE measures which are taken in the power plants that generate
electricity and thermal energy It is necessary to emphasize that the
implementation of measures at the site of energy end users is considerably more
conducive to reducing the consumption of primary energy, compared to power
plants that generate energy The reason for this lies in the fact that the
generation of energy, except losses during transformation of primary into
secondary form of energy, appear and additional losses of transmission and
distribution  Reducing high-voltage network losses and Enhancing reliability of
Power Supply in Armenia Optimal approach is to predict the energy efficiency
measures in all steps – at the side of power supply (production of transformed
form of energy, transport, distribution) and at the side of the energy end users
Table  Energy Losses in the Armenian Energy System 2005 2010 216 43 40 2011 205
22 35 2012 192 53 00 2013 per year Losses in energy transformation (ktoe) Losses
in electricity transportation (GWh) 23 Losses in electricity distribution (GWh)
00 48 63 Losses in centralised heat pipelines (TJ) Losses in natural gas
pipelines (million m³) 22 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT As
the above table indicates, the losses in transmission and distribution processes
are significant and their mitigation is in the Government’ list of priorities
The planned projects which target loss reduction and efficiency in distribution
networks include the following:  "EBRD -Armenia Power Supply Rehabilitation
Project: Phase  Rehabilitation of 220 kV transmission network and substations in
Armenia (EUR 65,000,000), of which :  "WB Electricity Supply Reliability Project
Rehabilitate key substation and transmission lines critical for system-wide
reliability of power supply (US$ 41,550,000 for now) or US$ 66, 600,000)
reducing system losses from - % to % reaching positive net economic benefit in
Reducing low-voltage electric network losses In addition to the high-voltage
network losses and reliability issues, losses remain higher than allowed by the
regulator in the low-voltage networks operated by the Armenian Electric Networks
Figure Energy Losses in  kV network (% of energy entering the network) %  - 2009
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Actual Regulated limit Technical Source: PSRC, 2015 The
actual losses are about 10 percent higher than allowed by the Public Services
Regulatory Commission Hence, the second NEEAP must include measures for the
reduction of the losses in the low-voltage networks 23 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT In addition to the above, the lossess in the low-
voltage network of the Armenian Electric Networks (ArmElNet) have persistently
been beyond the regulated permissible level See below table for details The
losses visualized in Figure 11 are quantified along with the energy saving
potential below in Table  Table  Losses in ArmElNet System and Potential for
Energy Saving Losses, mln kWh Actual Regulated limit Technical 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 Average Energy Saving potential, mln kWh 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 Average Total Sale, mln AMD with VAT 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Average
mln kWh mln AMD with VAT Average system tariff, AMD/kWh
,,,107,116,125,131,155,188,137,,,,,Cost Saving potential, mln AMD 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 Average Total ,,,,,,As the above table indicates, the ArmElNet
has potential to save an average of 62 GWh energy per year which will result in
an average of AMD  billion financial savings due to reduced commercial losses
Promotion of EE-integrated renewable energy applications As Armenia lacks own
fossil fuel resources, energy efficiency (EE) and utilization of country’
significant renewable energy (RE) potential are key to sustainable development
and national security In order to 24 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT facilitate investments in EE and RE solutions, and increase the use of
clean, efficient, safe and affordable heating technologies the Government of
Armenia has joined the donor community to create replicable technical and
financial models for enhanced access to renewable energy use The 2011 Renewable
Energy Roadmap identified the RE technical-economic potential ( almost
Terawatt- hours of solar photovoltaic (PV) electricity per year, and over  TWh
in geothermal heat pumps) In 2013 the President of Armenia approved the National
Energy Security Concept In 2014 the Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program
Investment Plan set targets for renewable energy development until The survey of
Armenian RE equipment vendors conducted in June 2015 revealed that there is
notable growth trend in implementation of RE practices in many different sectors
of the economy The graph below illustrates the cumulative areas and capacity of
installed solar panels by the local companies during last five years derived
from the survey While the trend is positive, the installed capacities are still
less than ,% of the solar PV target set for The level of utilization of solar PV
electricity can be promoted through possibilities of grid-connection and
definition of parralel operation through net metering  Enforcing Net Metering
for Independent Solar Electricity Producers facilitated Net metering policies
have the expansion of renewable energy through on-site generation, distributed
generation Common distributed generation sources, which can be located at
house, school or business rather than utility-owned property, are solar panels,
micro-turbines or other renewable energy sources Increasing numbers of utility
customers are using net metering to generate electricity from sources on their
property Net Metering provides PV customers with opportunity to have  zero
charge against their electricity consumption if it is offset by the PV
generation; in case they produce and export to the grid more energy than they
consume, they will receive the relevant remuneration or, alternatively, will be
charged for the excess consumption, if it exceeds the level of PV generation The
2003 Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy created the legal provision for
net metering In 2005 the PSRC developed the procedures for parallel operation of
autonomous renewable energy producers, which defined the non- commercial
relationship of the electric network with the micro-generation facilities with
capacity under 150 kW (PSRC Resolution №194, 2005) The regulation, however, has
failed to be implemented 30 250 as also known 25 200 #REF! #REF! )    ( 20 )
150 (         15     100 10 50   years       Figure Solar PV Installations,  25
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT due to tax accounting issues,
which require immediate solution With the growing energy tariffs, the small-
scale solare PVs systems hold  large potential to help develop the distributed
RE generation  Greater Use of Solar Thermal Energy The solar water heaters’
market has been evolving rapidly  vendor survey conducted specifically for
purposes of second NEEAP preparation revealed  trend much faster than expected
(See Figure 13) Figure Estimated Trend of Installed Solar Water Heating
Capacities: Output and Savings ,120 ,178 ,000 400 SWH Installed Area (m2) Annual
Energy output (MWh/year) ,000 ,000 Cummulative Energy Savings (GCal) ,500 350
Cummulative Financial Savings (Mln AMD) ,500 ,000 ,000 300 Financial saving (Mln
AMD, @156 AMD/m3) ,000 141 ,500 250 ,500 ,000 ,000 200 ,000 ,646 ,000 ,500 150
,877 ,500 ,656 85 56 855 ,000 100      ,000     ,000 593 576 666 547  29 27 500
50   / 20 11 500 275 920             320 370 304  - - - - 2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 The growing energy prices, the availability of
loan financing from IFIs (EBRD, GGF, AFD, pending KfW’ plans to diversify the
current small HPP lending to also cover SWHs) for concentrated solar thermal
technologies, have jointly lead to an expansion of the SWH capacities of over
MWh throughout Armenia in various consumer groups, which leads to annual
cummulative thermal energy output of over ,600 MWh per year as of mid-If the
growth trend continues, which is highly probable given the increased
availability of loans and leasing schemes for SWHs, Armenia may accoplish more
than the targets set for 2020 for SWH installed capacity and energy output (at
current rate, by 2020 there will be 15 MW installed capacity, which is more than
the SREP target by 5MW, similarly the energy output will be 25GWh per year
instead of the 13 GWh / year set in the SREP Investment Plan)  Piloting
Geothermal Heat Pumps for Scalable Centralized Heating Solutions Another EE-
integrated renewable energy solution for Armenia is geothermal heat pumps, which
have been estimated to have significant potential for space heating The
Renewable Energy Roadmap of 8Scaling up Renewable Energy Program (SREP)
Investment Plan, 26 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Armenia has
estimated maximum 75MW capacity for geothermal energy, which can be event more
if utilized for supply hot water and heating to nearby locationsUnlike other
countires, there is no applied experience of geothermal heat pumps’ in Armenia
Development and piloting of geothermal district heating system for the resort
town of Jermuk for supply to municipal, residential and commercial buildings
(sanatoriums/spas), utilizing the water from local high-temperature mineral
springs Jermuk has  long heating season and high tourism traffic which creates
need to supply high qualiity heating and hot water services to the multiple
hotels and resort facilities Should the system be found efficient in Jermuk,
there is replication potential in other towns of Armenia Such investments have
to be estimated for each particular site and terrain (variable borehole drilling
cost), however, under Armenia’ general circumstances  pilot project for  typial
building -floor building is necessary to verify the cost-effectiveness and
economic viability of this technology for heating residential and public
buildings It is key to seek  public-private partnership arrangements whereby
private energy service provider can partner with the local Government (Jermuk
municipality, in this case) for utilization of municipal assets and private
management, investment co-financing and know-how At the same time, geothermal
heat pumps for heating can reduce the demand for imported gas for heating
purposes and associated greenhouse gas emissions, utilize indigenous clean and
sustainable energy resource The assessment of the primary energy saving measures
are presented in the section on Industry, Power and SMEs 27 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  FINAL ENERGY SAVINGS IN THE END USE SECTORS  Review
of final energy saving targets and final energy saving achievements As Figure 14
indicates, Armenia’ final energy consumption largely takes place in the
buildings (residential, public and commercial) and the transport sectors What is
noteworthy, both sectors make only small insignificant contributions to GDP
Industry used only 18% of the energy, while selivering about 33% of the GDP
Commercial and public services accounted for about 16% and agriculture - for
about % The share of the residential sector fluctuates depending on weather
conditions Agriculture & Forestry % Industr  18% Public & Commercial Services
16% Residen tial 34% Transport 25% As the below figure indicates, the
commercial, and the public service sector is the only one which showed steady
increase of energy consumption over the last years With the projected economic
trends, the industrial energy use and buildings are expected to grow
substantially and lead to  significant hike in the final energy consumption The
dinamics and forecast of final energy consumption is presented in Figure
Structure of Final Energy Consumption by Sector, 2012 Figure ,831 3000     2500
,134 ,106 ,998 ,964 ,905 ,901 ,858 ,858 2000 1500 1000 500  2010 2011 2012 2014
2015 2017 2018 2020 2030 Industry Transport Residential Commercial and public
services Agriculture/forestry TFEC 28 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Figure Final Energy Use Trend and Projections by Sector9  National overall
end-use energy savings targets and progress towards them  Achievement of the
2014 intermediate energy end-use target The 2010 energy balance was prepared
shortly after the completion of the first NEEAP The indicative target for the
end of the first NEEAP was thus later quantified by the team developing the
second NEEAP using the energy balance data for 10 Since the second NEEAP was
prepared in 2015, the first period was assumed to cover 2011-The energy saving
target for the first period of the first NEEAP was baseline energy consumption
of 2010 (ktoe) The second NEEAP sets an interim target of %, equivalent to ktoe
The assessment of the first NEEAP revealed that this target has been
outperformed: The overall energy saving reached by 2014 was % (ktoe) The second
NEEAP continues the relevant measures from the first NEEAP, and in addition
proposes an updated bundle of measures and energy saving targets for the second
period, covering 2015-The second NEEAP tracks both the indicative milestone year
2018, as well as  long-term plan until The document was prepared based on the
template recommended by the Energy Community, in which the Republic of Armenia
has had observer status since In accordance with the NEEAP methodology, the
baseline used in the second NEEAP is the average energy consumption from three
consecutive years (2010, 2011 and 2012), in this case ,047 ktoe Based on the
assessed progress under the first NEEAP and the expected impact of the ongoing
and new energy efficiency improvement measures, the second NEEAP proposes  new
set of targets for 2017 (% instead of the % proposed in the first NEEAP),
9Source: USAID, Reference scenario for  EC-LEDS Program In Armenia 29 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT for 2018 (% instead of %), and  higher
overall target for 2020 (% instead of %) Table  National Indicative Targets
under the Second NEEAP National indicative target in 2020 (ktoe) National
indicative target in 2018 (ktoe) National intermediate target in 2017 (ktoe)
National intermediate indicative target in 2014 (ktoe ) Revised estimated energy
saving target Sector target In 2014 (ktoe) (ktoe) Sector division of target
Target Achieved 2017 2018 2020 Horizontal and CC - Residential  Services
Industry Transport Agriculture Total: Percentage (%)(compared to reference
consumption)      % % % % % It is noteworthy that some of the ongoing energy
efficiency programs in Armenia, particularly those financed by international
financial institutions and the banking sector, have been assessed in depth for
past performance, but were reluctant to provide any projections of future
lending due to market volatility For this reason, the reduced targets of the
second NEEAP may be outperformed when energy efficiency financing is quantified
in the third NEEAP  Expected savings in relation to the 2018 overall energy end-
use target New measures are introduced in all sectors second NEEAP These
measures primarily relate to enforcing new regulations, into public procurement,
encouraging improved energy performance of industrial and SME energy consumers,
promoting end-use distributed generation of electricity and thermal energy by
energy end— integrating energy efficiency 30 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT users, as well  introducing  comprehensive monitoring and planning
approach for the transport sector Table Overview of targets and
achieved/projected energy savings both in respect of primary and final energy
Final energy saving target Primary Energy Saving Target in absolute terms
Percentage (%)(compared to reference final consumption) % in absolute terms
(toe) Percentage (%) (compared to reference primary energy consumption) 16%
(toe)  2014(interim period) % 04% 2017(interim period) % 05% 2018 (overall
period) % 46% 2020 (extended period) This primarily concerns the increased use
of solar energy for hot water preparation, but also significant attention and
application of heat pumps and increased use of solar photovoltaic technology via
net metering Envisaged measures are closely related to strategic documents,
action plans and promotional measures for greater use of renewable energy The
national intermediate indicative targets for 2017 and onward was calculated on
the basis of the average final consumption of energy during the realization of
first NEEAP Table National indicative targets Indicative target in 2017 (ktoe)
Realized savings in 2014 (ktoe) 10% % Sector target Sector 2017 (ktoe)   % 17%
84% 55% 67% 13% 94% 06 00% Horizontal Residential Public sector Industry
Transport Agriculture Total:  significant number of strategic documents and
regulations have been adopted in the Republic of Armenia Those documents contain
various activities related to the implementation of EE measures The impact of
these individual actions can hardly be separated and difficult to 31 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT evaluate due to their combined nature and
overlapping results For this reason, when there are no defined standards and
methods for this purpose, the effect of these measures cannot be accurately
assessed The climate change mitigation potential of the second NEEAP measures
has been assessed ad is presented below in Table Table Tons of CO2 emission
avoided by target year based on Sectoral Measures Sectors Tons of CO2 emission
avoided by target year 2014 183,88 ,26 32 2017 209,79 28,00 25,02 2018 222,74
28,00 27,80 2020 Horizontal and CC Buildings (Residential) Public Buildings and
Services Industry Transport Agriculture Total GHG Avoided (tons CO2) 249,65
28,00 31,79 36 37 - 183,93 13 15 ,80 271,88 ,54 93 15,00 295,02 ,54 63 22,80
334,40  combination of top-down and bottom-up methodologies was used For the
implementation of the proposed set of energy efficiency measures, it was
necessary to strengthen the institutional support, especially in buildings
Adoption of the new Housing Legislation – stipulating that every multi apartment
facility must operate as  legal entity – to form  community of tenants of the
building or delegate the housing maintenance function to  professional
organization, is  big step forward in the legislation, which, combined with the
enforcement of the amended Law on ES & RE and the secondary legislation, should
enable faster renovation of these buildings Establishment of Home-Owners
association will ensure higher quality of housing maintenance and potentially -
implementation of thermal modernization of buildings This process is envisioned
with the establishment of private maintenance companies and development of ESCO
services, too Monitoring of the implementation of the second NEEAP and reporting
results based on measuring and verification of energy savings are under
responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources In order to
monitor the actual energy savings and to avoid problems related to the lack of
data needed to calculate the savings from individual measures, which was present
in the preparation of this NEEAP, the MoENR must establish an information system
to track all activities of energy efficiency and energy savings assessment Tasks
can be assigned (outsourced) to expert teams outside MoENR, if necessary
Realistic and stable funding sources for the implementation of the second NEEAP
have to be provided in most of the extra-budgetary sources of financing and
market mechanisms The second NEEAP 32 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT includes measures which still do not have committed funding  very small
part of budgetary resources (Central and Local) have to be allocated, for the
drafting of the policies, development of tariff reform, preparation of the
programs within the specific measures, however significant funds will be
necessary for the implementation of the energy efficiency investments will
remain under the funding of the donors and IFIs  National targets for nearly
zero energy buildings Armenia has not formally established  national target for
nearlyzeroenergy buildings – buildings with energy consumption close to zero
Nevertheless, several steps have been taken to support buildings beyond the
current codes’ requirements These initiatives are aimed at  broader of green
architecture, sustainable communities, smart cities and green economy These
initiatives particularly include the following:  Drafting of the Law on Yerevan
City Center, with beyond codes ambition for energy performance in new
construction if it is to happen in the Center of Armenia’ capital;  Drafting of
Law on Green City of Dilijan, Tavush Marz  Developing  dialogue and concept for
smart cities in Armenia with the example of Goris, Vayots Dzor Marz  Avedisian
School and Community Center in Yerevan’ Malatia-Sebastia district was
constructed as  “green” building and was certified for Leadership in Energy and
low-carbon Environmental Design (LEED), utilizes renewable energy and
footprintUNDP estimated that energy consumption in the building will be reduced
by 30 percent, which is even  stricter criteria than required in the EU and the
US The green roof of the school will provide insulation, lowering heating and
cooling costs Rainwater will be filtered and stored to water plants, shrubs, and
provide water for the grass on the soccer field is  UWC Dilijan College built
in Tavush Marz was built and certified as good by the Building Research
Establishment Environmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM)The building has
green roof, green walls and holistic building management system (BMS), meets
high standards for health, environment, life security, water, materials,
recycling, ecology, land-utilization and pollution as well as based on the
impact of its use on the environment 11See more at: arkaam/en/news/economy/uwc_d
ilijan_college_first_breeam_certified_in_armenia/#sthashe7FLUxc4dpuf 33 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Educational curriculum and courses were
developed and delivered on integrated building design and energy efficient
construction, supported by UNDP/GEF and ITS While having no international
obligation for transposing any directives or international standards for nearly
zero, green or passive buildings, Armenian Government and business community
voluntarily endeavors tosupport the construction of new nearly zero energy
buildings and the achievement of thislevel of energy performance in the
refurbishment of existing buildings for Basictasksforthisperiodincludeeducation
ofdesignersas well as providingtraining developers, architects and contractors
Thistaskwill be carried outin parallelwiththe determinationof criteria for
priorityareas for implementation, constructionofpilotsites andthe
definitionofmomentumfor the implementationofthesemeasures to complywith
thefinancial resources Due to the voluntary nature of this process, it can only
be promoted through certification, recognition and publicity of such
accomplishments, which through professional associations and academia can set
the tradition and culture for nearly zero energy performance in construction
Horizontal Measures The first NEEAP set forth  set of horizontal measures in
seven key areas, largely directed at the legal-regulatory framework, capacity
building and financing for energy efficiency Considering the horizontal nature
of these measures, their quantitative assessment is presented among the
respective sectoral measures Table First NEEAP Assessment: Cross-
cutting/Horizontal Measures (without quantitative impact) End- use targete
Horizontal measures Description of the energy saving measure Duration 34 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT horizo ntal 2010- 2012   Implementation
of  regular national “ Energy Statistic” ( with annual update ) USAID LEDS
Program supported development of national energy balance according to IEA and
Eurostat requirements for years 2010-The National Statistical Service, Ministry
of Energy and Natural Resources and INOGATe Technical Secretariat have signed
memorundum on "Cooperation in the field of statistics" including an action plan
related to sctions necessary the energy balance However, no regular procedure
for routine preparation of energy balances for following years was put in place
The National Agency was not established, instead the R2E2 has been tasked with
many of the functions that traditionally national agencies perform horizo ntal
Implementation of  “National Energy Agency for Energ  Efficiency and  enewable
Energy” Financial Support  or Energy Efficienc  measures in all Sectors horizo
ntal 2010- ongoing   Over $86 million has been committed to energy efficiency
and EE-integrated renewable energy investment during  via various donors and
IFIs, such as WB, IFC, GEF, EBRD, IFC, GGF, EIB, KfW, and UNDP In addition,
these donor and IFI funds have had  market transformation impact on the
financial services sector According to Econoler experts' estimations, the local
financial institutions and universal credit organizations have also tapped into
this market and financed EE & RE investments from own resources in addition to
on-lending portfolio with the IFIs By expert assessment, over $420 million has
been invested by LFIs and UCOs in diverse loans, with average equity financing
of % which leverages approximately $89 million in equity participation Overall,
it can be concluded that approximately $595 million has been invested in energy
efficiency and EE- integrated RE solutions during 2010-Quantified separately in
Table 14  Information campa igns, training and education in the ar ea of energy
efficienc  improvements  Awareness raising compaigns by UNDP/GEF, R2E2, horizo
ntal horizo ntal 2012- 2015 2012- 2015 INOGATE  Professional trainings by
UNDP/GEF, R2E2, INOGATE, EBRD  General  Amendments to the Law on Energy Saving
and horizo ntal horizo ntal 2012- 2015 2013- 2015 Regulatory demand-side
measures Renewable Energy  The draft RA Law “On making an addition into the RA
law “On urban development” submitted to the Ministry of Urban Development dated
July 13, 2013 Revise tariff structure: Remove perverse tariff incentives that
are accelerating winter electricity consumption and unnecessary gas consumption
by public facilities and commercial establishments  Removing inadequ ate gas &
electricit  tariff structure to encourage energy savings  horizo ntal not implem
ented 35 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The regulatory
initiatives which are cross-cutting but also concern the buildings sector and
which have contributed to the achievement of the first NEEAP targets is
presented below (the complex programs and initiatives which have both
regulatory and  financial element are presented in the Financing section): 36
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table Summary of Cross-cutting
Measures With Quantative Energy Saving Impact Achieved/Expected energy savings
in target year (MWh) Status in relation to 1st EEAP No Title of the energy
saving measure End-use targeted Duration 2014 2017 2018 2020 EE and RE solutions
for households space heat and lighting efficiency (windows, doors,heat supply,
lighting, distribution systems) and SMEs Start: 2014 End:: 2020 (ongoing)
partially implemented  Financing for Energy Efficiency: GGF 35,069 35,069 35,069
35,069 residential energy end-use, SME EE of production processes, space heat
conservation EE loans for residential and business clients (corporate energy
efficiency, sustainable energy financing facilities, cleaner energy production,
municipal infrastructure energy efficiency) Financing for Energy Efficiency: IFC
EE loans for households and SMEs Start:2009 End: 2015 partially implemented
35,792 35,792 35,792 35,792 Financing for Energy Efficiency: Energy efficiency
loans for residential and business clients, EBRD ArmSEFF Start:2006 End: 2015
partially implemented  341,655 341,655 341,655 341,655 initializing, tracked as
part of other measures Financing for Energy Efficiency: Eastern European Energy
Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P) faclitation of energy efficiency
finance in municipal infrasturcture with grant co- financing Start: 2015 End:
ongoing  / / / / Developing  revised tariff structure which would not penalize
SMEs and autonomous heating systems Start: 2016, ongoing Removing inadequate gas
tariff structure to enc ourage energy savings not implemented  59,365 89,047
148,412 Start: 2015; End 2020 Support to Armenian Municipalities in Sustainable
Energy Action Planning municipal infrastructures, building sector, households
51,083 new measure ,056 22,811 31,961 Total (MWh) 412,516 471,880 501,562
560,927 Total (KTOE) 47 57 13 23 37 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT The individual measures are presented below These individual financial
programs have been intergated in their respective sectoral programs to assess
the impact on the sector Those financiers, whose efforts are aimed at more than
one sector, are described below Green for Growth Fund Support the development of
an energy efficiency lending product within the institution, enabling households
in Armenia to reduce energy costs, consumption and CO2 emissions Title of the
Measure  Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures, EE finance, cross-
sectora Category Start: 2014 Timeframe End: 2020 On-lending via local banks to
create credit lines for EE loans for households and businesses with the aim to
reduce energy consumption and increase energy efficiency Aim/brief description
EE and RE solutions for households space heat and lighting efficiency (windows,
doors,heat supply, lighting, distribution systems) and SMEs            Target
end-use Support to lending instiutions for creating energy efficiency and
renewable energy (EE/RE) lending products as well as in setting up an overall
EE/RE lending and marketing strategy This embraces the creation of an EE/RE
lending policy, the design of new retail, SME and corporate loan products and
the organizational implementation of EE/RE lending Furthermore, this type of
project promotes establishing partnerships with local suppliers of EE/RE
equipment and technology, and supports marketing and public awareness events,
thereby boosting EE/RE lending activities of Financial Institutions National
Target group Regional application Establishing EE/RE Lending at Financial
Institutions Supporting eSave Implementation Capacity Building for Financial
Institutions for Renewable Energy Lending Energy Audit Services EE Showcase
Projects Environmental & Social Standards Awareness Raising & Market Enabling
Activities List and description of energy saving actions    substantiating the
measure                     $ 15,354,00 Budget and financial source GGF ACBA,
ACBA Leasing, Ineco and Ararat Banks Implementing body GGF Monitoring authority
Method for monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings Savings achieved in 2014
as per 1st EEAP bottom up              35,069 38 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) 35,069
Expected energy savings in 2018 (MWh) Expected impact on energy savings in 2020
(if available) 35,069 35,069 Assuming that lending will remain at the same rate
Note: GGF has not provided projections of future lending Assumptions Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy financing covers residential, commercial and
industrial sectors IFC EE loans for households, Industry and SMEs Title of the
Measure  Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures Category Start: 2009
Timeframe End: 2015            Sustainable Energy Finance Projects working with
Byblos Bank on EE lending for households and HSBC for EE in SMEs residential
energy end-use, SME EE of production processes, space heat conservation
Aim/brief description Target end-use Household and SME EE lending Target group
National Regional application With the support of the Government of Canada, IFC
has partnered with HSBC Bank Armenia to expand the financing of renewable energy
and energy-efficiency projects, promoting the efficient use of resources and
reducing GHG emissions It has provided HSBC Bank Armenia with  US$30 million
loan, including US$ million from the IFC-Canada Climate Change Program, and
advisory support from the Armenia Sustainable Energy Finance Project The
advisory services from IFC support energyefficient and renewable energy projects
for MSMEs in Armenia So far, the bank has financed nine projects with expected
energy savings of 35,792 MWh per year (MWh/) and an expected annual GHG emission
reduction of ,614 tCO2e -         List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure (Source:  Bankorg/content/dam /World
Bank/document/Arme nia-Snapshotpdf)                    39 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT IFC funding, along with advisory supportfrom the
Armenia Sustainable Energy FinanceProject, is being provided to Byblos Bank
Armenia to increase access to housing finance and support Armenia’ first
residential energyefficiencylending packages offered by  local bank So far, the
bank has financed 59 projects with expected energy savings of 801 MWh/ andan
expected annual GHG emission reduction of401 tCO2e Advisory support from IFC
also helps partnerbanks design renewable energy and energyefficiencyfinancing
products, encouraging them to adopt international environmental and social
standards and contribute to decreasing GHG emissions $ 40,000,00 Budget and
financial source International Finance Corporation (IFC) HSBC (industrial) and
Byblos Banks (residential) Implementing body IFC Monitoring authority Method for
monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP (MWh) not available 35,792 Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) 35,792
Expected energy savings in 2018 (MWh) 35,792 Expected impact on energy savings
in 2020 (if available) (MWh) )    35,792 (              Lending will stop in
2015 and past investments will continue to yeild savings Assumptions Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy financing covers residential, commercial and
industrial sectors EE Finance: EBRD ArmSEFF (Energocredit) Energy efficiency
loans for residential and business clients Title of the Measure  Index of the
measure EE Programs and Measures Category Start: 2006 Timeframe End: 2020
40 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Armenia Sustainable Energy
Financing Facility (ArmSEFF) has set up the EnergoCredit facility aimed at
providing energy efficiency loans for residential and business clients On the
other hand, has been working with MUD to assess the market for residential
energy efficiency lending which would target the energy saving potential in
existing residential buildings Private companies and individuals who pursue
highest energy efficiency standards and take out an Energocredit loan will be
rewarded through % cash back payment from EU Neighbourhood Investment Facility
(EU-NIF) to reward environmentally friendly investment Aim/brief description EE
loans for residential and business clients (corporate energy efficiency,
sustainable energy financing facilities, cleaner energy production, municipal
infrastructure energy efficiency) Residential and business cleints Target end-
use Target group Regional application National Energocredit loans are provided
for investments in energy efficiency and in renewable energy projects
Energocredit Partner Banks go beyond financing eligible and energy efficient
materials and equipment Other projects of extended scope are also eligible after
Energocredit expert review Actions include energy efficiency and RE in
residential, food processing, agriculture, manufacturing, industry, and
construction sectors $ 28,000,000 List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure                           Budget and financial source
EBRD ArmSEFF/Energocredit with  partner banks Implementing body Monitoring
authority EBRD Method for monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings Savings
achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWH) Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWH)
Expected energy savings in 2018 (MWH) Expected impact on energy savings in 2020
(if available) (MWH)  EBRD internal procedures 51 51 51 51              No new
lending volumes have been estimates beyond 2014, which is unlikely, however it
was not possible to make assumptions on future lending volumes as no lending
forecast has been provided by EBRD Assumptions 41 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy due to
mixed nature of EBRD EE lending, overlaps with all sectoral measures for which
financing is made availanle Eastern European Energy Efficiency and Environment
Partnership (E5P) grant co-financing of EE lending Title of Measure  Index of
the measure EE Programs and Measures Category Start: 2015; ongoing Membership in
the Eastern Europe EE and Environment Partnership (E5P) will enable implementing
very important EE projects The Government of Armenia signed the Contribution
Agreement with EBRD, the Fund manager, on 16 March 2015 and will make its first
installment in the contribution agreement EE loans Timeframe Aim/brief
description in accordance with the timeline specified            Target end-use
Municipalities, SME and households Target group National Regional application
Energy efficiency improvements and GHG emission reduction in:  District
Heating;  Water and Wastewater;     Urban Transport List and description of
energy saving actions substantiating the measure Solid Waste Management; Street
Lighting; Insulation of public buildings or residential housing              €
21,000,000  Budget and financial source             RA (  EUR), MoE Grant (20
EUR) and E5P E5P Secretariat (EBRD), Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources
Implementing body EBRD Monitoring authority  Method for monitoring/ measuring
the resulting savings Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP / / Expected
energy savings in 2017 (MWh) Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected impact on
energy savings in 2020 (if available) /              / / 42 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT the fundgins is fully disbursed Assumptions The E5P
grant fundings is not used separately for project financing, but only to
provdie1/-/ grant co-financing for member IFIs (EBRD, WB, IFC, KFW) Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy Gas price reform to eliminate disincentive for EE
Title of Measure  Index of the measure regulatory measure Category
2016-ongoing Removing inadequate gas tariff structure to encourage energy
savings gas-fired space heating buildings, SME national Developing  revised
tariff structure which would not penalize SMEs and autonomous heating systems
The users between 10,,000m3 will each save (avoid using) an average of ,800m3 /
MoENR, PSRC MoENR, PSRC Timeframe Aim/brief description Target end-use Target
group Regional application List and description of energy
saving actions substantiating the measure Budget and financial source
Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/ measuring the
resulting savings Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Expected energy
savings in 2017 (MWh)    regular reporting by GazProm to PSRC 59,365 59,365
59,365 Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020
(if available) 59,365              an administratively feasible solution is
found Eliminated disincentive in the tariff structure will create incentives for
efficiency in conservation among medium-size gas consumers, such as building-
level heating systems, hospitals, schools, etc Assumptions Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy Support to Armenian Municipalities in Sustainable
Energy Action Planning Title of the Measure  Index of the measure       EE
Programs and Measures, EE Finance, cross-cutting   Category    43 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Start: 2015; End 2020 Timeframe End:
ongoing European Covenant of Mayors efforts in Armenia is gradually evolving
with now 10 signatories, of which  cities already have their Sustainable Energy
Action Plans (SEAPs), the remaining  are scheduled to have their SEAPs by the
end of 2015, however lack substantially capacity to make progress in this
direction on their own Aim/brief description municipal infrastructures, building
sector, households Target end-use communities, residential sector, cross-cutting
Target group National Regional application  Introducing municipal energy
management system in public institutions,  Capital repair and thermal
modernization of municipal buildings ; Insulation, window & door replacement,
efficient lighting in kindergartens, culture centers, art schools,
administrative buildings, etc  Energy efficiency retrofits of multi-apartment
residential buildings : Insulation, Efficient doors and windows; Improved
lighting List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the
measure  Energy efficiency upgrades in public lighting system Public spaces /
courtyards  Efficiency Municipal transport; Road network optimization;
Development of bike lanes and pedestrian commute  Renewable Energy Development:
Increased public awareness on sustainable energy and energy efficiency
Informationa: Trainings and capacity building, Energy days, Earth Hour; Energy
Certification of buildings;  Rehabilitation of green spaces $ 11,000,000  Budget
and financial source             European Commission, Municipalities, other
funds Energy Cities support program COMO-East, CoM signatories Implementing body
Energy Cities Monitoring authority  44 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Method for monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings Savings achieved in
2014 as per 1st NEEAP (MWH) Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) Expected
energy savings in 2018 (MWH) Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (MWH)
Assumptions SEAP methodology by Energy Cities ,056 22,811 31,961 51,083
assuming that financing will be made available EEIMs in other sectoral programs
and financing schemes may overlap as local authorities are free to enroll
financing for SEAP implementation HFHA SUDEP project is already targetted at
SEAP implementation Spitak and Vayq cities The task also is in synergy with
Armenia' committments under the UNFCCC Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy
Financial Support for Energy Efficiency in All Sectors As discussed with the
stakeholders, the second NEEAP devotes more attention to the investment
framework than the first NEEAP The purpose of this focus is to analyze the
availability, nature and direction in which investment finance is available for
energy efficiency improevement measures This analysis then allows to identify
the gaps where investments are not supplied by the banks, donors and IFIs, and
invite decision-makers’ attention to this issue and recommend interventions The
figure below provides an at--glance overview of the major donor and IFI funding
directions in the field of energy efficiency, followed by an analysis of the
various investment flows, supplied lending as well as the unmet demand for
investment finance 45 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Figure
Overview of the major donor and IFI funding directions in the field of energy
efficiency Renovation and new construction in the public sector is largely
financed by the World Bank (through different PIUs and R2E2 Fund), including
social investments, major infrastructure projects in irrigation, construction
and for public/social/municipal sectors In addition, during the middle of 2014
KfW has been discussing the possibility of  concessional loan for energy
efficiency renovation of schools with Ministry of Finance and MUD, potentially
with participation from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) reconstruction of
public buildings, as well as energy efficiency The European Commission has
recently been supporting the municipal energy efficinecy initiatives within the
scope of the Covenant of Mayors and the Sustainable Energy Action Plans by
Armenian signatory cities Other FIs (EBRD, AFD, IFC, GGF, KfW) are implementing
or planning credit facilities for the residential sector, predominantly through
participating banks / credit institutions and offering energy efficiency loans
46 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT for household energy efficiency
retrofits, however none of them offer residential EE financing for building-
level solutions As part of these IFI-funded credit lines numerous commercial
banks have access to credit specifically for energy efficiency activity: › In
2012 the GoA approved EE project under the WB financing implemented by R2E2 fund
The project is targeted to implement energy saving activities in public
facilities to reduce the level of energy consumption by social and other public
facilities The cost of the project estimated to be about mln USD › The R2E2 Fund
is involved in BSBEEP-Black See Buildings Energy Efficiency Plan Project (2013-
2015) within EU funded Black See Joint Operation Programme with the overall
objective of strengthening the administrative capacity of local authorities and
exchange good practice knowledge in energy efficiency in buildings12 › UNDP/GEF
is implementing  project aimed at Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings
including massive support to the Armenian Government in transposition of EPBD,
development of secondary legislation for EE in buildings, as well as funding the
first pilot thermal modernization of  residential multi-apartment building in
Avan district of Yerevan, as well as social housing in Goris and Akhouryan towns
› United Nations Development Program (UNDP) / Global Environment Facility (GEF):
Green Urban Lighting: This is  grant-funded project aiming at reducing emissions
of greenhouse gases by increasing energy efficiency of municipal lighting in the
cities of Armenia via implementation of municipal investment programs and
national policies The project is in compliance with the national priorities to
strengthen the economic and energy independence of the Republic of Armenia by
promoting resources efficient and climate resilient growth The project covers ()
municipal energy audits and technical capacity-building; () demonstration
projects; () replication via municipal lighting programs and associated
financial instruments; and () national policies, codes, and standards on
lighting13 › Ararat and ACBA Banks have received multi-million credit lines for
EE loans from the Green for Growth Fund, › International Finance Corporation
(IFC): Sustainable Energy Finance Project is working with Byblos Bank on EE
lending for households and HSBC for EE in SMEs 12 BSBEEP – Black Sea Buildings
Energy Efficiency Plan,  13 Green Urban Lighting UNDP-GEF/Republic of Armenia
BRIEF PROJECT DOCUMENT, UNDP January 2014 47 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT › AFD works with National Mortgage Company and 14 PFIs on household
energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans with an overall EUR 10 million
credit line and  target of 3000 households to be reached within the first year
of the program, › Under the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD): Armenia Sustainable Energy Financing Facility14 has set up the
EnergoCredit facility which provides energy efficiency loans for residential and
business clients On the other hand, has been working with MUD to assess the
market for residential energy efficiency lending which would target the energy
saving potential in existing residential buildings › Habitat for Humanity
Armenia has worked with Inecobank on residential energy efficiency upgrades
serving  total of 99 families in  buildings, with  total disbursement of roughly
USD$ ,000 per building and is the only entity that has succeeded in extending
bank-based commercial loan to  condominium in Armenia to  condominiums, more
pending within their ongoing USAID- funded Residential Energy Efficiency for
Low-Income Households (REELIH) program, as well as the SUDEP Project financed by
European Commission for EE and RE projects in Spitak and Vayq communities, as
signatories of the Covenant of Mayors › Ameria Bank also has household and SME
EE Loan product supported with own financial resources › Membership in the
Eastern Europe EE and Environment Partnership (E5P) will enable implementing
very important EE projects The investment from Armenia will amount to about €
million to be paid in portions and in addition to which Armenia will be granted
nearly €20 million Armenia did not yet pay the first portion of the membership
fee to commence the projects On  April 2014 the MoE has received  letter from
EBRD informing that three countries (Czech Republic, Poland and Sweden) have
already contributed to Armenian window in total €84 mln The Government of
Armenia signed the Contribution Agreement with EBRD, the Fund manager, on 16
March 2015 and will make its first installment in accordance with the timeline
specified in the contribution agreement › KfW and the Republic of Armenia have
signed the Inter-Governmental Agreement on three new loans aimed at: - EE
integrated reinforcement of Schools - EE credit line for SME ; and - Housing EE
credit line › Also gradually evolving are the European Covenant of Mayors
efforts in Armenia, with now 10 signatories, of which  cities already have their
Sustainable Energy Action Plans (SEAPs), the 14 Armenian Sustainable Energy
Financing Facility (ArmSEFF),  Is Energocredit and Armenia Sustainable Energy
Financing Facility the same??? 48 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
remaining  are scheduled to have their SEAPs by the end of 2015, however lack
substantially capacity to make progress in this direction on their own › EU-
funded INOGATE programme15 - Armenia participated in the EU-funded INOGATE
programme, which provided the country with technical assistance concerning
electricity and gas standards and tariffs, as well as the development of
sustainable energy sourcesArmenia has been an INOGATE Partner Country since 1996
and has benefited from 33 of INOGATE' 69 projectsIn addition to the IFI
resources, the local financial institutions as well have committed  substantial
share of resources; which have also been financing energy efficiency investments
bundled with usual loans to corporate clients and SME This NEEAP assesses the
financial resources available in the financial market, their specifics as well
as the unmatched investment potential and potential market barriers to recommend
financing and other solutions to accelerate EE investments 36,211,872 , 20%
,879,780 , % 18,965,000 , 10% 30,046,573 , 17% - RE Portfolio (EE- integrated)
Residential Buildings Public&Service Buildings Municipal Infrastructure
Industrial Power Sector/generation 31,050,928 , 17% SME 35,019,840 , 19% Other
11,970,296 , % 15,300,000 , % Figure EE/RE PORTFOLIO FOR 2010 - 2020, USD 15See
16 JOINT STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT Implementation of the European Neighbourhood
Policy in Armenia Progress in 2013 and recommendations for action, HIGH
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND SECURITY POLICY,
EUROPEAN COMMISSION HIGH REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR FOREIGN
AFFAIRS AND SECURITY, Brussels, 2014 49 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT The lending trend for EE and RE investments over the past five years and
the provided forecast for future lending is presented in the below figure
,         , , 60,000,000 ,         50,000,000 ,         40,000,000 , , ,
30,000,000        , ,                            20,000,000      , , , , , , ,
10,000,000 , , , - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 EE
Portfolio RE Portfolio (EE-integrated) Figure EE / RE PORTFOLIO FOR 2010 - 2020,
USD The analysis of the energy efficiency and sustainable energy investment
market, including the IFI reporting indicators has identified recent trends in
EE investment field in the Republic of Armenia, revealed the capacity of the
market to support planned investments in energy efficiency development until
2020 on annual basis, as well as assessed the uncovered need for investments in
energy efficiency to sustain the fastest rate of achievement against energy
saving targets There are two main sources to finance EE projects : ) Local
Financial Institutions: Banks and Universal Credit Organizations Total loan
portfolio of local financial institutions (LFIs), which includes banks and
universal credit organizations (UCOs) increased from $026 bln in 2010 to $625
bln17in 2015,  ,88% per year This is about twice more than the GDP growth of
Armenia for the same period (recorded at less than 65%18) The assessed portfolio
largest in Local currency loan portfolio increased 59 times, 17 Information
Source:  18 Information source: IMF World Economic Outlook, 2014 50 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT and foreign currency loan portfolio
increased 27 times in the same period The main conclusion is that LFIs prefer
loans in foreign currency as  currency risk mitigation tactic The total loan
portfolio grew from 34% of GDP in 2010 up to 42% of GDP in Thus, the total loan
portfolio has at least twice growth potential, up to % of GDPlevel19 The average
loan maturity for loans provided by banks for  registering  slight decline for
both local and foreign currency loans20 The total amount of loans provided in
both local and foreign currency has increased at the same time (see table and
figure below) Two major factors impacting this trend were the lack of long term
funds and currency risk Table Main indicators of Banks loan portfolio for  loans
provided in local currency  29 (38 years in 2010 and 17 in 2015)  Average
maturity 11% (from AMD923bln to AMD1024bln)  Growth of total amount  loans
provided in foreign currency 47 (54 in 2010 and 12 in 2015)  Average maturity
83% (from AMD1244 bln to AMD2274 bln)  Growth of total amount 19 Cumulative LFI
loan portfolio amount of most of developing countries with -% GDP yearly growth
is comparable with GDP 20 Information source: dates provided by Banks 51 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT                 , ,                 , , ,
, 35,000,000 , , , , , , 30,000,000                 , , , ,                 , ,
25,000,000                        ,        ,        ,        , , 20,000,000 , ,
, , , , , , , , , 15,000,000 , , 10,000,000 ,000,000 - 2010 2011 Local Currency
2012 2013 2014 Foreign Currency 2015 Total Figure EE / RE LOANS PROVIDED BY
LOCAL BANKS IN 2010 - 2015, ,000 AMD The average loan maturity for loans
provided by UCOs for  registering  slight decline for local currency loans only
maturity of foreign currency loans increased21 Thus, UCOs prefer to provide
short-term loan in local currency and mid-term loans in foreign currency Table
Main indicators of UCOs loan portfolio for   loans provided in local currency
Average maturity 75 (91 years in 2010 and 72 in 2015)  Growth of total amount
99% (from AMD277 bln to AMD551 bln)  loans provided in foreign currency  Average
maturity 07 (91 in 2010 and 19 in 2015)  Growth of total amount 67% (from AMD103
bln to AMD172 bln) The total amount of loans provided LFIs in local currency has
increased by133%, and the total amount of loans provided LFIs in foreign
currency has increased by over 40%, it means that growth of landing in local
currency is about 13 times less than growth of lending in foreign currency How
could this 21 Information source: dates provided by Union of Credit
Organizations of the Republic of Armenia (UCORA) 52 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT happen? There are two strong reasons here: ) it
conforms that LFIs has not any effective currency risk mitigation tools,
experience and capacity, and in lack of these lending in foreign currency is
more attractive for LFIs ) Most of LFIs preferred turn to lending to foreign
currency loans when provided refinancing of local currency loans The main
conclusion is that LFIs pay strong attention to currency risk mitigation, and
currency risk is  determining factor for EE investments The share of EE projects
in total loans disbursed by LFIs decreased for loans in both local and foreign
currency22 (see table below)The main conclusion is that EE lending become less
attractive for LFIs, plus there is  huge share of loan refinancing, which
increased in 2010-Table Total loans disbursed by LFIs Average share for
Indicator 2010 2015 Total loans disbursed by local banks Loans in local currency
60% 70% 00% Loans in foreign currency 70% 40% 30% Total loans disbursed by UCOs
Loans in local currency 00% 40% 00% Loans in foreign currency 40% 30% 50% We can
mark two issues for this period: ) Share of refinancing, including IFI loans,
increased in 2010- LFIs re-qualify loan from "EE" to "ordinary usually in
process of refinancing ) We can see that drop of loans in Local currency about -
times faster than in foreign currency It is obvious that trend to turn to
foreign currency lending is not attractive for EE project hosts and developers
Amount of EE / RE Loans provided by LFIs, including International Financial
Institutions’ (IFI) funds, increased from $74 mln in 2010 to $78mln in 2015,
71% per year, which is about 72 times less than the annual GDP growth rate So,
Armenia had about $340 mln unutilized EE investment potential in 2010-The total
amount of funds disbursed in EE loans during  as of mid-2015 was $14 mln, of
which about 81,88% or $78 mln disbursed by banks, the remaining 12% - by UCOs At
the same time, the share of EE loans disbursed by UCOs increased from 92% to 97%
reaching the largest share in 2012 at about 45% The trend proves that UCOs
become one of key players in EE investment In Armenia, especially in short- and
medium-term lending The lending by LFIs and UCOs is presented in Figure 22
Information source: dates provided by banks and UCORA 53 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT 80,000,000 70,000,000
60,000,000         ,         , , , , , 50,000,000 , , , ,
,         , 40,000,000                 , , , , , , 30,000,000 , , , , , ,
20,000,000 10,000,000 - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Local Banks UCOs Figure EE
/ RE LOANS PROVIDED BY LOCAL BANKS and UCOs IN 2010 - 2015 (including IFI funds,
USD) IFI share in total EE investments for  was less than 19%, while the
remaining 81% was covered by LFIs from their own sources In fact, LFIs are
strongly interested in EE lending, and LFIs are the main player in EE financing
(See Figure 21) 54 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT 90,000,000
, 80,000,000                         , 70,000,000 , ,         ,         , ,
60,000,000 , , ,         , 50,000,000         , , , 40,000,000 ,               ,
30,000,000        , ,       , 20,000,000 , , , , 10,000,000 - 2010 2011 2012
2013 2015 2014 IFIs LFIs Figure EE / RE LOANS PROVIDED BY LFIs and IFIs IN 2010
- 2015, USD ) International Financial Institutions23 International financial
institutions (IFIs) provided more than $96 mln EE lending through LFIs, which
generated (leveraged)$30 mln or more than 26% additional
investments/contribution from other sources in EE business in 2010-The biggest
lenders were EBRD with total amount of $26 mlnand IFC with total amount of $57
mln These two IFIs covered 86% of total loan disbursement by IFIs: 56% EBRD and
30% IFC Shares of other IFIs were very small, except GGF-about % of total amount
disbursed Average weighted interest rate was 72%, loan maturity more than 78
months At 23 Information source: dates provided by IFIs 55 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT the same time average weighted life time of
projects/equipment was more than 10 years,  about  times more than loan maturity
The most acceptable collaterals were company fixed and current assets, including
production facilities, transport and raw materials, own facilities and funds of
company shareholders, as well as guaranties from other/third entities The
biggest portion of EE loans in  were provided to Industry, more than 35%, about
22% to power sector/generation and 18% to small and medium enterprises (SMEs),
with transport sector being blended with industry and SMEs as well About 14%
were invested in municipal infrastructure projects The smallest share of lending
went to public buildings - about % See the share of energy efficinecy lending in
the banks’ portfolio visualized in Figure 00% %   %   00% %      %    00%   %
%      %   %   00%  %     %      00%         %   %   00% 00%     00% Total loans
disbursed by local banks in local currency Total loans disbursed by local banks
in foreign currency Total loans disbursed by UCOs in local currency Total loans
disbursed by UCOs in foreign currency 2010 2015 Average share for  Figure Share
of EE projects in total loans disbursed by LFIs in 2010 - 2015, % The reported
volume of lending has yielded total energy saving of176 mln MWh for , in with
cumulative impact in 2015 being  times more in quantity of energy saved than in
Total energy savings estimated for  is 213 mln MWh, with cumulative impact
occurring predominantly after Generally, yearly growth is estimated on  level
96% About 150 thousand TOE was saved in , and more than 30 mln TOE would be
saved in , due to the cumulative effect of savings from past investments GGF is
going to be  main 56 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT player in
this activity with its estimated share in total savings expected to be about %
This may potentially be due to the fact, that majority of IFIs has failed to
provide reasonable forecast of lending plans beyond Capacity Building for
Financial Institutions and Supporting the Market for Energy Services Considering
the unserved gap in the energy efficinecy financing demand and the liquidity of
the local financial institutions,  comprehensive effort is necessary aimed at
building the capacity of the LFIs in the following three directions: Legislation
and regulations ) EE Invest/lending climate and banking regulation improvement
event (ILCIE) The overall objective of this task is to improve investment
policy, banking regulations and normative to make SE financing/lending more
feasible for LFIs, IFIs and investors, and attract investments to the
sustainable energy sector of Armenia, as well as to promote cooperation among
Financial sector, regulatory and policy makers and interested bodies in Armenia
through creation of  list of recommendations to submit to Government )
Introduction of  compulsory energy audit (label) system for industry Specific
objectives of the combined event are: to create  roadmap forintroduction of
compulsory energy audit (label) system for industry to formulate the compulsory
energy audit procedures, terms and conditions for big energy consumers to
formulate the compulsory energy audit procedures, terms and conditions for SMEs
) Improving university curricula in the areas of energy efficiency The overall
objective of this task is to teach new skills in EE to students Armenian
technical universities through improving the EE curricula of the beneficiary
universities by developing and giving new lectures on following EE subjects: )
EE policy, ) EE economic analysis, ) EE technologies in energy & industrial
sector and ) EE tech in design, const & operation of buildings Capacity building
events )  Combined Study tour and Capacity Building Workshop on EE financing ›
Specific objectives of the combined event are: › to equip participants with
improved knowledge and skills for making better EE investment decisions to
transfer to participants EU best practices on EE financing conditions,
technologies and methods, including risk management, security activities and
monitoring steps, as well as their efficient use to improve the capacity of
participants to develop and carry out effective and profitable operations with
EE project development and implementation to promote effective approaches and
systems for EE/RES financing, including study of completed loan deals and
investment projects, as well as demonstration of working plants constructed
through SE financing tools, and projects implemented within the scope of EE
financing › › › )  Capacity building for LFIs on EE financing ) The intention is
for  West European local banker to teach LFIs how best to conduct business in
the EE sphere It means training bankers, loan officers and investment
specialists in EE financing technologies, optimal financing tools, conditions
and schemes, project development and feasibility 57 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT assessment, as well as to teach how to identify and
reduce risks through creation of financing support, guarantee mechanisms and
risk management measures )  Industrial Energy Audit Analysis for Bankable
Projects for Energy Engineers and ESCOs This event is targeted to equip local
engineers with adequate tools and methodologies to assess the financial and
economic viability of EE projects This capacity building workshop teaches energy
engineers and energy managers to understand and speak management’ language,
improves their capacity in using tools and methodologies in preparation of their
EE project, and the crucial parts of the process of how to prepare EE projects
that can be submitted for financing, and present projects in relevant economic
terms ii)  Capacity building for LFIs on Energy Audit ) Specific objectives of
the event are: ) to improve the capacity of participants to carry out effective
energy audit through using new methodologies, tools and advanced technologies )
to transfer to participants EU best practices on energy audit, ) to transfer to
participants package of documents to provide energy audit services, including
typical forms and templates ) to present participants energy audit legal
framework, and the main factors and milestones which formulate energy audit
market in Armenia )  Capacity building for LFIs and ESCOs on performance
contracting ) Specific objectives of the combined event are: ) to equip
participants with improved knowledge and skills for making better EE business
decisions 10) to transfer to participants main principals, topics, terms and
forms of performance contracting, as well as legal, regulatory and normative
framework EE business, 11) to transfer to participants package of documents for
performance contracting for EE business, including typical forms and templates
12) to transfer to participants EU best practices on EE business terms,
technologies and methods, including risk management, security activities and
monitoring steps, as well as their efficient use 13) Awareness raising )
Development of online information portal on EE Business ) Establishment of  web
portal of all energy efficiency product and service vendors, financiers,
consults, governmental and non-governmental institutions as well as basic
portfolio of awareness materials on energy efficiency, technical and financial
solutions ) Establishing and operating  EE business information centre 14)
Promote EE policy by engaging policy makers in events that are highlighting
particular problems that needs to be addressed through legislation or regulation
15) Provide EE public and information actions 16) Develop EE information
materials and work with general public, especially students and children, as
well officials, business entities, IFIs and NGOs 58 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT ) Combined Study tour and Capacity Building Workshop
on EE Awareness Raising 17) The main goal of this event is to raise awareness of
EE in Armenia through enhancing capacities of the participants to design and
implement effective awareness raising activities in EE, as well as capacity
building among participants to create and operate awareness raising and
information centre and implement awareness raising activities for various groups
Expected results will be: ) improved professional skills to design and conduct
effective information campaigns and awareness raising activities to promote SE
among  broad range of groups; ) increased awareness of these professionals on
the need, importance, and benefits of adequate awareness raising efforts; )
enhanced networking among peers in EE  Promotion of the Covenant of Mayors
process which has initiated after the first NEEAP development was the Covenant
of Mayors East Movement It is  horizontal measure with regards to the cross-
sectoral nature, local policy and planning elements, as well as emerging
synergies with the national and international policies and progams, as well as
financial measures Implementation of CoM in Armenia is facilitated by respective
supporting structures including the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of
RA, acting as the Covenant Coordinator in Armenia, as well as by Union of
Communities of Armenia and Energy Saving Foundation, acting as the Covenant
Supporters in Armenia Coordinators are defined as those entities that are in
position to provide strategic guidance, technical and financial support to
municipalities with the political will to sign up to the Covenant of Mayors, but
lacking the skills and /or resources to fulfill its requirements, namely the
preparation and implementation of Sustainable Energy Action Plan Supporters are
national, regional and local networks and associations of local and regional
authorities which leverage their 59 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT lobbying, communication and networking activities to promote the Covenant
of Mayors initiative and support the commitments of their signatories As of 2015
there are 10 signatories of the Covenant of mayors in Armenia List of
signatories with completed SEAPs and SEAPs under development is presented in the
table below Table Information on SEAPs of the Covenant signatories in Armenia
Signatories Item Tsaghkadzor 2009 Vayk Hrazdan 2014 2014 2013 2013 2014 Aparan
Spitak Artik Date of adhesion Completeness of SEAPs as of 2015 Date of SEAP
approval by municipal councils Baseline year for BEI Population in baseline year
GHG emissions in baseline year Fixed year or BAU GHG emission reduction
commitment by 2020 Total investment needed for implementation of SEAP, thousand
Euro Per capita investment for SEAP implementation, Euro/person 100% 100% 100%
100% 90% 50% 2014 2015 2015 2015 2011 2011 2011 2012 2012 2012 1750 6724 16883
53525 7387 19600 2235, 7515,64 8953,24 26399,23 3091,13 Fixed year Fixed year
BAU BAU BAU 447, 1776,95 2294,24 6617, 776, 1214, 1344, 1949, 5239, 658,*) 693,
200, 115, 97, 89,*) *) Preliminaryinformation Except for Tsaghkadzor per capita
investments for SEAP implementation varies from 100 to 200 Euro per person For
Tsaghkadzor this value considerably differs not only because of very small size
of the community but also because consideration of transport streams (including
intercity traffic through the territory of the community) in the Baseline
Emission Inventory (BEI) of that signatory For other communities that component
of BEI is usually not considered because influence of the local authorities on
that sector is very limited As of 2015 there are four SEAPs approved by the
municipal councils of the signatories and two plans for Aparan and Artik are
under development For estimation of ecological efficiency of the proposed energy
saving and GHG emission reduction measures  concept of sectorial capital
intensity ( investments needed to reach one tone of CO2 emission reduction 60
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT per year) of measures is
applied Sectorial capital intensity of measures proposed in SEAPs are
represented in the below table Table Sectorial capital intensity of SEAP
measures Sector Capital intensity of measures, Euro / tCO2 year Spitak Hrazdan
Aparan 823 5430 795 664 1628 2182 83 84 271 792 Tsaghkadzor 2235 3779 2281 Vayk
3472 705 2202 140 241 90 754 Artik Municipal budget * Residential sector
Renewable energy Transport Awareness raising CO2 absorptions 1962 384 1884 343
327 848 523 368 850 1085 Total 2714 *) Including municipal street lighting As it
is seen for the above table, except for Tsaghkadzor, capital intensities for the
municipalities do not differ sizably Average value can be estimates at about 800
Euro / tCO2 year The biggest investments are needed for budgetary and RE sectors
Most effective investments seem to be in residential sector The capital
intensity value for this sector is quite close to the total value which is
explained by big weight of this sector in overall balance of GHG emission
reduction sometimes reaching up to 80% ( for Spitak) Key measures proposed for
implementation in residential and public buildings are as follows:  Thermal
insulation of building envelopes;  Replacement of roof coats with galvanized
iron plates or new coating materials;  Application of thermal insulation
materials ( cm thickness) on ceilings of last floors of the buildings with
balks;  Replacement of wooden windows with new energy efficient ones; 
Replacement of entrance doors of multi apartment buildings;  Replacement of
inefficient incandescent lamps with energy efficient lighting, etc Also the
following so-called low-cost measured aimed to save heat in premises are
envisaged in the buildings:  Insulation of windows and doors with application
of silicone, foam rubber, sealants, polyvinylchloride and foam plastic; 
Installation of door closers;  Installation of heat reflecting screens behind
radiators;  Construction of tambours;  Heat insulation of internal heat
distribution networks in basements and attics, etc Key measures proposed in
transport sector are introduced below:  Introduction of bikeways;  Shift to
natural gas as  fuel for municipal and public transport 61 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT In the renewable energy sector the following
measures are proposed:  Installation of individual (apartment level) solar
water heaters;  Installation of solar water heaters for collective use for hot
water supply and pools;  Installation of PV modules for electricity generation
for illumination of entrances and yards of multi apartment buildings Utilization
of other types of RE sources on the territories of the target municipalities is
not promising and, hence, is not considered in the SEAPs From energy and
ecological efficiency standpoints renewable energy is relatively “expensive”
option (see table ) Measures proposed for awareness raising of population and
enterprises are summarized below:  Organizationof “EarthHours”  Organization
of Energy Days;  Application of energy certificates for buildings; 
Involvement of pupils of schools into energy development of municipalities 
Introduction of optional subjects on energy saving and renewable energy in
schools, etc Energy efficiency of proposed measures In the table  below energy
efficiencies of the measures proposed in the SEAPs are summarized Table Energy
efficiency of SEAP measures Sector Unit Energy efficiency of measures in SEAPs
Tsaghkadzor 435, 17, 847, 34, 651, 26, - - 541, 21, 2475, Vayk 313, , 5065, 68,
346, , 1483, 19, 227, , 7435, Spitak Hrazdan Aparan 500, 4303, 157, 15, 15, ,
2047, 19682, 7967, 63, 69, 82, 513, 1909, 817, 16, , , - 1168, - - , - 147,
1286, 669, , , , 3209, 28350, 9612, Municipal sector * MWh/year % MWh/year %
MWh/year % MWh/year % MWh/year % MWh/year Residential Renewable energy Transport
Awareness raising Total *) Including municipal street lighting The biggest
relative efficiency is ensured by residential sector which requires that most of
the investments In the considered SEAPs contribution of residential sector in
reduction of energy consumption varies from 34% to 83% The longer the heating
season is the more efficient 62 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
investments in heat insulation of buildings are From that point of view Aparan
is in better position because of 212 day long heating season Residential sector
has the largest potential for energy efficiency because the vast majority of
infrastructure is old and has low thermal insulation capacities However, for
identification of optimal and economically justified level of heat proofing
features of the infrastructure it is required to carry out  separate and more
detailed study with consideration of the existing and perspective heat
insulation materials market In the transport sector shift from petrol to natural
gas for passenger cars is definitely justified from economic and ecological
points of view However, GHG emission reduction effect of this measure is limited
because difference between emission coefficient of petrol (,249 tСО2/MWh) and
that of natural gas (,202 tСО2/MWh) are quite close (taking into consideration
energy values of both fuels) Nevertheless, transition from petrol to natural gas
in the privet transport sector is ongoing intensively and has positive influence
In renewable energy sector only solar energy plays  vital role in the provided
SEAPs Contribution of this source of renewable energy in increase of power
consumption efficiency varies from 55 to 25% Capital intensity of measures with
utilization of solar energy is quite stable (1800 – 2200 Euro/tCO2 year) Table
Efficiency of measures in solar energy sector within CoM SEAPs Signatories with
developed SEAPs Spitak 422, 40, 777, 193, Parameter Unit Tsaghkadzor 300,  651,
131, Vayk 181,  346, 82, Hrazdan Aparan * 728, 430, 1479, 447, 228, 58, 455,
121, 1000 Euro MWh/year MWh/year /year Investments till 2020 Power generation
Heat power generation GHG emission reduction СО2 Share of energy saving from
solar technologies in the total energy saving proposed in SEAP Share of GHG
emission reduction from solar technologies in the total GHG emission reduction
proposed in SEAP % 33,17 ,66 ,50 ,74 16,01 % 29,41 ,62 ,43 ,76 15,61 *) For
Aparan all data are preliminary Baseline years selected by all considered
municipalities are different from years of SEAP development (earlier years are
selected) as it can be seen from the table  As  result some part of measures
described in SEAPs have already been implemented within the period from the
selected baseline years to the years of SEAP development Hence, it makes sense
to consider also that period of time ( before 2015) For Tsaghkador, Vayk and
Spitak 63 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT implementation of
measures starts from 2012, whereas for Hrazdan, Aparan and Artik from
Realization of the majority of proposed measures require more than on-year
period Given that at this stage there are no exact time and work schedules for
realization of the measures, annual distribution (breakdown) of investments
needed for realization of the proposed measures is made evenly Dynamics of
annual investments for already realized and planned SEAP activities are
represented in theTable Information in the table is given for respective sector
for  municipalities up to It is likely that this number will grow, but no data
is available to assess the dynamics The consecutive NEEAP() will need to assess
this impact For purely analytic purposes, the full range of various financing
programs is summarized in the Table 22 to show the overall impact of various
donor and IFI efforts and the full scope of the EE financing measures in  single
table The EE financing programs from the below table without cross-
cutting/horizontal impact are evaluated as part of their respective sectoral EE
improvement measures 64 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table
Summary of All EE financing Facilities and Programs, and their Assessed Impact
Achieved energy savings in 2014 toe Achieved energy savings in 2017 toe Achieved
energy savings in 2018 toe Achieved energy savings in 2020 toe Status in
relation to 1st EEAP Title of the energy saving measure No End-use targeted
Duration Financing for Energy Efficiency: Implementation of energy saving
activities in municipal and social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Start: 2012
End: 2017 partially completed  Social and public facilities 401 ,006 ,609 ,814
New construction and capital renovation of public buildings and social housing,
significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE
in buildings New construction and capital renovation of public buildings and
social housing, significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary
legislation for EE in buildings Start: 2016 End: 2020 (ongoing) partially
completed  - 11,442 14,653 21,037 Legal Support, Financing and Information:
Improvement of Energy Efficiency in Buildings; development of secondary
legislation for EE in buildings, as well as funding for the first pilot thermal
modernization of  residential multi-apartment building in Avan district of
Yerevan and social housing in Goris and Akhouryan towns Residential multi-
apartment buildings, social housing, significant reconstruction of existing
buildings, secondary legislation for EE in buildings Start: 2013; End: 2017
partially completed  ,200 ,200 ,200 ,200 65 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Financing for EE & Public Procurement for EE: UNDP Green Urban
Lighting Project GHG Emission reduction by increasing energy efficiency of
municipal lighting in the cities of Armenia Municipal lighting electricity use
in the cities of Armenia Start:2013 End: 2017 partially completed  47 47 47 EE
and RE solutions for households space heat and lighting efficiency (windows,
doors,heat supply, lighting, distribution systems) and SMEs residential energy
end-use, SME EE of production processes, space heat conservation Household EE
loans and EE mortgage loans ; residential buildings and private homes' space
heating, hot water preparation EE loans for residential and business clients
(corporate energy efficiency, sustainable energy financing facilities, cleaner
energy production, municipal infrastructure energy efficiency) partially
completed Financing for Energy Efficiency: GGF  35,069 841,656 361,847
176,747,728 Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW EE loans for households and
SMEs Start:2009 End: 2015 partially completed  ,078 12,310 15,388 24,620
Financing for Energy Efficiency: Household energy efficiency loans and EE
mortgage loans (NMC/AFD) Start:2014 End: 2020 partially completed  - 141 164 211
Financing for Energy Efficiency: Energy efficiency loans for residential and
business clients, EBRD ArmSEFF Start:2006 End: 2015 partially completed  341,655
341,655 341,655 341,655 Financing for Energy Efficiency: Residential energy
efficiency bank-based commercial loan through HFHA Condo, REELIH and SUDEP
Projects residential energy end-use in space heating and hot-water preparation
Start: 2013; End: 2018 partially completed  30 ,914 ,067 ,067 66 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Financing for Energy Efficiency: Eastern European
Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P) faclitation of energy
efficiency finance in municipal infrasturcture with grant co-financing Start:
2015 End: ongoing partially completed 10 - - - - Financing for Energy Efficiency
& Public Procurement for EE: EE-integrated reinforcement of Schools by KfW
Public & service buildings (schools) Start:2016 End: 2020 none, new measure
partially completed 11 39,897 39,897 39,897 Appropriate indicators and energy
saving forecast will be provided as soon as the project concept is fully
developed Appropriate indicators and energy saving forecast will be provided as
soon as the project concept is fully developed The exact EE savings depend on
the specific measures which will be financed through the subloans Residential
energy end use, heating, hot water preparation, lighting Financing for Energy
Efficiency: KfW Housing EE credit line Start:2016 End: 2020 new measure
partially completed 12  The exact EE savings depend on the specific measures
which will be financed through the subloans Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW
EE loans for SMEs - EE credit line Commercial energy end use, heating, hot water
preparation, lighting, process heat, etc Start:2016 End: 2020 new measure
partially completed 13  67 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low-income Energy Efficiency Program Start:
2015; End: 2016 Residential energy end use, lighting efficiency 14 new measure
40,531 58,545 94,573 Sum of savings: 381,78 ,297,45 844,60 177,284,82 68 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  ALL INDIVIDUAL MEASURES  Buildings
Sector The overall buildings sector in the NEEAP is split between several
sections, according to the NEEAP methodology and template The overall energy
efficiency policy reform, regulatory processes and developments are reported in
the cross-cutting/horizontal elements, the investments in existing residential
buildings and regulations for new construction are covered in the Residential
Buildings section (titled ”Buildings”) The public buildings, grouped with
services sector, are presented in Public and Private Services Of overall 80
million km2 of the nation-wide building stock, 83% are residential buildings,
and the remaining 17% - public buildings Both the residential and public
building stocks are projected to grow, but the residential sector is going to be
responsible for most of this growth (Figure 23) 900                 800 700
public residential 600 500 400 300 200 100
Figure Growth dynamics and forecast for residential and public building stock in
Armenia The buildings have been responsible for % of national energy use during
2010-This 69 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT share has been
declining and is expected to fall further in the next 15 years See Figure ,000
40% 40%   Residential Energy Use Share in Overall Energy Use 37% 847 35%   34%
756 800 32% 696 709 30% 30% 664 29% 29% 29% 28% 609 564 25% 27% 556 543 600 533
20% 400 15% 10% 200 % - % years 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2017 2018 2020
2030 Figure Energy Use in Residential Sector, 2010-Source: EC-LEDS Energy
Balance for , authors’ own calculations for , MARKAL model projections beyond
Regulatory Measures The energy consumption has been decreasing in the buildings
sector over the past  years There is  vivid adverse correlation between the
growing energy prices and the residential energy end use Hence, it can be
presumed that the shrinking energy demand is likely  consequence of 70 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT deteriorating energy affordability (See
Figure 25) 900 156      156 156 200   800 132 132 132 700 160 600 500 120 400 80
300 86 93 08 200 08 08 08 40 100 years - - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015*
Residential Natural Gas Consumption (ktoe) Other Energy Sources (ktoe) Average
Electricity Tariff for Population (AMD/kWh) Residential Electricty Consumption
(ktoe) Natural Gas Tariff - Retail (AMD/m3) Figure Energy tariffs and Energy
Consumption in Residential Sector,  * - the 2015 tariffs for electricity have
been announced by the PSRC, but not effectively enforced due to public protests
The President of RoA announced  temporary freeze on the tariff while an audit
investigation assesses the grounds for the proposed tariff hike In the meantime,
the Government will shoulder the difference subsidizing the tariff The review
was not completed by the time of delivery of the present document * - data on
other sources was not available beyond The 2013 WB Power Sector Tariff Study for
Armenia has analyzed the affordability of current and expected energy tariffs
under various scenarios The recent energy price hikes have enhanced energy
poverty of low-income households (13% of household disposable income spent on
energy costs24) To cover the suppressed demand for electricity and natural gas,
the population has increased consumption of wood for heating purposes Wood
consumption throughout the country has increased from 20% of primary energy
sources to 30% in In rural communities this share has reached 62% in In the
absence of the 2011 subsidy for the recipients of the national poverty benefit
plan this situation would have been worse The current tariff structures need to
be reviewed and revised to introduce built-in incentives for energy efficiency
and conservation, while providing the minimal consumption block to the low-
income households at an affordable tariff The regulatory reform should be
supplemented with support for energy efficiency as the best way to sustainably
reduce the energy demand in the long run The next section further analyzes the
tariff regulatory framework for electricity and 24 Internationally accepted
threshold for energy poverty being 10% of household’ disposable income 71 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT natural gas Electricity Tariff
Electricity tariffs for the end users are one-part and are defined based on
voltage and time zones (time-differentiated tariffs) Difference between tariffs
in two time zones may be within about 30% Hence, electricity tariffs indirectly
depend on consumer groups  large consumers that are fed from high voltage
substations enjoy lower tariffs then those that are fed from relatively lower
voltage distribution system (see Table 23) Table 23 Electricity tariffs for
final customers (in national currency) Type of consumer AMD/kWh Since  August
2014 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 AMD/kWh Since  August 2015 78 For private
households, day For private households, night For industry  (10) kV, day For
industry  (10) kV, night For industry 35 & 110 kV, day For industry 35 & 110 kV,
night For public sector, day/night For commercial sector, / 78/ 78/ Source:
PSRC, June 2015 EE for Low Income Households On June  the PSRC announced  new
expected increase in the electricity tariff within  years from the last time the
tariff has increased This increase will step in as of August , 2015, which
triggered major social unrest, followed up by  promised by the Government to
shoulder the burden of the tariff increase with extra-budgetary sources, while
the justifications for tariff increase are being scrutinized through an audit of
the utility To cope with the latest proposed increased of the tariff for the
population, in the buildings sector the second NEEAP proposes  low-income
efficient lighting program To remedy the impact of tariff increase, the
Government must offer energy efficiency solutions to the low-income households,
as opposed to the traditional subsidies Mitigating impact of electricity tariff
increase on low-income households can be done by offering subsidized efficient
(LED light bulbs) to replace incandescent light-bulbs in 225,000 households (32%
of population categorized as below the poverty line)  respective measure is
included in the Financing section 72 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Gas Tariff Due to the increase of the natural gas import prices
electricity tariffs for final customers have been raised several times Tariffs
are also set for the natural gas transmission and distribution companies as well
as for the operator of gas supply system and retail supply One-part tariffs are
set for natural gas end users and the tariffs depend on  monthly consumption
volume For different consumers groups the PRSC sets tariffs in different
currencies For large consumers (which consume about 75% of all imported natural
gas) the tariff is set in USD to mitigate the currency exchange rate risk for
Gazprom-Armenia (the gas importing company) Gas Tariff Increases in Armenia 400
180 Import Price (USD/per 1000 m3) 156 156 156 160 350 Wholesale Tariff (USD/per
1000 m3) Retail Tariff (AMD/ 1000 m3) 132 132 132 140              300
120 250 96 100 84 84 / 200 65 80 / 59 59 150 51 60 100 40 50 20 Year - - 2003
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Figure Natural gas
import price and tariffs for two different final customer groups (2003- 2015)*
Tariffs for the large customers were 38% lower in 2013 than tariffs set for the
smaller consumers (consuming less than 10,000m3 per month) Servicing large
consumers indeed creates lower costs However, such  considerable difference
between the tariffs for these two customer groups leads to forced increase of
the monthly gas consumption by customers whose monthly consumption is close but
still below 10,000 m³ threshold in order to save money by being billed the
wholesale tariff This happens for building level heating systems and SMEs25 In
order to stop incentivizing waste, and instead incentivizing energy efficiency
measures, this perverse tariff incentive must be removed Certain types of gas
consumers must automatically qualify for the wholesale tariff These include
autonomous heating systems, SMEs, small-scale service vendors (cafes,
restaurants, hotels, laundries, etc) and other consumers who on average consume
over 7000 m3 per month In addition, the difference between the wholesale and
retail tariffs should be narrowed to eliminate incentive to calibrate
consumption to take advantage of the lower tariff, while stopping the cross
subsidy of the industrial consumers by the 25 Since many years there has been
discussion about the need to apply the whole-sale tariff for centralized heating
systems, but this discussion did not lead to any results 73 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT population Table RA Natural Gas Supply and Payments,
As of 2014  Natural Gas Number of Consumers Volume of Supplied Natural Gas in
Distribution System (mln m3) Product Delivery (mln AMD) Inflow of Financial
Means (mln AMD) Consumer Groups Consumers with <,000 m3 monthly consumption
Consumers with - ,000 m3 monthly consumption Consumers with - ,000 m3 monthly
consumption Consumers with - 10,000 m3 monthly consumption Consumers with 10-
13,000 m3 monthly consumption Consumers with >=13,000 m3 monthly consumption
633 101  22  14  214 653 1394 134727 Total Considering that in most cases the
customers consuming in the group between 10,000m3 and 13,000m3 are likely to
choose this high level of consumption intentionally to qualify for the lower
tariff (which explains the dramatically small number of consumers in categories
between ,000- 10,000m3 monthly), it is recommended to revise tariff structure
reform is necessary to remove perverse tariff incentives that are accelerating
unnecessary gas consumption by public facilities and commercial establishments,
SMEs and decentralized small-scale, building-level heating systems  new tariff
structure is necessary to make  transition to an increasing block rate system,
which is the internationally recognized best solution for  tariff system, which
not only has incentives for conservation, but also  built-in social safety net,
allowing the all the lowest income groups (not just the recipients of the
poverty benefit plan, which have been paying 100AMD/m3 since 2011 for the first
300m3 as social assistance measure supported by the Government) to receive the
minimal level of gas for the lowest possible price, while excessive use is
penalized by 74 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  higher block
rate Technical Regulations for Building Energy Performance The energy efficiency
issues of the buildings sector are related with the poor energy performance of
the building envelopes in both residential and public buildings, inefficiencies
of internal energy infrastructures (heating, lighting, hot water, and cooling
systems), as well as the poor behavioral practices in energy management For the
new construction, the main issues are the overarching failure to comply with the
building codes regulating building thermal protection and general energy
performance, as well as overall law technical capacity of the professionals in
the construction sector to design and construct energy efficient buildings  New
Construction Housing construction was one of the driving forces of the economic
boom in Armenia (26% of GDP) until 2008 financial crisis But the number of
completed dwellings remained low, and the construction sector started slowly
recovering in New Residential Building Comissioning (1000m2)       32000 31000
30000 29000 28000 27000 26000 25000 24000 year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 Similarly, the INOGATE Energy Saving Initiative in Buildings
provided support with integrated building design for  social housing project in
Dilijan, which reduced the energy demand of the proposed building from estimated
260kWh/m2 per year to 160 kWh/m2 per year with the use of optimized building
design, passive solar gains, improved shape coefficient, and extensive use of
insulation The 1995 construction code on “Thermal Protection of Buildings” has
had very poor enforcement from its adoption, it was never revisited to adapt to
the new construction technologies and materials, neither has it been integrated
into the context of Armenia’ international cooperation 75 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT in the field of building energy performance
regulation These processes included the CIS Interstate Construction Norms
development and harmonization, as well as approximation attempts of Armenia with
the European Union’ Directives, including the Energy Performance in Buildings
Directive, within the Eastern Neighborhood Partnership Initiative (ENPI) The
Ministry of Urban Development (MUD) is the key state institution responsible for
the regulatory framework on building energy performance In 2013 the bylaws of
the MUD were updated (Governmental Decree N225-) to add requirement to ensure
energyefficiency and energy saving in the sector For Armenia it is an issue of
major importance with respect to its energy security, economic stability, social
and environmental protection and the Government of the Republic of Armenia has
regularly emphasized the importance it attaches to energy efficiency improvement
both in existing and newly constructed buildings Moreover, most of the
investments in energy efficiency in buildings have positive economic features
and can be financed with loan financing under close-to-commercial terms However,
there are  number of persistent barriers, such as legislative, institutional,
socio-economic, and low-awareness that impede large-scale uptake of energy
efficiency investments in the market In particular, it is suggested that the
government take the following urgent steps: To eliminate the barriers in the
legal framework for energy efficiency:  Introduce binding legislation ( new law
or  technical regulation) stipulating energy auditing, passportization,
certification and labeling of buildings, mandatory enforcement of building
energy codes with compulsory application to new buildings as well as with
gradual application to already existing ones26 to harmonize with energy
efficiency certification (EEC) policy and regulatory requirements and EU
Directive on Energy Performance Indicators in Buildings  The legal reform in the
field of energy saving and energy efficiency to ECU membership and transposition
of the ECU regulations To implement this approach the following steps will be
necessary:  Make appropriate changes and amendments in the Law on Urban
Development allowing to stipulate mandatory norms for energy efficiency in
design, construction and exploitation 26 It is noteworthy that, unlike other
fields, this sector has  unique feature of energy efficiency mandatory
application In the field of industry, for instance, there are no incentives, no
mixed private and common property areas, which would lead to inefficient use of
energy, and industry owners possess capital investment funds (own or borrowed)
for various modernization measures, including energy efficiency ones In
addition, in the industrial sector, the energy efficiency requirements, if
imposed by Government, despite the cross-cutting monetary and non-monetary
benefits, due to lack of awareness can be considered as an investment burden,
barrier to growing local production, which is not politically acceptable, and
not in line with the Government of RoA politics over the recent years to create
favorable investment climate for local producers and international investors
While the public sector does not usually need strong legal instruments, as the
Government has its internal tools to implement energy efficiency measures in the
public sector As for the residential sector, it has  complex ownership
structure, split interests in relation to private, rented and shared spaces,
mixed property level in multi-apartment buildings; old buildings, limited access
to capital, and  malfunctioning system of self-organization and collective
decision-making Therefore, in new buildings, where it is easier and less
expensive to implement, the energy efficiency should be  mandatory norm and the
energy efficiency of the existing buildings should be assessed and published 76
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT phases for cases specified by
legislation  Based on the above requirements of the law, secondary legislation
reflecting transposed relevant EEC regulations can be enacted These can be
adopted as:  Technical regulations in accordance with RA Law “On Technical
Regulations” can be adopted by RA Government Resolution (especially when there
is unavoidable need to refer to international/regional/national standards) The
technical regulations will define energy auditing, certification and labelling
procedures in accordance with the local geographic and climatic conditions, and
acting laws  Normative-technical documents based on the RA Law “On Urban
Development” (in cases where reference to international/regional/national
standards is not necessary)  Assign clear responsibility and eliminate
institutional overlap in this field of energy efficiency in buildings; The
Republic of Armenia has abandoned the path towards association with the European
Union, but the years spent in negotiations have shaped up the list and timeline
of harmonization of the RoA legislation standards with the EU directives and
standards, which has been approved by RoA Government resolution No1481 from 22
November The transposition of the Energy Performance in Buildings Directive has
been assigned to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources with support from
line Ministries including Urban Development, Economy, Transport and Environment
and was performed in the form of draft Technical Regulation with support of
UNDP-GEF project From the January 1st 2015 Republic of Armenia became full
member of the Eurasian Customs Union (ECU) In this regard the policy in the
fields of EE and RE is to update the existing legal and regulatory field to
comply with ECU requirements In particular that will affect the EE labelling of
products, Energy Audit procedure and requirements, buildings EE certification,
etc Technologies and energy efficiency practices to be promoted - Energy
efficient technologies/measures to be promoted: integrated building design
approach, including building envelop, heating system, ventilation, solar water
heating, and lighting - Cost effective energy efficiency measures mainstreamed
in the on-going renovation/ rehabilitation/seismic reinforcement of the existing
buildings implemented in the framework of state programs - Energy efficient
management/maintenance practices, including building level and sector level
energy management systems, and use of the building The above issues have been
outlined in the first NEEAP and dealt with in part by the ongoing reform efforts
supported by donors Pilot projects and financing schemes successfully
demonstrated the effectiveness of various technical energy efficiency solutions,
as well as organizational and crediting solutions, which have potential for
scaling up In other cases, such as the existing multi-apartment residential
buildings, still efforts are needed to establish  77 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT sustainable and functional solution for improving
the energy efficiency of these buildings The Table below summarizes the
activities implemented aimed at meeting the regulatory objectives of the first
NEEAP The regulatory initiatives which have contributed to the achievement of
the first NEEAP targets is presented below (the complex programs and initiatives
which have both  regulatory and  financial element, as well as have mixed
financing eligible for buildings and non-buildings projects are presented in the
EE Financing Activity as cross-sectoral measure): 78 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table Summary of Regulatory Measures for Energy
Efficiency Improvement from 1st NEEAP No Title of the energy saving measure end-
use targeted Dura tion Status in relation to 1st NEEAP Partially impleme nted
Additional comments 1st NEEAP Measure No  II Development and adoption of the new
Building  2010 - 2014 Expected to be finalized and adopted in 2015 II National
Building Code con sidering energy performanc  of buildings27 building codes: •
MSN “Thermal Protection of Buildings” • MSN “Thermal Networks” • MSN “Thermal
Insulation of Equipment and Pipelines” Development and adoption of the National
standard AST  “Energy efficiency Building energy passport Main provisions
Typical forms” II  Building  2012 - 2013 Impleme nted as planned Registered in
accordance with the current procedures by the National Institute of Standards
(SARM) on December 18, 2013 (registration ID: AST ) The standard was enacted on
January ,  icam/res/pdfs/documents/EEB_reports_pu bl/Energy-Passport-
Axuryan_Engpdf II Standards and calculation methodology to assess ene rgy
performance in building   icam/res/pdfs/documents/EEB_reports_pu bl/Energy-
Passport-Goris_Engpdf  icam/res/pdfs/documents/EEB_reports_pu bl/Energy-Audit-
Mush_Engpdf 27Note, the Armenian version of the NEEAP had erroneously translated
the "Code" as  package of laws rather than  building construction code/norm 79
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT II  Adoption of EPBD based
technical regulation “On Building Energy Performance” Building  2013 - 2014
Partially impleme nted Passed to the MoNP, approval pending In accordance with
the RA Government decision  1481- of 2012 “On approving the combined list of
legal acts subject to harmonization in the energy sector as envisaged by the
draft EU-RA association agreement”, harmonization of Directive  2010/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council “On Energy Performance of Buildings” of
2010 MoENR letter #03// of 2013 initiated  harmonization process of the sector-
relevant directives and standards in cooperation with the UNDP Approved by the
order of 2014 of National Institute of Standards CJSC of the RA Ministry of
Economy and enacted on Passed to the MoUD, approval pending II  Harmonization of
EN and ISO standards in relation of energy efficiency Cross- sectoral 2013 -
2014 Impleme nted as planned II  Development of the technical regulation on the
building safety, including provisions on building EE Amendments to the Law on
Energy Saving and Renewable Energy Building  2011 - 2012 2012 - 2015 2013 - 2015
Partially impleme nted Partially impleme nted Not impleme nted II  Cross-
sectoral Passed to the National Assembly, approval expected in 2015 II  The
draft RA Law “On making an addition into the RA law “On urban development”
submitted to the Ministry of Urban Development dated July 13, 2013 Building
This is included into the package of legislative amendments pertaining to the
adoption of draft RA law “On developing the smaller center of Yerevan” The
document is still in its status of draft pending the delayed adoption of the
draft RA law “On developing the smaller center of Yerevan” and has reached its
final discussion stage as of now II Institutional capacity‐ building for
implementing  nd enforcing new standard  80 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT The decision of RA Government “On implementation of energy saving
and energy efficiency improvement measures in facilities being constructed
(reconstructed, renovated) under the state funding" Changes to the GovDecision
on Energy Audits 2014 Impleme nted as planned Adopted by the RA Government on
December 25, 2014, protocol decision #1504-, developed in the frames of the UNDP
Building , Public & Services II  2013 - 2015 Partially impleme nted #1399- from
2006 (modified in 2011 #1105-) Passed to the Government and circulated, approval
expected in 2015 Cross- Sectoral II  - The energy efficiency and energy saving
related tasks and functions were added in the MUD charter in 2013 by the
Government decision N225- (13 March 2013) According the 2014 Action Plan the MUD
is currently elaborating  draft government decision “On application of measures
directed towards increasing of energy saving and energy efficiency in objects
constructed (reconstructed, renovated) by the state means” Workplan for 2015
includes new Housing Code development  laboratories were established for testing
thermal-physical parameters of construction materials in Armenia Over 14
materials were tested and certified Buidling , Public & Services II  Building ,
Public & Services 2012 - 2014 Impleme nted as planned UNDP supported the
establishment of  labs with state of art laboratory equipment The laboratory is
now enabled to test and certify insulation materials, providing opportunity for
the specialists to use reliable, tested and certified materials and
prefabricates in Armenia II II Establishing quality assuran ce/quality control
(QA/QC) standards that will support the certification of key buil dingmaterials
for energy pe rformance 81 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The
Handbook was endorsed by the Minister of Urban Development of the Republic of
Armenia (order #343 of November , )  icam/wp- content/uploads/Advisory_Handb
ook_on_Insulation_2013pdf/ Database aims to facilitate activities of designers,
students, constructors and other specialists In general, the database
encompasses more than 40 materials, pre- fabricates and their basic properties
icam/res/pdfs/publications/EEB- database_insulation/database_engpdf #1399- from
2006 (modified in 2011 #1105-) Passed to the Government and circulated, approval
expected in 2015 II  “Advisory Handbook on Technical Solutions for Thermal
Insulation of Envelopes of Residential, Public and Industrial Buildings in
Construction and Reconstruction in the Republic of Armenia” Building , Public &
Services 2012 - 2013 Impleme nted as planned II Set up road‐ test procedures for
buildin  certification and method ology for assessment of en ergy performance
for pilot buildings II  Development of “Database of construction insulation
materials and pre-fabricates” Building , Public & Services 2012 - 2013 Impleme
nted as planned II  Changes to the GovDecision on Energy Audits Cross- Sectoral
Partially impleme nted 2013 - 2015 II  Building  Black Sea Basin  Energy
Efficiency Program strengthening the administrative capacity of local
authorities and exchange good practice knowledge in energy efficiency in
buildings, Black Sea Join Operational Program Trainings including: - Study Tour
on Energy Efficiency, Renewable Energy and Other Eco Solutions in Buildings in
Armenia; -  Public Seminar on Energy Efficiency in AUA; etc Impleme nted 2007 -
2013 II Training and education in  orrespondance with the pr omotion of
integrated build ing design approach and ne  energy performance req uirements in
buildings 82 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT II  UNDP/GEF
Improving EE in Buildings Program held multiple trainings and seminars aimed at
building experts' capacity as follows: Building  impleme nted 201 - 2015 •
Strengthening National Capacities for Housing and Urban Planning in Armenia 2015
• Seminar in the Frame of the International EE Day Held in Architects Union of
Armenia 2014 • Two-Day Training on the Czech Experience of EE in Buildings 2014
• Seminar over Issues of Thermal Protection of Buildings for the RA State Urban
Development Inspectorate 2014 • Energy Week 2014 Launched 2014 • Current issues
in thermal protection of buildings:  seminar 2014 • South Caucasus
Infrastructure and New Energy Investment Summit 2014 2014 • “Sustainability,
LEED & Commissioning and How They Connect” Lecture at AUA 2014 • The current
issues in production, testing and certification of thermal insulation materials
in Armenia (02) 2013 • Greening Energy Sector: VIII Annual REC Conference ()2012
• Energy for Sustainable Development, the Third International Forum () 2012 •
Improving EE in multi-apartment buildings:  training-seminar (26- 27) 2012 •
Recent Developments per “Thermal 83 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Protection of Buildings” code (20) 2012 • Seminar on EE Design Approaches
(02)2012 • Training on laboratory testing of construction materials () 2012 •
Energy Efficiency in  Community: Spitak (13) 2011 II  INOGATE Technical
Secretariat, SEMISE & ESIB Programs held  series of trainings and seminars
related to energy efficiency, energy auditing, EE finance, ESCOs, etc: Building
84 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT II  Pilots on energy efficiency
in residential buildings 2012 - 2015 Impleme nted as planned Pilot building in
Goris 2012: Energy savings - 109 MWh/year CO2 emission reduction - 25
ton/yearPilot building in Avan 2014Energy savings - 290 MWh/year CO2 emission
reduction - 60 ton/yearCascade Hills residential complexEnergy savings - 496
MWh/year Solar water heating collectors ~ 19 pilot projects of solar energy
utilization and about 600m2 of solar thermal collectors installed throughout
Armenia CO2 emission reduction from the implemented pilot projects (as of 2014):
about 215 tCO2eq annuallyPrivate investment leveraged for completed/ongoing
projects on the application of renewable energy solutions totaled to about USD
million The World Bank is supporting improvements in the energy efficiency of
social and other public facilities (, schools, kindergartens, hospitals,
streetlighting, other public buildings) supports energy-efficiency investments
in social and other public facilities through energy saving agreements and
energy performance contracting The Project Development Objective is to reduce
the energy consumption of social and other public facilities The global
environmental objective is to decrease GHG emissions through the removal of
barriers to the implementation of energy-efficiency investments in the public
sector II Pilot Project: Design compe tition and construction of  everal “best‐
practice” buildings ( sch ool or other public the construction of  typica
buildingapproach within available budget and time  chedule for building, and
multi‐ family house) in Yerevan an  another larger city, using an integrated
building desi gn II  Pilots on energy efficiency in public buildings through
energy saving agreement scheme which cover the investment loan from energy
savings Public Building  & Services 2013 - 2015 Impleme nted as planned 85
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Results achieved to date: -
Projects implementedd include: - Energy saving measures completed and operation
launched in 27 public buildings; - Construction works underway on 15 sites; - In
procurement stage: 14 projects - Under review:  applications Total approved (of
309 received): 65 applications Government of Armenia (GoA): EUR million
Investment grant: EUR  million Average investment cost: 8400 AMD/m2; Average
payback:  years; Average saving: % II not implemented II Development of an
incentiv  scheme to promote ener gy efficient construction or reconstruction in
residentia  and service buildings 86 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT  Residential Buildings This section deals with existing residential
buildings Armenian housing sector comprises about 95 million km2, of which 54%
is in the urban settlements and 29% are in multi-apartment buildings Armenia’
housing stock 19,000 dwellings, 822,000 units, of which: Urban housing, million
km² In Private houses: 427,000 units  71% of total housing space  in Multi-
apartment buildings:  Rural housing, million km² 435,000 dwellings (52 %) are
in the multi-apartment stock, 29% of total housing space  2010 2011 2012 2013 
Figure Total housing stock and breakdown by urban and rural settlements, million
km2  About 30% of all multi-apartment housing is made of panel or monolith
concrete, which is 40% below EU average As can be seen on Figure 28, only 40 %
of the overall housing stock is over 40 years old The private houses, comprising
the one third of all housing space is relatively well maintained  number of
credit lines have been offering residential energy efficiency loans (IFC, EBRD,
AFD/NMC, GGF) with some degree of incentives, such as lower interest rates or
grant money back This section reviews activities focusing on residential energy
efficiency exclusively The scale of impact of those credit lines, which finance
residential energy efficiency among other sectors, is assessed in Table 26 among
the cross-cutting measures 87 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Housing Fund Structure by Year of Construction Housing Fund Structure by Number
of Floors Housing Fund Structure by Wall Type Monolith, 1244, % -, 51% Before
1970, 39 % Panel, 4340, 23% 1970- 1990, 44% -, 35% Stone, 13206, 70% After 1990,
17 %  +, 12% -,  % Figure Structure of MAB stock by age, floors, and
construction material Yet in the multi-apartment housing this trend has not
evolved The overall ownership scheme in multi-apartment buildings and of
management and maintenance of common owned property is highly inefficient, which
hampers the uptake of energy efficiency opportunities by the multi- apartment
housing market The 2002 Law on Apartment Building Management did not adequately
legislate and enforce the rights and responsibilities of condominiums
Consequently, multi-apartment housing repair and maintenance does not work well
Deterioration worsens from year to year Not less than 75% of all roofs and roof
drain systems are in urgent need for repair  growing number of residential
buildings are in urgent danger of physical destruction This situation aggravates
the serious seismic risk in Armenia Investments in housing repairs are
insufficient For example, in 2008 less than AMD  billion ($  mln) was invested
in the whole stock of multi-apartment buildings The extremely low maintenance
fees allow for not even the most urgent repair works Similar serious is the
collection rate of hardly over 60% Debts on maintenance fees are set too low to
supply sufficient funds for adequate maintenance, and are very difficult to levy
Clarification and  redefinition of the roles of owners on the one hand and of
the management organizations on the other hand are urgently needed Several
initiatives have thoroughly analyzed the origins of the problems in the existing
housing sector, and repeatedly concluded that the lack of investments in housing
repair and maintenance, as well as adequate thermal rehabilitation To address
the issues within the housing sector, the conservation and maintenance of common
space and supporting infrastructure in urban housing, the Armenian Government
with assistance from partners (international aid organizations) has pursued
major policy reform efforts that concern utility supply, public utility
regulation, organization of multi-apartment building management bodies and
condominiums, housing policies, municipal budget autonomy, revenues, etc To
date, the accumulated experience and expertise have demonstrated that energy
efficiency improvements can help vulnerable households in Armenia, and that
energy efficiency is the quickest, cleanest and cheapest way to bring comfort
and economic mitigation to these 88 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT households IFI resources can cover only  small fraction of the investment
needs of this sector; the private sector should thus be tapped for investment
capital to address the modernization and efficiency improvement needs over the
next  years The potential for energy efficiency in the buildings sector has been
estimated Armenia is not an exception: the latest studies have confirmed
potential for energy saving The National Program on Energy Saving and Renewable
Energy estimates 40 percent potential for energy saving in Armenia’ building
sector According to the results of donor-funded pilot projects, an average
residential building in Armenia has % potential for energy saving at current
energy prices The most illustrative of all were the pilot projects implemented
by UNDP/GEF Improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings project The thermal
modernization of  multi-apartment panel building in Yerevan reduced 178kWh/m2
energy consumption to 74kWh/m2 after thermal rehabilitation of the building
façade Moreover, the Habitat for Humanity of Armenia (HFHA) has also found the
lending model and implemented loan-funded thermal envelopingof  existing typical
panel buildings The Municipality of Yerevan has provided grant co-financing for
such loan-financed projects within the scope of  bi- lateral memorandum of
understanding with HFHA In some cases, the investments received  modest co-
financing by residents (home-owners’ association) In addition to EBRD, IFC and
GGF loans for energy efficiency investments, the French Development Agency (AFD)
and the National Mortgage Company (NMC) have launched the “Jerm Ojakh” Social
Energy Efficiency Renovation Program for Armenia’ Housing Sector KfW plans to
launch  Housing Energy Efficiency Credit line in 2016, which will also be
partnered with NMC and seek to cover another niche for residential energy
efficiency The barriers to energy efficiency investments in multi-apartment
residential buildings can be summarized as follows: • Lack of housing strategy
or clear policy on state/local government responsibilities to vulnerable groups;
• Clear separation of responsibilities among state and local authorities; •
Private-sector involvement in housing industry and finance; • Improvements of
eviction, foreclosure and bankruptcy mechanisms to conduct legally transparent
and sustainable transactions in real estate, including sales and other transfers
of nonperforming loans and, Implementation and enforcement of acting laws and
regulations in the field of multi- apartment building maintenance and management
• • Weak capacity for building management, project development, financial
planning and management, fund-raising, human resources, reporting and
customer/member relations • Survey revealed up to 20% HOA managers still
initiate cash-paid service recruitment • Up to 20% of HOAs implement maintenance
work no more frequently than once every - years • Lack of financial resources
due to low maintenance fee rates and low collection; • Poor creditworthiness due
to their new status, slow development, failure to collect service fees, and
failure to conduct creditworthy accounting, bookkeeping and reporting 89 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT • Difficulty securing the necessary
number of votes for strategic decision-making with respect to heat supply
issues; the situation is exacerbated by the growing number of autonomous
apartment-level solutions) and the significant share of absentee households
(~20%); • The need, often, to sign individual loan repayment and service supply
contracts with each households due to mistrust and lack of experience of
purchasing utility services from the intermediary • Lack of overall awareness
and understanding of the legal-regulatory framework, rights and responsibilities
related with the home-owners’ associations, and benefits of EE, in general To
adequately direct investments in this sector, policy reform, capacity building,
outreach and adequate financing schemes are necessary The RA Law on Condominiums
should be recognized as ineffective The Ministry of Urban Development recognized
the need to amend or rewrite Law on MAB Management, with appropriate amendments
to be provided to the RA Civil Code regarding provisions of management of multi-
apartment buildings, and the RA Government Decree N1161- on Adoption of
Obligatory Norms of for Maintenance of the MAB Common Shared Properties
revisited This reform must be accompanied by  national program for promoting
residential building energy efficiency, aimed at the following actions:  Assess
the investment needs of the sector (including for financing of the -year
Strategic plan of MAB housing fund management, maintenance and exploitation of
RA adopted by Minutes decree of RA Government #38 on 2011)  Define the
procedures for lending to MAB management and/or maintenance bodies, and
availability of state subsidies for organizing comprehensive refurbishment and
energy efficiency retrofits in the housing stock  Design  financing scheme with
features customized to economic features MAB retrofit projects, with ‘soft’
terms, and combined with grant financing and technical assistance  Seeking
grant resources to support investments for low-income households from state
social safety funds;  Cultivate PPPs to facilitate investment in MABs,
eliminate legal & institutional barriers for attracting private capital 
Utilize lessons learned from demo projects, test-drive programs on small-scale
pilots  Seek opportunities to capitalize on sectoral programs to finance
housing rehabilitation (environmental, EE, seismic, etc)  When loan-financing
investments in MABs, have special provisions (grants) for vulnerable households
 Enable the participation of the HOAs in residential investment projects by
finding creative solutions for loan financing  Collect adequate & data through
to document impacts and fine-tune the programs for improved effectiveness To
strengthen the institutional capacities for improved efficiency of energy use in
the housing Sector  Capacity strengthening for the relevant State institutions
and public services related to the energy efficiency in buildings for overseeing
existing buildings and ensuring effective enforcement of the MAB management and
condominium policy including HOAs, regional and 90 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT local authorities, energy auditors, urban
development inspection, private housing maintenance companies, as well as
financial institutions interested in lending for housing maintenance and energy
efficiency Technical assistance with respect to home-owners’ associations (HOAs)
ability to participate in the new procedures stipulated by the -year Strategy
Program and overall reform in the sector, including lending to HOAs for EE
improvements, competitive procurement of private maintenance services by HOAs,
assessment of buildings’ energy efficiency potential, conduct of energy audits,
development of energy efficiency investment projects, passportization of
buildings’, etc  Raise public Awareness providing information on end-use energy
efficiency measures and their benefits to decision-makers as well as consumers
Recommended features of an effective financing scheme for residential energy
efficiency: Design  Financing Scheme with features customized to economic
features MAB retrofit projects, with ‘soft’ terms, and combined with grant
financing and technical assistance Seeking grant resources to support energy
efficiency programs for low-income households from state social safety funds to
replace traditional tariff subsidies for natural gas; Cultivate public-private
partnerships private maintenance or energy service companies with
municipalities, private housing maintenance firms and HOAs to facilitate the
elimination of institutional barriers while attracting private capital Utilize
lessons learned from demonstration projects to inform government policies on the
choice of institutional and regulatory reforms, and test-drive the programs on
small-scale pilot scale, roll-out to offer  standard solution in regular
commercial banks/local financial institutions (LFIs) Seek opportunities to
capitalize on environmental benefits of energy efficiency in residential
buildings, for instance through environmental funds or carbon financing Value of
Non-monetary Savings considering that residential energy efficiency may not
always bring to financial savings but to significant non-monetary improvements
in lifestyle, comfort, health and environment       When loan-financing
residential energy-efficiency programs for multifamily buildings, have special
provisions (grants) for vulnerable households so that they may participate
Enable the participation of the HOAs in Residential EE investment projects by
finding creative solutions for loan financing to HOAs Collect adequate data
through monitoring and evaluation to document impacts and fine-tune the programs
for improved effectiveness Create security funds to insure loans for
condominiums in the case of collateral deficiency; Provide funds for
reconstruction, energy efficiency measures, preparation of technical and
financial documents as well as for the application of innovative technologies
The financial and economic benefits of energy efficient building are well-
researched and documented internationally Many energy efficiency investments
have  short payback periods in terms of reduced energy costs (considering energy
efficiency in the design of  building could even reduce construction costs The
few studies considering the national circumstances of Armenia (construction
costs, established market prices for construction materials, heating,
conditioning and ventilation costs) confirm 91 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT these findings28The profitability of energy efficiency will further
increase with rising energy prices This will for public buildings and social
housing result in  substantial saving of the scare public resources for
construction and operation of buildings For residential buildings energy
efficiency will be the only way to maintain utility affordability with the
rising energy prices, while maintaining an adequate comfort level National
Program for MAB Housing EE Retrofits It is recommended that the pilot project
experiences from UNDP/GEF and HFHA/REELIH programs are scaled up into  national
program for residential energy efficiency addressing the policy reform, capacity
building, development and scaling up of  sustainable financing scheme for multi-
apartment building retrofits in Armenia See new EEIM proposed (measure II10) LED
Lights for Low-Income Households In addition to the investments and measures to
help reduce the building sector demand for heating energy, the residential
sector needs support dealing with the growing electricity prices As discussed
earlier in regulatory section, the rising energy tariffs have had substantial
impact on energy affordability and social acceptance of the announced tariff
increase, triggering civil unrest To avoid another instance, when the Government
spend scarce public funds to subsidize the energy prices to avoid political
turmoil, it is recommended that the energy social safety nets make  transition
from tariff subsidies to subsidized energy efficiency programs for low-income
households The latest % increase proposed for electricity prices needs to be
remedied with such assistance About 40% of electricity use in low-income
households (Armenia has 225,000 poor households, of which 105,000 – classified
as extremely poor) is for lighting purposes To help manage the electricity
consumption within affordability limits, it is proposed to offer replacement LED
lights-bulbs to low-income families (See Measure II11) Appliance Energy Labeling
Outreach Another tool that helps the population deal with the energy demand-side
management, for middle- to high-income range population, is the appliance energy
labeling The UNDP-GEF had prepared  draft Government Decision and energy
labelling regulation, which were both submitted to the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources for adoption The adoption was on hold before the political
rout with regards to EU association and ECU membership is resolved Now with
Armenia’ member status in ECU, the regulatory package must be 28The 2007
National Program of RA for Energy Saving and Renewable Energy estimated  total
annual energy saving potential in the building sector equivalent to 331 ktoe
through improvement of thermal protection of buildings, introducing energy
efficient lighting and heating systems 92 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT adapted and adopted Upon adoption, enforcement of appliance energy
labeling regulation requires  substantial outreach effort to help introduce the
labels, disseminate information and adequately inform consumers’ purchasing
decisions (EEIM II) 93 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table Energy
Efficiency Improvement Measures in Residential Buildings Achieved energy savings
in 2014 (MWh) Achieved energy savings in 2017 (MWh) Achieved energy savings in
2018 (MWh) Achieved energy savings in 2020 (MWh) Status in relation to 1st EEAP
Title of the energy saving measure No End-use targeted Duration Legal Support,
Financing and Information: Improvement of Energy Efficiency in Buildings;
development of secondary legislation for EE in buildings, as well as funding for
the first pilot thermal modernization of  residential multi-apartment building
in Avan district of Yerevan and social housing in Goris and Akhouryan towns
(UNDP/GEF BEEI project) Residential multi- apartment buildings, social housing,
significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE
in buildings Start: 2013; End: 2017 partially implemented II ,200 ,200 ,200 ,200
Household EE loans and EE mortgage loans ; residential buildings and private
homes' space heating, hot water preparation Financing for Energy Efficiency:
Household energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans (NMC/AFD) Start:2014
End: 2020 partially implemented II 136 141 164 211 Financing for Energy
Efficiency: Residential energy efficiency bank-based commercial loan through
HFHA Condo, REELIH and SUDEP Projects residential energy end-use in space
heating and hot- water preparation Start: 2013; End: 2018 partially implemented
II 30 ,914 ,067 ,067 94 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Appropriate indicators and energy saving forecast will be provided as soon as
the project concept is fully developed The exact EE savings depend on the
specific measures which will be financed through the sub-loans Residential
energy end use, heating, hot water preparation, lighting Financing for Energy
Efficiency: KfW Housing EE credit line Start:2016 End: 2020 II new measure TBD
pending Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low-income Energy Efficiency Program
Start: 2015; End: 2016 Residential energy end use, lighting efficiency II10 new
measure new measure 116,159 116,159 116,159 EE Retrofits in existing residential
buildings: National Program and Action Plan for MAB Renovation & EE Existing
residential buildings, space heating Start: 2016; End: 2020 II11 new measure new
measure 65,00 65,00 65,00 Appliance Energy Labeling Awareness Campaign
Residential energy end use, lighting efficiency Start: 2015 End: 2020 II12 new
measure new measure 176,704 209,369 409,635 Sum of savings: MWh ,26 364,58
396,02 597,89 Sum of savings: KTOE 12 31 13 36 95 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Individual measures contributing to legal-regulatory
reform, financing and capacity building for improved energy efficiency of the
residential building sector are presented in the below individual tables
UNDP/GEF Improving EE in Buildings Program (Building EE Project) Title of the
Energy Saving Measures II Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures,
Regulatory, Information Category Start: 2013; End: 2017 Timeframe Description
The project is aimed at improving Energy Efficiency in Buildings including
massive support to the Armenian Government in transposition of EPBD, development
of secondary legislation for EE in buildings, as well as funding the first pilot
thermal modernization of  residential multi-apartment building in Avan district
of Yerevan, as well as social housing in Goris and Akhouryan towns Aim/brief
description Residential multi-apartment buildings, social housing, significant
reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE in buildings
Target end-use Residential multi-apartment buildings, social housing,
significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE
in buildings Target group National Pilot building in Goris 2012: Energy savings
- 109 MWh/year; CO2 emission reduction - 25 ton/year; Pilot building in Avan
2014 Energy savings - 290 MWh/year; CO2 emission reduction - 60 ton/year Cascade
Hills residential complex: Energy savings - 496 MWh/year; Solar water heating
collectors ~ 19 pilot projects of solar energy utilization and about 600m2 of
solar thermal collectors installed throughout Armenia CO2 emission reduction
from the implemented pilot projects (as of 2014): about 215 tCO2eq annually
Private investment leveraged for completed/ongoing projects on the application
of renewable energy solutions totaled to about USD  million Regional application
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
$,200,000 Budget and financial source UNDP/GEF MoNP, UNDP/GEF UNDP/GEF
Implementing body Monitoring authority              Method for monitoring/
measuring the resulting savings NBU 96 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWh) Expected energy savings in
2017 (MWh) Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected impact on energy savings in
2020 (if available) ,200 ,200 ,200 ,200 Assumptions Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy Horizontal/cross-cutting measures in EE policy Reform, EPB
regulation Residential energy efficiency bank-based commercial loan Title of the
energy saving measure II Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures Category
Start: 2013; End: 2018 Timeframe The program worked on residential energy
efficiency upgrades serving  total of 99 families in  buildings, with  total
disbursement of roughly USD$ ,000 per building and is the only entity that has
succeeded in extending  bank-based commercial loan to  condominium in Armenia to
condominiums, more pending within their ongoing USAID-funded Residential Energy
Efficiency for Low-Income Households (REELIH) program            Aim/brief
description residential energy end-use in space heating and hot-water
preparation Target end-use Residential households, condominiums, municipalities
Target group National Regional application 97 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT             Habitat for Humanity of Armenia (HFHA) has several
programs addressing housing finance and residential energy efficiency and
renewables Residential EE for Low-Income Households (REELIH) funded by USAID
grant, aimed at establishing near-commercial lending for residential energy
efficiency;  Condo: HFHA housing finance with focus on condominium EE lending
for common-space EE retrofits and overall repairs On-lending of similar loans
through  local universal credit organizations (UCOs):  New Horizon UCO  Kamurj
UCO  First Morgage Company (FMC)  EC SUDEP Project funds EE and RE solutions for
Covenant of Mayor signatories Spitak and Vayq towns               List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure  $ ,629,507
Budget and financial source provided by: Habitat for Humanity Armenia (HFHA),
European Commission, USAID-funded REELIH program Inecobank, UCOs Implementing
body USAID, European Commission Monitoring authority              Method for
monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings NBU Savings achieved in 2014 as per
1st EEAP 30 Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) ,914 ,067 Expected energy
savings in 2018 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) ,067
Assumptions Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Social & Energy Efficiency
Housing Finance Program in Armenia: Jerm Ojakh, AFD/NMC II Title of the energy
saving measure Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures Category Start:
2014 Timeframe End: 2020 Household energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans
by French Development Agency and National Mortgage Company: The program is aimed
to provide household energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans with  target
of 3000 households to be reached within the first year of the program
Aim/brief description Household EE loans and EE mortgage loans ; residential
buildings and private homes' space heating, hot water preparation Target end-use
98 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Residential buildings Target
group National The Agence Française Développment (AFD) has set up the ”Jerm
Ojakh” SEEHFP as  loan facility of EUR 10 mn, which aims at providing loans, for
on-lending to private households outside Yerevan city Center and in the regions
of Armenia to finance energy efficiency investments in social housing through
local PFls at affordable conditions Eligible measures include insulation, window
and door replacement, SWHs, heating system replacement, as well as other general
renovation In order to overcome various barriers to sustainable energy
investments, the Program is complemented by technical assistance funding from
the EU NIF to PFIs as well as non- refundable grant funding from the EU NIF to
borrowers The Program aims at overcoming the main barrier in the implementation
of energy efficiency investments, which is the lack of appropriate access to
affordable financing Given the line, the sub-loans will target amount of the
credit approximately ,000 households and will finance the households’ renovation
investments outside Yerevan city Center The sub-loans will be offered in AMD and
will be systematically granted after  simplified energy audit They will have
longer maturity period than currently offered by commercial banks in the market
and will have  grace period, as well as -10 grant bonuses for qualifying loans $
13,000,000 AFD Regional application                            List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure Budget and
financial source NMC and 15 participating financial institutions (PFIs)
Implementing body NMC, ASBA, KPC Monitoring authority              Method for
monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings EUAMT tool Expected savings in 2014
as per 1st EEAP (MWh) 136 Expected savings achieved in 2017(MWh) ,25 Expected
energy savings in 2018*(MWh) ,84 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (MWh)
,02 Every loan is invested in some kind of home improvement which leads to an
average of 44% energy saving Assumptions Overlaps with Building EE programs,
synergy with KfW' pending residential EE lending credit line Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW Housing EE
Credit Line Title of the Energy Saving Measure II Index of the measure
EE Programs and Measures, financing scheme Category    Start: 2016 Timeframe 99
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT End: 2020 KfW intends to
establish an EE Finance Program for residential housing in Armenia with  volume
of up to EUR 20 million Aim/brief description Residential energy end use,
heating, hot water preparation, lighting Target end-use Residential households
Target group National Regional application             is to decrease the energy
consumption in The target residential buildings and thus the Greenhouse gas
emission by at least 20% compared to  baseline List and description of energy
saving actions substantiating the measure  € 20,000,000              Budget and
financial source KFW, 80% guaranty for the loan from the Federal Republic of
Germany Borrower: Central Bank of Armenia Program has been agreed upon by the
Government of Armenia and the Government of Germany during the government
negotiations in September 2014  Implementing body Program Management Unit:
National Mortgage Company Monitoring authority              Method for
monitoring/ measuring the resulting savings / Expected savings in 2014 as per
1st EEAP MWH new measure The exact EE savings depend on the specific measures
which will be financed through the subloans Expected energy savings in 2017* MWH
Appropriate indicators and energy saving forecast will be provided as soon as
the project concept is fully developed Expected energy savings in 2018* MWH
Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) MWH TBD Project
agreements Signing Start of implementation in Q3 appraisal in Q1, Q2, of in
Assumptions The effort will be implemented through NMC and will seek to
complement and not overlap with the "Jerm Ojakh" product offered by NMC
Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low-
income Energy Efficiency Program: LED-ligthing for Low-income households Title
of the Energy Saving Measure II10 Index of the measure EE Programs and Measures
Category            Start: 2015; End: 2016 Timeframe 100 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Mitigating impact of electricity tariff increase on
low- income households by offerring subsidized efficient (LED light bulbs) to
replace incadescent light-bulbs in 225,000 households (32% of population
categorized as below the poverty line) Aim/brief description Residential energy
end use, lighting efficiency Target end-use residential sector, low-income
households Target group National Regional application             Develop Low-
income Energy Efficient Lighting Program including: low-income - provision of
LED-light bulbs to all households bulbs; - development of  partnership with the
electric utility to perform maintenance and replacement of these bulbs within an
agreed limit List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the
measure incadescent replace to               $ ,092,687 Budget and financial
source provided by Government of Armenia  Ministry of Energy and Natural
Resources; Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs Implementing body MoENR
Monitoring authority              Method for monitoring/ measuring the resulting
savings NBU Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP MWH Expected energy savings
in 2017 (MWh) 116,159 Expected energy savings in 2018 MWH 116,159 Expected
impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) MWH 116,159 Assuming that
financing will be made available Based on features of  small sample of HHs
conducted by UNDP/GEF, that will need to be expanded Assuming 35% of all
electricity is used for lighting (in low-income HHs – would be more, such as %)
From  to 16 light-bulbs per households, 10 on average Assuming  is the bathroom
and is not used at the  hour per day rate, suggested replacement of  bulbs per
households The average bulb is assumed to be 60 watt capacity, replacing with
/hr LED light bulb Simple payback calculated for current tariff AMD 78 equals
months Assumptions Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy EE Retrofits in
existing residential buildings: National Program and Action Plan for MAB
Renovation & EE Title of the energy saving measure 101 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT II11 Index of the measure Financial instruments,
Information Category Start: 2016; End: 2020 Timeframe The EEIM implementation
speed will depend on the sector readiness, capacity building of beneficiaries,
and market conditions The measure suggests that the Government of Armenia, in
cooperation with donors and IFIs, designs  comprehensive action plan for the
rehabilitation of existing residential buildings by the end of 2020 and the
implementation of that plan The plan attention focuses primarily on multi
apartment residential buildings and weatherization of building envelope This
measure provides energy certification before and after energy renovation
Aim/brief description Existing residential buildings, space heating Target end-
use HOAs, private housing maintenance companies Target group National Regional
application List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the
measure Preparation of multi-year Action; Plan for the renovation of residential
buildings till 2020; Roll-out for replication through commercial banks;
$ 25,000,000 Budget and financial source IFIs    Donors, IFIs/LFIs, PS, HOAs,
ESCOs, MUD Implementing body Monitoring authority MUD Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings NBU Savings achieved in 2014 as per
1st EEAP (MWh) Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) 65,00 Expected energy
savings in 2018 MWH 65,00 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (MWh) *
65,00 The measure recommends that the Ministry of Urban Development initiates
national program for energy efficiency in multi- apartment residential buildings
(MABs) in the Republic of Armenia The program must include: - legal-regulatory
reform eliminating barriers for lending to home- owners associations (HOAs); -
capacity building and institutional strengthening to prepare the HOAs, local
financial institutions (LFSs) and private sector for effectively utilizing the
energy efficiency opportunities in the MABs; To achieve multiplier the effect
and to increase the interest of the apartment owners in the restoration of its
buildings and apartments, it is in the common interest to effectively showcase
the completed projects and the benefits they bring to the households Activities
under this measure that are related to building Assumptions Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy 102 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
refurbishment overlap with the legal regulatory efforts on energy efficiency
policy, and efforts by HBHA These are complex thermal modernization measures
that are subject to  comprehensive program Energy efficiency labelling of
energy-consuming household appliances Title of the energy saving measure II12
Index of the measure Information and mandatory information measures Category
Start: End: end of Timeframe The measure continues with anticipated certain
changes, additions and improvements Using the provisions of the EC Directives as
the basis for defining labelling requirements, in 2010 the UNDP-GEF project
conducted  study to find the best approach for introducing an energy efficiency
labelling system for energy consuming household appliances in Armenia As  result
of this study,  draft Government Decision and energy labelling regulation were
developed Since this was the first time  labelling regulation had been applied
in Armenia,  phased approach was proposed, with only  limited number of
household appliances subject to labelling in the first phase The prepared
materials need to be harmonized with the Eurasian Economic Union requirements
and  labeling outreach campaign designed and launched The list of appliances
subject to labelling would then be gradually enlarged To this aim, the
corresponding international and European (CEN) standards on testing the energy
performance of selected energy-consuming household appliances were translated
and adopted            Aim/brief description The UNDP-GEF prepared  draft
Government Decision and energy labelling regulation, which were both submitted
to the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources for adoption Approval was
expected in Not adopted until now Existing residential buildings, appliance
replacement Target end-use Property owners, tenants Target group National
Regional application List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure Increased awareness and consequently modified end-
user behavior                         $,000,000 Budget  TBD MoENR, producers and
importers/distributors/suppliers of energy-consuming household appliances, and
households Financial source   Implementing body 103 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Monitoring authority MoENR In order to monitor the
effects of this measure it is necessary to ensure the use of TD method
recommended by the European Commission Method for monitoring/measuring the
resulting savings Expected energy savings in 2017 (MWh) 176,704 Expected energy
savings in 2018 (MWh) Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (MWh) 209,369 *
409,635       The tracking the realization of this measure, and with that, the
estimate even with the TD methods have become difficult earnings to the lack of
information concerning the number of the energy-consuming household appliances
which are placed on the market, how much following equipment was purchased and
in which classes on energy efficiency belongs Assumptions Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy This is  horizontal measure  Public Buildings and
Services  Public Buildings Schools, universities, colleges, kindergartens,
medical institutions and athletic facilities comprise 92% of all public
buildings Over 40% of all public buildings are located in the capital of Armenia
Public Buildings: Yerevan Public & Private Secondary Schools Medical
Institutions (Ministry of Health) Higher Education Institutions Middle
Professional Training Institutions Athletic facilities % % % % 41% % 59% 59% 15%
Pre-school Institutions Other Figure The number and area of public buildings in
Armenia, 2013 Source: NSS, and calculations of authors based on average building
size, where statistics was not available 104 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Majority of public buildings are under governmental ownership,
control and direct co- financing The Ministry of Urban Development is the lead
state agency in the field of housing construction and urban development, while
other branch ministries manage and oversee their respective premises ( Ministry
of Health in charge of medical institutions) for the purposes is routine
maintenance and repair Majority of public buildings have very low energy
performance, largely due to the age, poor condition of building envelope as well
as lack of adequate energy management On average such buildings have % potential
for energy saving With energy costs comprising -20% of running costs of most
public institutions, they still supply an average comfort level of approximately
40% The current financing scheme of public institutions per person (per patient
bed in hospitals, per student at educational facilities) created  possibility to
utilize borrowed resources for energy efficiency retrofits, and cover the
investments from savings Such energy saving agreements have successfully been
implemented by Armenia’ Renewable Resources program (worth million USD)
supported by the World Bank and implemented by the R2E2 Fund The program is
targeted to implement energy saving activities in public facilities to reduce
the level of energy consumption by social and other public facilities - Energy
efficiency would free up the scarce public budgets for this sector Without
energy efficiency, the expected increase of energy prices will increase the
demand for public budgets - Within the overall framework of the national energy
security and growing energy prices, and constrained budget resources in public
buildings, energy efficiency is the shortest, cheapest way to help reduce
country’ energy import dependence, curtail the energy expenditures of public
budgets, while mitigating climate change - Finally, addressing this sector could
secure the necessary market transformation, which will have an indirect impact
on private buildings (housing and commercial buildings) as well As to energy
efficiency in building reconstruction, despite the higher cost (than in case of
new construction) the growing energy prices have made these investments cost-
effective The GEF-funded program in Armenia targeted to building energy
efficiency (R2E2’ “Energy Efficiency Project” and “Improving Energy Efficiency
in Buildings” UNDP-GEF project) have proven that energy efficiency investments
with positive net present value and  years of simple payback can save over 50%
of energy compared to baseline consumption both in residential and public
buildings R2E2 experience in public building energy efficiency retrofits firstly
indicated that these buildings were in such poor state of maintenance and repair
that would require substantial investments in rehabilitation without prospects
for cost recovery R2E2 estimated with incremental investments of about $ per m2
(this is equivalent to approximately 10% of the common average $200/m2 for
comprehensive building rehabilitation) the natural gas consumption for heating
can be reduced twice, correspondingly the GHG emissions will be reduced by
around 50% The baseline heating energy demand of 120-125kWh/m2/year is ensuring
only % comfort level, the EE measures allowed improving the comfort to
acceptable levels within the existing budget constraints These improvements are
achieved by  105 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT improvement
package comprehensive energy efficiency insulation of walls/finishing,
replacement of doors and windows, replacement of windows by walls, and roof
insulation, after an efficient heating system has already been put in place The
R2E2 credit line has very strict eligibility criteria and can only finance
energy efficiency measures which have attractive economic indicators (positive
net present value) and only accept applications from public buildings where the
comfort level is beyond 50% As  result, the energy efficiency measures which may
result in substantial greenhouse gas mitigation but has lower cost-effectiveness
or is proposed for suppressed demand conditions will not be eligible for finance
including The demand for energy efficient construction and renovation is much
larger than the funds, currently available in Armenia To this purpose, this
component aims to attract (international) concessional finance to further
increase the number of funding in new construction (including through the PPP
scheme under consideration of MUD according to the 2014 Action Plan) and to the
public buildings to be rehabilitated incorporating the energy efficiency
requirements Despite the 58% energy saving and climate change mitigation
potential, an average of $200 million is being invested in public and social
housing buildings without concern for energy efficiency due to poor legal gaps
and poor enforcement, lack of awareness of the benefits of energy efficiency,
limited technical and institutional capacity to pursue change, lack of
incentives, etc The recent Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA)
Project developed by UNDP to seek climate finance proposes to leverage grant
resources which can cover the incremental cost of energy efficiency investments
at the time of major renovation and reconstruction of public buildings, or new
construction of public buildings and social housing The NAMA project is in
harmony with the state policy in this sector As the regulatory section reported,
the protocol decision #1504- of RA Government “On implementation of energy
saving and energy efficiency improvement measures in facilities being
constructed (reconstructed, renovated) under the state funding" sets the policy
requirement for major public investments in urban development to be integrated
with energy efficiency 106 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table
Energy Saving Potential in Public Buildings Total Area of public buildings in
Armenia (m2) Total energy consumption in Public Buildings (MWh/year)* Annual
Energy Saving Potential (MWh/year)* * - based on R2E2 experience with 56
projects 13,787,397 ,764,787 896,181 Average energy consumption prior to EE in
public buildings Average energy consumption after EE Average energy saving rate
128 kWh/yr 63 kWh/yr 51% 115,814,134,238 Investment need (AMD) at average of AMD
8400/m2 for typical ESMs Investment need (USD) - exchange rate 473 Total
Financing currently available (GEF and KfW) $244,850,178 $ 27,270,296 Source:
National Statistical Service Despite the above large energy saving potential
that is availabe in the public buildings, the operational scheme for energy
saving agreements offered by the R2E2 has strict eligibility criteria and can
cover only  fraction of all public/municipal institutions interested in reducing
their energy costs The current eligibity criteria have put at least 100
appications in the rejection list Considering the limitations of the current
lending scheme it is important that an alternative financing mechanism is worked
out to address the energy efficiency investment needs in those 200 public
institutions From the full NSS databank of Armenia’ all public buildings, the
average public building size is 3292m2 Overall, the unserved demand for energy
efficiency retrofits for these indicative 658,000m2comprises $11,851,806, and
has energy saving potential of This is particularly important because the
submission of the application to R2E2 indicates the political will and readiness
of the management in these institutions to commit to energy efficinecy
improvement measures, loan repayment, etc To favor this positive trend, the E5P
project idnetification mission has proposed an alternative lending scheme with
grant co- financing to supplement the R2E2 credit line for public building EE
The alternative conditions proposed were as follows : • Comfort level > 40%
(instead of the current “> 50%”, because studies show that an average public
building has  comfort level of 35%, which makes many perfectly good project
ineligible) • Estimated energy savings > 20% • NPV > • Simple payback < 10 years
Investment > $ 50 000 • Expansion of acting R2E2 credit line for public and
municipal building energy efficiency retrofits under energy performance
contracting scheme It is proposed to expand the credit line to include
approximately 100 projects (each project usually covers one municipal/public
building or 107 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  street-
lighting system) which have not met the eligibility criteria of the GEF-funded
credit line Typical measures to include:      Insulation of walls and roofs,
replacement windows and doors replacement of street-lighting systems, Heating
system replacement/upgrade Replacement of windows by walls  Street-lighting
Urban lighting costs of Armenian municipalities account for more than USD
million per annum (power costs and maintenance) The capital city of Yerevan has
the largest energy consumption and saving potential in its lighting sector: it
accounts for approximately 80 percent of all urban lighting energy use in the
country29 Table Municipal street-lighting systems in RA Indicators Yerevan Other
cities Number of illuminated objects Number and type of street lights 1235 54880
981 7450 High pressure sodium 150W/250W 50785 7450 Mercury (250W) 2000 3734
Mercury (400W) 700 2740 CFL LED and halogen  229 15 110   Total installed
capacity of street lighting system, MW Annual electricity consumption for 2011,
mln kWh/year 31, , Annual electricity costs for 2011, mln USD/year ,99 , Average
daily length of operation of street lighting, hours  ,44 Annual GHG emissions,
street lighting systems, tCO2/year 12500 3500 Source: UNDP-GEF Several
financiers have addressed energy efficiency improvements in municipal street-
lighting: - R2E2 has been providing 10 loans to municipalities with over
$212,000 in investments via energy saving agreements (ESAs) in cooperation with
contracted ESCOs with energy saving rate of % for Vayq, Dilijan street-lighting
through 368 new light sources - UNDP-GEF Green Urban Lighting Project introduced
about 500 LED lights to Isakov Avenue,Tairov street, as well as Yerevan Zoo and
street lighting pilot in Alaverdi city The initiative, which was carried out in
partnership with the Ministry of Nature Protection and Yerevan Municipality,
allows energy savings of 63 percent, reduction of costs by USD 29 Source:
urban-lightinghtml 108 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT 45,000, and
carbon emissions by 220 tons per year The project has just launched in 2013 and
will continue until 30 - EBRD signed Yerevan Municipal Street lighting loan with
the Armenian Government for 28 pilot streets for EUR  million of which EUR
million will be covered from the E5P grant facility All the individual measures
related to buildings sector were presented either in the regulatory / cross-
cutting section, or in the financing section above Considering the overall
commercial viability of energy efficiency investments in the street-lighting
sector, no new activities are proposed by the NEEAP The R2E2 energy efficiency
credit line for public buildings also finances street-lighing projects and the
available loan funding can be adequate to address the demands of other local
governments for energy efficiency retrofits in public stree-lighting systems
These measures are also cross-cutting with the Covenant of Mayors initiatives
The below summary table provides  summary overview of all described measures in
public buildings and streetlighting, followed by individual activity tables 30
Source:  energy-efficient-leds-installed-along-isakov-avenue-and-tairov-street/
and data provided by Project team 109 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Table Summary of EE Improvement Measures in Public Buidling and
Streetlighting Status in relation to 1st EEAP Achieved energy savings per year
(MWh) No Title of the energy saving measure End-use targeted Duration 2014 2017
2018 2020 Public Building EE: Implementation of energy saving activities in
municipal and social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Implement energy saving
activities in public facilities to reduce the level of energy consumption by
social and other public facilities under energy saving agreement (ESA) scheme
with ESCO participation Start: 2012 End: 2017 partially completed III 401 521
521 521 Public Building EE: Grant-cofinanced Implementation of energy saving
activities in municipal and social public facilities (E5P/R2E2/GEF/WB) Expand
the current R2E2 lending facility to implement energy saving activities in
public facilities to reduce the level of energy consumption by social and other
public facilities, which have suboptimal comfort levels in status quo Start:
2016; End: 2020 new measure III new measure ,214 ,057 ,585 NAMA project to
Support Energy Efficinecy in Public Buildings and Social Housing New
construction and capital renovation of public buildings and social housing,
significant reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE
in buildings Start: 2016 End: 2020 (ongoing) new measure partially completed III
11,442 14,653 21,037 Financing for EE & Public Procurement for EE: UNDP Green
Urban Lighting Project GHG Emission reduction by increasing energy efficiency of
municipal lighting in the cities of Armenia Start:2013 End: 2017 new measure
partially completed III Municipal lighting electricity use in the cities of
Armenia 47 47 47 Energy Efficiency -integrated reinforcement of Schools by KfW
(and potentially ADB) EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan streetlighting USAID Clean Energy
and Water Program for EE & RE solutions in community energy and water use
Start:2016; End: 2020 new measure III Public & service buildings (schools)
pending 39,897 39,897 39,897 Municipal lighting electricity use in 49 streets of
Yerevan, Armenia Start: 2015; End 2017 new measure pending launch III ,277 ,277
,277 rural communities, agricultural water users, community organizations,
municipalities III Start: 2012 completed 19 19 19 19 Sum of savings: MWh 420
57,417 61,470 70,382 Sum of savings: KTOE 04 94 29 05 110 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Agricultural Sector The use of energy in the
agricultural sector has been growing over the past two decades Although this has
been accompanied by growth of the gross agricultural product (GAP), energy use
has increased at  significantly faster rate than has GAP since As  result, the
energy intensity of agricultural output has increased, leading to higher net
energy use per unit of output This is largely due to inefficient machinery (,
pumps) and irrational irrigation water use (, over-irrigating), as well as the
transition from largely manual agricultural practices to more technology- and
machinery-driven practices According to the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) of the
Republic of Armenia, 93% of existing agricultural machinery originated during
Soviet times and is technologically obsolete Figure 30below illustrates these
trendsin agricultural energy consumption and GAP during  40 50 00 00 35 34 00 70
30 00 25 00 22 20 00 18 15 00 10 11 00 94 15 05 00 00 00 2010 2011 2012 GAP ktoe
energy use in agriculture ktoe/output in national currency Figure Energy
Intensity of Gross Agricultural Output,  The share of total national energy
consumption accounted for by agriculture since 2010 has ranged from % to % (See
Figure ), but has been growing steadily since Theenergy 111 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT consumed in this sector is largely in the form of
natural gas and motor fuels; the agricultural sector accounts for only % of
total final electricity consumption % 17% % 15% 13% 11% % % % % % % % % % %  -%
2010 2011 2012 2014 Energy Use in Agriculture & Forestry Share in Total Final
Energy Consumption % increase Figure Dynamics of energy consumption in
agricultural sector (energy use for  from EC-LEDS Energy Balance, for 2014 –
authors’ own calculations based on PSR & NSS data) Armenia’ agricultural
policies are driven by the government’ Strategy for Sustainable Rural and
Agricultural Development for the period  (published in 2010) The Strategy
specifies the key directions for Armenia’ policy in the agriculture sector,
defines sectorial priorities, and identifies preferred areas of specialization
for higher sustainability, as well as social and economic indicators The
Strategy sets the following targets that affect agricultural energy use: • The
volume of agricultural production in 2020 will exceed the  average level by 64%
Total area of cropland will increase by 39% Areas under fodder crops will
increase by 58%, and perennial plantings by 38% Livestock population will
increase (large animals by %, sheep and goats by 62%, pigs by 45%, and poultry
by 46%); livestock productivity will also increase through improvements in
pedigree stock breeding, feeding and farming practices • • • The strategy also
envisages the consolidation of farms and development of agrarian cooperatives,
the improvement of credit, the development of risk mitigation measures, the
development of organic agriculture, efforts to reduce vulnerability to climate
change, and the development of social infrastructure in rural communities As
noted, the growth in energy consumption in the agricultural sector has been
largely attributed to the aging fleet of agricultural machinery, and the
transition from manual processes to machine- 112 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT driven agricultural processes (with new machinery
added even before the old fleet is phased out) In addition, there has
beensignificant growth in the greenhouse industry as well as increasing
irrigation demand to meet the growing demand for agricultural crops and an
increasing amount of aquaculture (fish nurseries) Thus, these sub-activities of
the agricultural sector are the focus of the agricultural section of the second
NEEAP Table The current status of agricultural machinery in Armenia Existing
Unit 15,025 15,063 ,356 ,130 ,031 405 425 ,863 ,903 ,279 ,664 Working Order
11,862 11,383 ,007 ,337 ,714 295 362 ,597 ,447 ,926 ,397 Working Level % % % % %
% % % % % % Tractors Trucks Combine-Harvester Tractor Trailer Tractor Mowing
Machines Forage Harvester Grain Cleaning Machines Row Sowing Machines Tractor
Plows Cultivators Square Baler Source: NSS Note: Based on interviews with Head
of the State Inspectorate Vardan Ghushchyan, around 93% of existing agricultural
machinery was produced in the Soviet Union (during ) and is obsolete The
remaining % (885 different models of tractors) has been imported, financed
largely by grants from IFIs, donors and the Armenian Government The greenhouse
subsector has grown dramatically, from only  hectares in 2011 to 114 ha in 2015,
and this growth trend is projected to continue By 2020,Armenia is expected to
have 634 ha of commercial greenhouses –  growing industry, with growing energy
demands; even the smaller greenhouses built in  consume over  million m3of
natural gas per hectare Natural gas consumption thus almost doubledin this
sector during  (See Figure 32) Considering the expected expansion of the
horticulture sector in Armenia and the energy intensity of this field, improving
the efficiency of energy use in existing greenhouses as well as in planned
greenhouse designs is of critical importance According to the data reported by
the private sector, modern design and economies of scale for greenhouses can
deliver ten times the output using the same energy use Thus, if the greenhouse
industry receives technical assistance and favorable financing, technological
upgrades of existing greenhouses as well as intelligent design 113 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT of new greenhouses can significantly
reduce the rate of growth in energy use of this sector,enabling the sustainable
growth of commercially viable and cost-competitive greenhouses 700 600 634 500
541 448 400 300 200 100 16 12 114 47  - 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
2019 2020 GH Hectares Gas consumption - EE GHs (mln m3) Figure Natural Gas
Consumption in the Greenhouses and hectares of Greenhouses in 2010–2012 (Source:
Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre CJSC, ArmRusGas) Another emerging sector is
cultured fish production – aquaculture in fish nurseries31A Food and
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO) study has estimated that,
as of 2011,Armenia’ total annual fish production is ,000–,500 tons from 233 fish
farms occupying about ,720 hectares This sector is also growing rapidly Since
regulations now require that fish farms circulate the deep-water well
groundwater that they extract for fisheries, the electricity use in this sector
is expected to increase dramatically To mitigate the energy impact of this
practice, it will be necessary to develop and implement energy efficiency
solutions for cultured fish production technology  case study by the Regional
Environmental Center revealed significant potential for energy resource
efficiency in one of the operating fisheries sized hectares: Almost 200 MWh of
electricity can be saved annuallyjust by upgrading the air compression and
conditioning technology This represents  17% reduction in energy costs
associated with fish production at this site It is noteworthy that these energy
efficiency measures also improve the feeding efficiency and productivity of the
fishery overall Considering the growing significance of this sector in Armenia,
providing fish nurseries with technical assistance and access to affordable
finance should be  priority It is important to note that energy solutions in the
fisheries subsector overlap with those inthe industrial sector, considering the
industrial scales of many fisheries enterprises as well as the further
processing and packaging of raw fish into ready food products The proposed
activities for the industry sector related to ISO 50001, resource efficiency and
clean production and introduction of best available technologies are thus
relevant for the fisheries sector and should be included in proposed measures
for aquaculture/fish nurseries Since 2010, when the first NEEAP was developed,
the Government of Armenia and  number of donors and IFIs have implemented  wide
range of programs that have implicitly or explicitly delivered energy efficiency
measures to the agricultural sector These programs have included improvement of
irrigation networks and water supply facilities, upgrading machinery and
equipment, modernization of aquaculture and greenhouses to serve the broader
objectives of 31 Source: FAO Study Available at  114 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT supporting rural communities, and increasing the
sector’ productivity and competitiveness Some of these measures have been aimed
directly at improving energy efficiency in agriculture; others havehelped
improve the sector’ energy efficiency indirectly The main financiers of these
projects have been international organizations and the Government of Armenia The
private sector also contributes significant investments to the sector, mainly
for aquaculture and greenhouses Table  summarizes related activitiesimplemented
as part of the first NEEAP, as well as new measures proposed for the second
NEEAP to help accelerate the introduction of efficient energy and water use in
the agricultural sector It is noteworthy, that the second NEEAP team has
identified  substantially larger portfolio of programs and projects in the
agrcultural sector, which can assumed to have  significant energy and water
sector impact with great certainty However, due to the lack of reporting and
basic metrics available from these activities, it was not possibly to assess
their impact on the sector’ energy consumption to date or expected impact until
These initiatives, however, have been documented and filed in the second NEEAP
for further tracking within the consecutive NEEAPs 115 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table Summary of EEIMs in Agriculture 116 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the   Description Achieved
energy savings in target year (MWH) Status in relation to 1st NEEAP energy
saving measure Target end-use Time- frame 2014 2017 2018 2020 Since 2013 after
negotiations with the Republic of Belarus, 288 comparatively affordable wheeled
tractors MTZ -,40 units plow -108, 20 units square baler PT-165M,  units
precision seed sower SPCH-6LT, units potato Planting machine -201,19 units
potato digger KTN-2V, units hoe -131-, 15 units lawn mowers - and  units
universal pneumatic seeder SPU-4d were imported through SMEDNZ, Since 2010 Japan
Government through the program Official Development Assistence provided to
Armenian Government 171 tractors and spare parts had been imported Farmers
Start: 2013 End: Ongoi ng        Rural development program: high efficiency
agricultural machinery import  Farmers Start: 2010 End: 2012 ,267 ,267 ,267 ,267
Importing high efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA     The Project Development
Objectives were to: () improve water use efficiency in two selected irrigation
schemes; and (ii) foster immediate rural employment Rural irrigation users;
Start: 2009 End: 2013 Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB     The
Project Development Objective is to support improvement of the quality and
availability of water supply in selected service areas of the Armenian Water and
Sewerage Company Total project Cost 18m The activities envisaged under the
Project will bring direct benefits to about 133,000 AWSC service consumers in
three selected cities identified for the Project interventions,  Ashtarak, Masis
and Echmiadzin and neighboring rural settlements Rural irrigation users; farmers
Start: 2012 End: 2015     Municipal water project, WB 117 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Achieved energy savings in target year (MWH) Title
of the   Description Status in relation to 1st NEEAP Target end-use Time- frame
energy saving measure 2014 2017 2018 2020 150 150 150 150 Rural commun ities
Start: 2013- 2014 End: Ongoi ng ) The Berkaber Village Water Supply Project will
improve the community' water network through the installation of modern, loss-
less polyethylene piping, the introduction of water metering infrastructure and
practices, and the repairing of the network' intake/catchment facility ) The
Lukashin Village Water Supply Project will improve the community' water network
through the installation of  new water main, installation of modern, nearly
loss-less polyethylene piping, the introduction of water metering infrastructure
and practices, and the addition of  new pump, and will result in significant
water and energy savings ) Arazap,  small rural community in the Armavir marz,
has access to irrigation water; however, the drinking water was only available
hours per day The project improved the efficiency of the water supply system,
reduced the water losses and contamination risks and has led to significant
water, energy, and financial savings Now, instead of just  hours, the citizens
of Arazap have access to clean water 24 hours  day ) Improve the village
drinking water supply by implementing  combination of measures that allow
significant water and energy improvements and in better cost recovery of the
water supply services, due to improved billing and collection     USAID Clean
Energy & Water Program 118 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Achieved energy savings in target year (MWH) Title of the   Description Status
in relation to 1st NEEAP Target end-use Time- frame energy saving measure 2014
2017 2018 2020 19000 19000 19000 Rural irrigation users; farmers Start: Future
plans On 26 June 2013, the Council of the Anti-Crisis Fund of the Eurasian
Economic Community approved the preliminary request and Concept Note for the
investment project Irrigation System Modernization and Institutional Capacity
Building in Armenia in the amount of US $50 million, with the anticipated
contribution of the Fund of US $40 million The project includes the following
components: · Replacement of mechanical irrigation with flow irrigation; ·
Rehabilitation of main and secondary canals; · Rehabilitation of WUAs’ on-farm
distribution network; and · Building WUAs institutional capacity and pilot
creation of WUAs federation On April , 2014 the  Agency for International
Development (USAID) Administrator Rajiv Shah announced the establishment of the
Global Development Lab The  Global Development Lab will support breakthrough
solutions in water, health, food security and nutrition, energy, education, and
climate change, reaching 200 million people in the next five years Armenia is
selected as one of USAID’ twenty lead missions worldwide that will champion
science, technology, innovation and partnership (STIP) initiatives In recent
years, USAID has invested nearly $45 million in STIP-related projects in
Armenia, particularly in the sectors of high technologies, energy and water,
governance, and health care      Irrigation System Modernization and
Institutional Capacity Building, WB Fish farms Start: 2014 End: 2030
Science technology innovation partnership (STIP) 119 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the   Description Achieved energy savings
in target year (MWH) Status in relation to 1st NEEAP energy saving measure
Target end-use Time- frame 2014 2017 2018 2020 Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre
cooperating with the Government of Armenia is planning to expand the greenhouse
area to reach at least 500 ha of large industrial greenhouses in Private greenho
use sector Start: 2011 End: 2020 425 480 591     Energy efficient greenhouse
Creating mechanisms for grading agricultural products based on quality for the
processing industry This is especially important for the grape processing sector
This will focus farmers’ attention on the proper agro management, which in turn
means providing adequate volume of water to the plants Most of the agricultural
machinery equipment is in the private hands These owners are established service
providers in their communities However, they do not generate sufficient funds to
replace their old and obsolete machinery with newer equipment The new equipment
tends to be given to the agricultural cooperatives under state or other donor
subsidy mechanisms Usually the cooperative members are small holder growers and
are not capable of properly operating and maintaining the equipment This lack of
skills and knowledge drastically cuts the useful life of the equipment
Transformation into gravity irrigation will contribute into energy saving,
because pumping system installed in Soviet Union periods is very expensive to
operate This action will result to energy saving, for example in 2013 the energy
consumption of water supply companies dramatically reduced from 129 watt/hour to
25 watt/hour Process ors, farmers Start: Immed iately End: 2020     Grading
agricultural products based on quality  8620 25900 51700 Farmers Start: Immed
iately End: 2020 134 201 269      Renewing the agricultural machinary park
Start: Immed iately End: 2020      Install gravity irrigation 172000 17200 34500
51700 Farmers 120 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Description
Title of the   Achieved energy savings in target year (MWH) Status in relation
to 1st NEEAP energy saving measure Target end-use Time- frame 2014 2017 2018
2020 ,508 19,223 19,223 19,223 65 Total MWH 13 65 65 Total ktoe 121 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The above tablealso presents the new
measures and policy/program recommendations, which can help slow down the rate
of increase in energy intensity of agriculture, while helping improve the
productiveness of the sector These included the following programs:  Rural
development program brought Government support in negotiations and import of288
units of high efficiency agricultural machinery  Operational Development
Assistance from Japanese Government supported importing 171 high efficiency
tractors;  The World Bank implemented several rural and community development
programs aimed at irrigation system enhancement, emergency irrigation
rehabilitation, community agricultural resource management and competitiveness,
as well as municipal water supply The WB also plans to launch  new program aimed
at Irrigation System Modernization and Institutional Capacity Building with
complex portfolio of irrigation improvement projects  USAID through its Clean
Energy and Water Project supported water supply improvements in Berkaber,
Lukashin, Arazap villages, potable water supply project in Hartavan village; 
The GEF Small Grants Program supported Parakal community decentralized
wastewater treatment,  Water supply and sanitation sector project  Agriculture
and rural development, ENPI, ADA  Science technology innovation partnership
(stip)  Energy efficient greenhouse  Farmer education on irrigation management
 Grading agricultural products based on quality  Renewing the agricultural
machinary park  Establishment of agricultural groups/cooperatives  Install
gravity irrigation Considering The international best practices in the context
of Armenian agriculture, the following measures need to be implemented in order
to further improve the energy efficiency and competitiveness of the agricultural
sector:  Addressing the problem of regular electricity supply at relatively low
cost through effective use of solar, land, underground, water energy
alternatives in mountainous and border villages  Farmer education on irrigation
management: Many of the farmers in Armenia over- irrigate their plots
considering the abundance of water  positive impact for the plants and trees
This practice is counter-productive and even damaging for many plants, including
apricot trees and grape vineyards Education of farmers is necessary on
sustainable irrigation practices, which will not only help optimize the water
use and improve harvest productivity, but also save substantial amounts of
energy  Continue the modernization of the agricultural machinery and equipment
park as well as the equipment park database management, as 92% of current
tractors and 80% of 122 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
combine harvesters are more than 25 years old Most of the agricultural machinery
equipment is in the private hands These owners are established service providers
in their communities However, they do not generate sufficient funds to replace
their old and obsolete machinery with newer equipment The new equipment tends to
be given to the agricultural cooperatives under state or other donor subsidy
mechanisms Usually the cooperative members are small-scale holder/growers and
are not capable of properly operating and maintaining the equipment This lack of
skills and knowledge drastically cuts the useful life of the equipment If the
trend continues, there will be  serious risk of losing the cadre of the
community tractorists So, there should be  program directed to these individuals
or the cooperatives should be encouraged to integrate the community
mechanizators into their groupThis activity should be integrated with the
continued establishment of agricultural groups and cooperatives, which generally
contributes to the scale effects of grouping smaller producers and harvesting
benefits from shared access to cost-intensive technical solutions  Meanwhile
the current database of the agricultural machinery lacks quality information and
is poorly managed To be able to support and track the effect of the fuel-
efficient technology adaptation in the country, one needs to have access to
indicators on the use of existing modern equipment is being utilized in the
country This data is not available at this stage One of the ways to improve the
registration system is implementation of  general system of agriculture
administrative register  Continue focusing on the gravity irrigation
programs:The pumping system inherited from Soviet Union is too expensive to
operate In order to avoid huge costs of inefficient electricity use in those
systems the gravity irrigation system needs to be installed where possible 
Focus on waste water collection and waste management in general:There are 20
factories, which are engaged in wastewater cleaning However, those factories are
inefficient, physically and morally obsolete Investing in new technologies
directed to wastewater cleaning will substantially improve the energy use of
this sector, as well as the volumes of water saved  Armenia has significant
water resources ensuring development of aquaculture In this context, an
important problem is the excess use of water and electricity by this sector
Installation of dissolved oxygen concentration readers inaquaria, allowing
working out air-conditioning equipment can be considered as one of the best
methods of saving electricity Within the scope of RECP energy efficiency
programs  similar project was implemented in Unifish LLC in The expected annual
energy saving after the project implementation for just one fish farm was194
MW/year (or AMD ,153,920)  In order to make the use of agricultural resource
potential more effective,  special attention should be paid to promotion of
creation of greenhouses in farming entities The following activities need to be
implemented:  Provision of tax privileges for import of main equipment and
construction materials needed for creation of greenhouses, 123 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Provision of affordable targeted loans for creation
of greenhouses for farmers Implemented within the scope of first NEEAP, the
energy efficiency projects listed below were/are aimed at mitigating the
increase in energy intensity of agriculture 124 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Rural development program: high efficiency
agricultural machinery import Title of the energy saving measure VI Index of the
measure Category Agriculture Machinery Start: 2013 End: Ongoing Timeframe Since
2013 after negotiations with the Republic of Belarus, 288 comparatively
affordable wheeled tractors MTZ -,40 units plow -108, 20 units square baler
PT-165M,  units precision seed sower SPCH-6LT, units potato Planting machine
-201,19 units potato digger KTN-2V, units hoe -131-, 15 units lawn mowers -  and
units universal pneumatic seeder SPU-4d were imported through SMEDNZ,
Aim/brief description Target end-use Farmers Target group Ministry of
Agriculture Regional application National List and description of energy saving
actions substantiating the measure Tasks to be implemented are:  Giving farmers
new machinery with low rates and cheap prices is intended to help farmers save
energy by working efficiently                          Not possible to be
determined Ministry of Agriculture Budget and financial source Implementing body
State sector, SMEDNZ, Ministry of Agriculture   Monitoring authority Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP MWH/year Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP Expected achieved in 2018
MWH/year Expected energy savings in 2020 Expected impact on energy savings in
2020 (if available) Energy Efficiency of vehicles                   125 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy 126 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Importing
high efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA Title of the energy saving measure VI
Index of the measure agricultural machinery upgrade, Information and mandatory
information measures; Transport specific measures; Start: 2010 End: 2012
Category Timeframe            Since 2010 Japan Government through the program
Official Development Assistance provided to Armenian Government 171 tractors and
spare parts had been imported Aim/brief description Target end-use Farmers
Target group Regional application National List and description of energy saving
actions   substantiating the    measure    Budget and financial  source
Implementing body              Replacement of agricultural machinery / Ministry
of Agriculture, Japan Government   Monitoring authority Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP MWH/year Savings achieved in 2014 Expected energy savings in 2017 Expected
energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available)
Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy MoA Energy Efficiency of
vehicles,                   127 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure Irrigation system
enhancement project, WB VI Category Irrigation Start: 2013 End: 2017 Timeframe
The Project Development Objectives are () to reduce the amount of energy used
and to improve the irrigation conveyance efficiency in targeted irrigation
schemes; and (ii) to improve the availability and reliability of important
sector data and information for decision-makers and other stakeholders
Aim/brief description Target end-use Rural irrigation users; Target group
Farmers Regional (Meghri, Gegardalich, Baghramyan-Norakert and Kaghtsrashen) Key
Indicators are the volume of water savings was increased from 97 to 131 million
cubic  Rehabilitation of identified stretches of primary canals (US$90million)
in the selected irrigation schemes Six schemes were identified for support with
approximately 50 km of main and secondary canal sections to be rehabilitated
Rehabilitation of Primary Canals in Talin and Armavir Irrigation Schemes (US$08
million) This component financed rehabilitation of 81 km of primary canals (main
and branch canals) in the Talin and Armavir schemes: 01 km of the Talin
Irrigation Scheme located in Aragatsotn and Armavir Marzes, as well as 80 km of
the Armavir Irrigation Scheme located in Armarvir Marz As the geographic scope
of the project was expanded under the Additional Financing, water users in
Kotayk, Shirak, Lori, Ararat, and Gegarkunik marzes were brought within the fold
of the project and benefited from project interventions It is estimated that
approximately 118,000 water users benefited under the project meters (MCM) (35
percent increase) Target was subsequently set to reduce seepage losses by
percent so that by end-of project losses would be  percent Potential increase of
total irrigation area as  result of rehabilitation works on main/secondary
canals from 28,275 ha to 83,210 ha Rehabilitation of on-farm irrigation network
(US$02 million) would rehabilitate selected tertiary canals Restored irrigation
area in communities with rehabilitated tertiary network is 704 ha Nineteen
communities of Lori, Shirak, Gegharkunik and Armavir marzes would benefit from
improved water conveyance over about ,500 hectares Regional application
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source $ 33,100,00 128 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Implementing body Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector Monitoring
authority World Bank Method for monitoring/measuring the resulting savings
Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014 Expected
energy savings in 2017 Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on
energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy Energy Efficiency of project Changed Irrigation Pipes
129 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Index of the measure Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB VI
Category Irrigation Start: 2009 End: 2013 The Project Development Objectives
were to: () improve water use efficiency in two selected irrigation schemes; and
(ii)foster immediate rural employment Rural irrigation users; Timeframe
Aim/brief description Target end-use Target group Regional application Farmers
National Key Indicators are the volume of water savings was increased from 97 to
131 million cubic  Rehabilitation of identified stretches of primary canals
(US$90million) in the selected irrigation schemes Six schemes were identified
for support with approximately 50 km of main and secondary canal sections to be
rehabilitated Rehabilitation of Primary Canals in Talin and Armavir Irrigation
Schemes (US$08 million) This component financed rehabilitation of 81 km of
primary canals (main and branch canals) in the Talin and Armavir schemes: 01 km
of the Talin Irrigation Scheme located in Aragatsotn and Armavir Marzes, as well
as 80 km of the Armavir Irrigation Scheme located in Armarvir Marz As the
geographic scope of the project was expanded under the Additional Financing,
water users in Kotayk, Shirak, Lori, Ararat, and Gegarkunik marzes were brought
within the fold of the project and benefited from project interventions It is
estimated that approximately 118,000 water users benefited under the project
meters (MCM) (35 percent increase) Target was subsequently set to reduce seepage
losses by  percent so that by end-of project losses would be  percent Potential
increase of total irrigation area as  result of rehabilitation works on
main/secondary canals from 28,275 ha to 83,210 ha Rehabilitation of on-farm
irrigation network (US$02 million) would rehabilitate selected tertiary canals
Restored irrigation area in communities with rehabilitated tertiary network is
704 ha Nineteen communities of Lori, Shirak, Gegharkunik and Armavir marzes
would benefit from improved water conveyance over about ,500 hectares
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source Implementing body $ 36,220,00 Ministry of
Agriculture, State Sector, World Bank 130 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/measu ring the resulting
savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014* MWH
Expected energy savings in 2017 Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact
on energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy World Bank Energy Efficiency of project Changed Irrigation pipes
Rehabilitated canals              / 131 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Community agricultural resource management and competitiveness project, WB
Title of the energy saving measure VI Index of the measure Category Irrigation,
Pasture Start: 2011 End: 2016 Timeframe The project development objective is to
improve productivity and sustainability of pasture/livestock livelihood systems
in selected communities This would be evidenced by: () increased livestock
productivity as measured by milk productivity and increase in daily animal
weight gain; (ii) increased efficiency of communal pasture management, as
measured by increased communal budgetary revenues from lease of pastures; (iii)
increased farm sales from livestock; and (iv) increased Pasture Management
Effectiveness            Aim/brief description Target end-use Rural irrigation
users; farmers Target group Regional application Farmers National 132 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT As  result of project interventions, milk
productivity both for cattle and sheep have increased by % and 15% respectively
as compared with the end project targets of 20% and 10% (from ,428 kg/year to
,748 kg/year for cattle and from 66 kg/year to 76 kg/year for sheep) Similarly,
the growth rates of animals for cattle and sheep have increased by 18% and 16%
respectively against the end project targets of 20% and % Efficiency of communal
pasture management as measured by increased communal budgetary revenues from
lease of pastures has increased by % compared with the end-target of 30% Sales
from livestock have increased by 133% vs planned mid-term of 10% and end-project
20%  total of 83 communities have established and registered Pasture User
Cooperatives (PUCs) and developed their Pasture Management and Livestock
Development Plans (PMLDP) (28 more than originally planned) In addition  more
communities have registered PUCs, which will be supported with potential savings
or with funds provided under CARMAC II Construction works of pasture watering
systems are: () completed (165 km waterline, 205 watering points) in 63
communities, () under implementation in  communities (18 km waterline, 18
watering points) and () in the stage of design in  communities (12 km waterline,
watering points) Some 545 units of agricultural machinery, including 124 wheeled
tractors, 80 baling machines and 341 units of other agricultural tools have been
provided to the PUCs of 70 communities Two communities have implemented some
160ha of cultivated fodder production supported under the Project and most of
the other communities plan to use the provided machinery to cultivate fodder
with subsidized inputs from the government program In 2014, this agricultural
machinery and equipment generated AMD  million in income for the MASCs and AMD
million for the RASC              List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure               Budget and financial source
Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/measu ring the
resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in
2014 Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector, World Bank World Bank Energy
Efficiency of project        Irrigation canals       133 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on
energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy 134 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the
energy saving measure Index of the measure Municipal water project, WB VI
Category Irrigation Start: 2012 End: 2015 Timeframe The Project Development
Objective is to support improvement of the quality and availability of water
supply in selected service areas of the Armenian Water and Sewerage Company
Total project Cost 18m The activities envisaged under the Project will bring
direct benefits to about 133,000 AWSC service consumers in three selected cities
identified for the Project interventions,  Ashtarak, Masis and Echmiadzin and
neighboring rural settlements            Aim/brief description Target end-use
Rural irrigation users; farmers Target group Regional application Farmers
National Weighted average daily supply of drinking water service in selected
areas (Hours, Custom) from 30 hours in beginning of project(2012) increased to
current indicator 82 hours (2015) The weighted average non-revenue water in
selected areas (Percentage, Custom) baseline was %,actual number decreased to
81% As part of the water network rehabilitation, the project is replacing main
water pipes in the selected areas While most of the network rehabilitation and
pipe replacement is completed, the individual connections to households are yet
to be completed The water is still being delivered to the customers through the
old deteriorated pipes until the household connections are done This explains
the high level of non- revenue water This indicator is expected to drop to
realistically reflect the actual NRW The measurement will be taken in end June
2015 and reported in the final ISR Number of people in rural areas provided with
access to improved Water Sources under the project (Number, Custom), the
baseline was 21,400 users, actual increased to 31,089 users, moreover expected
target number during program closing is 33,328 The water production (liter per
capita per day) (Number, Custom) initially was 752L, currently it have decreased
to 484l Number of automation systems installed at pumping stations and daily
regulation reservoirs (Number, Custom) List and description of energy saving
actions substantiating the measure               Budget and financial source 135
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Implementing body Ministry of
Agriculture, State Sector, World Bank Monitoring authority World Bank Method for
monitoring/measuri ng the resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP Savings achieved in 2014 Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact
on energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy Energy Efficiency of project Electricity consumption
136 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Index of the measure USAID Clean Energy & Water Program VI Category
Irrigation Start:  End: Ongoing ) The Berkaber Village Water Supply Project will
improve the community' water network through the installation of modern, loss-
less polyethylene piping, the introduction of water metering infrastructure and
practices, and the repairing of the network' intake/catchment facility ) The
Lukashin Village Water Supply Project will improve the community' water network
through the installation of  new water main, installation of modern, nearly
loss-less polyethylene piping, the introduction of water metering infrastructure
and practices, and the addition of  new pump, and will result in significant
water and energy savings ) Arazap,  small rural community in the Armavir marz,
has access to irrigation water; however, the drinking water was only available
hours per day The project improved the efficiency of the water supply system,
reduced the water losses and contamination risks and has led to significant
water, energy, and financial savings Now, instead of just  hours, the citizens
of Arazap have access to clean water 24 hours  day ) Improve the village
drinking water supply by implementing  combination of measures that allow
significant water and energy improvements and in better cost recovery of the
water supply services, due to improved billing and collection Rural irrigation
users; farmers Timeframe            Aim/brief description Target end-use Target
group Farmers Regional application Regional List and description of energy
saving actions substantiating the measure Budget and financial source
Implementing body Reduction in energy use by installing gravity irrigation,
Reduction in water losses by installing new pipelines                          $
265,00 Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector, World Bank   Monitoring authority
USAID Method for monitoring/measuring  the resulting savings             Energy
Saving of project Number of beneficiaries: ,641residents 137 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP 82 Savings
achieved in 2014 82 Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on energy
savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect,
synergy 82 82 138 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Parakar
Community Decentralized Wastewater Treatment, GEF Small Grant Title of the
energy saving measure VI Index of the measure Category Irrigation Start: 2010
End: Ongoing March 2010, the Global Environment Facility’ (GEF) Small Grants
Program (SGP) in Armenia supported the initiative of the Parakar community
administration to address the issue through application of  low-cost,
decentralized wastewater treatment system as  simple local solution The
initiative was aimed to rehabilitate community farmlands through application of
lagoon type biological ponds for domestic wastewater treatment The technology
allows treating the household wastewater to the quality required for irrigation,
while using the naturally treated effluents Target end-use Rural irrigation
users; farmers Target group Farmers Regional application Regional Timeframe
Aim/brief description It was estimated that after the project implementation 100
hectares of degraded lands will be restored and penetration of about 12 tons of
nitrogen and  tons of phosphorus into the groundwater aquifer will be prevented
About 45 households of the community will gain an average USD 700-,200 annual
income, depending on the cultivated cropThe community administration plans to
provide the treated wastewater to the most vulnerable groups for irrigation at
lower price It will result in expansion of cultivated farmlands by about
hectares $ 220,00 Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector, USAID              List
and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority USAID  Energy
Saving of project Water Saving Number of Beneficiaries Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings              Expected savings in 2014
as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014 Expected energy savings in 2017
Expected energy savings in 2018 139 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions*
Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 140 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure Water Supply
and Sanitation Sector Project VI Category Energy Start: 2012 End: 2017, Ongoing
The Project funds two project components which include: () municipal
infrastructure rehabilitation and improvement; and (ii) management improvement
and development which include gender features This Component will address the
rehabilitation and replacement of the existing water supply infrastructure Works
will include construction of about 600 km of new mains and pipe network to
connect about 110,000 new and existing households, rehabilitation of about
pumping and about  chlorination stations,  water treatment plants, about 15
daily regulation reservoirs as well as installation of about 20,000 water meters
to commercial and domestic consumers Further, this component will include the
re-designing of the water supply systems Rural irrigation users; farmers Farmers
Regional By redesigning the overall WSS systems, this component addresses the
existing problems of the systems being overdesigned/under-designed It also
includes updating of consumer databases, conversion of illegal connections to
registered accounts, and monitoring of water quality To demonstrate 100% water
supply coverage, 100% metering, 24- hour water supply with the desired pressure,
and 100% collection efficiency, the Project will select  pilot zone and
concentrate resources to undertake the related actions This will help gain the
confidence of all consumers in the Project area in an efficient and strongly
governed WSS system, and help the implementing agency (IA) to replicate it
smoothly Selection of the pilot zone will be based on active participation and
strong commitment of the users, apart from technical considerations to isolate
the zone hydraulically for the required water pressure after addressing all the
water losses $ 36,000,000 Timeframe            Aim/brief description Target end-
use Target group Regional application              List and description of
energy saving actions substantiating the measure              Budget and
financial source  ADB Financing Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector,ADB ADP
Energy Saving of project Implementing body Monitoring authority              141
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Method for monitoring/measuring
the resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved
in 2014 Expected energy savings in 2017 Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected
impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps,
multiplication effect, synergy Water Saving 142 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Irrigation System Modernization and Institutional
Capacity Building, WB VI10 Title of the energy saving measure Index of the
measure Category Irrigation Start: future plans End: ongoing On 26 June 2013,
the Council of the Anti-Crisis Fund of the Eurasian Economic Community approved
the preliminary request and Concept Note for the investment project Irrigation
System Modernization and Institutional Capacity Building in Armenia in the
amount of US $50 million, with the anticipated contribution of the Fund of US
$40 million The project includes the following components: · Replacement of
mechanical irrigation with flow irrigation; · Rehabilitation of main and
secondary canals; · Rehabilitation of WUAs’ on-farm distribution network; and ·
Building WUAs institutional capacity and pilot creation of WUAs federation
Target end-use Rural irrigation users; farmers Target group Farmers Regional
application Timeframe            Aim/brief description Regional 143 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Replacement of Mechanical Irrigation with
Flow Irrigation (US $ 14 million); The objective of this component is to reduce
the costs related to supply of irrigation water by replacing mechanical
irrigation (using pumps) with flow irrigation: Argichi, Amrakits, Akunk,
Norabats, Masis, Nor Kharberd, Spitak, Tsav Shikaog, Sarashen, Artamet, Ptghni
As  result of this component implementation, mechanical irrigation systems will
be replaced with flow ones for ,250 ha of land that will generate annual savings
of 16 million kWh of electricity or US $  million Rehabilitation of Main and
Secondary Canals (US $  million); As  result of this component implementation,
canals of total length of around 31 km will be restored in Aragatsotn, Armavir,
and Kotaik irrigation systems,239 ha of land will be connected to reliable water
supply Implementation of this component will generate annual savings of
operating costs(US $ 15 million) and million m3 of water (US $ 52 million)
Rehabilitation of WUAs On-Farm Distribution Network (US $ 25 million) In some
cases, on-farm distribution system is not consistent with existing agricultural
needs Some of these systems can be modified by the introduction of drip
irrigation or rain Under this component, such options will be fully explored and
developed for certain areas of the main and inter-farm canals in Ararat,
Aragatsotn, Armavir, Syunik, Vayots Dzor, Kotayk and Shirak irrigation systems
and Yerevan As  result of implementing this component, 27,000 ha of land will be
connected to reliable water supply Implementation of this component will
annually generate savings of operating costs (US $ 30 million),  million kWh of
electricity (US $ 21 million), and million m3 of water              List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority $ 44,000,00
Ministry of Agriculture, State Sector,EDP, World Bank EDP, World Bank Method for
Energy Saving of project monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings Expected
savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Water Saving       144 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Savings achieved in 2014 Expected energy savings in
2017 Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020
(if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 19000 19000
19000 145 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy
saving measure Index of the measure Agriculture and Rural Development, ENPI, ADA
VI11 Category Irrigation Start: 2014 End: 2017 The Project will support in:
establishment and strengthening of cooperatives, business capacity building,
increase of the production volume, product development, technology upgrading,
marketing, as well as introduction of best agricultural practices (drip
irrigation, etc) and disaster risk reduction (antihail nets, anti-frost) systems
The Program is financed from the European Neighborhood and Partnership
Instrument (ENPI) and consists of three parts: Support to Agriculture and Rural
Development, to contribute to efficient and sustainable agriculture and
development of rural areas in Armenia, in line with the European Neighborhood
Program for Agriculture and Rural Development (ENPARD) approach (€25 million)
Support to Regional Development in Armenia to ensure progress towards the more
balanced social and economic development between regions of Armenia (€10
million) Support for EU-Armenia Agreements to assist key Armenian institutions
to implement the Visa Facilitation/Readmission Agreements and the ENP Action
Plan, to reinforce Armenia' civil society role to monitor the implementation of
the Armenian reform agenda, to strengthen the ability of civil servants, as well
as to promote Armenia' participation in EU programs and cooperation with EU
agencies (€ million) Target end-use Rural irrigation users; farmers Target group
Farmers Regional application Regional List and description of energy saving
actions substantiating the measure Budget and financial source Implementing body
Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/measuring  the resulting savings
Timeframe            Aim/brief description                          € 41,000,00
Ministry of Agriculture, European Union, ADA European Union, ADA
146 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected savings in 2014 as per
1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014 Expected energy savings in 2017 Expected
energy savings in 2018 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available)
Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 147 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Index of the
measure Category Science technology innovation partnership (STIP) VI12
Technology, energy, water Start: 2015 End: 2030 Ongoing On April , 2014 the
Agency for International Development (USAID) Administrator Rajiv Shah announced
the establishment of the  Global Development Lab The  Global Development Lab
will support breakthrough solutions in water, health, food security and
nutrition, energy, education, and climate change, reaching 200 million people in
the next five years Armenia is selected as one of USAID’ twenty lead missions
worldwide that will champion science, technology, innovation and partnership
(STIP) initiatives In recent years, USAID has invested nearly $45 million in
STIP- related projects in Armenia, particularly in the sectors of high
technologies, energy and water, governance, and health care Fish farms
aquaculture businesses & SMEs Timeframe            Aim/brief description Target
end-use Target group Regional application National Build  simple model to
analyze energy, environmental (water), and economic data; populate the model
with data specific to Armenian fish farms and micro-hydro technologies; and use
the model to analyze at least three micro-hydro technologies applied to at least
five Armenian fish farms and weigh the options against E3 factors The output
must be an easy-to-understand matrix of fish farms and micro-hydro technologies
ranked by suitability The model must be simple and accessible The resulting
model and output will be used by USAID Armenia as part of its Advanced Science &
Partnerships for Integrated Resource Development (ASPIRED) program Science,
Technology, Innovation & Partnerships (STIP) Signature Effort, under which at
least two technologies with the objective of increasing energy efficiency and/or
renewable energy generation will be developed, piloted, and evaluated
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority USAID Method
for monitoring/measuring the resulting savings  $,000,000 Ministry of
Agriculture, USAID             /  148 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT / Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014
Expected energy savings in 2017 Expected energy savings in 2018 Expected impact
on energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy / / / / 149 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title
of the energy saving measure Index of the measure Energy efficient greenhouses
VI13 Category Technology, energy, water Start: 2011 End: 2020 Armenian Harvest
Promotion Centre cooperating with the Government of Armenia is planning to
expand the greenhouse area to reach at least 500 ha of large industrial
greenhouses in Today  projects of Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre are already
in the production phase, they cover 14 ha today with plans to expand to 70 ha by
Additionally,  ha started the construction, 150 ha project is in the final
negotiation, 126 ha and 150 ha are in the final stage of study In those
greenhouses the main productions currently are tomatoes, cucumbers, radish, and
roses The table in the right represents the greenhouse covered areas since 2010
and the planes until Utility cost for greenhouse(per m3/year) Water - 61 AMD
Gas- 35 AMD Electricity - 10 AMD Private greenhouse sector Timeframe
Aim/brief description Target end-use Target group horticulture businesses & SMEs
Regional application National Drip irrigation saves 90%-95% of water, the old
system saves only % The new greenhouse energy saving is estimated to be nearly
60%, compare to old one Reducing gas consumption per hectare from  million m3 to
35 million m3 for all the new Greenhouses since 2016 List and description of
energy saving actions substantiating the measure                          Budget
and financial source Implementing body $27,000,000   Armenian Harvest Promotion
Centre Monitoring authority Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP Savings achieved in 2014  Energy savings               Water saving 150
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected energy savings in 2017
Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if
available) 78 30 33 new energy efficient greenhouse design will be developed and
endorsed as  construction code and provided to greenhouse developers as guidance
Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 151 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Index of the
measure Category Farmer education on irrigation management VI14 Agriculture
Education Start: 2016 (immediately) End: Ongoing Many of the farmers in Armenia
over irrigate their plots thinking that the extra water is good for the plants
and trees This over watering, however, hurts many plants  vivid example of this
is irrigation management of Apricot orchard, which can get easily hurt by too
much watering Moreover, many farmers plant alfalfa (requiring frequent and heavy
irrigation) in the in rows of the Apricot orchard In this case the farmers end
up using twice as much water than needed Target end-use Farmers Target group
Regional application List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure Timeframe            Aim/brief description Ministry
of Agriculture, Ministry of Education National Tasks to be implemented are:
Inform the farmers about the proper irrigation management to save water and
improve the health of the plants The program can cover planting area for most of
fruits (40,200 ha) and grapes (17,500 ha) and could result in about 30% water
saving ( page 303) Not possible to be determined Ministry of Agriculture
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for
monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st
EEAP MWH/year Expected achieved in 2018 MWH/year  State sector, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Education  Ministry of Agriculture Reduction of the
quantity water used              152 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Expected energy savings in 2020 MWH/year Expected impact on energy savings
in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 153
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Grading agricultural products based on quality 15 Index of the measure
Category Agriculture Processing Start: 2016 (immediately) End: Ongoing Timeframe
Creating mechanisms for grading agricultural products based on quality for the
processing industry This is especially important for the grape processing sector
This will focus farmers’ attention on the proper agro management, which in turn
means providing adequate volume of water to the plants The current quality
inspection is based on acceptable vs non acceptable qualities There is no price
incentive for the better quality grapes based on the health and sugar content of
the grapes As  result, many farmers over irrigate the vineyards to increase the
weight of their produce            Aim/brief description Target end-use
Processors, Farmers Target group Regional application List and description of
energy saving actions substantiating the measure Ag Processors National Tasks to
be implemented are:  Organize the processors and farmers into industry boards to
set quality standards and connect the price to the standard
Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Economy Budget and financial source
Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/mea suring the
resulting savings Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP MWH/year  State
sector, Ministry of Agriculture  Establishment of quality based grading system
Improved agronomy Improved irrigation management and reduction of water usage
8620 154 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected achieved in
2018 MWH/year Expected energy savings in 2020 MWH/year Expected impact on energy
savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect,
synergy 25900 51700 155 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title
of the energy saving measure Renewing the agricultural machinary park VI16 Index
of the measure Category Agriculture Production Start: 2016 (immediately)
Timeframe End: 2020 Most of the agricultural machinery equipment is in the
private hands These owners are established service providers in their
communities However, they do not generate sufficient funds to replace their old
and obsolete machinery with newer equipment The new equipment tends to be given
to the agricultural cooperatives under state or other donor subsidy mechanisms
Usually the cooperative members are small holder growers and are not capable of
properly operating and maintaining the equipment This lack of skills and
knowledge drastically cuts the useful life of the equipment If the trend
continues, there will be  serious risk of losing the cadre of the community
tractorists So, there should be  program directed to these individuals or the
cooperatives should be encouraged to integrate the community mechanizators into
their group Replacement of the old tractors with new once would result in 20%
fuel savings The current database of the agricultural machinery lacks quality
information and is poorly managed To be able to support and (track the effect
of) the fuel efficient technology adaptation in the country, one needs to know
how is the existing modern equipment is being utilized in the country
Aim/brief description Target end-use Farmers Target group Regional application
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure Budget
and financial source Implementing body Ag Mechanizators National Tasks to be
implemented are:  Assist the community mechanizators (tractorists) to aquire new
and fuel efficient equipment                           Create  reliable database
of the Ag Machinary in the country Ministry of Agriculture   State sector,
Ministry of Agriculture 156 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings
Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP Expected achieved in 2018 Expected
energy savings in 2020 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available)
Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Energy saving 157 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure
Establishment of agricultural groups/cooperatives VI17 Index of the measure
Category Agriculture Production Start: 2016 (immediately) End: 2020 Timeframe
The land and agricultural machinary privatization created  system with hundreeds
of thounsands small holder farmers on the one side and  small number of
agricultural machinary owners on the other side The relationship between these
two groups is regulated by the market, which in this situation creates loose-
loose situation for both groups, because the agricultural fields are usually
several kilometers away from the community On the one side the farmers has to
pay extra for the fule for the tractorist to reach the plot and On the other
side the tractorist uses the useful life of the tractor on the roads to reach
small land plots This useful life could have been spent on ploughing, spraying,
harvesting, or any other mechanization requesting activities that are so much
needed in the fields today Furthermore, for this trip the tractorists do not
recieve payment other than fuel compensation This extra fuel cost to reach the
plots is about 10% of the total fuel cost            Aim/brief description
Target end-use Farmers Target group Regional application List and description of
energy saving actions substantiating the measure Budget and financial source
Implementing body Monitoring authority Farmers National Tasks to be implemented
are:  Establish cooperatives to have joint management of the plots In addition
to saving on fuel to reach the plot, this will create economies of scale and
reduce the fuel efficiency in general                          Ministry of
Agriculture State sector, Ministry of Agriculture   158 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Method for monitoring/mea suring the resulting
savings Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP Expected achieved in 2018
Expected energy savings in 2020 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if
available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Energy saving
159 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Index of the measure Install gravity irrigation VI18 Category Irrigation
Systems Start: Immediatley End: 2020 Transformation into gravity irrigation will
contribute into energy saving, because pumping system installed in Soviet Union
periods is very expensive to operate This action will result to energy saving,
for example in 2013 the energy consumption of water supply companies
dramatically reduced from 129 watt/hour to 25 watt/hour In case if the gravity
irrigation is not possible, to establish small renewable energy sources (such as
solar) to provide energy to the pumps Timeframe            Aim/brief description
Apply modern irrigation methods (such as drip irrigation) and support private
sector to introduce this technology for irrigation Target end-use Farmers Target
group Regional application List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure Farmers National Tasks to be implemented are:
Install garvity irrigation, in order to avoid energy spending on pumps
Install modern irrigation methods (drip irrigation) Ministry of Agriculture
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for
monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings Achieved savings in 2014 as per 1st
EEAP MWH/year  State sector, Ministry of Agriculture               Energy saving
172000 160 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Expected savings in
2017 as per 1st EEAP MWH/year Expected achieved in 2018 MWH/year Expected energy
savings in 2020 MWH/year Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if
available) MWH/year Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 17200
34500 51700  Industry, SMEs and Power The industry sector  significant energy
consumer in the country, at 18% of national final energy consumption in This
sector is expected to grow its energy consumption dramatically reaching % in the
next five years ( forecast of the Armenia: Energy Demand Planning) This trend
highlights the importance of energy efficiency measures in this sector 161
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT ,00 50 ,90 ) 45        00 43
,00 40 36 40  35 00 33 / 30   ( 00 25        20 72 27 43 00  15        10 00 05
- - 2010 2011 2012 Sectoral GDP (Bln AMD) Energy Use in Industry (ktoe)
Industrial energy intensity Figure Industrial Energy Intensity Trend,  The
analysis of energy intensity of the industrial sector reveals  visible reduction
of the energy use per unit of industrial output This has largely happened due to
increasing energy prices and modernization of production technologies (Figure
33) 162 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The structure of
energy used in the industrial sectors is presented below Figure 34 - Industrial
Energy Use by Sub-sector,  The industrial energy consumption is largely
comprised of electricity and natural gas Table Structure of Natural Gas
Consumption by Sectors () 2011 2012 2013 2014 Share in Final Consumption (%)
Quantity of Imported Gas Gas distributed through Networks, including to
Population Power Sector Industry Vehicle Fueling Stations (CNG) Public Sector
Other Consumers Average calorific value of natural gas (kCal/m3) 05 92 92 82% 75
542 93 26% % % 24% % % 91 29 04 261 36 418 96 45 89 42 250 8214 163 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT The industry sector consumes about 18% of
all natural gas in Armenia Almost imported is 30% of all natural gas consumed in
the power industry for generation of electricity Furthermore, all 20% the
electricity produced country is consumed in the industrial is electric dominated
equipment and metal product sub-sectors The breakdown of electricity consumption
by sub- sector is presented in Figure 500 400 300        of in 200 100 sector
which years  by 2010 2011 2012 2013 Waste collection, treatment and disposal
activities; materials recovery Sewerage Water collection, treatment and supply
Water supply, sewerage, waste management and remedlation activities  Power
Sector Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply Manufacture of
machinery and equipment  Electricity generated by: in Armenia is Manufacture of
electrical equipment Manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products ;
Nuclear power plant, which generates 30- 50% of the electricity needs, depending
on plant uptime and ability to purchase nuclear fuel; Manufacture of fabricated
metal products, except machinery and equipment Figure 35: Electricity
Consumption by Industry Sub- Sector,  ; hydro-electric plants, which generate
about % of the country’ needs; and ; thermal plants, which provide the balance
of electricity needs from burning natural gas Municipal heat and hot water
supply systems in Armenian cities essentially collapsed because of the economic
and energy crisis that followed the separation of Armenia from the former Soviet
Union in Though centralized district heating (DH) systems have been partially
restored in some cities, most of the urban population does not have access to
organized heat and hot water supply services The population switched to gas-,
electricity- or wood-fired individual heating systems with varying levels of
efficiency Well managed district heat systems are more efficient and can be
better solution for Armenia, especially if utilizing renewable energy sources
Considering Armenia’ potential for geothermal energy utilization, it is
important to consider 164 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
geothermal heat pumps as  district heating technology If successful, this
solution can be scaled up to larger share of consumers Today, in some large
public and private service buildings heat is supplied by centralized boiler
systems while smaller residential buildings mostly use local heating systems
However, most of the buildings equipped with central boiler systems operate
inefficiently due to poor maintenance or old age Refurbishment or reconstruction
of these systems would result in  significant decrease in energy intensity and
greatly reduce the maintenance burden The latest WB Armenia Power Sector Policy
Note highlighted the urgent need for investment to mitigate the emerging energy
supply gap For example, the least efficient thermal power plant, Hrazdan TPP has
an efficiency of 31% This highly inefficient plant is currently used as the
circuit station and needs to run post 2016 thus incurring heavy cost burden on
the generation This power station has been targeted for refurbishment with  new
gas-fired 500 MW combined cycle gas turbine planned to be operational by Aside
from the generation, several transmission assets are in  state of disrepair and
require urgent maintenance and modernization to maintain supply reliability WB
compared the Armenian transmission networks with the well-performing US and
European networks, and found  higher outages per transmission line The improved
transmission reliability will significantly reduce energy losses Several
transmission project related investments are underway and planned in this
direction and presented in Table  Energy Management and Clean Production
Industrial and SME Affordability of tariffs for both natural gas and electricity
has become  major concern not only for the population, but also the large
industrial consumers and SMEs Energy efficiency can help the local producers
remain competitive under the conditions of growing energy prices When energy
prices increased in 2013, the National Association of Manufacturers,
Entrepreneurs and Employers (NAMEE) requested Government support for seeking
energy savings and energy efficiency solutions In response, the Ministry of
Energy and Natural Resources and the Ministry of Economy worked with the NAMEE
to develop specific steps to reduce energy intensity in industry and improve
competitiveness Recent pilot projects and technical assistance programs
implemented by donors have identified the great potential to improve energy
efficiency in industry through implementation of energy management systems,
building capacity in energy auditing and application of best available
technology practices for energy efficiency It has been estimated that these
initiatives could reduce energy intensity by 20% with  reasonable financial
return on investment Some of the identified measures include: 165 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT ; UNIDO/REC Resource Efficiency and Clean
Production Program, with RECP audits of 10 pilot enterprises revealed % cost
effective energy and water use reduction possibilities; ; Ministry of Nature
Protection transposing BREF notes for application of best available technologies
in various sectors of the economy (including cement production and copper
smelters) identified % reduction in energy use, accompanying the technological
changes aimed at reducing environmental pollution The international best
practice for  country like Armenia is to set up  Cleaner Production Assistance
Center Such  center() work with the of Government and academia in assisting
industry through outreach programs, trainings, subsidized energy audits,
dissemination of information on best available technologies, benchmarking, etc
There is  potentially great value added effect for academic institutions helping
industry through outreach and research in EE and RE and thus increasing the
opportunity for academic institutions to conduct more research which will
provide more training for future industry participants (student and researchers)
Hence, this activity must be carried out incombination with the development of
adequate university curricula and preparation of adequate professorial cadre, to
further prepare qualified industrial energy managers and auditors This all
contributes to improving competitiveness of the country  Financing of Industrial
and SME Energy Efficiency Concurrently, several IFIs (GGF, IFC, EBRD, and soon
KfW) have offered sustainable energy financing for industrial and SME borrowers
during , with some of these loans accompanied with subsidized energy audits
Although these IFIs have not forecasted future lending plans, but it can
reasonably be assumed that the same lending trend will persist and potentially
accelerate in the light of growing energy costs KfW, for example, is expected to
launch  new credit line in Table 33 summarizes the data supplied by IFIs for
this sector Table EE Project Financing by IFIs in Industrial and SME Sectors
Total Loan Portolio [USD] Annual Lending Reported for  New Source 2016 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 2015* EBRD - Industrial (specify) 800,000 ,760,000 ,560,000 -
Power Sector/generation 18,965,000 18,965,000 - SME (specify sector) ,120,000
,720,000 ,050,000 400,000 15,290,000 Subtotal ,920,000 18,965,000 ,480,000
,050,000 400,000 - - GGF 37,815,000 166 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT - Industrial (specify) ,440,928 ,440,928 - SME (specify sector) 921,872
921,872 Subtotal - - - ,362,800 - - - IFC ,362,800 - Industrial (specify)
25,050,000 25,050,000 Subtotal - - - 25,050,000 - - - KFW 25,050,000 - SME
(specify sector) 20,000,000 20,000,000 Subtotal - - - - - 20,000,000 -
20,000,000 86,227,800 ,920,000 TOTAL 18,965,000 ,480,000 37,462,800 400,000
20,000,000 - *- data for 2015 reported as of May 2015 Considering the
demonstrated potential in Armenia for cost effective projects that can
significantly reduce energy intensity and deliver important operational
efficiency in the industrial and SME sectors, it is recommended to seek
opportunities for wider implementation of resource efficiency initiatives
Implementation of ISO 5001 compliant energy management systems, conducting
energy audits, and dissemination of knowledge about benchmarking practices will
contribute to the increased quality of economic growth and clean production in
Armenia initiating  program The NEEAP proposes for supporting energy resource
efficiency transformation programs for large industrial companies (large energy
consumers) for promotion of best practices and to accelerate the identification,
planning, and implementation of high impact energy efficiency measures
Fundamentally, the program must be aimed at mainstreaming energy management and
resource efficiency in large energy consuming enterprises to ensure sustainable
outcomes The program will start with implementation of ISO 50001 Energy
Management in industry This program must be developed in cooperation with the
Ministry of Energy and Natural resources, the Ministry of Economy, National
Association of Entrepreneurs and Employers, Armenia’ Chamber of Commerce,
Regional Environmental Center (REC) and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO), major players in industry The program must
build  network for introducing energy management best practice, encouraging
cooperation, and developing  platform for sharing lessons learned on site The
program should be introduced through voluntary compliance schemes, benchmarking,
coordination with financiers for soft financing terms on targeted loans,
awareness, outreach, and  clear recognition process highlighting positive
outcomes 167 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  EE-Integrated
Renewable Energy Sources Armenia does not have any domestic fossil fuel
resources which puts the country in  perilous state of energy insecurity
National economic development is tightly linked to energy prices and
availability of imported energy resources Promotion of renewable energy
technologies will also support development of technical skills in this field,
create jobs, reducing national carbon footprint while helping nation’ energy
security Therefore, utilization of indigenous renewable energy sources is of
utmost importance The NEEAP proposes stronger support for solar water heaters,
distributed solar PV systems and piloting of geothermal heat pumps for building
heat Development of domestic renewable energy sources featured prominently in
the the Primary Energy Saving Section of the NEEAP Similarly, the market for
energy efficiency services remains one of the missing links for the private
sector players to tap into energy efficiency potential in their businesses
Energy Service Companies (ESCOs) are gradually becoming  new important partner
in promoting sustainable energy solutions in Armenia Their creation has been
supported by  number of donor-funded programs As long has donor support was
fully available for grant-funded energy efficiency investments, the ESCOs did
not develop financing features, but built up skills for designing energy
efficiency projects and implementing implemented the engineering work As the
R2E2 established the lending scheme for public building energy saving
investments via energy saving agreements through ESCOs, more than 30 companies
are now operating, which provide services such as weatherization, design,
installation and maintenance of boiler houses, as well as broader consulting on
related issues While the ESCOs do not function under guaranteed or shared
savings contracts, the payments are linked to delivered energy savings and
However, they still do not share or guarantee amounts of energy saved neither do
they bear direct financial risk This is why the promotion of ESCOs, as promoters
and vendors of energy efficiency, need support This task is addressed among the
cross-cutting/horizontal measures, along with the capacity building needs of
other players in initiation, development and financing of energy efficiency in
private sectorOverview of initiatives implemented and proposed for the
industrial, power and SME sectors are presented in Table 34 with specific
measures presented in the subsequent tables 168 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table Summary Overview of EEIMs for the industry
sector (power, industry & SME) Title of the energy saving measure end-use
targeted Duration Achieved /Expected energy savings in target year(MWh) Status
in relation to 1st NEEAP not implemented   2014 2017 2018 2020 Considering
energy efficiency aspects during approval an Industry & SME: ISO 50001 users,
RECP, BAT, benchmarking Start:2016 End: ongoing Start:2010 End: ongoing -
construction of new industrial facilities 271,969 397,132 718,979  Increasing
the efficiency of the central heating plant Developed model of an efficient
energy cogeneration and supply partially implemented     and suppliers: Avan DH
- cogeneration 57,228 67,327 70,693 77,426  Implementation of Energy Efficiency
Financing Facil Reported in cross-cutting section partially implemented not
implemented     ity for Industrial Enterprises  Natural gas savings through
improvement of transm ission pipelines and substations, and optimisation of
existing boiler houses in TPPs TPP 500 MW to cover peaks and reserve margin,
after the decommissioning of blocks - of Hrazdan TPP since 2020 energy
generation, distribution Start:2020 End: ongoing - - - ,739,961      not
implemented Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: Start: 2015
End: 2060      WB Electricity Supply reliability - - - ,560  not implemented not
implemented Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks:    reduced
energy losses in distribution networks Improved energy efficiency and energy
savings of power sector   EBRD Power Supply Reliability - - ,311 ,311
Electricity savings through improvements of existing electricity network,
compensation of reactive power and improvement of transformers Reduction of
Electricity Losses in Low-voltage networks, ArmElNet Start: 2012 End: 2017
Start: 2016 End: 2020      - - 18,000 18,000  not implemented reduced energy
losses in distribution networks - 62,072 62,072 62,072        169 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure end-
use targeted Duration Achieved /Expected energy savings in target year(MWh)
Status in relation to 1st NEEAP new measure   2014 2017 2018 2020 Wider
Application of Renewable Energy: SWHs The measure is designed on the basis of
realized best practices and experiences Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and beyond)
Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and beyond)  10 12 16     Geothermal Heat Pumps for
Central Heating space heating, energy efficiency, renewables, PPP new measure -
705 705 705       Total Industry & Power (MWh) 57,233 402,082 551,925 ,623,030
Total Industry & Power (toe) ,921 34,573 47,457 483,494 Individual measures are
presented below 170 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Table 35:
Specific measures associated with the initiatives presented in Table 34 above
Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure Energy Management IV
Information and mandatory information measures, Voluntary measure Start: End: ()
The measure is linked to the agreement between RA Government and The union of
manufacturers and businessmen (employers) of Armenia for energy management,
resource efficiency and environmental performance in industry sector The main
objective of measure is to provide fast and quality cooperation between industry
and exchange of good practice during the implementation of organizational
recommendations contained in ISO Category Timeframe This measure provide support
for assessment of potential energy savings in industrial plants through an
implementation of energy audit The audit include: the - mandatory energy audits
for companies with an annual energy consumption of more than than prescribed
with the law; - voluntary scheme for other companies, especially for SMEs -
Introduction and implementation of ISO 50001 scheme for Energy Management in
Industry Increased resource and energy efficiency in manufacturing industry
Industry sector Aim/brief description for industry scheme should
Target end-use Target group Regional application National 171 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Energy Management
Promotion of ISO The purpose of this International Standard is to enable
organizations to establish the systems and processes necessary to improve energy
performance, including energy efficiency and intensity The standard should lead
to reductions in cost, greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental impacts,
through systematic management of energy Application of the standard can be
tailored to fit the requirements of the organization, including complexity of
the system, degree of documentation, and resources and applies to the activities
under the control of an organization - To organize training on implementation of
Energy Management in Industry - To organize trainings for obtaining
authorization for energy auditors and licenses for energy audit performing - To
prepare manuals for training programmes for experts entitled to perform energy
auditing  - To realize energy audit of industrial processes - Good housekeeping
includes no-cost or low-cost measures and activities such as tracking steam and
compressed air leaks, tuning boiler and furnace burners, piping insulation,
replacing leaking steam traps, shutting-off equipment when it is not required,
as well as preventing maintenance on heat transfer equipment (, heat
exchangers), and on pumps, fans, compressors, measuring devices, and control
systems Most of the savings are related to steam generation, distribution and
condensate return -Promotion of good practices in the use of energy in
appliances and equipment, use of raw materials, production, waste materials
handling, maintenance, etc -Dissemination of the results and achievements -One
of the most important issue for direct practicing of good house-keeping is
motivation of employees directly dealing with the facilities and equipment and
that should be  task of the management of the companies $,000,000 Government,
PS, other              List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure               Budget and financial source 172 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Energy
Management Academic institutions - Preparation of training programmes for
experts entitled to perform energy auditing and inspection Consulting
organizations – performing energy audits Academic institutions, Private sector,
NGO- Provide consultancy services, trainings of auditors etc Financial
institutions- Soft loans for EE projects State Statistical Office of RM-
Collection, processing and dissemination of statistical data Implementing body
Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings
Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2014* , MWh Savings
achieved in 2017 , MWh Expected energy savings in 2018* , MWh Expected impact on
energy savings in 2020 (if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy MoENR, Ministry of Economy Industrial energy auditing New 67,19
*              271,78 397,57 718,76 Funding availability synergy with amendments
of ES&RE Law on mandatory energy audits, REC/RECP initiatives, BREF/BAT
introduction, etc 173 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the
energy saving measure Increasing the efficiency of the central heating plants
and  uppliers: Avan DH - cogeneration Index of the measure Category Timeframe IV
Cross-cutting Start: 2005, ongoing UNDP CHP Project in Avan district connected
36 multi-apartment buildings to Avan CHP Aim/brief description            Target
end-use Developed model of an efficient energy cogeneration and supply Target
group Regional application Citizens Regional (Yerevan/Avan) assistance the of
included: Project ) study; ii) development of  regulatory framework to reduce
commercial risk, by establishing public-private partnerships and establishing
preferential tariffs for electricity generated from cogeneration units and heat;
iii) assistance in negotiations between private sector and national authorities
– Government, Regulator and Yerevan Municipality - during the initiation and
implementation of the pilot project; iv) organisation of consultations with the
Avan district community management; and ) area; vi) provision of international
consultants, particularly Ramboll / and organisation of study tours for national
decision-makers; vii) provision of apartment level heat and hot water metering
equipment; viii) Monitoring system operation The Autonomous Thermal Power Plant
with - 4MWe and 36 MWt capacity was commissioned on 15 December As of 2012, one
CHP unit and one peak boiler had been installed to supply 30 apartment
buildings, 12 mln USD schoo ments- USD The system was commissioned on 15
December  and two kindergartens residents) (,000 Leveraged foreign direct invest
2009 feasibility development for tariffs two-part supplied              List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure condominium
public surveys opinion pilot the of in              one  Budget and financial
source Implementing body Monitoring authority Method for    monitoring/mea $
12,000,000 UNDP UNPD Measuring the periodic consumption of energy by selected
district and comparing to the previous data           174 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Increasing the
efficiency of the central heating plants and  uppliers: Avan DH - cogeneration
suring the resulting savings GHG emissions district The the for compared
baseline natural their appliances annual GHG needs the phase amounted to 10,200
CO2eq 57,228 reduction assessment project the using electric hot water of
project Avan the scenario gas-fired heating restoration project of with
households using emissions 75% of 25% heat emissions of and both for and The
first reduction the Savings achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in
2014 (mWh) Expected energy savings in 2018* mWh Expected impact on energy
savings in 2020 (if available) ktoe Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication
effect, synergy 67,327 70,693 77,426 Natural gas savings through replacing old
turbines with new and more efficient turbines in TPPs Title of the energy saving
measure IV Index of the measure Utility, power generation, supply-side Category
Start: 2018 End: 2020 In 2019 it is scheduled to take out of operation - blocks
in Hrazdan TPP, instead of with it is planned to put into operation 500MW TPP in
2020 Timeframe Aim/brief description 175 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Natural gas savings through replacing old turbines with new and more
efficient turbines in TPPs Title of the energy saving measure Improved energy
efficiency and energy savings of power sector Target end-use Power sector Target
group National Regional application List and description of energy saving
actions substantiating the measure Budget and financial source TPP 500 MW
proposed by the WB to cover peaks and reserve margin, after the decommissioning
of blocks - of Hrazdan TPP                         $ 515,000,00  World Bank,
MoENR Implementing body   Monitoring authority World Bank, MoENR Method for
monitoring/measuring the resulting savings Expected savings in 2012 as per 1st
EEAP, MWh Savings achieved in 2012*,, MWh Expected energy savings in 2018, MWh
Expected impact on energy savings in 2020, MWh National BU              ,739,961
The new gas turbine will be replacing the oudated facility Hrazdan TPP, phasing
out excessive gas consumption due to low efficiency of the old unity (31%),
while the new will have 49% eff Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect,
synergy Title of the energy saving measure Reduction of energy losses in
distribution networks: WB Electricity Supply reliability Index of the measure IV
Category Programs, Financing 176 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Title of the energy saving measure Reduction of energy losses in distribution
networks: WB Electricity Supply reliability Start: 2015 End: 2060 Timeframe WB
Electricity Supply Reliability Project reducing system losses from - % to %
reaching positive net economic benefit in Aim/brief description Cost: $102
million (WB + RoA Govt) Target end-use energy generation, distribution Target
group Regional application Power industry National The proposed project
represents phase  of the comprehensive program transmission network and
substations in Armenia that will upgrade the national power system operation
reliability and efficiency, and enhance transmission capacity Phase  of three
main components: () expansion of supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA) system and energy management system (EMS), (ii) rehabilitation of four
existing 220-kilovolt (kV) substation, and (iii) support for institutional
development, capacity building, and project management The benefits of avoided
equipment breakdown can be quantified in terms of avoided loss of energy,
measured in kWh All four concerned substations are over forty years old and
physically and morally obsolete what causes frequent temporary shutdowns The
substations are expected to become fully non- operational shortly and if they
are not replaced the total loss of generation is quantified in final feasibility
study at ,474 GWh, what corresponds to more than 80% of total supply in Armenia
The rehabilitation of  substations will improve operational efficiency of whole
internal transmission network, by reducing the number of unplanned outages
(defined as outages above  hour) in the 220 kV transmission network by 50%
Replacement of one section of the power transmission backbone, the transmission
line connecting two key generation centers in the central part of the country
(Hrazdan Thermal Power Plant) and in the South (Vorotan Cascade of hydropower
plants), and service for large electricity consumers in the central-eastern part
of the country Replacement of the targeted section of the transmission line is
critical, since it is in extreme disrepair and jeopardizes the to rehabilitate
220 kV include the project will              List and description of energy
saving actions substantiating the measure failures of individual components and
177 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: WB Electricity
Supply reliability reliability of the power supply and overall network stability
The line was constructed in 1956–58 and has been in service since then
Conductors, pylons, insulators, and other key pieces of infrastructure are
obsolete and need replacement There are also  number of critical substations
that are essential to the reliability of the power supply in the country and
require urgent rehabilitation, particularly given that some of the equipment
dates back to the 1930s and has not been replaced since then The Additional
Financing will be rehabilitating three of those substations: Haghtanak,
Charentsavan-, and Vanadzor- Budget and financial source Implementing body
Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/mea suring the resulting savings
Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP Expected achieved in 2018 Expected
energy savings in 2020 Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available)
Assumptions* US$ 41,550,000 for now WB, GoA MoE, WB MoE, WB              178
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving
measure Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: WB Electricity
Supply reliability Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Reduction of energy
losses in distribution networks: EBRD Power Supply Reliability Title of the
energy saving measure Index of the measure IV Rehabilitation, capacity building
Start: 2016 End: ongoing EBRD -Armenia Power Supply Rehabilitation Project:
Phase  Rehabilitation of 220 kV transmission network and substations in Armenia
Category Description Timeframe Aim/brief description reduced energy losses in
distribution networks Target end-use Power industry Target group National
Regional application List and description of energy saving actions
substantiating the measure Rehabilitate key substation and transmission critical
for system-wide reliability of power supply lines Information on implementation
US$ 70,000,000 Budget and financial source MoE Implementing body Monitoring
authority Method for monitoring/measuring the resulting savings Expected savings
in 2012 as per 1st EEAP Energy savings Expected energy savings in 2017* ,311
,311 Expected energy savings in 2018* Expected impact on energy savings in 2020
(if available) Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy submitted
for consideration for E5P grant co-financing 179 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Reduction of Electricity Losses in Low-voltage
networks, ArmElNet Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure IV
Rehabilitation, capacity building, financing Category Start: 2016 End: 2020
Timeframe Description Reduce the network energy losses by an average of
Aim/brief description reduced energy losses in distribution networks Target end-
use Power industry Target group National Regional application () reorganization
of transformers based on current substation loads () deeper penetration
(bringing high voltage transmission lines closer towards retail (low voltage )
consumers)); () loads equalizing phases in transmission lines (supplementing
loads) missing () changing the of the wire sections to cost-optimal size to
loads; () modernization of switchboard equipment List and description of energy
saving actions substantiating the measure symmetrical ensuring Information on
implementation current meet $ 22,768,434 Budget and financial source ArmElNet
Implementing body MoENR Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/measuring the
resulting savings Expected savings in 2014 as per 1st EEAP  62,072 124,144
Expected energy savings in 2017* Energy savings Expected energy savings in 2018*
Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) 496,577 financing
availability Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy submitted for
consideration for E5P grant cofinancing 180 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Wider Application of Renewable
Energy: SWHs IV Index of the measure Financial instruments, Regulation,
Information Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and beyond) The measure is designed on the
basis of realized best practices and experiences Timeframe Considering the
positive trend in installation of solar water heaters (SWHs), and recognizing
the potential for these systems to help contribute to nationwide energy saving,
this measure aims at encouraging the wider application of solar thermal systems
for hot water preparation and the use of heat pumps in heating systems and wider
application of solar thermal systems for hot water preparation
Installation of solar thermal systems for hot water preparation is mandatory for
public buildings during their rehabilitation, if there is economical
justification Suggest legal requirement for new buildings and building units
subject to major renovation owned by the state or the municipalities to
incorporate solar thermal systems for the preparation of hot water where it is
economically justified Solar collectors should be installed in hospitals,
kindergartens, secondary school and university students’ residence halls, social
care facilities, sports halls, justice and military relatively acceptable
payback period of the investment can be provided with large hot water needs
during the day and during the year As an alternative, but also complement to the
solar systems are geothermal heat pumps, which provide efficient heating and
cooling of buildings with an efficiency of over 400% lodged in terms of energy (
kWh electrical energy provides up to  kWh heat) The use of renewable energy
(solar thermal systems, heat pumps, biomass) Aim/brief description institutions
Economic viability and Target end-use Municipal, residential Target group
National Regional application  Law on Yerevan City Center
List and description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure  Law on
Dilijan – Green City  Amendment 1405 (Dec 25, 2014) to Law on ES&RE on Mandatory
EE in public procurement       181 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Title of the energy saving measure Wider Application of Renewable Energy: SWHs
Mandatory application of solar systems for hot water preparation for new public
buildings and building units and public buildings and building unit subject to
major renovation, if economically justified;  Energy auditors control
Government Financial incentives; -proper realization of BEP;  NGO, Private
sector awareness, information, promotion;  Academic institutions, Private sector
Development of domestic technologies, Transfer of know-how Budget and financial
source TBD MoENR, R2E2, KfW, AFD/NMC, GGF Implementing body R2E2 Monitoring
authority Monitoring the effects of these measures is realized using the NBU
method where are set up  national benchmarks Details are given in the document
"Measurement and verification of energy savings using the method of bottom-up"
Method for monitoring/measuring the resulting savings To monitor the effects of
these measures will be used NBU method for solar systems as recommended by the
EC Beneficiaries of funds required by local and territorial (regional)
governments provide information about the surface and the type of installed
collector (plate or tube), as well as the efficiency of the hot water that was
used prior to the installation of solar panels              Expected savings in
2014 as per 1st EEAP MWH  *        Savings achieved in 2014* MWH Expected energy
savings in 2017 MWH Expected energy savings in 2018*         182 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the energy saving measure Wider Application
of Renewable Energy: SWHs Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if
available) MWH Although 1st Energy Efficiency Action Plan gives approximate
estimates for achieving energy savings that are associated with this measure,
due to the lack of detailed plans for the implementation and the uncertainty
related to the response of MoENR and R2E2, for the next period is not possible
to give precise estimates of potential savings However, it is assumed that all
consumers will establish cooperation with the EEF to co-finance the installation
of solar thermal systems Assumptions Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy
Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure Geothermal Heat Pumps
for Central Heating IV Category Financial instruments, Regulation, Information
Start: End: 2020 (and beyond) 2016 Timeframe            Aim/brief description
Target end-use space heating, energy efficiency, renewables, PPP Target group
Municipal, private sector, PPP Regional application Pilot in Jermuk, Vayots Dzor
Region, scale out to nationwide As  supplement to EE and SWH, geothermal heat
pumps can provide efficient heating and cooling of buildings with an efficiency
of over 400% lodged in terms of energy ( kWh electrical energy provides up to
heat) Design and implement  pilot project for  typial building the cost- -floor
building effectiveness and economic viability of this technology for heating
residential and public buildings It is key to seek  public-private partnership
arrangements whereby  private energy service provider can partner with the local
Government (Jermuk municipality, in this                          List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure kWh is necessary
to verify   183 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Title of the
energy saving measure Geothermal Heat Pumps for Central Heating case) for
utilization of municipal assets and private management, investment co-financing
and know-how $ 68,60 E5P, own resources, other MoENR, Municipality of Jermuk,
Vayotz Dzor Regional Administration Budget and financial source Implementing
body Monitoring authority MoENR Method for monitoring/measuring the resulting
savings Bottom-up Expected savings in 2017 as per 1st EEAP (MWh) Expected
achieved in 2018 (MWh) Expected energy savings in 2020 (MWh) 705
,410 ,820 financing will be secured and technical solution successful
Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy Application submitted to
E5P for grant co-financing Electricity savings through improvements of existing
electric ity network, compensation of reactive power and improveme nt of
transformers Title of the energy saving measure Index of the measure IV5c
Category Capacity building Start: 2012 End: 2017 Under the project financed
through the Asian Development Bank loan (2013) it is planned to rehabilitate and
upgrade four of seven in Sevan-Hrazdan Cascade Hydropower System, HPPs
rehabilitation of water outflow canals three plants and replacement of
electrical equipment in the plants respectively            Timeframe Aim/brief
description in 184 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Electricity
savings through improvements of existing electric ity network, compensation of
reactive power and improveme nt of transformers Title of the energy saving
measure Target end-use Improved energy efficiency and energy savings of power
sector Target group Regional application Power sector National The project
includes two major components: extension of dispatching control and data
collection system (SCADA), and rehabilitation of eight existing 220 kV
substations with respective replacement of aged transformers, circuit breakers
and other equipment The project aims to restore the capacity of the hydropower
plants by megawatts (MW), improve their reliability and safety, and reduce IEC’
operational and maintenance expenses The project will also reduce water leakage
from the diversion channels and could increase power generated by the system
After repair of the diversion channels, it is estimated that water leakage will
decrease by 50 million–85 million cubic meters annually, which will bring
additional generation of 18–30 GWh of electricity              List and
description of energy saving actions substantiating the measure
Budget and financial source Implementing body Monitoring authority $ 25,000,00
MoE Method for monitoring/meas uring the resulting savings NBU
Expected savings in 2012 as per 1st EEAP Savings achieved in 2012* Expected
energy savings in 2018* , mWh 18,00 185 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Electricity savings through improvements of existing electric ity network,
compensation of reactive power and improveme nt of transformers Title of the
energy saving measure Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available),
mWh Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect, synergy 54,00 Development of
distributed solar PV generation through implementation of Net metering provision
Title of the energy saving measure IV Index of the measure Policy
implementation, Regulation, Information Category Start: 2016 End: ongoing
Timeframe Net Metering provides PV customers with opportunity to have  zero
charge against their electricity consumption if it is offset by the PV
generation Distributed generation, solar energy, autonomous electricity
production, net metering Aim/brief description Target end-use
Citizens, autonomous electricity production for own needs Target group National
Regional application The 2003 Law on Energy Saving and Renewable Energy created
the legal provision for net metering In 2005 the PSRC developed the procedures
for parallel operation of autonomous renewable energy producers, which defined
the non-commercial relationship of the electric network with the micro-
generation facilities with capacity under 150 kW (PSRC Resolution №194, 2005)
The regulation, however, has failed to be implemented due to tax accounting
issues, which require immediate solution With the growing energy tariffs, the
small- scale solare PVs systems hold  large potential to help develop the
distributed RE generation             List and description of energy saving
actions substantiating the measure                186 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Development of distributed solar PV generation
through implementation of Net metering provision Title of the energy saving
measure Budget and financial source $ 66,000,000 GoA Implementing body
Monitoring authority Method for monitoring/measuring the resulting savings
Savings achieved in 2012 mWh Savings achieved in 2014 mWh Expected energy
savings in 2017* mWh 133 501 ,938              Expected energy savings in 2018*
mWh Expected impact on energy savings in 2020 (if available) mWh ,729 ,094
Assuming that the GoA will take the necessary measures to implement the
provision: Assuming the current trend of installing Solar PV increases by 30%
from the reference value of  Assumptions* Overlaps, multiplication effect,
synergy  Transport/Mobility According to recent studies supported by USAID to
investigate the Energy-Fuel Balance of Armenia, the transport sector in Armenia’
economy was the second biggest energy consumer for three consecutive years (),
surpassed only by the residential sector In 2010, the transport sector consumed
about 500 ktoe (which was %of the nation’ total consumption) Figure 36 shows the
energy consumption trend of the transport sector Figure Final Energy Consumption
in Transport Sector,  (ktoe, % of total, % annual change) 187 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Final energy consumption in Transport (ktoe) Share
in TFEC (%) Annual change (%) 700 45% % 40% 600 35% 500 % 30% % % 400 25% % % %
20% 300 15% 200 10% 100 %  % 2010 2011 2012 2014 Source: USAID Enhancing
Capacity for Low Emission Development Strategies (EC-LEDS) for , for 2014 –
authors’ own calculations based on PSRC and NSS data The main primary energy
sources consumed by the transport sector include:  motor fuels (mainly
gasoline, diesel and compressed natural gas or CNG) consumed by all types of
road transport (RT);  electricity consumed by public transport (mainly by the
metro systemin the capital Yerevan and trolleybuses) and railroad (more than 95%
of Armenia’ railroad networkis electrified); jet kerosene consumed by air
transport  According to Armenia’ the Third National Communication on Climate
Change and GHG Inventory, there were about 434,600 units of registered road
transport (RT) vehicles in Armenia, of which 70% (about 300,000) in running
condition Table 36summarizes the 188 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT available data on the structure of the RT fleet actually running in
Armenia in 2010 by the main category and motor fuel burned Table RT Fleet
(Number) Actually Running in 2010, by Main Category and Motor Fuel Burned RT
Fleet Category Total RT by Category Gasoline Diesel CNG Passenger Cars 165,171
,409 80,999 247,579 Buses and Minibuses Trucks ,962 ,902 ,521 11,385 13,434
182,567 14,848 12,550 15,861 101,368 40,832 299,796 Total RT by motor fuel
Source: GHG Inventory, Transport Sector Yerevan, October, One third of the
running RT fleet in 2010 used CNG The passenger car category accounted for about
83% of the total running RT fleet; in this category, the share of cars on CNG
was about 34%, or about 81,000 cars (see Table 36)The share of buses using CNG
(mainly Russian-made Gazel type of minibuses) was even higher, at almost 50%
During past  years, the CNG consumption by RT increased by about 11 times from
32According to data from Armenian RT Technical Inspection, 51% of the passenger
cars actually running in 2010 was Pre-Euro standard cars (aged before 1992) Euro
and  technological standard carsaccounted for about 14% respectively, and Euro
and 4technological standard carsaccounted for about % respectively 189 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT 21 kt in 2000 up to 229 kt in 2010,
making Armenia the world leader by the share of transport running on this
relatively low-carbon fuel33 Figure Annual Growth of Motor Fuel Consumption by
RT, , (in ,000 tons) Source: GHG Inventory, Transport Sector Yerevan, October,
The rapid growth of CNG used by road transport in Armenia during the past 14
years is highlighted inFigure During , the CNG consumption increased by about 16
times, from 21 kt in 2000 up to 327 kt in With an accuracy level of %, CNG
consumption growth for the period of  can be approximate with the linear trend
The accuracy of linear approximation would have been even greater if we had
smoothed out the variation caused by the realities of the 2008 crisis By 2009,
consumption of CNG was visibly declining, but returned to the same linear growth
in the subsequent years (Figure 37) In 2006, the amounts of gasoline and CNG
consumed by RT became equal Since then, CNG has surpassed the share of gasoline
consumption It should be noted that during last - years, the growth rate of CNG
consumption by RT has become even faster, which has been exactly mirrored by the
decline of gasoline consumption In 2012, the share of CNG for the first time 33
According to the Bloomberg Agency: “Armenia is not generally known as  world
leader, but it holds at least one record: Seventy-five percent of its cars and
trucks run on natural gas", 26 June bloombergcom 190 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT accounted for more than 50% of the overall annual
fuel consumption by RT, making Armenia the world leader in this aspect Figure
Motor Fuel Consumed by Armenian RT,  700 Gasoline Diesel CNG     600 500 272 360
331 252 286 242 226 400 173 118 87 70 51 300 23 131 110 135 114 121 23 54 116 92
139 124 116 89 153 144 200 214 207 100 203 200 198 195 195 189 188 182 179 174
143 140 years  2011 2012 2013 2000 2010 Source: GHG Inventory, Transport Sector
Yerevan, October, 2004 2006 2002 2001 2008 2007 2009 2003 2005 Figure Motor Fuel
Consumed by Armenian RT,  above highlights the data on motor fuel annual
consumption by Armenian RT in ktoe for , based on data obtained from the
Ministry of Economy and the Armenian Custom Service It should be noted that the
data in Error! Reference source 191 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT ot foundthis figure differs from the EC-LEDS Energy Balance data for  due
to the differences in calculation methodologies 130      127 125 123 120 120 120
119 119 119 120 116 115 115 113 110 years 105 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Figure Annual Electricity Consumption (Million kWh) by
Armenian Transport Sector, 2003-Source: PSRC RoA Figure 39 highlights the annual
electricity consumption by transport forthe  period It is noteworthy that
despite such increases in energy consumption in the sector, the overall delivery
of transport services has declined 192 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT 4500 railroad lines air transport rope-ways motor vehicles trolley-bus
pessenger taxi underground lines 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500  2010
2011 2012 2013 2014 Figure Passenger Turnover (Million Passenger Kilometers
Travelled) As highlighted in Figure 40 regarding the passenger and goods
turnover, the energy intensity of the transportation services has grown due to
the lack of efficiency in the fleet and infrastructure Figure Energy Intensity
of Transport Sector 193 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Under
such circumstances, especially in the light of growing energy prices, energy
efficiency measures are necessary to maintain affordable transportation
services, which will in turn support all the other economic sectors The first
NEEAP defined several measures, as listed below, aimed at reducing energy
consumption growth in the transport sector, with  special focus on road and rail
transport V1 Development of legislative background on fuel efficiency and
emission norms V2 Dissemination of information on technologies and energy
savingV3 Continuous replacement minibuses by larger passenger buses and route
optimization V4 Expansion and modernization of the electrified public transport
V5 Expansion and modernization of rail transport network (passenger and freight)
In addition, two new measures, as listed below, were integrated in the second
NEEAP, including: V6 Continuous switching of road vehicles from gasoline to CNG
V7 Development of an integrated electro-transport network and services to cover
unsatisfied demand in public transportation services in the greater Yerevan area
The “Armenian Transport Sector Development Strategy 2020” (2008) and the
associated documentswere updated as the Transport Sector Master Plan was
integrated into the Armenia Sustainable Development Program , and  dedicated
investment plan was developed This plan includes 58 investment projects, with
the total cost estimated at about US$ billion, of which about $ billion is for
49 new projects and $ billion for 10 ongoing projects The 14 TA projects, at an
estimated cost of $million, include feasibility studies for potential projects,
advisory support for planning, technical knowledge transfer and institutional
capacity development Figure Investments Needed to Implement the Republic of
Armenia’ Sustainable Transport Strategy Investments Needed, Million US$
$$$,$Roads and road transport Railways Urban transport Civil aviation
Substantial financial resources have already been set aside by the government,
the IFIs and donors to implement the infrastructure development projects in the
transport sector (see Table 37) The funding needs of the development
projectsshould target the road transport network, railway, urban public
transport and civil aviation The breakdown of the estimated investments required
is presented in the following chart 194 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Table Major Development Partners in Armenia’sTransport Sector Development
Partner Amount (US$million) Project Name Duration North–South Road Corridor
Investment Program Tranches , ,  Sustainable Urban Development Program Tranche
Planned North–South Road Corridor Project: Lanjik – Gyumri Road Planned
North–South Road Corridor Project, Ararat – Megry Road 2012 2017 $ ADB
Investment  $ EIB € EDB $EBRD, EIB, NIF EBRD Yerevan Metro Rehabilitation II
2012 €Bridge construction near Georgian border Lifeline Road Network Improvement
Project, with additional financing Lifeline Road Network Improvement Project  €
$World Bank  $The measures indicated in the first NEEAP were implemented to
certain extent The greatest savings were achieved by the V3 measure “Continuous
replacement of minibuses by larger passenger buses and route optimization of
public transport” The table below summarizes the energy efficiency improvement
measures in the transport sector 195 Second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST
DRAFT Table Overview of Individual Measures in the Transport Sector Achieved
Energy Savings in 2014 (MWh) Energy Savings Expected in 2017 (MWh) Energy
Savings Expected in 2018 (MWh ) Energy Savings Expected in 2020 (MWh) Status in
Relation to 1st NEEAP Additional Comments Title of the Energy-saving Measure
End-use Targeted      V1 Development of legislative Regulatory, feasibility
studies Information / Partially / / / background on fuel efficiency and emission
norms implemented V2 Dissemination of information on Not yet implemented
technologies and ES V3 Continuous exchange of mini buses Road transport ,118,245
,267,202 Partially 821,022 ,045,391 by larger passenger buses implemented V4
Expansion and modernization of the V4Yerev an metro V4 Electric transport –
trolleys Railroad transport ,294 partially ,294 ,294 electrified public
transport implemented / Not yet Pre- feasibility stage, / / / implemented V5
Expansion and modernization of rail ,206 Partially 582 862 972 transport network
(passenger and freight) implemented V6 Continuous switching of road Road
transport Partially vehicles from gasoline to CNG implemented V7 Development of
an integrated electro-transport network and services to cover unsatisfied demand
in public transportation services in the greater Yerevan area Information ,
planning / / / / Total Total MWh ktoe ,124,511 ,273,702 821,604 ,051,547 196
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Overview of the Individual EEIM
Measures for Transport/Mobility is presented in the below tables Development of
legislative background regarding fuel efficiency and emission norms of vehicles
Title of Energy Saving Measure Index of the Measure   Transport sector Category
Start: 2014 Timeframe End: 2025 “Armenian Transport Sector Development Strategy
2020” was ordered by MoTS RA in Financial assistance to the work was provided by
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) as part of the Country Partnership Strategy
"The strategy 2020” was updated as the Transport Sector Master Plan The
Transport Strategy is included in the Armenia Sustainable Development Program ,
and  dedicated investment plan was developed It includes 58 investment projects
with the total cost estimated at about $ billion, of which about $ billion is
for 49 new projects and $ billion for 10 ongoing projects Regulatory measure,
feasibility studies            Aim/Brief Description Target End-use Road
transport Target Group National Regional Application List and Description of
Energy-saving Actions    Substantiating the   Measure        The 14 TA projects,
at an estimated cost of $million, include feasibility studies for potential
projects, advisory support for planning, technical knowledge transfer and
institutional capacity development The funding needs of development project are:
Roads and road transport: $,million Railways: $million Urban transport: $million
Civil aviation: $million Total: $,million              Budget and Financial
Source MoTS, Dedicated PIU Implementing Body  MoTS Monitoring Authority Method
for Monitoring/    Measuring the Resulting     Savings       197 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Savings Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (toe/year)
/ Expected Energy Savings in 2017 (MWh/year) / Expected Energy Savings in 2018
(MWH/year) / Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020 (if Available) (MWH/year)
/ Assumptions Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy Dissemination of
information on technologies and approaches for reducing energy consumption
effectively  Title Index of the Measure Category  Transport sector Timeframe
Not yet implemented Aim/Brief description Target End-use Target Group Regional
Application List and Description of Energy-                          saving
Actions Substantiating the Measure Budget and Financial Source Implementing Body
Monitoring Authority Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings
Savings Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWH/year) / / Expected Energy Savings
in 2017 (MWh/year)              / Expected Energy Savings in 2018 (MWH/year) /
Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020 (if Available) (MWH/year) Assumptions
Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy 198 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Title Continuous exchange of mini buses by larger passenger buses
Index of the Measure V3 Investments in public transport improvement 1st Phase:
Start 2005, End 2nd Phase: Start 2007, End 2013, 3rd Phase: Start 2014, End 2020
• Optimization of public RT route grid and reduction of annual running distance
• Replacement of minibuses by larger ones, and • Overall modernization of public
RT fleet Yerevan Municipality Category Timeframe            Aim/Brief
description Target End-use Yerevan Municipality, public transport companies
Target Group Yerevan  The first phase of strategy: In , first 131 new Euro-
technology standard urban buses were put in operation, replacing 143 old Pre-
Euro standard minibuses and several buses Two new bus routes were introduced,
replacing  minibuses routes (one canceled and  replaced)  The second phase of
the strategy: Since 2007 and by 2013, the number of minibus public RT fleet was
reduced by ,758 vehicles,of which ,536 were removed in the  period In 2009
alone, 836 minibuses were put out of operation, which made that year  formative
year for implementing the RT fleet optimization strategy’ second phase At the
same time,the amount of minibuses reduced were replaced by 351 new urban buses,
different routes of minibuses were canceled and 20 routes of minibuses were
replaced by public bus routes Regional Application              List and
description of Energy-saving Actions Substantiating the Measure
Intergovernmental loans, "Cooperation of Sister Cities" Program, Green Crediting
and Energy Efficiency loans through various national banks under WB, EBRD, KfW,
GGF projects, Yerevan Municipality budget Budget and Financial Source  MoTC,
Yerevan Municipality Implementing Body Yerevan Municipality Monitoring Authority
Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings Savings Achieved in 2014
as per 1st EEAP (MWh) Expected Energy Savings in 2017 (MWh) Expected Energy
Savings in 2018 (MWh) Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020 (MWh) Bottom-up
national methodology 821,022              ,045,391 ,118,245 ,267,202 199 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  The price of imported Russian natural
gas will remain in the current low range  Net calorific value of imported
Russian natural gas is no less than ,200 kcall/cub Continuation of current
trends in CNG/Diesel (gasoline) proportions for minibus and urban bus fleet and
running distance reduction through the optimization of public transport run
route-grid Assumptions Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy Eurasian customs
union impact on car import structure, EE lending financing new car purchases,
road improvement impact on fuel efficiency Implementation of the Yerevan public
transportation fleet optimization strategy and replacement of minibuses by
larger urban buses started in The main aims of strategy are to:  optimize the
public RT route grid and reduce the annual running distance of the fleet  
achieve the overall modernization of the public RT fleet replace minibuses by
larger ones First phase of implementation, 2005-The first 131 new Euro-
technology standard urban buses were put in operation, replacing 143 old Pre-
Euro standard minibuses and several buses Two new bus routes were introduced,
replacing  minibuses routes (one canceled and  replaced) Even this modest start
led to significant outcomes Not only was the unsatisfied demand for public
transportation in Yerevan visibly reduced (from 130 to 110 trip/person), but
substantial energy savings were recorded, with 315,937 MWh in energy savings in
2007, in comparison with the case of not implementing of RT fleet optimization
strategyorreplacing minibuses by larger urban buses Second phase, 2007-The
number of minibus public RT fleet was reduced by ,758 vehicles, of which ,536
were removed in the  period In 2009 alone, 836 minibuses were put out of
operation, which made that year  formative year in implementing the RT fleet
optimization strategy’ second phase At the same time, the reduced amount of
minibuses were replaced by 351 new urban buses,  different routes of minibuses
were cancelled and 20 routes of minibuses were replaced by public bas routes As
result, the total annual average running distance of the Yerevan public minibus
fleet was reduced from 161 million km in 2010 to about 101 million km in 2014 (
% reduction)Energy savings of 389,837 MWh were achieved in 2010, in comparison
with the case of not implementing of the RT fleet optimization strategy In 2014,
the energy savings increased to 821,022 MWh Third phase,  (time period
considered under NIEP ) Energy saving calculations for this phase are based on
continuation of the current trends From 2015 to 2020, another ,020 minibuses are
expected to be pulled from the public RT fleet, while the number of buses will
increase with the addition of 468 new Euro  and higher technology standard buses
This would ensure 896,852 MWh in energy savings in 2015, in comparison with the
case of not implementing of the RT fleet optimization strategyor replacing
minibuses by larger urban buses In 2020, the energy savings are expected to
increase to ,267,202 MWh The quality of energy savings assessment could be
improved if more detailed information on activity data is available Actual
recordings of RT fleet running distances (daily and annual) is of paramount
importance Besides, completeness and accuracy of activity data (including
technical description of the RT fleet, data on specific fuel consumption by type
and vehicle technology class (Pre-Euro and Euro standards, etc) is of great
importance, as well It is also extremely important to ensure consistent and
robust data gathering, recording and activation processes in place, and improve
the institutional memory The fuel-switching of road transport is one of the
largest shareholders of energy savings in the overall list of considered EE
measures The energy savings here could be even bigger, if over the  period, EEV
or Euro- and newer technology standard urban CNG buses are introduced to replace
old minibuses and Euro- and earlier standard urban diesel/gasoline buses In
addition, it should be kept in mind that environmental benefits of switching to
CNG (reduction of hazardous emissions) in public transport 200 Second National
Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT are far more significant (although currently not
monetized) than the energy savings, though these benefits are important Fig V3
Yerevan Public RT Fleet RunningDistance Net Reduction (,000 km) and Annual
Energy Savings (GWh/year) via Implementation of the Fleet Optimization Strategy
and Replacement of Minibuses by Larger Urban Buses  Actual Savings 201 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT EBRD and EIB Loan for Yerevan Metro
Modernization Index of the measure EE Finance, Municipal Services  EE programs
and measures, finance, municipal services, mobility, transport Category Start:
2015 Timeframe End: 2020 EBRD Metro Rehabilitation aimed to increase the energy
efficiency of passenger rolling stock EE loans for residential and business
clients (corporate energy efficiency, sustainable energy financing facilities,
cleaner energy production, municipal infrastructure energy efficiency) Yerevan
City            Aim/Brief Description Target End-use Target Group National •
Rolling stock modernization: modernization and repair of rolling stock will save
390,258 kW on an annual basis • Ventilation replacement: Replacement of worn-out
and partially functioning ventilation systems at 10 stations will save 932,575
KW on an annual basis • Escalator replacement: Replacement of worn-out
escalators with modern ones at 10 stations will save 640 kW per hour • Depot
rehabilitation: Rehabilitation of depots equipped with worn-out and obsolete and
partially functioning equipment will save  considerable amount of energy
(quantification is not available), improve environmental situation through
replacement of old stuff by using of modern, environmentally friendly materials,
less polluting equipment, better treatment of lubricants and other waste
maintenance materials EUR 37 million provided by EBRD, EIB, Sovereign Loan, E5P
Grant co-financing pending Regional Application List and Description of Energy-
saving Actions Substantiating the Measure                           Budget and
Financial Source EBRD, Yerevan Metropolitan after Demirhcyan Implementing Body
EBRD Monitoring Authority Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings
Savings Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWH/year) Expected Energy Savings in
2017 (MWh/year)  EBRD internal procedures ,294              ,294 Expected Energy
Savings in 2018 (MWH/year) ,294 Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020 (if
Available) (MWH/year) 202 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No
new lending volumes have been estimated beyond 2014, which is unlikelyHowever,
it was not possible to make assumptions about future lending volumes since no
lending forecast has been provided by EBRD Due to the mixed nature of EBRD EE
lending, there ae overlaps with all sectoral measures for which financing is
made available Assumptions Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy 203 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT EBRD and EIB Loan for Yerevan Metro
Modernization Index of the Measure EE Finance, Municipal Services  EE programs
and measures, finance, municipal services, mobility, transport Category Strat:
2015 Timeframe            End: 2020 Investment in trolleybuses in Yerevan is
aimed at increasing energy efficiency of the passenger rolling stock Aim/Brief
Description Public transport Target End-use Yerevan City Municipality Target
Group Yerevan Regional Application List and Description of Energy-saving Actions
Substantiating the Measure Modernization of trolleybus fleet, electric
substations and trolley contact network                          Budget and
Financial Source Municipality, PIU Implementing Body Yerevan Municipality
Monitoring Authority Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings
Savings Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWH/year) Expected Energy Savings in
2017 (MWh/year)   / / / Expected Energy Savings in 2018 (MWH/year) /
Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020 (if Available) (MWH/year) Assumptions
Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy 204 Second National Energy Efficiency
Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund
FIRST DRAFT Expansion and modernization of rail transport network (passenger and
freight) Title Index of the Measure  Investments in rail road transport
improvement Category Timeframe Continuous (seasonal) activity Russian-owned
UKZHD Company operates an electric train on the Yerevan (Almast) - Shorzha (YSY
ET) extended route  times  week, which significantly unloads the road traffic of
passengers usually taking personal cars or buses to Lake Sevan recreation zone
The share of passengers switching to rail transit varies between 18% and 20%
Aim/Brief Description Rail road transport Target End-use Target Group Rail road
transport fuel efficiency Regional Application Regional List and Description of
Energy-saving Actions Substantiating the Measure Budget and Financial Source
Prevented car (road transport) trips by operation of YSY ET, modernization of
electric trains fleet (train types ВЛ8, ВЛ 10, ЭР2)
Investments by UKZHD Company Implementing Body UKZHD Company   Monitoring
Authority MoTC Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings Savings
Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWH/year) Expected Energy Savings in 2017
(MWh/year) Expected Energy Savings in 2018 (MWH/year) Expected Impact on Energy
Savings in 2020 (if Available) (MWH/year) Energy savings from seasonal operation
are based on the concept of “prevented car trips” by the passengers of YSY ET;
otherwise,passengers need to use passenger cars or buses for their seasonal
trips to  Sevan 582              862 972 ,206 205 Second National Energy
Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy
Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Operation of Russian-made electric trains with  fuel
efficiency will continue up to Afterwards and until 2020, more modern trains
with 71 fuel efficiency will be in operation (on YSY ET and elsewhere in
Armenia) The savings have been assessed based on the avoided car trips have been
estimated based on  blended mix of types of cars used by the given passenger
group and the seasonality of this transit (summeronly) Assumptions Overlaps,
Multiplication Effect, Synergy Significant multiplication effect will be
achieved by overall modernization of electric trains fleet (98% of rail road
grid in Armenia is electrified) The energy savings from operation of YSY ET are
based on prevented car trips to  Sevan recreation zone each year during the
summer periods The Figure below highlights the obtained results Fig V5 Energy
Savings by Operation of YSY Electric Trains (MWh/year) without and with
Modernization in  aimed at increasing YSY ET fuel efficiency The quality of
energy saving assessments could be significantly improved if more detailed
information on passenger flow by each routewas available (, Hrazdan-
Charentsavan-Yerevan(Almast) and back, separately from Yerevan(Almast)-Sevan-
Yerevan(Almast) seasonal route, as well as for regular routes:
Yerevan(Central)-Tbilisi(Georgia)-Yerevan(Central),Yerevan(Central)-Gyumri-
Yerevan(Central), Yerevan(Central)-Armavir, Yerevan(Central)-Artashat, etc) If
detailsare available about the “Concept Program of Passenger Transportation for
” developed by UKZhd, they could be of great help Another very important portion
of the activity data, currently unavailable in sufficient details, is related to
the technical description of the stock of electric locomotives (with specific
energy consumption information), drive-mode description of routes (average
inclination, wasteful break portions of the routes and their distances), etc It
is also extremely important to ensure consistent and robust data gathering,
recording and activation mechanisms, and improve the institutional memory The
completeness of energy saving assessments of the considered measure could be
essentially improved if more activity data becomes available for analysis This
is especially true in case of current activities of UKZhd CJSC, such as cargo
transportation of mining products, seasonal round trips to Batumi (Georgian 206
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Black see coast) from Yerevan
Rail Station, Yerevan-Tbilisi (Georgia)-Yerevan and Yerevan-Gyumri- Yerevan
round trips across Armenia As far as the assessment of energy savings from UKZhd
planned future activities is concerned, more detailed information about
transportation of coal for the Yerevan Thermal Power Plant (announced in 2013)
and transportation of municipal solid waste to centralized regional MSW disposal
sites (announced in 2014) would be of great importance The future new passenger
turnover projects have significant energy-saving potential One of the most
promising that should be considered is the “AeroExpress” project According to
UKZhd officials, under this project announced in 2012, it is planned to connect
Yerevan Central Rail Road Station to the Zvartnots international Airport 207
Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Continuous switching of road
vehicles from gasoline to compressed natural gas (CNG)  Title Index of the
measure Category Transport Continuous activity Timeframe            Aim/Brief
Description Switching from Gasoline/diesel fuel to CNG has significant potential
to reduce GHG emissions in RA The trend of the past 14 years shows  substantial
growth in the number of vehicles working on CNG Transport sector Target End-use
Transport companies, municipalities Target Group Regional Application National
List and Description of Energy-saving Actions Substantiating the Measure
Switching from Gasoline/diesel fuel to CNG
Intergovernmental loans, Green Crediting and Energy Efficiency loans, Carbon
finance, or Analogues of CDM (JI) projects under UNFCCC after Transport
companies, MoTC Budget and Financial Source   Implementing Body Monitoring
Authority MoTC Method for Monitoring/ Measuring the Resulting Savings Savings
Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWh) Expected Energy Savings in 2017 (MWh)
Expected Energy Savings in 2018 (MWh) Expected Impact on Energy Savings in 2020
(if Available) (MWh) Bottom-up national methodology / /              / /  The
price of imported Russian natural gas will remain in the current low range  Net
calorific value of imported Russian natural gas will increase from the current
,200 kcall/cub to ,500 kcall/cub by  Carbon (CO2) trade will continue after Dec
2015 IPCC Paris summit Assumptions Overlaps, Multiplication Effect, Synergy
Eurasian customs union impact on car import structure, road improvement impact
on fuel efficiency 208 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia
Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT No direct
assessment of energy savings associated with this measure can be performed
Monetary savings from this measure are expected to be significant, and could be
assessed based on the saved monetary value associated with switching to CNG by
the Armenian RT fleet Fig V6 Monetary Savings Associated with Switching to CNG
of Armenian RT fleet, in billion AMD (right) and million USD (left) 209 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT Development of an Integrated Electro-
transport network and services to cover unsatisfied demand in public
transportation services in the greater Yerevan area V7 Title Index of the
Measure Category Public Transport • First phase:By 2025, -station new metro line
with West HUB connecting metro with Zvartnots International Airport will be put
in operation, which will double the metro annual turnover • Second phase by 2030
commissioning of ITEN new  station metro line with North HUB (to the cities of
Abovian and Charentsavan, on the base of Almast Rail station) ITEN turnover will
more than tripled in comparison with 2010 level Annual electricity consumption
will increase from current 120 mln kWh level up to  mln kWh in Significant
public transport infrastructure development is needed in order to cover the
unmet potential of public transportation services Main focus here should be
placed on the development of the integrated electro-transport network (IETN) for
Yerevan agglomeration with essential expansion of Yerevan Metro Transport sector
MoTC, Yerevan and suburban municipalities Timeframe            Aim/Brief
Description Target End-use Target Group Regional Application Yerevan
agglomeration Optimization of public transportation routes in Yerevan
agglomeration (including Zvartnots int airport, cities of Abovyan, Charentsavan
and Edcmiadzin, replacing of motor (fossil fuel) based passenger traffic flow
with electric based one Reduction of overall trip distances by essential
improving of logistic and development of feed-in routs Infrastructure loans (WB,
IFC, ADB, EBRD, etc), private-public partnership, GoA, Yerevan Municipality GoA,
MoTC, Yerevan Municipality, municipalities of the greater Yerevan area List and
Description of Energy-saving Actions Substantiating the Measure
Budget and Financial Source Implementing Body   Monitoring Authority MoTC,
Interagency Project Implementation Unit Method for Monitoring/Measuring the
Resulting Savings Savings Achieved in 2014 as per 1st EEAP (MWh) Expected Energy
Savings in 2017 (MWh) Expected Energy Savings in 2018 (MWh) Expected Impact on
Energy Savings in 2020 (if Available) (MWh) Monitoring standards for transport
infrastructure projects Implementation, developed by WB, EBRD, ADB, etc
/ / / / 210 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT  Regional stability
will be ensured  Harmonization between the European and Eurasian integration
processes will be achieved  An attractive business environment for
infrastructure loans will be created Currently, several transport development
strategies are in place, lacking overall synchronization of activities and
absence of  unified approach Assumptions Overlaps, Multiplication Effect,
Synergy Significant public transport infrastructure development is needed in
order to cover the huge unmet demand for public transportation services in the
greater Yerevan area The main focus should be placed on the development of the
integrated electro-transport network for the greater Yerevan area with an
essential expansion of the Yerevan Metro  Significant development of the public
transport infrastructure by introducing an integrated electro- transport network
(IETN) for the capital Yerevan with two transport hubs to the Zvartnots
International Airport (West Hub) and to the cities of Abovian and Charentsavan
(North Hub, based on Almast station in Nor Zeytun district of Yerevan, see V3
Report)  First phaseBy 2025,  -station new metro line with West HUB connecting
metro with the Zvartnots International Airport will be put into operation, which
will double the metro annual turnover  Second phase In 2030, commissioning of
ITEN new -station metro line with North HUB (to the cities of Abovian and
Charentsavan, on the base of the Almast Rail station) ITEN turnover will more
than triple in comparison with the 2010 level Annual electricity consumption
will increase from the current 120 million kWh level to  million kWh in  Energy
savingsachieved from the implementation of this measure will be at least  times
more than the savings from the V3 measure and will mainly occur after More
detailed estimates should be made through  properly conducted analysis based on
consistent and adequate primary data  Encouraging import of gas-fired public
transportation vehicles, electromobiles and hybrid cars (via duty and tax
incentives)  Modernizing the electro-transport fleet; introducing modern Unified
Ticket for Public Transport (including electro-transport, trolleybuses, metro,
electric rail and urban busses)  Development of the related infrastructure
(services, operation and maintenance)  Attracting direct investments and
technology transfer, introducing private-public partnership mechanisms and
establishing effective collaboration with local authorities are essential to
accomplishing the strategic goals  Developing the appropriate roadmap and action
plan is crucial to the successful implementation of this measure Others
components include: advertising of public transport use, promotion of the
“sustainable green transport for cities” concept, introducing  modern ticketing
system, including monetization of gains from increasing the sustainability of
the transport sector and its level of independence from fuel imports It is hoped
that the development of the ITEN in Armenia’scapital city will essentially help
tap the significant potential of public transport services and bring the use of
services to the 1989 level (185 trips per person annually) by 211 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT COMPETENT BODIES AND ASSIGNED
ORGANIZATIONS Energy efficiency policy has  pivotal role to play in Armenia’
economy: It is essential for creating conditions for economic growth while
improving energy security By reducing the energy intensity of the national
economic output, energy efficiency holds the key to maintaining  safe,
sustainable and affordable energy supply, while meeting increasing energy demand
and improving quality of life for the Armenian population Under conditions of
extreme import dependence for fossil fuels, energy that Armenia’ citizens,
businesses, and infrastructure do not use is the cheapest, cleanest, and most
secure energy resource The potential for energy efficiency in all sectors has
been assessed repeatedly and remains high, despite the relatively low energy
intensity of the economy The Armenian Government has promoted energy efficiency
through various programs and policies, but the overall potential for efficiency
improvement still remains largely untapped With energy prices rising, the
urgency of accelerating the uptake of energy efficiency throughout Armenia’
economy has increased The goal of the second National Energy Efficiency Action
Plan (NEEAP) is to assess the effectiveness of ongoing efforts by the
Government, donors, international financial institutions and the private sector
to improve the efficiency of energy use since 2010, when Armenia’ first NEEAP
was developed The second NEEAP also identifies barriers to more extensive
efforts in this direction, proposes measures to help overcome these barriers,
and offers additional energy efficiency improvement measures for the period
covering 2015–The key pillars of the second NEEAP are:  Reducing energy demand
by improving the efficiency of energy end use;  Improving national energy
security by reducing the need for imported energy resources;  Decreasing the
energy content of the key economic outputs to reduce costs and raise the
competitiveness of output;  Addressing growing energy affordability concerns
through energy efficiency solutions (instead of relying on social aid); and 
Providing impetus for behavioral change by decoupling growth from energy use,
and thus enhancing the quality and sustainability of development through the
introduction of knowledge and traditions for resource efficiency and smart
growth The development and adoption of the Second NEEAP for the Republic of
Armenia is one of the steps on the pathway upon which the Government of Armenia
embarked  decade ago, by adopting Armenia’ first Law on Energy Saving and
Renewable Energy The 212 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for
Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT
Republic of Armenia developed its first NEEAP in 2010 to accelerate the
implementation of its national energy efficiency policy The first NEEAP set
forth  set of programmatic and policy measures for energy efficiency improvement
for all economic sectors of the country The first NEEAP, adopted by Government
Resolution #43 on  November 2010, set the country on track for  ten-year process
with intermediate targets and interim evaluations Because adequate data were not
available at the time for developing targets based on statistics, the first
NEEAP provided rough estimates of the potential impact of the proposed measures
as fractions of the overall target up to The successful implementation of the
energy policy of the Republic of Armenia depends on the active engagement of all
stakeholders in the sector The realization of the secon NEEAP is  necessity All
planned measures should be implemented to achieve the anticipated results None
of them has  low priority, all individually and as  whole are necessary The
application of EE measures reduces dependence on imports of primary and
transformed energy, decreases environmental pollution, improving the living
conditions of citizens (less pollution, better health conditions, lower energy
costs), create new jobs While the Table 39 summarises the roles and
responsibilities of the key stakeholders with respective investments necessary
for each of the EE improvement measure, the role of the Ministry of Energy and
Natural Resources (MoENR) must be additionally emphasized The existing
organizational structure in the field of energy efficiency policy has been
priority measure in the first NEEAP and the NEEAP proposed establishment of an
Energy Efficiency Agency This activity was not implemented De facto, R2E2 has
been tasked with many functions of an EE Agency The R2E2 is well positioned for
this role, but the administrative capacities within MoENR are scarce with very
limited capacity and cadre for the implementation of the national policy of
energy efficiency This situation of understaffed bodies responsible for the
overall implementation and monitoring of energy efficiency policy can cause
delays in the execution of the obligations These capacities are also necessary
to adequately pursue the legal-regulatory reform tasks and promotion 213 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT of the policy initiatives with the
legislative bodies Failure to do so will cause further delays in implementation
of amendments of energy efficiency policy The competent bodies and assigned
organizations are Development Department at the Ministry of Economy, R2E2 and
the National Statistical Service The Ministry of Economy, oversees the entire
industry and SME sector and is currently in charge of all energy efficiency-
related issues related to standards and certification The Ministry of
Agriculture must be in charge of programs related to irrigation, aquaculture,
and greenhouses The Ministry of Urban Development (MUD) must continue to take
the lead in housing poicy reform MUD is also strongly understaffed According to
international best practices, when initiating reform, establishing  National
Housing Agency could help speed up the process creating  viable financing scheme
for MABs with the enrollment or the private sector The main tasks to be adopted
by the MoENR or R2E2 related to the second NEEAP are the following: › Develop
and maintain appropriate and transparent data bases on energy efficiency and
renewable energy sources (monitoring and reporting services) › Monitoring,
verification of savings and preparing reports on realized energy audits in
building sector › Organize and monitor training courses for energy auditors ›
Cooperate with non-governmental sector in developing the awareness of the need
of EE and RES › Encourage innovative approaches for investment including third
party financing or co- financing › Undertake measures for raising the awareness
of consumers on end-use heat efficiency and increasing the efficiency of MABs,
insulation, efficiency of pumps, flow regulation and other distribution
efficiencies can occur The National Statistical Service, in turn, must receive
permanent mandate for the debelopment and maintenance of the national energy
balance on annual basis As an important step, the Government should establish
Watch Group –Committee (WG) to draw on private sector and community expertise
during the implementing NEEAP and EE Strategy WG an interagency group of experts
from key stakeholders in the government, academia, public/non-governmental and
private sectors, consumer groups, etc will be established as  formal committee,
adjascent to the Government, to convene on regular basis and discuss the
direction and effectiveness of reform in energy efficiency and recommend
actions, thus building  consensus among disparate energy efficiency 214 Second
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT stakeholders, while providing  platform
for public discussion and lobbying of new legal initiatives It can provide
information to Government on lessons learned and best practice in implementing
energy efficiency strategies which will underpin the long-term success of the
Strategy An organization such as this has proven to be critical to the success
of other governmental energy efficiency programs Main tasks of the WG will be: ›
Oversee existing and proposed Government funds and Grants  › Engage stakeholders
to enhance the effectiveness of existing and proposed funds and incentives (
work with banking and property industry to increase awareness) › Support
national and sector specific information campaigns to increase awareness of
energy efficiency options › Suggest, coordinate and enhance energy data
collection › Report annually to Parliament on the effectiveness of all policies
and measures and make recommendations for improvements › Engage with state and
local authorities to encourage coordination, consolidation and collaboration of
programs and policies Lead  national program to stimulate EE skills, knowledge
and work needed for  sustainable economy development › The Board of Trustees of
R2E2 is well positioned to perform these above roles Awareness and education of
the stakeholders Continuous consumer information is an important measure assumed
before and during the implementation of NEEAP Through it promote benefits for
the application of EE measures It envisage realization of education at all
levels vertically, creating new working places and businesses and acquire new
skills that are missing from the market by way of qualification which solves the
problem of unemployment; mitigated problem outflow of educated people Crucial
element for the realization of the envisaged action plan is providing the
necessary funding The efficient functioning of the NEEAP is of very high
importance for the implementation of the state policy in the sector of energy
efficiency The political decision through legal benchmark for compulsory
implementation of energy efficiency measures in public buildings, paved the way
to  successful implementation of the measures envisaged Incentive instruments
for the implementation of EE measures are extraordinary impulse to potential
investors The measure of financial incentives for installing solar panels should
215 Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan for Armenia Armenia Renewable
Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund FIRST DRAFT not remain single Positive
results have been achieved during participation in the cost of refurbishment of
private housing by municipalities and donors (HABITAT / USAID) The state needs
to provide funds for financial assistance to industry, manufacturing and
services in order to become more market competitive by the cheaper products,
while simultaneously increasing quality, due to lower energy costs by adopting
new technological processes Donors’ assistance in this direction is valuable,
but should not be the only one in providing technical assistance on best
available technologies, subsidizing energy audits and facilitating finance
through commercial banks  The below Table 39 summarizes the key NEEAP activities
along with their responsible implementing entities, financiers and estimated
funding needs 216 Table Competent Bodies and Assigned Organizations No Title of
the energy saving measure Duration Status in relation to 1st EEAP Horizontal &
Cross Cutting Implementing body Required financing (US$) Sources of financing
Start: 2014 End: 2020 (ongoing) ACBA, ACBA Leasing, Ineco and Ararat Banks HSBC
(industrial) and Byblos Banks (residential) ArmSEFF/Energocredi  with  partner
banks GGF partially implemented 15,354,000  Financing for Energy Efficiency: GGF
IFC Financing for Energy Efficiency: IFC EE loans for households and SMEs
Start:2009 End: 2015 partially implemented 40,000,000  EBRD partially
implemented initializing, tracked as part of other measures Financing for Energy
Efficiency: Energy efficiency loans for residential and business clients, EBRD
ArmSEFF Start:2006 End: 2015 28,000,000  E5P Secretariat (EBRD), MoENR RA (
EUR), MoE Grant (20  EUR) and E5P MoENR, PSRC Financing for Energy Efficiency:
Eastern European Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership (E5P) Start: 2015
End: ongoing 22,470,000  MoENR, PSRC / Removing inadequate gas tariff structure
to encourage energy  avings Start: 2016, ongoing not implemented  Energy Cities
support program COMO-East, CoM signatories European Commission, Municipalities,
other funds Support to Armenian Municipalities in Sustainable Energy Action
Planning Start: 2015; End 2020 11,000,000 new measure  Buildings/Residential
Legal Support, Financing and Information: Improvement of Energy Efficiency in
Buildings; development of secondary legislation for EE in buildings, as well as
funding for the first pilot thermal modernization of  residential multi-
apartment building in Avan district of Yerevan and social housing in Goris and
Akhouryan towns (UNDP/GEF BEEI project) MoNP, UNDP/GEF UNDP/GEF ,200,000 Start:
2013; End: 2017 partially implemented II NMC and 15 participating financial
institutions (PFIs) HFHA, Inecobank, UCOs AFD Financing for Energy Efficiency:
Household energy efficiency loans and EE mortgage loans (NMC/AFD) Financing for
Energy Efficiency: Residential energy efficiency bank-based commercial loan
through HFHA Condo, REELIH and SUDEP Projects Start:2014 End: 2020 partially
implemented II  13,000,000 USAID, European Commission Start: 2013; End: 2018
partially implemented II  ,629,507 NMC Borrower: Central Bank of Armenia, KfW
Start:2016 End: 2020 22,898,000 II Financing for Energy Efficiency: KfW Housing
EE credit line pending 160 Saint-Paul St, Suite 200, Quebec City,QC G1K
3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   MoENR; Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
Donors, IFIs/LFIs, PS, HOAs, ESCOs, MUD to be provided by Government of Armenia
Mitigating Tariff Increase with Low-income Energy Efficiency Program Start:
2015; End: 2016 ,092,687 II10 new measure IFIs TBD EE Retrofits in existing
residential buildings: National Program and Action Plan for MAB Renovation & EE
Start: 2016; End: 2020 25,000,000 II11 new measure MoENR, producers and
importers/distributors/ uppliers of energy- consuming household appliances, and
households TBD ,000,000 Start: 2015 End: 2020 II12 Appliance Energy Labeling
Awareness Campaign new measure Public Buildings and Services R2E2 fund, public
institutions and ESCOs (  US$82 million GEF grant coupled with US$ million in
government cofinancing,) Ministry of Urban Development, Urban Development
Projects Implementation Unit UNDP/GEF, Municipality, Other (grant-funded)
Borrower: Government of Armenia, represented by the Ministry of Finance Project
Executing Agency: Ministry of Urban Development $4mln by EBRD loan, $2mln by E5P
grant R2E2 fund, public institutions and ESCOs (  US$82 million GEF grant
coupled with US$ million in government cofinancing,) 10,700,000 Financing for
Energy Efficiency: Implementation of energy saving activities in municipal and
social public facilities (R2E2/GEF/WB) Start: 2012 End: 2017 partially completed
III international funding partner to be identified NAMA New construction and
capital renovation of public buildings and social housing, significant
reconstruction of existing buildings, secondary legislation for EE in buildings
Financing for EE & Public Procurement for EE: UNDP Green Urban Lighting Project
GHG Emission reduction by increasing energy efficiency of municipal lighting in
the cities of Armenia Start: 2016 End: 2020 (ongoing) 24,000,000 partially
completed III UNDP/GEF, Municipality, Other (grant-funded) Start:2013 End: 2017
partially completed 452,670 III KFW 15,000,000 Financing for Energy Efficiency &
Public Procurement for EE: EE-integrated reinforcement of Schools by KfW
Start:2016 End: 2020 III pending $4mln by EBRD loan, $2mln by E5P grant Start:
2015; End 2017 ,000,000 III EBRD Loan-funded Yerevan streetlighting pending
launch Mendez England & Associates (ME&) Armenia Mendez England & Associates
(ME&) Armenia USAID Clean Energy and Water Program for EE & RE solutions in
community energy and water use 76,237 III Start: 2012 completed Industrial
Processes and Power Sector 160 Saint-Paul St, Suite 200, Quebec City,QC G1K
3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   Academic institutions; Consulting
organizations; Private sector, NGOs,Financial institutions; NSS UNDP  ,000,000
Start: 2015 End: 2020 (ongoing) Considering energy efficiency aspects during
approval and cons truction of new industrial facilities IV not impemented
Increasing the efficiency of the central heating plants and suppli ers: Avan DH
- cogeneration Start: 2005 End: ongoing partially implemented 12,000,000 IV
Implementation of Energy Efficiency Financing Facility for Indus trial
Enterprises Natural gas savings through improvement of transmission pipeli nes
and substations, and optimisation of existing boiler houses   TPPs IV World
Bank, MoENR World Bank, MoENR Start: 2018End: 2020 515,000,000 IV not impemented
MoE, WB WB, GoA IV  Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: WB
Electricity Supply reliability Start: 2015End: 2060 41,550,000 not impemented
MoE EBRD IV  Reduction of energy losses in distribution networks: EBRD Power
Supply Reliability Electricity savings through improvements of existing
electricity  etwork, compensation of reactive power and improvement of tra
nsformers 70,000,000  not impemented MoE ADB IV5c  Start: 2012 End: 2017
25,000,000 not impemented ArmElNet IV  Reduction of Electricity Losses in Low-
voltage networks, ArmElNet Start: 2016End: 2020 Start: 2016 End: 2020 (and
beyond) Start: 2016End: 2020 (and beyond) 22,768,434 not impemented MoENR, R2E2,
KfW, AFD/NMC, GGF TBD - IV Wider Application of Renewable Energy: SWHs new
measure E5P, own resources, other MoENR, Municipality of Jermuk, Vayotz Dzor
Regional Administration GoA 68,251 IV  Geothermal Heat Pumps for Central Heating
new measure  development of distributed RE generation through implementation of
Net metering provision Start: 2016 End: ongoing 66,000,000 IV7
Transport/Mobility   Development of legislative background regarding fuel
efficiency and emission norms of vehicles Start: 2008 End: ogoing partially
implemented ,066,200,000   Dissemination of information on technologies and
approaches  or reducing energy consumption effectively -   not implemented MoTC,
Yerevan Municipality 34,200,000 Intergovernmental loans, "Cooperation of Sister
Start: 2012; End: ongoing partially implemented  Continuous exchange of mini
buses by larger passenger buses 160 Saint-Paul St, Suite 200, Quebec City,QC G1K
3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   Cities" Program, Green Crediting and Energy
Efficiency loans through varios national banks under WB, EBRD, KfW, GGF
projects, Yerevan Municipality budget EBRD, EIB, Sovereign Loan, E5P Grant co-
financing pending EBRD, E5P, GoA EBRD, Yerevan Metropolitan after Demirhcyan
EBRD, Yerevan Urban Lighting Co Start: 2015 End: 2020 partially implemented
37,000,000 Expansion and modernisation of the electrified public transport
system in the City of Yerevan  TBD - Start: 2016 End: 2020 pre-feasibility stage
UKZHD Company funded as part of the Transport Sector Strategy portfolio private
sector, uncontrolled Investments by UKZHD Company Expansion and modernisation of
rail transport network (passeng er and freight) Start: 2010 End: Ongoing
partially implemented  Transport companies, MoTC Intergovernmental loans, Green
Crediting and Energy Efficiency loans, Analoges of CDM (JI) projects under
UNFCCC after Infrastructure loans (WB, IFC, ADB, EBRD etc), Private-Public
Partnership, GoA, Yerevan Municipality Continuous switching of road vehicles
from gasoline to compressed natural gas (CNG) Start: 2008; End: ongoing
partially implemented  ArmElNet TBD Development of Integrated Electro-Transport
Network and services to cover unsatisfied demand in public transportation
services in Yerevan agglomeration Start: 2016; End: ongoing  - Agriculture State
sector, SMEDNZ, MoA (MoA) Not possible to be determined MoA Rural development
program: high efficiency agricultural machinery import Start: 2013 End: Ongoing
partially completed VI MoA, Japan Government / Japan Government Start: 2010 End:
2012 implemented as planned VI Importing high efficiency tractors, Japanese ODA
MoA, State Sector World Bank Start: 2013 End: 2017 partially completed
33,100,000 VI Irrigation system enhancement project, wb MoA, State Sector, World
Bank World Bank Start: 2009 End: 2013 implemented as planned 36,220,000 VI
Irrigation rehabilitation emergency project, WB MoA, State Sector, World Bank
WB, GoA Community agricultural resource management and competitiveness project,
WB Start: 2011 End: 2016 partially completed 33,000,000 VI 160 Saint-Paul St,
Suite 200, Quebec City,QC G1K 3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   MoA, State
Sector, World Bank Not possible to be determined MoA, State Sector, World Bank
Start: 2012 End: 2015 Start: 2013- 2014 End: Ongoing partially completed VI
Municipal water project, WB MoA, State Sector, World Bank MoA, State Sector,
World Bank 265,803 implemented as planned VI USAID Clean Energy & Water Program
MoA, State Sector, USAID  Parakar Community Decentralized Wastewater Treatment,
GEF Small Grant Start: 2010 End: Ongoing Start: 2012 End: 2017, Ongoing
partially completed 220,000 VI MoA, State Sector,ADB ADB Financing 36,000,000
partially completed VI Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project MoA, State
Sector,EDP, World Bank MoA, European Union, ADA  Irrigation System Modernizaiton
and Institutional Capacity Building, WB 44,000,000 Start: Future plans VI10 new
measure  Start: 2014 End: 2017 partially completed 41,000,000 VI11 Agriculture
and Rural Development, ENPI, ADA MoA, USAID  Start: 2014 Eng 2030 partially
completed ,000,000 VI12 Science technology innovation partnership (STIP)
Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre Armenian Harvest Promotion Centre Start: 2011
End: 2020 Start: Immediately End: 2020 Start: Immediately End: 2020 Start:
Immediately End: 2020 Start: Immediately End: 2020 Start: Immediately End: 2020
partially completed - VI13 Energy efficient greenhouse State sector, MoA,
Ministry of Education Not possible to be determined MoA VI14 Farmer education on
irrigation management new measure State sector, MoA / Ministry of Economy MoA
VI15 Grading agricultural products based on quality new measure State sector,
MoA / MoA VI16 Renewing the agricultural machinary park new measure State
sector, MoA MoA - VI17 Establishment of agricultural groups/cooperatives new
measure State sector, MoA MoA - VI18 Install gravity irrigation new measure $
,338,265,588 ,870,375 MWh Grant Total 75 ktoe 160 Saint-Paul St, Suite 200,
Quebec City,QC G1K 3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   160 Saint-Paul St, Suite
200, Quebec City,QC G1K 3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418   160 Saint-Paul St,
Suite 200, Quebec City,QC G1K 3W1CANADA|Tel: + 418  Fax: + 418