RENEWABLE ENERGY ROADMAP FOR THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS
January 2015 Copyright © IRENA 2014 Unless otherwise indicated, material in this
publication may be used freely, shared or reprinted, so long as IRENA is
acknowledged as the source Cover photo: An old wind pump next to Faneromeni
Church, Nicosia, Cyprus (Emanuele Taibi / IRENA) About IRENA The International
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that
supports countries in their transition to  sustainable energy future, and serves
as the principal platform for interna- tional cooperation,  centre of
excellence, and  repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowl-
edge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable
use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal,
hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy in the pursuit of sustainable
development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and
prosperity Acknowledgements Key components of the analysis have been developed
by the Swedish Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) and the Cyprus University of
Technology (CUT), respectively for electricity supply and energy demand
scenarios The report benefited from comments and guidance from Dolf Gielen,
Director of IRENA Innovation and Tech- nology Centre, along with the
contributions of all members of the roadmap working team, as listed below This
report has been made possible by  Voluntary Contribution from the Government of
the Federal Republic of Germany This roadmap was developed by IRENA, in
cooperation with the Ministry of Energy, Commerce, Industry and Tourism (MECIT)
of the Republic of Cyprus For further information or to provide feedback, please
contact IRENA (secretariat@irenaorg) or Emanuele Taibi, IRENA Innovation and
Technology Centre (ETaibi@irenaorg) This report is available for free download
from  Roadmap working team IRENA: Emanuele Taibi and Peter Journeay-Kaler KTH:
Constantinos Taliotis, Mark Howells and Manuel Welsch CUT: Theodoros Zachariadis
MECIT: Energy Service & Hydrocarbon Service: George Partasides, Iosif Spyrides
Cyprus Transmission System Operator: Constantinos Varnava and Irene Zavrou
Cyprus Distribution System Operator: Savvas Papadouris Electricity Authority of
Cyprus: Constantinos Rouvas Other contributions Environmental Department of
Cyprus Department of Labour & Works Cyprus Statistical Service Disclaimer While
this publication promotes the adoption and use of renewable energy, IRENA does
not endorse any particular project, product or service provider The designations
employed and the presentation of materials herein do not imply the expression of
any opinion whatsoever on the part of the IRENA concerning the legal status of
any region, country, territory city or area or of its authorities, or concerning
their authorities or the delimitation of their frontiers or boundaries FOREWORD:
REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS Cyprus has one of the highest electricity prices in Europe,
due to high reliance on liquid fuel for power generation However,  major
transition is imminent for electricity supply On one hand, indigenous natural
gas discoveries are to be developed in the coming years On the other hand, the
costs of renewable power supply options have fallen dramatically Meanwhile,
concerns about greenhouse gases and local pollutants have increased, reflecting
stringent European Union regulations Renewable energy offers  way for Cyprus to
reduce both the cost and the environmental impact of generating electricity In
the wake of the recent economic recession, turning to re- newables can help to
reduce fuel imports, strengthen the trade balance and create local jobs The
success of solar water heaters, for example, can be replicated for solar
photovoltaics (PV) Cyprus has set out to attain  higher share of renewables, and
this roadmap helps to assess op- timal investment strategies in the power sector
Solar PV and wind power will play  major role in the roadmap to Roadmap findings
will play an important role to revise existing energy policies and develop new
ones As part of the same engagement, the energy planning model used to quantify
the possible pace and benefits of renewable energy deployment given different
conditions has been handed over to the Government of Cyprus The model will
remain an important tool for assessing future energy policies and examining
different energy pathways, and will assist in determining the op- timal
penetration of RES for electricity supply, identifying the technical and
economic potential for further increasing electricity production by RES We would
like to thank IRENA for this support and look forward to  continued close
coopera- tion in the future  Yiorgos Lakkotrypis Minister of Energy, Commerce,
Industry and Tourism Republic of Cyprus  FOREWORD: IRENA and, versatility,
increasingly, the diversity the The cost-competitiveness of renewable energy
makes such sources essential for energy security and access around the world For
islands, in particular, clean, indigenous renewable energy is inherently more
attractive than costly fossil-fuel imports Countries such as Cyprus, which
depend heavily on imported petroleum products, are investing in clean energy
sources to provide affordable energy, green jobs and modern supply chains, while
contributing to reducing greenhouse-gas emissions in the post-2015 world As an
active participant in global efforts to ensure  sustainable energy future, the
Republic of Cyprus has engaged with IRENA to develop  renewable energy roadmap
for the country The Ministry of Energy, Commerce, Industry and Tourism, along
with  range of stakeholders, has worked closely with IRENA to examine least-cost
pathways for the evolution of the power generation mix, the increasing role that
renewable energy will play within it, and the impact of key decisions on energy
policy that Cyprus is confronted with making today  trust this roadmap will
prove useful in the country’ pursuit of accelerated renewable energy deployment
As our world strives for  future based on clean, secure and affordable energy
for all, Cyprus can be the lighthouse that helps illuminate the course for
others Adnan  Amin Director-General International Renewable Energy Agency
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY FOREWORD: IRENA Roadmap structure The national energy balance,
along with two of the demand forecast scenarios developed, were used as key
inputs to the second section of the roadmap and the electricity supply model on
which that section is based The Renewable Energy Roadmap for the Re- public of
Cyprus is based on three comple- mentary sections The details of what is co-
vered by each section and how each of them relates to the others are described
below ) Electricity supply model In order to examine options for economically
optimal deployment of renewable energy in Cyprus under different scenarios, and
to un- derstand the potential impact of key policy decisions on the power
generation mix,  long-term energy planning model of the cur- rent power system
in Cyprus was deve loped The Electricity Supply Model for Cyprus (ESMC) has been
developed using the long- term energy modelling platform called the Model for
Energy Supply Strategy Alterna- tives and their General Environmental Impact
(MESSAGE) (IIASA 2012) This is  dynamic, bottom-up, multi-year energy system
model allowing the use of linear and mixed-integer optimisation techniques )
Cyprus energy balance and demand forecasts As  first step to analysing the
potential for renewable energy deployment in Cyprus and answering key questions
related to the impacts of key policy decisions for the energy sec- tor, it was
necessary to develop an extensive understanding of the current energy use in
Cyprus, as well as demand forecasts, based on more detailed examination of
current energy use and its possible future evolution in each demand sector This
analysis was developed together with the Cyprus University of Tech- nology (CUT)
and is detailed in “Cyprus Energy Balance and Demand Forecasts”, one section of
the full roadmap report, which provides: This model was used to analyse the
optimal evolution of the Cyprus electricity generation mix to meet electricity
demand under dif- ferent sets of assumptions, which led to the definition of six
main scenarios (see Figure ), which are explained below ●  detailed national
energy balance based on official 2012 data and provisional 2013 data, with
detailed analysis of residential energy demand by end-use and  break- down of
final and useful energy demand in hotels; and ● Energy Efficiency Demand
Scenario without Interim Gas Solution Scenario (SC1): Demand factors for this
scenario are taken from an energy efficiency scenario developed in  separate
study examining energy demand projections (Zachariadis et al 2014) None of the ●
forecasts of final energy demand up to the year 2040 for  number of scenarios
reflecting different sets of assumptions on Cyprus’ economic and energy system
development  major projects under consideration are implemented, except the
production of domestic natural gas for the internal market in 2022;  transition
period is assumed where indigenous gas for power generation becomes available in
Specifically, the Interim Gas Solution, the EuroAsia Interconnector and the LNG
export terminal are excluded from this scenario ● LNG Export Terminal Scenario
(SC4): In this scenario, assumptions are the same as in the previous scenario
(SC3), but investment in  liquefaction facility for ex- port purposes is allowed
Since the inter- connector is not deployed in this scenario, storage is again
deemed necessary be- yond certain predefined limits (discussed later in section
) ● EuroAsia Interconnector Scenario (SC5): This scenario assumes that the
EuroAsia Interconnector will be imple- mented as planned, but no liquefaction
facility will be developed Unless  sepa- rate grid analysis indicates otherwise,
the assumption here is that storage is not  prerequisite in the case of high
renewable energy penetration The Interim Gas Solu- tion is assumed to be
successful as in SC3 Final electricity demands are the same as in SC1 and SC3
The aim of this scenario is to identify the price at which impor- ted
electricity becomes cost-competitive enough to be part of the Cyprus power
generation mix Since investment cost for development of the cable connection has
not been considered in the analysis, the economic and other benefits from the
deployment of the interconnector should outweigh the cost of the associated in-
frastructure for the interconnector to add value to the electrical system In the
pre- sence of an interconnector, the impact on renewable energy deployment would
be twofold: no storage would be required and more variable renewable energy can
enter the power generation mix without the need for storage, which would reduce
its competitiveness ● Extra Efficiency Demand Scenario with Interim Gas Solution
Scenario (SC2): This scenario follows the same logic as SC1, with the exception
of different final electricity demand assumptions and the success of the Interim
Gas Solution nego- tiations Demands are taken from the Ex- tra Efficiency
Scenario (Zachariadis et al 2014), which also assumes  decoupling between
economic growth and electricity demand Thus, demand in this scenario is lower
than in SC1 Also, the interim gas solution is allowed to make gas avail- able
for the power sector, which means that  limit is imposed on the maximum
contribution of renewables in the genera- tion mix, so as to ensure consumption
of  minimum volume of gas based on the likely minimum quantity requirements to
be purchased for the Interim Gas Solution to happen ● Energy Efficiency Scenario
Demand with Interim Gas Solution Scenario (SC3): This scenario follows the same
assumptions and final electricity demand as SC1 However, the Interim Gas
Solution negotiations are assumed to be success- ful, as in the case of SC2 By
comparing SC1 with SC3, outputs from this scenario can provide insights
regarding the effects of the interim solution ● LNG Export Terminal and EuroAsia
In- terconnector Scenario (SC6):  combi-  nation of Scenarios SC4 and SC5 has
been conducted, with both the liquefaction fa- cility and the interconnector
considered Assumptions regarding the Interim Gas Solution are the same as in
SC4, while the assumptions regarding the necessity of storage are the same as in
SC5 deployment of variable renewable energy (VRE) generation, while maintaining
stable operation of the electricity grid, the roadmap includes the results of
two studies examin- ing how VRE integration could be supported through:  VRE
production forecasting  State-of-the-art of technologies for the provision of
grid support services from variable renewable energy systems Additionally,
several sensitivity analyses were undertaken The demand scenarios consid- ered
in the MESSAGE model were based on the demand forecast developed by CUT In
particular, one demand scenario was used for five out of six supply scenarios,
with the scenario with the lowest electricity demand used only for evaluating
the possible benefits in one of the six scenarios (SC2) These studies were
developed by IRENA, as defined in the scope of work of the Cyprus roadmap, and
are included at the end of this report They provide key insights into the state
of the art of some key tools and measures that can be used to facilitate the
integration of large shares of VRE into Cyprus’ electricity system The modelling
work using MESSAGE was developed together with the Swedish Royal Institute of
Technology (KTH) and is detailed in the full roadmap report, in the section
“Electricity Supply Scenarios for the Republic of Cyprus” This section considers
six specific scenarios examining the optimal deployment of renewable energy and
thermal generation for the period 2013-The scenarios were designed by IRENA and
KTH in consulta- tion with the Ministry of Energy, Commerce, Industry and
Tourism (MECIT), to provide insights into key energy related decisions that
Cyprus is facing This part of the report forms the core of the roadmap and
provides key insights into how different policy decisions affect the optimal
evolution of the electricity system in Cyprus Key roadmap findings The following
conclusions have emerged from the roadmap analysis: ● To better position Cyprus
for the revision of its energy policy and associated plans, this report provides
quantitative insights on the impacts of major upcoming policy decisions; ●
Several renewable energy technologies (RETs), including photovoltaics (PV) and
wind, can already produce electricity at  lower cost than Cyprus’ current oil-
fired power plants; ) Technical studies investigating ● Based on this analysis,
renewable en- ergy could provide 25% to 40% of Cy- prus’ total electricity
supply in In these scenarios solar PV will be the VRE integration In order to
provide insights and state-of- the-art information on how to accelerate the
dominant source with about 500 – ,000 megawatts (MW) of capa city providing 15%
to 27% of the electricity supply while wind will be the second most important
renewable energy source with about 175 – 375 MW of capacity providing % to % of
the electricity supply ty that is fed into the grid is sold either at market
price or at  feed-in tariff below marginal generation cost; and ● Maintain the
feed-in tariff regime until  well-functioning market, which al- lows full
participation of renewable energy (including provision of ancil- lary services),
is in place ● The deployment of renewable energy in Cyprus has the potential to
create be- tween 11,000 and 22,000 jobs in Cyprus by 2030, based on IRENA’
estimates of the job-creation potential of different RETs; ● Certain features of
the electricity market currently being designed would affect the competitiveness
of renewables and should be reconsidered: ● Production forecast closes at :00
of the day before, with no re-de- nomination allowed on the same day; ● The
accelerated deployment of renewa- ble energy along with the shift of thermal
generation to natural gas is estimated to lower generation cost to EUR  per
megawatt-hour (MWh) by Costs in 2013 were around EUR 130/MWh, based primarily on
heavy fuel oil and diesel generation ● Limited size of the day-ahead market due
to thermal generation must-run and operating reserves constraints, with no
incentives to invest in flexibil- ity or dispatchability; ● RETs are not allowed
to provide ancil- lary services through the market, with compulsory requirements
applied to all RETs through grid codes; and ● The following recommendations
would help to minimise electricity generation costs in Cyprus: ● Uncapped and
non-compensated RET curtailment justified by system secu- rity concerns creates
substantial risk for renewable energy investors ● Create market incentives for
invest- ment in increasing the flexibility of thermal generation, to reduce
must- run requirements and increase the space for integration of renewable
energy into the market; ● To improve the quality and reliability of national
energy balance it is recommen- ded to: ● Minimise the requirements for provi-
sion of ancillary services from dis- tributed renewable energy in the grid codes
and allow renewable energy to participate in the market for ancillary services;
● Publish the annual energy balance of Cyprus and extend its coverage to
accommodate all available statistical information, , for industrial sub-
sectors; and ● Move from  net-metering scheme to net-billing, where renewable
electrici- ● Conduct energy surveys at regular in- tervals (every few years),
particularly  for sectors with diverse energy use such as households and tourism
tor (DSO) while also reducing financial risk and increasing revenues of IPPs and
utilities operating VRE assets There is substantial potential for ener- gy
efficiency improvements and further pene tration of renewables in the tourism
sector, provided that appropriate policies are implemented ● ● There is  strong
correlation between the value of forecasting and electricity market design In
particular short-term markets and full market access (, inclu- ding
participation in the ancillary services market) for VRE producers increases the
effectiveness of forecasting in reducing VRE integration costs and increasing
the share of VRE generation ● The Ministry of Energy, Commerce, Indus- try and
Tourism should consider making  long-term commitment to energy model- ling work
for both final energy demand and electricity supply as this would great- ly
expand in-house capacity to assess the potential impacts of energy policy deci-
sions and changes in the energy market conditions ● Current and near term
advances in power electronics allow VRE assets to provide grid support services
(GSS) In combi- nation with limited amounts of energy storage, VRE can provide
the full range of GSS already today These capabilities should be factored into
Cyprus’ proposed market design and future energy plan- ning efforts ● Accurate
forecasts support high levels of VRE generation by reducing integration costs
for the transmission system opera- tors (TSO) and distribution system opera-
(Peter Journeay-Kaler / IRENA)  INSIGHTS FOR POLICY MAKERS This section provides
review of the main findings and specific policy recommenda- tions that have
emerged from the roadmap analysis It is intended to assist policy makers in
identifying the main insights that will affect important upcoming policy
decisions ● the imminent end of derogations given to the electricity sector of
Cyprus with respect to the application of EU emission limits, particularly
according to the Large Combustion Plants Directive (Directive 2001/EC setting
emission limits for SO2, NOx and dust) and the free alloca- tion of CO2
certificates; new techno-economic developments, particularly with respect to
RETs, power electronics, smart and energy efficient technologies; and the
current economic situation of Cyprus, which is seeing increasing need for re-
duced energy costs in businesses and households Cyprus is at  major crossroad
for the deve- lopment of its energy system The key driving elements for the
evolution of Cyprus’ energy system are: ● ● the potential availability of
natural gas, either imported or indigenous, within this decade; the plan to open
up the monopolistic electricity market to competition, with  view to reduce cost
and give choice to consumers; ● ● This is reflected in the analysis through the
six key scenarios developed These scenarios 2014 2016 2017 2022 2023 2030
Indigenous gas becomes available to Cyprus power plants No imported natural gas
becomes available to Cyprus power plants No LNG export terminal for indigenous
gas Cyprus remains an isolated electrical grid SC1 Indigenous gas becomes
available to Cyprus power plants No LNG export terminal for indigenous gas
SC2-SC3 Current Cyprus power system Cyprus remains an isolated electrical grid
Indigenous gas becomes available to Cyprus power plants Indigenous gas begins
being exported via an LNG liquefaction terminal SC4 Imported natural gas becomes
available to Cyprus power plants Indigenous gas becomes available to Cyprus
power plants No LNG export terminal for indigenous gas SC5 Electrical
interconnection with Israel becomes available Indigenous gas becomes available
to Cyprus power plants Indigenous gas begins being exported via an LNG
liquefaction terminal SC6 Figure : Policy Decision Tree and Resulting Scenarios
200 )   (                000 800 600 400 200
SC1 SC2 SC3 SC4 SC5 SC6 Figure : Development of solar PV capacity under
different scenarios are based on possible combinations of ma- jor developments
for the energy system of Cyprus, particularly: availability of imported gas,
availability of an international electrical interconnection, availability of
indigenous gas and related infrastructure Wind is the second most important RET,
con- tributing between % and % The scenari- os on the low-end of the renewable
energy share are limited in penetration of vari able RET based on the
constraints obtained by the Ministry of Energy, Commerce, Industry and Tourism
The ministry’ constraints are based on provisional results from  study on grid
stability commissioned by CERA, which will be revised by  subsequent study under
development by the Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission None-
theless, mandatory renewable energy targets for 2020 are exceeded in all
scenarios In the absence of constraints related to must-run, operating reserve
and stability-related con- cerns, solar PV will reach higher shares at  steady
pace In the absence of imported gas becoming available for power generation in
2016, solar PV deployment will be strongly accelerated (see SC1 and Figure ) It
is re- commended to explore scenarios without the availability of natural gas
and imposed tech- nical constraints on variable renewables (cur- rently based on
non-finalised study) Figure  illustrates  decision tree defining the six key
scenarios based on the combinations of the above energy sector developments The
analysis of these scenarios shows that several RETs can already produce
electricity at  lower cost than power plants fueled by oil products RETs have
the potential to provide  sub- stantial contribution to the electricity mix of
Cyprus Based on this analysis, between 25% and 40% of Cyprus’ electricity supply
can come from renewables in 2030, in the economically optimal mix Solar PV is
the predominant renewable energy technology in all scenarios, supplying between
15% and 27% of the electricity consumed in Cyprus in Based on an IRENA analysis
titled Renewable Energy and Jobs (IRENA, 2013c), solar PV can provide  new jobs
per additional megawatt-peak (MWp) installed, while wind in  similar context
like Cyprus (, Greece) can provide  jobs per MWp (see table , page 42 of IRENA
2013c) The deployment of  gigawatt-peak (GWp) of PV over the period  can lead to
about 20,000 new jobs (see Table ), with about additional jobs still exceeding
10,000 in the scenario with the lowest renewable energy deployment (SC2) In the
case of Cyprus, synergies can be lev- eraged between the existing solar thermal
industry, which is already well-established, and the rapidly growing solar PV
market Therefore  dedicated analysis on the job im- pact for Cyprus would be
valuable extension of this work This analysis provides insights for the key
policy decisions that will determine the evolu- tion of the energy sector in
Cyprus Instead of suggesting one pathway as the optimal to fol- low, different
scenarios provide quantitative insights on the impacts of different policy
decisions, to better position Cyprus for the revision of its energy policy and
associated plans (, the National Renewable Energy Action Plan) Given the game-
changing na- ture of some of the policy decisions to be taken for the energy
sector of Cyprus, this analysis outlines an optimal roadmap for each of the
possible scenarios, without as- sociating  probability to each of them The
difference among different scenarios in terms of cost of generation, investment
needs, com- pliance with policy targets and optimal power generation mix can
guide the government in taking policy decisions that will lead to the most
desirable scenario and associated opti- mal roadmap ● Policy recommendations In
combination, renewables and natural gas are expected to lower the genera- tion
cost to EUR /MWh by 2030 (Table ) This is compared to 2013 levels estimated at
about EUR 130 /MWh, where power is generated mostly by burning heavy fuel oil
and diesel In order to minimise the electricity genera- tion cost for the Cyprus
system, the following recommendations can be made ● Create market incentives for
investment in flexibility for thermal power plants, to reduce the must-run
requirements and Table : Renewable energy shares, generation cost and system
investment per scenario SC1 SC6 % % % % % % Renewable energy share in 2030 % % %
% % % SC4 SC5 SC2 SC3 Renewable energy share in 2020 of which: solar PV % % % %
% % % % % % % % wind Cumulative generation system in- vestments * (billion EUR)
Average generation cost in 2013- 2030 (EUR/MWh) 10 70 06 46 45 55 * The cost of
some investments such as grid investments, electrical interconnector cost, and
energy efficiency measures are not included   Table : Estimated additional jobs
generated by wind and solar PV deployment in Cyprus Installed capacity in 2030
(MW) Estimated additional jobs Wind 251 175 251 275 372 352 PV 559 468 559 688
968 998 Wind ,209 ,540 ,209 ,420 ,274 ,098 PV 10,621 ,892 10,621 13,072 18,392
18,962 SC1 SC2 SC3 SC4 SC5 SC6 customers equally Moving to  net-billing scheme
can promote smarter consump- tion patterns, lead to the deployment of small-
scale storage systems and intel- ligent appliances, and generally leverage all
the potential benefits from distributed PV The same policy can replace the ex-
isting self-generation support scheme, which has not been very successful up to
now, especially in agricultural and other commercial consumers, who are unable
to derive benefits from it increase the space for integration of RET into the
market (see the case of Denmark, , from Blum and Christensen 2013) ● Minimise
the requirements for provision of ancillary services from distributed RET (,
small-scale residential PV) in the grid codes, and allow RET to partici- pate in
the market for ancillary services In this way, the participation of only
minimal part of the RET generators would be sufficient to compensate for the
rest of the variable RET, minimising the cost of providing the needed ancillary
services (see Van Hulle et al 2014) ● According to this analysis, acceleration
of the deployment of RET can reduce gene- ration cost substantially, especially
under the current conditions where oil products are used to generate most of the
electri- city However, the slow permitting process slows down the necessary
deployment, and current policy and future market un- certainty increase the risk
for investors As PV, concentrated solar power (CSP) and wind are capital-
intensive (but have no fuel cost), they are much more sensi- tive to cost of
capital compared to ther- mal power plants Increasing the risk for investors in
RET would reduce their competitiveness much more than would be the case for
investors in fossil fuel- powered plants, with  double impact on electricity
generation cost for Cyprus ● Consider moving from  net-metering scheme towards
asymmetric net-bill- ing, where electricity fed into the grid is purchased
either at market price or at  feed-in tariff below marginal genera- tion cost
This would allow both  reduc- tion of windfall profits for net metering custo
mers – due to the large difference between generation cost from PV and the
current tariff – as well as the reduction of grid integration costs, as  net-
billing scheme would provide strong incentives for maximising self-consumption
of elec- tricity produced from PV Currently all net metering customers pay
fixed fee for grid use,  measure that does not pro- mote self-consumption and
penalises all 11 This means that less RET deployment will take place, with
higher generation cost For each 12 MWp of utility-scale PV that gets delayed
compared to the sug- gested roadmap, this analysis estimates that total
generation cost will increase by EUR  million per year One suggestion could be
to maintain the feed-in tariff regime until  well-functioning market that allows
for full participation of RET, including provision of ancillary services, is in
place One possible way to achieve this is to provide  feed-in tariff set at
marginal generation cost minus grid integration cost for as many years as the
estimated break-even time This should be revised yearly for new installations,
to account for reductions in the cost of RET and changes in grid integration
costs; however, it should not be revised retro- actively for existing
installations Once their feed-in period expires, RET genera- tors will be
allowed to sell electricity (and services) on the market, which by then should
be fully operational In particular, certain features of the future market
currently being designed would affect the competitiveness of renewables and
likely slow down investments Key concerns related to current design of the
electricity market, related to deployment of renewables, are: ● production
closes at forecast :00  of the day before, with no re-denomination allowed on
the same day; ● limited size of the day-ahead market due to conservative
constraints on must-run for thermal power plants and operating reserves, with no
incen- tives to invest in flexibility for reducing the must-run requirements; ●
RET will not be allowed to provide ancillary services through the market, with
requirements being enforced to all RET through grid codes; ● RET can be
curtailed without com- pensation if TSO requests to do so because of system
security concerns, and no cap is set on max curtailment, which creates
substantial risk for RET investors ● Based on the decision tree in Figure , no
fuel switch will happen before 2016, in any of the scenarios Therefore, for 2015
the best policy option is to create the enabling conditions for accelerated
deployment of utility-scale solar PV, which is the cheapest available generation
option PV generation cost for 2015 in Cyprus is estimated to be below EUR
80/MWh, displacing diesel and less efficient heavy fuel oil (HFO) units, for
which the variable generation cost (short-run marginal cost, or SRMC) ranges
between EUR /MWh However, due to the current uncertainty on permitting,
licensing and future market design, the environment in 2015 is not conducive to
deployment of RET ● One of the major achievements in the development of this
analysis has been the creation of  platform for productive dis- cussions among
key stakeholders in the energy sector of Cyprus The added value of having
modelling platform to support discussions on quantitative results should justify
support for creating in-house ca- pacity on energy planning modelling In this
way future policy development will benefit from quantitative-based discus- sions
supported by  commonly agreed modelling platform, which can provide in- sights
on impacts from different policies being considered, and assess sensitivity of
results to specific assumptions used   IREN  Head quar ters  Box 236, Abu Dhabi
Unit ed Arab Emirates IREN  Innovati on and Technol ogy Centr  Rob er -Schuma -
Platz  5317   onn Germ any  rg  Copyright©IRENA 2014