ENERGY PROFILE Cameroon COUNTRY INDICATORS AND SDGS  Access to electricity (%
population)  Access to clean cooking (% population)  Renewable energy (% TFEC)
Energy intensity GDP per capita  Real GDP growth rate  %  100%   %  %
/           80% %  65%   60% %          ' -%  40%  -%  20% 23%  -%  %  % 2018
2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  Per capita
renewable capacity  Air particulate matter (PM2)  Public flows to renewables
Urban Average Rural WHO safe  200 33 70 32 000 60 32     800 50 31       / )
/   ( 40 600 31          30 30    400   20 30 200 29 10  45 29   2015 2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
TOTAL ENERGY SUPPLY (TES) Total energy supply in 2020 Total Energy Supply (TES)
Non-renewable (TJ) 2015 106 408 2020 105 096 Renewable (TJ) 277 654 316 341 18%
Oil Total (TJ) 384 062 421 437 Gas Renewable share (%) 72 75 % Nuclear % Coal +
others Growth in TES Non-renewable (%)  -  + 75% Renewables Renewable (%) ++
Total (%) + + Renewable energy supply in 2020 Primary energy trade Imports (TJ)
2015 89 816 2020 73 359 %% Hydro/marine Exports (TJ) Net trade (TJ) 196 893 107
077 206 073 132 714 Wind Solar Imports (% of supply) Exports (% of production)
Energy self-sufficiency (%) 23 40 129 17 37 132 Bioenergy 94% Geothermal
RENEWABLE ENERGY CONSUMPTION (TFEC) Renewable TFEC trend Renewable energy
consumption in 2020 Electricity Commercial heat Bioenergy Geothermal Solar
direct 400 % 336 328 319 350 313 304 293 300 )   ( 250   200     150     100 95%
50 %  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  Industry Consumption by sector Industry
(TJ) Transport (TJ) Households (TJ) 2015 10 393  186 591 2020 11 878  207 426
35% Transport Households Other 62% Other (TJ) 96 347 116 506 ELECTRICITY
CAPACITY Installed capacity trend Renewable capacity in 2022 Non-renewable
Fossil fuels Renewable Hydro/marine Hydro/marine Bioenergy Solar  Wind Bioenergy
Geothermal Total  706 827 812 14      533 46 Other Non-RE 54 Solar 53 Renewable
share     80% 100 % Nuclear Wind Geothermal Hydro/marine Solar 100% Wind
Bioenergy   98% Geothermal Capacity change (%)  Non-renewable   ( Renewable
Hydro/marine     Solar    Wind Bioenergy Geothermal Total   +  + 11 + 11 + 23
+   ) % (  60%                      ) 54% Net capacity change (GW)  40% Fossil
fuels Renewable      20%    %  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022  Net
capacity change in 2022 (MW)  Non-renewable Hydro and marine              2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Solar Wind Capacity utilisation in 2021 (%)   Fossil
fuels 22% Nuclear Bioenergy Geothermal Hydro/Marine 72%   Solar 16% Wind
Bioenergy Geothermal  20 40 60 80 100 ELECTRICITY GENERATION Electricity
generation trend Generation in 2021 Non-renewable Renewable Hydro and marine
Solar Wind Bioenergy Geothermal Total GWh  336  110  090 20     446 % 21 79 79
100 Fossil fuels Nuclear Other Non-RE Hydro/marine Wind Solar Bioenergy
Geothermal Renewable share  100%        80% 79%  )    ( ) % (      Per capita
electricity generation (kWh) 60%       -        Total Renewable 300
40% 200   20% 100    % 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2021 LATEST POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND LEGISLATION Cost of gas and transport fuel
subsidy - 2022  2022     ENERGY AND EMISSIONS Energy-related CO2 emissions by
sector Elec & heat generation CO2 emissions in Elec & heat Other Industrial
Transport Other Buildings % 12 Coal + others 10           36%  Gas     64%   Oil
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 CO2 emission factor for elec & heat generation
Avoided emissions from renewable elec & heat Emitted CO2 RE Avoided CO2 CMR
Africa World  000 14  500 12  000           10    /   500  ENERGY AND EMISSIONS
000         500    000 402 363  500   2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided emissions based on fossil fuel mix used for power
Calculated by dividing power sector emissions by elec + heat gen RENEWABLE
RESOURCE POTENTIAL Distribution of solar potential Distribution of wind
potential Cameroon World Cameroon World 100% 100% 80% 80%               60% 60%
40% 40% 20% 20% % % <260      >1060 <  -   -   -   -   -  > Wind power density
at 100m height (/m2) Annual generation per unit of installed PV capacity
(MWh/kWp) Biomass potential: net primary production Indicators of renewable
resource potential   Solar PV: Solar resource potential has been divided into
seven classes, each representing  range of annual PV output per unit of capacity
(kWh/kWp/yr) The bar chart shows the proportion of  country' land area in each
of these classes and the global distribution of land area across the classes
(for comparison)     Onshore wind: Potential wind power density (/m2) is shown
in the seven classes used by NREL, measured at  height of 100m The bar chart
shows the distribution of the country' land area in each of these classes
compared to the global distribution of wind resources Areas in the third class
or above are considered to be  good wind resource   Biomass: Net primary
production (NPP) is the amount of carbon fixed by plants and accumulated as
biomass each year It is  basic measure of biomass productivity The chart shows
the average NPP in the country (tC/ha/yr), compared to the global average NPP of
- tonnes of carbon 10   200 tC/ha/yr  11 = Global average of - tC/ha/yr Sources:
IRENA statistics, plus data from the following sources: UN SDG Database
(original sources: WHO; World Bank; IEA; IRENA; and UNSD); UN World Population
Prospects; UNSD Energy Balances; UN COMTRADE; World Bank World Development
Indicators; EDGAR; REN21 Global Status Report; IEA -IRENA Joint Policies and
Measures Database; IRENA Global Atlas; and World Bank Global Solar Atlas and
Global Wind Atlas Additional notes: Capacity per capita and public investments
SDGs only apply to developing areas Energy self-sufficiency has been defined as
total primary energy production divided by total primary energy supply Energy
trade includes all commodities in Chapter 27 of the Harmonised System (HS)
Capacity utilisation is calculated as annual generation divided by year-end
capacity  ,760h/year Avoided emissions from renewable power is calculated as
renewable generation divided by fossil fuel generation multiplied by reported
emissions from the power sector This assumes that, if renewable power did not
exist, fossil fuels would be used in its place to generate the same amount of
power and using the same mix of fossil fuels In countries and years where no
fossil fuel generation occurs, an average fossil fuel emission factor has been
used to calculate the avoided emissions These profiles have been produced to
provide an overview of developments in renewable energy in different countries
and areas The IRENA statistics team would welcome comments and feedback on its
structure and content, which can be sent to statistics@irenaorg IRENA
Headquarters Masdar City  Box 236, Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates  Last updated
on: 8th August, 2023