Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/CMR/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Cameroon is  lower-middle-income
country with  population above 25 million inhabitants and  human development
index (HDI) of 563, ranking 153 out of 188 countries During the second phase of
operationalization of the national 2035 Vision, Cameroon adopted the National
Development Strategy,  (NDS30), whose objective is to enable the country’
transition to  high-income industrialized nation by reducing poverty, promoting
strong economic growth, and consolidating democracy The United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), , developed against the
backdrop of the COVID-19 pandemic, aims to contribute to achieving national
priorities through four strategic priority areas: () inclusive and sustainable
growth through structural transformation of the economy and creation of decent
jobs; () quality, inclusive and equitable human and social development; ()
institutional support and citizen participation; and () environmental
sustainability and climate and disaster risk management The UNDP programmatic
offer is aligned with the UNSDCF and informed by its comparative advantages in
structural transformation, inclusive governance, peacebuilding, climate change
and socioeconomic development The country programme document (CPD) considers the
independent country programme review (ICPR) recommendations and the 2019
national SDG reports UNDP will contribute to the achievement of UNSDCF
priorities by addressing four interlinked challenges  Slow transformation of the
economy and non-inclusive growth In the last few decades, the effect of economic
growth on employment was weak While national gross domestic product (GDP)
experienced inter and intra-sectors growth, the changes were not led by
productivity gains, especially in the agricultural sector The production system
is dominated by the tertiary sector with  low technological base, representing
57 per cent of the economy  Efforts to diversify have not yet led to
substantial increase in export earnings Between 2010 and 2019, average annual
economic growth was  per cent Still, this growth was not sufficiently inclusive,
as demonstrated by the high multidimensional poverty index of 243 and income
inequality index of per cent during the same period The COVID-19 pandemic
exacerbated poverty and inequality, resulting in  negative growth rate in 2020
of - per cent, reduction in living standards for 62 per cent of households, and
an income drop for 65 per cent of households In addition, per cent of
enterprises laid-off workers, among which per cent were micro, small and medium
enterprises (MSMEs)  Multifaceted conflicts and slow decentralization process
Cameroon experiences volatile situations due to violent extremism by Boko Haram
in the far-north and the socio-political crisis in the north-west and south-west
regions By March 2021, in 711,0564 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the
west, centre and littoral regions and the influx of over 440,000 refugees from
the Central African Republic and Nigeria to the northern and eastern regions To
respond to the internal social and security challenges, in 2019 the Government
organized  national dialogue that recommended granting special status to north-
west and south- west regions and forming regional councils to deepen
decentralization and drive local development Despite these efforts, basic
service delivery and overall decentralization have been slow because of the
limited transfer of resources and expertise to local administrative units called
decentralized territorial collectivities (DTCs) these conflicts resulted
Unsustainable exploitation of natural resources, weak national climate policy
and limited preparedness for disaster risk Cameroon recorded  deforestation rate
of  per cent (about 20,000 hectares/year) due mainly to unsustainable
exploitation of natural resources and non- exhaustive application of forestry
regulations, particularly certification of sustainability to timber exported by
Cameroon The high level of deforestation has contributed to an increase in the
Human Development Report, UNDP, National Development Strategy, 2020-Government
survey report, May UNHCR Cameroon multi-country office factsheet, March
DP/DCP/CMR/ adverse effects of climate change, land degradation and loss of
biodiversity The Government has set  regeneration target of ,500 ha/year in
forest areas or 50,000 ha in 20 years Bridging the significant gap between rate
of deforestation and regeneration requires  comprehensive strategy and
investments Over the last five years, the resurgence of extreme weather
conditions resulted in severe and unpredictable droughts and floods causing land
degradation and displacement of populations The Government has not been able to
mobilize substantial resources to implement the Paris Agreement and the Sendai
Agreement on Disaster Risk Reduction due to the absence of  national climate
policy  Persistent inequalities The national picture conceals deep inequalities
among income groups and regions In 2014, the highest income quintile accounted
for per cent of consumption compared to only  per cent for the poorest quintile
Poverty is more prevalent in rural areas where two-thirds of the population
live, increasing from per cent in 2001 to per cent in During the same period,
the urban poverty rate declined from to  per cent Inequality has  strong gender
dimension, with the national gender inequality index at 879 and women  times
more likely to be unemployed In addition, only per cent of women have land
titles, furthering limiting their access to productive assets and financial
services Youth underemployment stands at 77 per cent (per cent for women and per
cent for men) due to unequal access to productive assets Disability prevalence
is about per cent; women with disabilities face double discrimination  Cameroon
has immense potential to overcome its socioeconomic challenges Youth account for
nearly 78 per cent of the population Agriculture plays  pivotal role in the
economy, contributing to 15 per cent of GDP and employing 43 per cent of the
population Despite the sector’ importance, the country’ economy suffers from low
productivity, especially in the agriculture sector due to the limited downstream
value chain and underdeveloped market The decentralization programme launched in
2021 will create an enabling environment to accelerate local development by
building capacities of youth and other local actors, promoting skills and
resource transfers, and mainstreaming environmental issues and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in local development plans  The ICPR highlighted that
the Government considers UNDP  trusted partner to support elaboration of its
development policies and strategies UNDP will build on this position and its
integrator role to identify development solutions and address challenges related
to poverty and inequality, structural transformation, governance, peacebuilding,
climate and disaster risk prevention and management UNDP played  key convening
role during the NDS30 preparation process and was one of the main Government
partners in the national response to COVID-The ICPR noted that UNDP contributed
to restoring State presence in conflict-affected localities and helped develop
public policies and strategies to address violent extremism, peacebuilding,
civil status and biodiversity conservation  UNDP will deploy its experience in
devising innovative solutions to address the country’ complex development
challenges by: () fostering an integrated United Nations inter-agency cross-
sectoral approach, focused on joint United Nations activities for evaluations
and SDG achievement; () acting as  connector and mobilizing its wide networks
for SDG acceleration; () leveraging innovation work through its accelerator
labs; and () offering platforms for monitoring and evaluation of NDS30 and SDG
acceleration UNDP will build on its COVID-19 response experience to mobilize
resources, strengthen the health care system (including COVID-19 vaccination
deployment strategy), and support MSMEs, which account for 90 per cent of
overall employment in Cameroon  Forestry Outlook Study for Africa (FOSA)
(document national de prospective) – Cameroon, FAO  National report on the state
of the population, BUCREP, Genre, inclusion financière et pauvreté au Cameroun,
Institut national de statistique, Mai Sightsavers,  DP/DCP/CMR/ II Programme
priorities and partnerships  Building on ICPR recommendations and aligned with
the NDS30, UNSDCF and UNDP renewed strategic offer in Africa, the programme will
focus on supporting Cameroon to accelerate SDG achievement through three
integrated strategic pillars: () transformative, inclusive and sustainable
growth; () inclusive governance and peacebuilding; and () environmental
sustainability, climate risk and disaster management The interventions in the
east, north-west, south-west and the three northern regions will target youth,
women, IDPs, people in rural areas and those living with disabilities UNDP will
deliver the three pillars in an integrated approach The first pillar on
transformation, inclusion and sustainable growth includes building  broad- based
climate-resilient green economy that contributes to environmental sustainability
and building resilience of vulnerable groups The second pillar, governance and
peacebuilding (especially the component on decentralization and accountability),
is  key strategic driver to accelerate structural transformation of the economy,
foster local development, strengthen social cohesion, and provide effective
response to climate change The programme' theory of change envisions that by
2026, if the decentralization process is accelerated, the economy is diversified
(leading to structural transformation), mechanisms for inclusive dialogue are
strengthened, social cohesion and peacebuilding are strengthened, socioeconomic
recovery (especially in conflict-affected areas) is accelerated, and the
environment is sustainably managed; provided there is strong collaboration with
United Nations agencies, full government and local community participation and
ownership, engagement of CSOs and the private sector, progress on government
structural and institutional reforms, adequate resources, and  safe and secure
environment to implement the programme; then youth, women and vulnerable people
will have decent jobs, be empowered to participate in decision-making processes
and be more resilient to climate shocks and disasters UNDP will contribute to
achieving three of the five SDG accelerators identified by the Government: ()
strengthening institutional processes through better governance; ()
strengthening gender equality in education and employment; and () improving
infrastructure development, especially small-scale renewable energy In the
process, UNDP will consolidate its strategic positioning for policy and strategy
support and capitalize on gains from the national response to COVID-19, as
component of the socioeconomic transformation UNDP support to the Government
will align with national priorities articulated in various plans9 and includes:
() mobilizing resources for the SDGs through the integrated national financing
framework (INFF); () promoting new integrated development solutions; and ()
supporting knowledge and technology transfer through South-South and triangular
cooperation UNDP will continue to support the Government in mobilizing vertical
funds and strengthening partnerships with international financial institutions
for economic resilience and COVID-19 response Furthermore, UNDP will partner
with bilateral cooperation agencies such as German Corporation (GIZ) on
decentralization and the private sector on innovation Transformative, Inclusive,
and sustainable growth UNDP will support the Government in reducing monetary and
multidimensional inequalities and underemployment, particularly among women,
youth and vulnerable groups UNDP will support the transformation from cash to
digital government-to-person (G2P) payments using mobile money systems This has
the potential to be replicated and scaled up to  social transfer payment system
UNDP will act at the strategic level to promote structural reforms and at the
operational level to reach beneficiaries The approach will prioritize
innovation, capacity building in the digital and green economy, and knowledge
management UNDP will support SMEs and small and medium industries (SMIs) that
contribute to expanding local industries and create jobs To do this, UNDP will
rely on government support structures, incubators, the private sector, and
universities to ensure the sustainability of interventions It will also
strengthen collaboration with  National COVID-19 response plan, National
COVID-19 vaccine deployment plan, National inclusive finance strategy, Special
three-year youth plan, National gender policy, National Development
Strategy,2020 - DP/DCP/CMR/ the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-
Women) Furthermore, UNDP will prioritize people affected by COVID-19 and
locations hosting IDPs UNDP will promote entrepreneurship and strengthen
inclusive access to finance for women, youth and vulnerable groups Interventions
will focus on developing value chains with high employment potential identified
in the NDS30, including promoting inclusive finance through improving financial
products and services adapted to the needs of different target groups UNDP will
support the technological transformation of SME/SMIs through partnerships with
the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), the IsDB, and it will build on ongoing
initiatives such as Youth Connekt and the accelerator labs Within the framework
of the decentralization policy, UNDP will strengthen the capacity of municipal
employment offices (MEOs) and improve access to market information by supporting
the deployment of the Cameroon Market Information System (CAMIS) The programme
will strengthen the capacities of national institutions and SMEs to become
competitive and contribute to economic diversification for better subregional
and continental integration within the framework of the Africa Continental Free
Trade Area (AfCFTA) UNDP will collaborate with the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa (UNECA) to develop interconnections between CAMIS and
other national price information systems in the subregion Inclusive governance
and peacebuilding Creating conditions for harmonious, more is essential for
transformation UNDP will contribute by strengthening the capacities of national
institutions mandated to lead decentralization, such as the Ministry of
Decentralization and Local Development (MINDDEVEL) and the National
Decentralization Council (NDC) and DTCs UNDP will partner with the World Bank,
AfDB, GIZ and the French Development Agency (AFD) to support the Government with
resource mobilization, inclusive and participatory budgeting, and -governance
(dematerialization of services) UNDP will also partner with the National School
of Local Administration (NASLA) to strengthen the capacities of DTCs inclusive
development UNDP will strengthen effective and inclusive decision-making
processes focusing on youth, women and vulnerable groups by supporting
initiatives for citizen participation, human rights and the rule of law The
programme will establish multi-stakeholder consultation platforms for the NDS30
and the SDGs within the INFFs Moreover, UNDP will strengthen the capacity of
local governments and citizens to anticipate and respond to endogenous and
exogenous shocks, make efficient use of resources/skills transfers, and
strengthen the legal and institutional environment for citizens’ participation
and enjoyment of rights UNDP will accompany the Government in peacebuilding,
strengthening social cohesion and preventing violent extremism in collaboration
with the United Nations system (UNFPA, UNESCO and UN-Women) To address effects
of fragility in the far-north, north-west and south-west regions, UNDP will
implement stabilization and recovery initiatives to strengthen social cohesion,
rehabilitate basic social services, and revitalize the local economy in
collaboration with Japan, Germany, France and United Kingdom UNDP will deliver
the initiatives following key principles, including the human rights-based
approach,  people-centred approach based on vulnerability, local ownership,
building forward better, and doing no harm UNDP will work with the country team
to ensure harmonious integration of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus
with human security as the guiding thread Furthermore, UNDP will promote  cross-
border approach to ensure better integration and management of interventions in
key target locations, mainly Lake Chad Basin and the north-west, south-west and
east regions UNDP will closely collaborate with neighbouring countries’ relevant
institutions and stakeholders, and with other UNDP country offices involved
Cross-border interventions will focus on capacity building of national and
community entities on conflict prevention, early warning, inclusive dialogue,
mediation and reconciliation with increased participation of women and youth
UNDP will also contribute to strengthening national human rights mechanisms,
capacities of law enforcement officers, and accountability institutions
DP/DCP/CMR/ Environmental sustainability, climate risk and disaster management
UNDP will strengthen the capacities of key actors to improve regulatory
frameworks and access climate finance to implement the Paris Agreement and the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction UNDP support will focus on: ()
developing  national climate policy to address climate change challenges in an
integrated manner through the formulation and early implementation of low carbon
emission options resilient to climate shocks; and () adopting  national
framework for climate finance, integrating requirements and obstacles to the
effective use of climate finance UNDP will forge partnerships with the Green
Climate Fund (GCF) and the United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) Within the
context of environmental fragility related to climate change and increasing
pressures on natural resources, UNDP will support initiatives that build the
resilience of populations to adverse effects of climate change and natural
disasters by implementing techniques for adaptation, mitigation (renewable
energy, agroforestry practices) and natural disaster risk management UNDP will
support the promotion of value-added techniques to climate change adaptation and
mitigation and the development of tools to manage natural disaster risks for
DTCs UNDP will forge partnerships with international financial institutions
(IFIs), FAO and UNESCO to contribute to these results Effective institutions are
critical for driving sustainable development UNDP will strengthen key
institutions capacities, including assessing economic costs of action and
inaction related to climate change and natural disasters and links to: ()
development of integrated climate/economic models and predictions, and
formulation of resilient sectoral policies; () monitoring and forecasting
changes in conditions causing floods, droughts and associated impacts; and ()
strengthening the national climate services framework UNDP will support the
Government in consolidating synergies and partnerships between actors to enable
communities and DTCs in the far-north regions for disaster preparedness,
application of knowledge and innovation on environmental management,
biodiversity and ecosystem services, and restoration of degraded land This will
be done by: () developing guidelines to capitalize on good practices, knowledge
and innovation to improve mechanisms for valuing environmental services and
ecosystems; and () supporting pilot DTCs to fight poverty through effective use
of guidelines to promote environmental services, biodiversity and ecosystems III
Programme and risk management UNDP will play an integrator role within United
Nations system following the principles of Paris Declaration and Busan
Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation UNDP will develop dialogue
platforms for better coordination of the implementation of the NDS30 and the
SDGs in partnership with the country team, the Government, technical and
financial partners, think-tanks, research institutions, IFIs and the private
sector Partnerships will be promoted within the framework of South-South and
triangular cooperation by strengthening the mobilization of development
assistance and technical cooperation to take advantage of AfCFTA This CPD
outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit
of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework steering committee chaired by the Ministry of
Economy, Planning and Regional Development (MINEPAT) will coordinate the
programme and bring together sectoral ministries and other stakeholders involved
in programme implementation The harmonized approach for cash transfers (HACT)
will be used in  coordinated manner with other United Nations organizations to
strengthen national ownership If necessary, national execution may be replaced
by direct execution for all or part of the programme to allow  response to  case
of force majeure   DP/DCP/CMR/ The office saw  sharp increase of 357 per cent in
resources and 273 per cent in delivery between 2018 and 2020 with the same
staffing structure The country office will review and adjust its structure to
create  nimble, effective set-up to respond to the country office’ increasing
scope to address complex development needs in recovery, the humanitarian-
development-peace nexus, youth employment, and empowerment of women The main
programme implementation risks are financial, environmental (floods, landslides,
extreme heats, pollution), health (COVID-19 and other pandemic), deterioration
of security and socio-political environment (especially in the far-north, north-
west and south-west regions), and slow implementation of institutional reforms
Financial risks relate, among others, to the programme’ high dependence on
government financing If the COVID-19 pandemic and its socioeconomic impacts
persist and growth stagnates, the Government contribution to the country
programme might be affected To mitigate this trend, the country office will
diversify its partnerships with development banks (IsDB, World Bank, AfDB) The
strategic partnership with the Government will be strengthened to support
programme implementation on recovery and environment UNDP will develop
communication and partnership strategy to diversify funding sources To mitigate
risks related to security and socio-political crises, UNDP will start
implementation in stable areas, monitor progress through established risk
mitigation mechanisms, and scale up gradually The programme will rely on ‘proof
of concept’ in fragile locations and systematically carry out conflict analysis
prior to intervention UNDP will partner with local actors (CSOs/NGOs, faith-
based organizations, DTCs) to mitigate security risks Moreover, UNDP will
mitigate the impact of environmental and social risks by systematically carrying
out human rights, due diligence and social and environmental standard
assessments To accelerate institutional reforms through decentralization, UNDP
will follow  two-pronged approach, including promoting and sensitizing
legislators and technical support through the decentralization project The
programme will be regularly reviewed to minimize shocks due to COVID-Overall
risk analysis will consider gender and community empowerment, including youth
and women participation, with continued emphasis on applying leaving no one
behind to target people living with disabilities and other vulnerable groups IV
Monitoring and evaluation Within the UNSDCF results and resources framework,
UNDP will rely primarily on the national statistical information system for the
production, regular updating, and dissemination of essential statistics for
monitoring CPD indicators, and developing new methodologies UNDP will support
capacity building of the National Institute of Statistics (NIS) Programme
implementation will be monitored through coordination meetings, annual reviews
and final evaluation of the programme organized jointly with MINEPAT Quarterly
quality assurance activities within the HACT framework will strengthen joint
monitoring of programme results The Government and UNDP will experiment
monitoring approaches by multidisciplinary teams while ensuring involvement of
beneficiaries by fostering community-level feedback mechanisms to strengthen
results-based management Based on UNDP monitoring and evaluation guidelines,
country office evaluation plan will be drawn up, including project and thematic
evaluations for the three programme priorities External evaluations, independent
evaluations and audits, conducted in accordance with corporate guidelines, will
guide programme implementation and theory of change adjustment, and the results
and resources framework UNDP will allocate  per cent of its programme budget to
strengthen monitoring and evaluation, especially for data collection, to set
baselines and undertake periodic surveys The country office will continue to use
the UNDP gender marker to ensure that at least 15 per cent of the country
programme budget is invested to achieve gender equality and women' empowerment
The country office will review and implement its gender equality strategy and
DP/DCP/CMR/ participate in the gender equality seal UNDP will strengthen its
knowledge management processes through documentation and sharing of experiences
to better capitalize on programme achievements with the accelerator lab
DP/DCP/CMR/ Annex Results and resources framework for Cameroon () NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Structural transformation of the economy COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
(OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, more people, especially youth,
women and the socially and economically vulnerable, benefit equitably from
increased opportunities in  green, diversified, transformative, resilient and
inclusive economy with decent jobs in the productive sectors (Goals , , , , 10,
11, 12, 17) RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural
transformations for sustainable development Estimated cost by outcome (United
States dollars) Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators,
baselines targets) Major partners/partnerships frameworks Cooperation Framework
outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data
collection, and responsibilities MINEPAT, MINADER, MINCOMMERCE,13 MINEFOP,14
Incubators, World Bank, European Union, AfDB, IFAD Regular: $,800,000 Share of
agro-industry in GDP (%) Baseline (2018): Target (2026): Data source: National
Accounts Frequency: Yearly Responsibility: NIS Output  Technical and operational
capacities of SMEs, cooperative societies and innovative start-ups enhanced to
develop inclusive value chains in agricultural, digital economy, green economy
and minerals Other: $45,696,000 Data source: MINFI10, MINEPAT11, MINADER12, NIS,
NDS30 Monitoring report Frequency: Yearly Responsibility: MINFI, NIS, MINADER
Indicator  Number of value chain strengthened to promote employment and wealth
creation for youth and women Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 20 Data source:
Projects reports Frequency: Annual Share of rural sector in GDP (%) Baseline
(2018):Target (2026): 21 Data source: MINEPAT, NIS, Economic and financial
survey of enterprises Frequency: Yearly Responsibility: MINEPAT Overall
underemployment rate of 15 to 24 years old Baseline (2010): 84, % Target (2026):
70% Indicator  Number of registered SMEs participating in productive sector
value chain Baseline (2020): 100 Target (2026): 300 Data source: Project reports
10 Ministry of Finance 11 Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Development
12 Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 13 Ministry of Trade 14
Ministry of Employment and Vocational Training   DP/DCP/CMR/ Frequency: Annual
and every  months Indicator  Number of jobs created through analysed value
chains Baseline (2020): 1500 (Male 1050, Female 450, Youth 1200), Target (Male
4200, Female 1800, Youth 4800, People with Disability PwD 200) Data source:
Project report, survey Frequency: Annual (2026): 6000 MINPMEESA,15 MINPROFF,16
MINEPAT, MINFI, INS, INCOMMERCE, MINMIDT,17 World Bank, BADEA, Output  SMEs,
cooperative societies, and innovative start-ups led by women, youth and
vulnerable groups enabled access to technology, and inclusive financing
Indicator  Volume of financing granted to SMEs and cooperatives for innovative
start-ups led by women, youth and vulnerable groups Baseline: TBD Target
(2026):10 000 000 USD Data source: Project reports Frequency: Annual Indicator
Number of people accessing financial and non-financial assets, disaggregated by
target groups Baseline (2020): ,500 (youths 2500, women 3000 and PWDs ) Target
(2026): 16,200 (youths 10000, women 6000 and PWDs 200 Data source: Project
reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of SMEs, 15 Ministry of small and
medium-sized Enterprises, Social Economy and Handicrafts 16 Ministry for Women
Empowerment 17 Ministry of Mines, Industry and Technological Development 10
DP/DCP/CMR/ cooperative societies, start-ups benefiting from upgraded
technological services (digitalization, processing) Baseline (2020): 300 Target
(2026): 1300 Data source: Activities report, Project reports Frequency: Annual
Output  Technical and operational capacities of entities at national, regional
and local levels enhanced to develop employment opportunities, improve access to
market, and build youth and women resilience MINPMEESA, MINPROFF, MINJEC,
MINDDEVEL, MINEPAT, MINADER, MINFI, NIS, MINCOMMERCE, MINEFOP, World Bank,
BADEA, IFAD, CNYC Indicator  Number of women, youth and vulnerable groups
benefitting from productive capacity building support structures Baseline
(2020):300 (Female 120, Male 180 PwD ) Target (2026): 1500 (Female 600, Male
900, Youth 1200, PwD 75) Data source: Partners’ activity reports, Frequency:
Annual Indicator  Percentage of DTCs with  functioning municipal employment
office Baseline (2020): % Target (2026): 34% Data source: MEO reports, project
reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Percentage of DTCs covered by the
information system on prices and agro-pastoral products Baseline (2020): %
Target (2026): 24% Data source: CAMIS implementation reports 11  DP/DCP/CMR/
Frequency: Annual MINPMEESA, MINJEC, MINMIDT, MINEPAT, MINADER, MINFI, MINEPIA,
MINCOMMERCE, MINEFOP, World Bank, European Union, ADB, IFAD, CEMAC, ECCAS,
African Union, UNECA, private sector GICAM Output  Capacities of exporting SMEs
and national institutions strengthened for better subregional and continental
integration within the framework of AfCFTA Indicator  Number of facilitation
tools developed (,, tax services, certification services, etc) Baseline (2020):
Target (2026):  Data source: Project reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number
of institutions and SMEs strengthened to improve access to export market
Baseline (2020): Target (2026): 200 (10 institutions and 190 SMEs) Data source:
Project report Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Governance,
decentralization and strategic management of the state (strategic pillar  NDS
2030) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026,
youth, women, the most vulnerable groups, and people living with disabilities
actively contribute to the effectiveness of policies and the performance of
public institutions at the national, regional, and municipal levels, and fully
enjoy their rights (Goals , 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17) RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME : Building resilience to shocks and crises Percentage of women mayors,
senators, parliamentarians Baseline (2021): 68% Target (2026): 30% Data source:
NIS, MINDDEVEL, MINFI, MINEPAT, MINFOPRA Frequency: Annual Responsibility: NIS,
MINFOPRA, MINEPAT Output  Capacities of institutions, civil society actors and
populations (youth, women and socially vulnerable people) are strengthened for
effective and inclusive participation in decision-making processes at local,
regional and national levels MINAT, MINDDEVEL, MINFI, MINEPAT, MINAS, MINPROFF,
MINFOPRA, CVUC, MINJEC CNYC Regular: $,429,000 Other: $72,828,000 Indicator
Proportion of DTCs with an effective and inclusive dialogue framework in place
Baseline (2020): 30% Target (2026): 60% Data source: DTCs activity reports
Frequency: Annual Data source: NIS, MINDDEVEL, MINEPAT, MINFOPRA, survey reports
Frequency: Annual Rate of user satisfaction with the quality of public service
Baseline (2020):25% 12  DP/DCP/CMR/ Target: (2026): 80% Responsibility:
MINFOPRA, MINEPAT, UNDP Indicator  Number of CSOs/networks with mechanisms
ensuring civic participation and representation in decision-making process
Baseline (2020):10 Target (2026):50 Data source: Activity reports Frequency: Six
() months Data Source: NIS, MINJUSTICE, Survey Reports Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: MINJUSTICE, NIS, UNDP Percentage of population with confidence
in the justice system Baseline (2014):35% Target: (2026): 65% Indicator
Proportion of central institutions with operational mechanisms in place to
promote participation of women, youth and vulnerable people in decision-making
processes Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 50% Data source: Project reports
Frequency: Annual Data Source: MINDDEVEL, MINEPAT, CVUC, survey reports,
activity reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MINDDEVEL, CVUC Output
Institutions, communities and vulnerable populations in targeted areas are
structured and equipped to foster social cohesion, peace, security and boost
local development and recovery from shocks MINHDU, MINAT, MINEPAT, MINPROFF,
MINEFOP, MINADER, MINEPIA, MINDDEVEL, MINFOPRA, Japan Indicator  Number of
facilities destroyed by natural or manmade disasters restored () Schools:
Baseline: 100; Target: 130 () Hospitals and health facilities: Baseline: ;
Target: 25 () Water facilities: Baseline :250; Target: 350 Indicator  Number of
people benefitting from emergency jobs and other livelihoods in crisis and post-
crisis settings, disaggregated by sex, age and disability Baseline (2020): 6000
(Male 4200; Female 1800, PwD ) Target (2026): 18,000 (Male 12600; Female 5400,
PwD 300) Data source: Project Report Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of
strategic partnerships established with IFIs to support resilience-building, 13
DP/DCP/CMR/ transformation, and strengthening health systems (including COVID-19
vaccine deployment) Baseline (2020): 318 Target (2026):  Data source: Project
report Frequency: Annual Overall ranking in the Mo Ibrahim Index of African
Governance Baseline (2020): /100 Target: TBD Output  Decentralization process
and local governance systems enhanced to improve service delivery MINFI,
MINEPAT, MINDDEVEL, MINFOPRA, ANTIC, World Bank, Japan, European Union Indicator
Number of DTCs with  participatory, inclusive and gender-responsive plans and
budget Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 374 Data source: Project activity
reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of DTCs with functioning resource
mobilization and partnership mechanism for local development Baseline (2020):
Target (2026): 150 Data source: Activity reports Frequency: Annual Indicator
Number of DTCs with innovative and digitized systems for effective service
delivery Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 40 Data source: Project reports
Frequency: Annual Indicator  Percentage of DTCs with functional accountability
mechanisms Baseline (2020): TBD Target (2026): 60% Data source: Project report
Frequency: Annual Output  Legal, institutional, and technical MINJUSTICE,
MINEPAT, MINFOPRA, 18 World Bank, IDB and BADEA 14  DP/DCP/CMR/ frameworks are
enabled for effective administration of justice, human rights and access to
services CNUDH, CONSUPE, MINSANTE, MINAT, National Assembly, CDHC, Indicator
Average length of pre-trial detention (months) Baseline (2020): 12 months Target
(2026): Six months Data source: MINJUSTICE report Frequency: Annual Indicator
Number of administrations at central, regional and local level that use Standard
1756 on the quality of service to users Baseline (2020): 11 Target (2026): 31
Data source: Project reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of law
enforcement personnel and other actors (Parliament, public administrations,
CDHC, CSOs) with capacities strengthened in gender and human rights issues
Baseline (2020):11 Target (2026):1000 (100 Parliament, 300 Justice, 600 others)
Data source: Project reports Frequency: Annual Output  Capacity of the National
Statistics Information and Planning System enhanced to provide quality data and
analysis for planning, implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluation
of development policies and decision making MINEPAT, INS, MINDDEVEL Indicator
Number of institutions using vulnerability and poverty profiles data for
evidence- based policymaking and implementation Baseline:  Target (2026): 25
Data source: MINEPAT report Frequency: Annual  Indicator  Percentage of Local
development plan 15  DP/DCP/CMR/ using disaggregated data to monitor progress
towards SDGs Baseline (2020): 34% Target (2026): 80% Data source: updated PCD
Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS: Structural transformation of the
economy (strategic priority , NDS2030); Governance, decentralization and
strategic management of the State (strategic priority , NDS2030) COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP , Effect  UNSDCF: By 2026,
people, including youth, women and socially vulnerable groups, in different
agro-ecological zones live in  safe environment, sustainably manage
environmental resources, including biodiversity, and are more resilient to
shocks from disasters and climate change (Goals , 13, 14, 15, 16, 17) RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME : Building resilience to shocks and crises Proportion of
DTCs with  local land use and sustainable development plan Baseline:  Target:
70% Data source: INS, MINEPDED, MINAT Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
MINEPDED, MINAT Output  Capacities of key actors and institutions strengthened
to access climate finance for the implementation of the Paris Climate Agreement
and the Sendai framework MINEPDED, MINFI, MINEPAT, MINDDEVEL, ONACC, World Bank,
GCF Regular: $,200,000 Other: $24,276,000 Indicator  Number of legal and
institutional framework developed for effective implementation of climate
agreements Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Data source: MINEPDED report,
climate policy document Frequency: Annual Area of sustainably managed forest
Baseline (2020):  530 489 ha Target (2026): ,000,000 ha Data source: Report on
national strategy for development of the rural sector, report MINEPDED, MINFOF
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: TBC Indicator  Number of SSC and development
partnerships with funding on climate action and environmental management
Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Data source: Project reports Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Number of institutional actors whose capacities are strengthened in
programming and financial resource mobilization Baseline (2020): TBC Target
(2026): 500 Data source: MINFI, MINEPAT, MINDDEVEL Training reports Percentage
of agricultural households resilient to climate and other weather shocks
Baseline (2020): % Target (2026): 15% Data source: Report on national strategy
for development of the rural sector, annual report MINEPDED, MINFOF 16
DP/DCP/CMR/ Frequency: Annual Responsibility: TBC Frequency: Annual Data source:
MINATMINDDEVEL, CVUC Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MINAT, MINDDEVEL,
MINEPAT, UNDP MINFOF, MINDDEVEL, MINAT, World Bank, FAO, UNESCO, AfDB Output
The resilience of populations to the adverse effects of climate change and
natural disasters is improved through the implementation of techniques for
adaptation, mitigation (renewable energy, good agroforestry practices, etc) and
risk management related to natural disasters Indicator  Number of key actors (at
central, regional, and communal levels) that have promoted innovative solutions
for the implementation of adaptation and mitigation measures to climate change
Baseline (2020): 15 Target (2026): 30 Data source: MINEPDED, MINFOF, MINDDEVEL,
activity reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of trained DTCs able to use
management and governance tools (prevention and response) of natural disaster
risks Baseline (2020):  Target (2026): 10 Data source: MINAT/DPC, MINDDEVEL,
MINFOF, training reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of community
leaders from at-risk areas with adequate capacity to apply adaptation and
mitigation techniques to climate change Baseline (2020):140 Target (2026):240
Data source: Project reports 17  DP/DCP/CMR/ Frequency: Annual Output  Key
institutions have the capacity to improve climate services including assessment
of the economic costs of action and inaction related to climate change and
natural disasters (decision support tools, informing policies) MINEPDED, MINFOF,
MINEPAT, ONACC, NIS, GEF, World Bank, COMIFAC Indicator  Number of
climate/economic models developed to inform policy-makers of the costs, benefits
and potential trade-offs of environmental policies and climate change mitigation
scenarios Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Data source: Report MINEPDED
Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of policy/strategy and plans incorporating
climate/economic model outputs Baseline (2020):  Target (2026):  Data source:
Annual report, MINEPDED, MINFOF, MINEPAT Frequency: Annual Output  Community
actors and DTCs in at-risk areas can use knowledge and innovations to value
environmental, biodiversity and ecosystem services as well as the restoration of
degraded lands Indicator  Number of good practice documents integrating
knowledge and innovation management for improved mechanisms for valuing
environmental services, biodiversity, and ecosystems Baseline (2020): Target
(2026):10 Data source: Activity report Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of
community actors and pilot DTCs with operational mechanisms in place and
knowledge to value environmental, biodiversity and ecosystem services Baseline
(2020): 10 MINFOF, FAO, MINEPDED, MINDDEVEL, World Bank 18  DP/DCP/CMR/ Target
(2026): 60 Data source: Project report Frequency: Annual 19