27//2016 MOU between India and Bangladesh on Renewable Energy Cooperation MOU
between India and Bangladesh on Renewable Energy Cooperation September 06, 2011
Memorandum of Understanding On Renewable Energy Cooperation Between Government
of the People’ Republic of Bangladesh AND Government of the Republic of India
The Power Division, Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources, Government
of the People’ Republic of Bangladesh AND the Ministry of New and Renewable
Energy, Government of the Republic of India, hereinafter referred to as ‘The
Parties’; Desiring to enhance traditional ties of friendship between the two
countries through development of economic cooperation; Having identified New and
Renewable Energy as  common area of interest; and Desiring to establish New and
Renewable Cooperation in this area with the aim of developing new and renewable
energy technologies; Have reached the following understanding: Article
OBJECTIVE The objective of this Memorandum of Understanding is to establish the
basis for  cooperative institutional relationship to encourage and promote
technical bilateral cooperation on new and renewable energy issues on the basis
of mutual benefit equality and reciprocity Article II MODALITIES OF COOPERATION
Cooperation under this Memorandum of Understanding may take the following
modalities  exchange and training of scientific and technical personnel;
exchange of scientific and technological available information and data;
organization of workshops seminars and working groups;  transfer of equipment
know­how and technology and technical standards on non­commercial basis;
development of joint research or technical projects on subjects of mutual
interest;  exchange visit of Government officials and technical experts for
sharing of experiences on renewable energy practices, policies, framework,
incentive and technologies with financing mechanism;  other modalities as may be
agreed upon by the Parties Article III WORKING GROUP In order to coordinate the
above­mentioned activities and decide upon project proposals related to design
and development of various new and renewable energy technologies such as but not
restricted to Solar Energy, Wind Energy and Bio­Energy the Parties intend to
establish  "Joint Working Group" with the objectives of: Identifying areas of
mutual interest and cooperation for development of new and renewable energy
technologies, systems, sub­systems, devices, components, etc Monitoring and
evaluating cooperation activities  / 27//2016 MOU between India and Bangladesh
on Renewable Energy Cooperation Financing mechanism and cost sharing of
activities under this MOU The Parties shall designate one main representative
not below the rank of Joint Secretary from each representative ministries to the
Joint Working Group For the aforesaid activities, the Joint Working Group shall
to the extent possible conduct its work through electronic communication, but
meet alternately in India and Bangladesh, when this is deemed necessary The
Joint Working Group can co­opt other members from Government agencies,
scientific institutions, research centers, universities or any other entity, as
and when considered essential Article IV AMENDMENT This Memorandum of
Understanding can be amended by the Parties through mutual consultation The
amendments shall be enclosed with this Memorandum of Understanding and shall
form an integral part of it thereof Article  ENTRY INTO FORCE, DURATION AND
TERMINATION This Memorandum of Understanding will enter into force on the date
of signing and shall remain in force unless revoked by the consent of the
Parties Either of the Parties may terminate this Memorandum of Understanding by
giving the other party  written notice of 90 (ninety) days in advance of its
decision to terminate this Memorandum of Understanding Termination will not
affect activities covered by  collaborative contract between the executive
agencies and already underway at the time of termination In witness thereof, the
undersigned representatives of the contracting parties being duly authorized
thereto have signed this Memorandum of Understanding Signed at Dhaka on the
Sixth day of September 2011 in two originals, in English language For and on
behalf of the Government of the People' Republic of Bangladesh For and on behalf
of the Government of the Republic of India  /