Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/IND/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Projected to be the fastest-
growing large economy in the world in 2022, India plays an increasingly
important global role as the sixth largest economy and second most populous
country India is the world’ sixth largest manufacturer in terms of value added2
and has the second fastest-growing service sector It lifted nearly 271 million
people out of multidimensional poverty between 2005 and  and made significant
improvements in access to clean water and sanitation and affordable and clean
energy The country’ growing digital capacity is supporting stronger service
delivery, as demonstrated through the roll-out of the world’ largest coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) vaccination programme The Government is strongly committed to
attaining the Sustainable Development Goals, as exemplified by subnational and
regional indices and  dashboard that monitors progress at the state and union
territory levels With  in 10 Indians aged  years, the country is poised to reap
rich demographic dividends  The country’ international contributions to
sustainable development continue to grow  leader of the International Solar
Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster-Resilient Infrastructure (CDRI), India
is  champion of South-South cooperation and emerged as  major global supplier of
COVID-19 vaccines and medicines during the pandemic India is offering its
digital vaccine platform, Co-WIN (Winning over COVID-19), as  public good With
its announcements arising from the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to increase its
clean energy capacity to 500GW, reduce emissions by  billion tons and reach net
zero by 2070, the Government shows its strong commitment to the climate agenda
This growth story is not without its challenges India ranks 131 of 189 countries
on the Human Development Index, social and spatial inequalities are widening and
the growth path could be more inclusive One in four Indians remains
multidimensionally poor10 and the top 10 per cent of the population earn 20
times as much as the bottom 50 per cent, making India among the most unequal
countries in the world11 Significant interstate inequalities are reflected by
the Multidimensional Poverty Index,12 which finds that 50 per cent of the
population of Bihar is poor, compared with less than  per cent in Kerala Five of
every six poor people belong to disadvantaged social groups13 and weak social
protection and high rates  International Monetary Fund (2021)  october-2021  The
World Bank (2020)   Economic Survey of India, Ministry of Finance, Government of
India ()  2015/es2013-14/echap-pdf  Global Multidimensional Poverty Index,
United Nations Development Programme and Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative (2020)   NITI Aayog, Government of India (2021)   Census of India and
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India (2020)
%20upload_compressed_0pdf  Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India
(2021); Global Health Strategies (2021)     Press Information Bureau, Government
of India (2021)  10 National Multi-Dimensional Poverty Index Report (2021)  pdf
11 Word Inequality Report (2022)
site/uploads/WorldInequalityReport2022_Full_Reportpdf 12 NITI Aayog (2021)  13
Global Multidimensional Poverty Index, United Nations Development Programme and
Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (2021)    DP/DCP/IND/ of labour
informality14 remain concerns  In terms of progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals, India ranks 120 of 165 countries with  score below the
regional average15 The extent of localization of the Goals by state governments
varies by region16 and large-scale adoption of innovative financing has not yet
been achieved Gender equality remains an unfinished agenda; India has one of the
lowest female labour force participation rates in the world17 and ranks 123 of
189 on the Gender Inequality Index18 India is highly vulnerable to climate
change 19 and frequent extreme weather events  disproportionately affect
marginalized communities20 Groundwater tables are falling at alarming rates and
it is estimated that the country will face severe water constraints by 21 Indian
waste management systems handle nearly one tenth of the world’ solid waste22 and
remain highly informal23 No Indian city meets World Health Organization (WHO)
air pollution guidelines24 and the country’ air pollution crisis translates into
economic losses of nearly $37 billion, or 36 per cent of its gross domestic
product (GDP)25 Other environmental challenges include biodiversity loss,26 soil
degradation27 and  shrinking forest cover28  The recent independent country
programme evaluation confirmed that UNDP played  significant role in Sustainable
Development Goal integration, leveraged digital technology to address many
development challenges, including strengthening of health systems, and
demonstrated effective models for skilling, the circular economy and
biodiversity Lessons learned include the importance of early planning, use of
data to inform quick pivots, expanding partnerships with government, using
evidence to drive programming and  nimble operational approach to minimize
delays in programme implementation  As recommended, UNDP will further strengthen
partnerships with government and extend Sustainable Development Goal integration
to local bodies; leverage the full potential of state offices; promote
financing; scale up innovative and successful skilling and employment models;
and invest in gender equality outcomes UNDP will support the Government’ net-
zero commitment and scale up circular-economy models To strengthen its though
leadership, UNDP will increase outreach to external stakeholders, generate
evidence and build knowledge partnerships to support national and subnational
governments, including 14 Confederation of Indian Industry (2014)  International
Labour Organization (2019)  15  16 NITI Aayog (2021)  17 The Economic Times
(2021)  indias-ever-declining-female-labour-force/articleshow/cms?from=mdr 18
Human Development Perspectives, United Nations Development Programme (2020)  19
Global Climate Risk Index (2021)  20 International Labour Organization (2018)
ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_645572pdf 21 Dhawan (2017)  22 India Water
Portal (2020)  23 United Nations Development Programme (2021)
economic_situation_of_Safai_Sathishtml 24 World Air Quality Report (2021)  25
26 Centre for Science and Environment (2021)  biodiversity-hotspots-says-cse--
new-statistical-analysis-
10838#:~:text=New%20Delhi%2C%20June%208%2C%202021,loss%20of%2095%20per%20cent 27
Bhattacharyya et al (2015)  Aulakh and Sidhu (undated)  28 Kanade and John
(2018)  Ramachandran et al (2018)    DP/DCP/IND/ by linkages with the Global
Policy Network and “#FutureSmartUNDP” approaches pioneered in the global network
of over 90 UNDP Accelerator Labs  The United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) is aligned with national priorities and the
government commitment to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development The
UNDP country programme is derived from the UNSDCF, and UNDP will use its
mandate, capacity and positioning to further the UNSDCF outcomes  In supporting
the efforts of the United Nations, led by the Resident Coordinator, and while
positioning itself in the UNSDCF as an integrator of the Sustainable Development
Goals, UNDP will leverage its unique position to work across economic, social
and environmental Goals UNDP will provide  mix of technical, implementation and
policy-oriented support, including upstream policy dialogue with government,
exchange of knowledge and national capacity development, while ensuring national
ownership and leadership for sustainability of results UNDP will contribute to
national priorities as articulated in national plans and strategies including
Digital India, Skill India, the National Urban Livelihood Mission, the Universal
Immunization Programme and the National Health Mission, in addition to
international agreements and frameworks on climate change, biodiversity,
desertification and the national framework on Sustainable Development Goal
localization This will entail close partnerships with the central and state
governments and other public and private sector stakeholders The UNDP
comparative advantage is its ability to combine trusted partnerships with
government, the private sector, civil society and think tanks with  policy
capacity that applies integrated approaches to complex development challenges at
the national, state and community levels UNDP works with the Government to
support its global and regional engagement to promote and benefit from South-
South cooperation The ability of UNDP to mobilize partnerships around leaving no
one behind, environmental sustainability and gender equality is its distinct
strength UNDP will continue to rely on volunteers as an integral means of
implementation, working with the United Nations Volunteers programme In line
with the findings of the evaluation of the country programme, other lessons
learned and the UNSDCF theory of change, the country programme theory of change
is built on the premise that: if delivery institutions, especially at the local
level, become more responsive, transparent and accountable including to the
vulnerable and at-risk populations, upholding their right to voice and
participation and ensuring their entitlements, while at the same time delivering
services that are efficient, inclusive and resilient to shocks; if India
leverages its digital technology and innovations in  manner that is inclusive
(including gender) and bridges the rural-urban divide, creating new jobs
especially for the marginalized and youth; if India is more judicious in the use
and restoration of ecosystems and biodiversity, while addressing climate change
through adopting low-carbon and circular-economy pathways, and disaster risk
management; if greater equality is achieved across regions, gender and social
and economic classes; then the people, especially the most vulnerable, will be
empowered and benefit from more equitable access to economic opportunities,
improved service delivery and social protection, and will build greater
resilience to shocks These change pathways are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing While managing risks and assumptions, this requires flexible
development solutions that will result in strong, accountable and evidence-led
institutions; enhanced economic opportunities and social protection for the
marginalized; and climate-smart solutions, sustainable ecosystems and resilient
development   DP/DCP/IND/ II Programme priorities and partnerships The country
programme  is aligned with UNDP Strategic Plan,  and is derived from the UNSDCF
It has been prepared in consultation with over 50 partners ranging from the
Government of India (Department of Economic Affairs and line ministries) and
state governments to the private sector, civil society, bilateral development
partners and academia The programme will be driven by strong partnerships,
drawing on the expertise, impartiality and trust that partners see as central to
the UNDP comparative advantage Working with government (national and
subnational), local bodies and institutions, UNDP will prioritize speedy
implementation and engage in deep demonstrations and scaling-up of pilots,
strengthen capacities and establish frameworks for Sustainable Development Goal
localization and acceleration With the private sector, UNDP will expand its
partnership for creating skills and employment, promoting digitalization,
combating climate change and finding innovative solutions With international
financial institutions, UNDP will aim to overcome operational bottlenecks to
meet national priorities UNDP will continue to expand partnership with civil
society coalitions, youth-led organizations and volunteer networks, leveraging
their grass-roots experience, knowledge and role in promoting accountability and
transparency UNDP will work with academia and think tanks and its global network
of Accelerator Labs to strengthen its position as  thought leader and provide
granular evidence for policymaking UNDP will continue to support the Government
in implementing South- South and triangular cooperation initiatives such as the
International Solar Alliance and the CDRI Funding partners will include the
Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund UNDP will work with other
United Nations agencies under the coordination leadership of the of the Resident
Coordinator for system-wide engagement of the United Nations country team (UNCT)
on critical priorities such as Sustainable Development Goal localization and
acceleration, COVID-19 recovery and furthering the normative agenda The
extraordinary disruption caused by the pandemic presents an opportunity for
transformation towards the kind of development pathways defined by the
Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement The three UNDP programme
priorities are designed to accelerate both progress towards the Goals and
recovery from COVID-19, while building forward better in  manner that is
inclusive, digital and green Leaving no one behind, gender equality, South-South
cooperation and data and evidence for policymaking are central to the programme
For improved scale and speed, strategic innovation, digitalization and
development financing will be promoted UNDP will work with vulnerable population
groups as identified in the UNSDCF and locations exhibiting high rates of
multidimensional poverty The UNDP programme contributes to four of six UNSDCF
outcomes Programme priority : Strong, accountable and evidence-led institutions
for accelerated achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals In support of
the NITI Aayog29 Indian model of localization of the Sustainable Development
Goals, UNDP will expand the network of coordination centres building planning,
implementation and monitoring capacities that integrate the Goals into
subnational plans, policies, budgets and programmes aiming to address the social
and spatial gaps In collaboration with the United Nations Children’ Fund
(UNICEF) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNDP will promote evidence-
informed decision-making and monitoring by investing in availability and use of
timely, quality and disaggregated data (such as by gender, age, disability and
location) including subnational composite indices on the Goals and
multidimensional poverty UNDP will work in partnership with NITI Aayog on
developing the national reform action plan on the Goals The UNDP Accelerator Lab
will build the capacity of state governments to plan and implement their future
programmes 29  government think tank and resource centre   DP/DCP/IND/ UNDP will
contribute to bridging the Sustainable Development Goal financing gap by
developing and implementing frameworks, processes and policies to enable the
Government to raise and deploy public resources for the Goals This will be
complemented by strengthening public financial management and formulating,
implementing and monitoring Goal-aligned, sustainable and green financing plans
UNDP will support the leadership of India on the sustainable finance agenda at
multilateral forums by providing technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance
UNDP will also engage with the private sector to enhance its capacity and
willingness to allocate capital for sustainable development; In partnership with
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, WHO and UNICEF, and contributing to
the Universal Immunization Programme and the National Health Mission, UNDP will
promote innovative and scalable solutions on digitalization in the health sector
for faster recovery from COVID-19 and preparation for future health emergencies
Building on the success of the Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (eVIN)
and Co-WIN initiatives, UNDP will provide technical assistance for  robust and
resilient immunization system for last-mile delivery and universal services
including antenatal health care and non- communicable diseases UNDP will further
South-South cooperation by supporting the Government’ offer of Co-WIN as
digital public good UNDP will work with vulnerable groups, including persons
living with HIV/AIDS and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer
(LGBTIQ) persons, and with community platforms to promote gender- equitable
outcomes in health-care services Programme priority : Enhanced economic
opportunities and social protection to reduce inequality, with  focus on the
marginalized Working with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will support
marginalized and vulnerable youth in transition from education to work by
promoting apprenticeships, career guidance, counselling, delivery of twenty-
first century skills, including life skills, fostering partnerships between
industry and educational institutes and enhanced participation of micro, small
and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in the skilling ecosystem With the Ministry
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, National Skills Development
Corporation and the state-level skill development missions, UNDP will provide
on-the-ground technical support to local government bodies such as district
skills committees; UNDP will partner with state livelihood missions to unlock
local prospects for livelihoods for educated youth by bridging the information
gap, enabling work exposure, upgrading skills and building managerial, financial
and digital capacities UNDP will also focus on the leadership of women and
marginalized communities, including transgender persons and persons with
disabilities, through supporting their take up of innovative mechanisms such as
the Mini MBA programme, the Biz-Sakhi Curriculum and youth employability service
centres UNDP will partner with industry associations to promote greater
participation of women in the gig economy, including addressing issued related
to income and social security; UNDP will support marginalized groups to realize
their rights and entitlements In partnership with the Ministry of Tribal
Affairs, UNDP will contribute to tribal development with  focus on entitlements,
forest-based livelihoods, entrepreneurship and improved monitoring of
initiatives and policy analysis Working with the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and the National AIDS Control Organization, UNDP and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS will support the implementation of the HIV
and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017 and Transgender Persons (Protection
of Rights) Act, 2019, including through inclusive service delivery and welfare
measures for key populations infected or affected by HIV With NITI Aayog, UNDP
will support the development of the national action plan for LGBTQI and support
state governments in its implementation UNDP will contribute to the promotion of
robust, inclusive and shock-responsive social protection systems by enhancing
access to government schemes and entitlements, particularly through
institutional strengthening and digital solutions, with  focus on migrants;
DP/DCP/IND/ UNDP will support capacity-building of local youth, migrants and
women to revitalize local farm and non-farm value chains, including through
volunteering schemes Inclusive local economic development will be bolstered
through identification of viable enterprise opportunities for local employment,
entrepreneurship and innovation-promoting ecosystems Cross-cutting green
recovery approaches, including adoption of clean and sustainable production
practices, green jobs and eco-entrepreneurship opportunities, coupled with
access to affordable finance and markets, will increase the resilience of
solopreneurs, enterprises and MSMEs Programme priority : Climate-smart
solutions, sustainable ecosystems and resilient development for reduced
vulnerability UNDP will support the Government in its net-zero emissions
commitment and nationally determined contributions, and in reporting to the
UNFCCC and the preparation of the national adaptation plan UNDP will advocate
for sustained investment in and accelerated transition to renewable energy
solutions and appropriate risk financing and blended financing models, while
working with communities, particularly the vulnerable and women, to manage
energy transition challenges UNDP will mobilize funds from the Global
Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund, the private sector and the
contributions of beneficiaries to implement innovative, climate-smart and
gender-responsive solutions, while facilitating the transfer of global best
practices UNDP will support government capacities for accessing and deploying
international climate finance and modelling climate impacts on growth and equity
Working with the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, UNDP will promote climate-
informed planning models in agriculture, fisheries, livestock and social
protection to enhance the adaptive capacity of vulnerable communities UNDP will
support innovative solutions for conservation and restoration of natural
resources, biodiversity and ecosystems This includes supporting the realignment
of the national biodiversity strategy, action plan and targets with the
post-2020 global biodiversity framework, while helping to mobilize innovative
and blended finance in support of green recovery UNDP will help mainstream
biodiversity and economic valuation of natural assets and services in planning,
policy and decision-making UNDP will support area-based conservation and develop
models for sustainable nature-based livelihoods and green enterprises, focusing
on vulnerable groups, women and youth UNDP will differentiate its approach
across the varied ecosystems of India, such as the high-altitude Himalayas and
the Western Ghats Aligning with the principles of the circular economy, UNDP
will support reform agendas that promote  clean and sustainable urban
environment including the Swachh Bharat30 mission, natural resource efficiency
framework, urban resilience action plans that address climate change and health,
and phasing out single-use plastics UNDP will facilitate integrating inclusive
green economy principles in the operations of local urban bodies; develop
capacities in local-level planning, budgeting and resource mobilization for
resilient and gender-responsive urban development; and support the national
clean air programme in partnership with the United Nations Environment Programme
UNDP will support environmentally sound management of plastic, electrical and
electronic waste This includes continued support to accelerated phase-out of
ozone depleting substances and working to reduce adverse impacts of persistent
organic pollutants, including unintentional persistent organic pollutants, and
other toxic chemicals harmful to the environment and human health through
integrated approaches UNDP will explore innovative models for addressing plastic
pollution alongside work with local urban bodies and waste pickers 30 Clean
India   DP/DCP/IND/ UNDP will enhance women’ participation in environmental
governance and community-based risk management while mainstreaming gender
equality in relevant sector policies UNDP global expertise on recovery,
insurance and risk mitigation and presence in the small island developing States
will be leveraged to support the Government of India in implementing its high-
level initiatives such as the Infrastructure for Resilient Island States,
established within the framework of the CDRI and announced at the Glasgow
Climate Conference III Programme and risk management This document outlines the
UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at the
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and internal control framework The country programme will be nationally executed
in coordination with the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance The
programme will deploy different implementation modalities, for example,
national, direct, non-governmental, civil society and United Nations
organizations, to ensure faster response and resource delivery The harmonized
approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other
United Nations agencies to manage financial risks Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects Local project appraisal committees chaired by the
Department of Economic Affairs will approve projects The Country Programme
Management Board, co-chaired by the Department of Economic Affairs and UNDP,
will monitor and provide guidance to the country programme Separate outcome and
project management boards will monitor respective outputs The successful
implementation and sustainability of results will depend on the management of
key risks The primary risks include global uncertainty affecting economic
growth; climate change and natural disasters; protracted COVID-19 or other
pandemics; shortfall in financial resources; widening gender gaps; lack of
access to quality data; and delayed implementation UNDP will strengthen risk
identification and mitigation procedures in line with its social and
environmental standards and accountability mechanisms,31 while ensuring  robust
pipeline of projects It will minimize these risks through regular engagement
with the Government and partners to promote adaptive programming for informed
decisions in response to new information, lessons and risks UNDP will build on
opportunities such as demographic transition and the country’ digital and
technological capabilities It will drive meaningful participation across gender
identities, and consistently empower women and girls, in line with the UNDP
Gender Seal standards UNDP will invest in strengthening community resilience and
early warning mechanisms to address climate risks and impact of hazards
Operational risks in projects spread across multiple line ministries,
departments and states will be mitigated by employing lateral and convergent
approaches and working with  range of stakeholders Strategic policy and
programmatic adjustments may also take place as  result of national and
subnational elections, to ensure that the programme remains relevant and
responsive Effective operations support, digital solutions and streamlined
processes will be put in place for efficient programme implementation and for
compliance with all corporate policies, rules and procedures The country
programme has adopted  realistic resource mobilization target based on learning
from the last cycle Given the declining trend for official development
assistance, 31    DP/DCP/IND/ UNDP will leverage government and private sector
financing building on its ongoing flagship partnerships and moving towards more
diversified resource mobilization The cost-recovery policy followed by the
country office is in compliance with Executive Board decisions In line with the
projected growth trajectory, the country office will ensure that its structure
remains fit-for-purpose and financial viability is maintained In case of
resource mobilization challenges, UNDP, in consultation with the Government,
will adapt its programme to the context and needs on the ground IV Monitoring
and evaluation The results and resources framework aligned with the UNDP
Strategic Plan and UNSDCF serves as the accountability framework, anchored in
the National Indicator Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will
collect and disseminate gender-disaggregated data during implementation The
continued validity of the theory of change will be monitored UNDP will
contribute to the efforts of the UNCT (including through the Data for
Development Committee) to strengthen national statistical capacities Systems
thinking, deployment of technological solutions and big data, geospatial data
and community-generated data will be leveraged to address data gaps and promote
anticipatory governance Partnerships with diverse data stakeholders (government,
United Nations, civil society organizations, the private sector) will generate
evidence on interconnected development challenges UNDP will strengthen national
evaluation capacities to monitor longer-term impacts of interventions The
country office will ensure that all programme and project documents have
appropriate gender markers, facilitating tracking, monitoring and reporting of
gender expenditure At least  per cent of programme resources will be allocated
for monitoring and evaluation and communication of results UNDP will promote
policy research and knowledge management through systematic engagement with
national authorities, academic institutions, research bodies and think tanks
UNDP will develop  communications approach which resonates with the stakeholders
and uses trending visibility platforms for increased messaging on results,
including giving voice to partners and stakeholders   DP/DCP/IND/ Annex Results
and resources framework for India () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Achieving SDGs
by 2030 aligned with national priorities including NITI Aayog’ focus on
localization and financing COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP:* UNSDCF Outcome : By 2027,  strengthened and more coordinated,
inclusive and accountable governance system is in place at the national and
local levels enabling all people, especially most marginalized and vulnerable,
to be protected, empowered, engaged, and enjoy human rights and social justice,
and lead their lives with respect and dignity RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: #:
Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transitions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET() DATA
SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES MAJOR PARTNERS /
PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) INDICATIVE COUNTRY
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) Indicator: Number of
states that mainstream and institutionalize SDGs into:  State budgets and union
territories  Gender Budget  Child budget NITI Aayog, Central and state
governments; Reserve Bank of India; Securities and Exchange Board of India;
Private and Public Sector Financial and Non-Financial Entities; and key United
Nations agencies Regular: $ million NITI Aayog, Annual Reports Output :
Government is better able to plan, implement, monitor and finance to accelerate
progress towards the SDGs Other: $23 million Indicator  Extent to which SDGs are
integrated into State budgets [SP IRRF*: ] Baseline (2022): 15 Target (2027):
All states and union territories (UTs) Source: Government of India (GOI)
Frequency: Annual [*Strategic Plan Integrated Results and Resources Framework]
Baseline (year) 15 states for ‘’  states for ‘’  states ‘’ Indicator : Number of
evidence-based knowledge products prepared and adopted to inform gender-
responsive actions on SDG acceleration and sustainable finance [SP IRRF:  & ]
Prepared Baseline (2021):  (MPI, Northeast Index, SDG Investor Map), Target
(2027): 10 Adopted Baseline (2022):  (adopted – MPI, Northeast Index) Target
(2027):  (adopted) Source: NITI Aayog / GOI Frequency: Annual Target (2027): 28
states ‘’ 12 states ‘’ 12 states ‘’ National Reforms Action Plan on SDGs
developed and implemented Indicator : Number of states where quality instruments
on SDG localization and sustainable finance are in place and functioning [SP
IRRF: ] Baseline:  Target (2027):  * The wording of the UNSDCF outcomes and data
for its indicators, baselines and targets are provisional pending finalization
of the framework 10  DP/DCP/IND/ SDG Coordination Centres launched Baseline
(2021):  states Target (2027): 10 states Sustainable finance instruments
developed and adopted Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 14 Source: Planning and
Finance departments Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of multi-stakeholders,
consultative platforms formed, including  national platform for exchange of best
practices in support of government efforts to advance SDGs [SP IRRF:  & ]
Baseline (2021): Target (2027):  Source: Platforms’ Reports Frequency: Annual
Indicator : National and State Reform Action Plan on SDGs prepared in
consultative manner to trigger and inform action [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2021):
Target (2027): One National Reform Action Plan and eight State Action Plans
Source: NITI Aayog Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Achieving SDGs
by 2030 aligned with national priorities including the Universal Immunization
Programme and the National Health Mission UNSDCF Outcome : By 2027, communities,
especially the most disadvantaged, demand for and benefit from an inclusive,
universal, affordable, accessible, accountable and quality health care services,
while adopting positive health practices RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: #:
Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transitions Indicator: % Children (ages  months) fully immunized National Family
Health Survey; National Health Profile Output : Improved service delivery of
health care and development programmes to the last mile to ensure that no one is
left behind Ministry of Health and Family Welfare; state governments; GAVI, the
Vaccine Alliance; WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA Regular: $60 million Other: $63 million
Baseline (year): Total: % Girls: % Boys: % Indicator : Number of states that
institutionalized the strengthened systems for health and development programmes
for equitable access to services [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 36
States and UTs 11  DP/DCP/IND/ Target (2025): 90% Source: Ministry of Health &
Family Welfare, -WIN Dashboards Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of states
that adopted innovative systems and implemented policies to deliver development
programmes to marginalized populations such as persons living with HIV (PLHIV)
and LGBTQI [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022): States (baseline pertains to PLHIV and
LGBTQI+) work) Target (2027): 15 States and UTs Source: State governments
Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of people that benefited from the
strengthened systems on health and development programmes [SP IRRF: ] Baseline
(2022): Target (2027):150 million Source: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
-WIN Dashboards Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Achieving SDGs by
2030 aligned with national priorities including Skill India; Financial
Inclusion; Digital India; National Rural and Urban Livelihood Missions
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2027, people
will benefit from and contribute to sustainable and inclusive growth through
higher productivity, competitiveness and diversification in economic activities
that create decent work, livelihoods and income particularly for youth and women
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: # No one left behind, centring on equitable
access to opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human
development Central and state governments; private sector; civil society;
volunteer networks; think tanks; ILO, UNICEF, UN-Women, IOM, WFP Regular: $87
million Output : Integrated models of sustainable local livelihoods promotion
are demonstrated and scaled up Indicator: Ratio of female to male labour force
participation rate Periodic Labour Force Surveys, National Sample Survey,
National Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
Other: $67 million Indicator : Updated national policy on skills development and
entrepreneurship adopted [SP IRRF:  & ] Baseline (2022): No (Policy last updated
in 2015) Target (2027): Yes Source: Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship, Govt of India, Policy document Frequency: Once during project
lifecycle Baseline (Year): 40 Target:  (2027) Indicator : Number of states
operationalizing the updated national policy for skills development and
entrepreneurship [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022):  Indicator: Proportion of regular
wage/salaried employees in non- 12  DP/DCP/IND/ agriculture sector with social
security benefits Target (2027):  Source: State governments reports Frequency:
Annual Baseline 2020: % Target (2027): 80% Indicator : Number of thematic
research/position papers produced providing human-centric insights and gender-
disaggregated data to inform and shape policies and programmes [SP IRRF: ]
Baseline (2022):  Target: (2027)  Source: Govt Reports Frequency: Annual Output
: Women, youth and other vulnerable groups transition into gainful employment
and productive economic activities Indicator : Number of individuals equipped
with necessary skills and supported with finance, market access and linkages to
schemes for enhanced access to livelihood opportunities and volunteerism
opportunities [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022): 23 million† Target (2027): 55 million
(50% women) including members of collectives Source: External evaluation report
and programme MIS Frequency: Annual Output : Expansion of robust and inclusive
social protection systems and improved access to assets and services for poor
and vulnerable groups such as tribal, migrants, people infected or affected by
HIV, PWD, LGBTIQ etc Indicator : Number of persons benefiting from social
protection schemes, other inclusive development schemes and enabling
legislations [SP IRRF:  & ] Baseline (2022) 48 million‡; Target (2027):  million
(50% women) Source: Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment; Ministry of
Tribal Affairs Frequency: Annual † Baseline based on UNDP’ achievement in CPD  ‡
ibid 13  DP/DCP/IND/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Achieving SDGs by 2030 aligned
with national priorities including the Panchamrit (Five Nectar Elements)
Declaration, Nationally Determined Contributions, National Action Plan on
Climate Change, Swachh Bharat (Clean India) Mission as well as commitments under
Multilateral Environmental Agreements including United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: #: By
2027, Government of India, state governments, communities, private sector and
other actors take informed actions to address climate change, pollution,
biodiversity loss and restore ecological integrity through improved knowledge,
capacity and mainstreaming of relevant actions across sectoral programmes,
policies and plans RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: # Resilience built to respond
to systemic uncertainty and risk Regular: $62 million Central and state
governments; district administration; Private sector; civil society; volunteer
networks; community-based organizations; think tanks; media; UNEP, IFAD, FAO,
UNIDO Indicator: Reduction in Emission intensity of the GDP Baseline: 2005
levels Target (2030): Reduced by 45% by 2030 below 2005 levels National
commitments under the nationally determined contributions (NDCs, COP 26 Summit);
National commitments under UNCCD, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change (MoEFCC); Plastic waste management rules, MoEFCC; Government reports
Output  Institutional and policy frameworks developed and strengthened to
address climate change, enhance green recovery, prevent environmental
degradation and promote conservation and circular economy Other: $38 million
Indicator : Number of climate and gender-responsive development strategies
(policies, schemes, programmes, and action plans) informed, through technical /
advisory support, for achieving national priorities and global commitments under
multilateral environmental agreements (global, national, subnational level) [SP
IRRF: ] Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): 14 Source: Central and state government
reports Frequency: Annual Indicator: Restoration of degraded land (hectares)
Baseline 2015:   million hectares restored Target (2030): 26 million hectares
Indicator : Funds mobilized through innovative finance mechanisms [SP IRRF: ]
Baseline (2022):  Target (2027): $20 million Source: reports, partnerships
agreements Frequency: Annual Indicator: Reduction in plastic pollution Baseline:
TBD Target (2027): 100% compliance with regulation on single-use plastic product
Output  Innovative solutions developed, demonstrated and upscaled at national
and subnational levels for vulnerable communities and businesses to benefit from
sustainable management of natural resources (land, water, air), chemicals and
circular economy Indicator : Number of people directly benefiting from
initiatives to protect environment and promote sustainable use of resources [SP
IRRF: & ] Baseline (2022) 550 Target (2027):  million (50% women) 14
DP/DCP/IND/ Source: Project reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of
technologies and ecosystem-based solutions developed and upscaled for
sustainable management of ecosystems and resource utilization and natural
resource efficiency [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022): 10 technologies and ecosystem-
based solutions developed Target (2027): 25 Source: Government records / Project
reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Terrestrial, coastal, marine, pasturelands
and agricultural lands protected and / or restored through improved management
practices (hectares) [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022):  million hectares Target
(2027): 25% increase in land restored from baseline Source: Government records
Frequency: Annual Indicator  Amount of chemicals reduced, disposed, or avoided
(metric tons) [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2023): HCFC phase-out- 965 MT (60% reduction
from baseline) Target (2025): HCFC phase-out- MT (% reduction from baseline)
Target (2030): HCFC phase-out- 1568 MT (% reduction from baseline) Source:
Government records / Project reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Amount of
waste channelized into circular economy [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022): 158,517
tons Target (2027): 250,000 tons Source: Urban local bodies Frequency: Annual
Output : Climate change resilience accelerated, capitalizing on technological
gains and clean energy financing for marginalized communities to support NDC
commitments 15  DP/DCP/IND/ Indicator  Amount of emission reduced at national
level [SP IRRF: ] Baseline (2022): 15 million tCO2e Target (2027): 50 million
tCO2e Source: GOI Frequency: Annual Indicator : Increase in number of renewable
energy installations [SP IRRF:  & ] Baseline (2022): 200 installations Target
(2027):,500 installations Source: GOI Frequency: Annual 16