SUSTAINABLE ENERGY ACTION PLAN The State Historical-Architectural Reserve
“Icherisheher” Azerbaijan July 2014 Contents  Executive Summary  Introduction
Country Background  Old City of Baku  Legislative and Institutional Framework
Governance  Socio-economical characteristics  Objective () and Targets  Current
framework and vision for the future  Baseline Emission Inventory  Natural gas
Building and facilities  Transportation  Electricity  Outdoor Lighting  Heating
system  Planned Actions and Measures for the Duration of Plan  Long Term Action
Construction of new gas distribution networks  Promotion of energy efficient
products and services   Short Term Action  LED bulbs for Outdoor lighting
Sensors in buildings  Transport System  Residential buildings  Public activities
with citizens and stakeholders  Public awareness programs  Bicycle culture
propaganda actions  Public campaign and networking  Administrative structure of
SEAP Implementation  Monitoring and Evaluation 11 ANNEXES Scheme of State of
technological infrastructure of the Icherisheher Energy resources consumed by
the Icherisheher in 2011 Public Lighting SolutionОшибка! Закладка не определена
ExecutiveSummary The Administration of the State Historical-Architectural
Reserve “Icherisheher” has committed itself to reduce its greenhouse gas
emissions up to 20% from 2011up to the year 2020 in its fields of activity
within the Administration’ sphere of authority 2011 was chosen as the baseline
year, due to the availability of reliable data The achieved reduction in
emissions will be  result of both long-term energy- saving work and attitude
changes of the local public The Administration of the State Historical-
Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” is able to control and reduce the carbon
dioxide emissions caused by its own energy use, but it is also partialy possible
to influence emissions caused by energy use in other sectors, through tools such
as building retrofitting, increasing the awareness and the provision of energy
conservation campaigns, and more generally by acting as  good example and
spreading information of the best practices Approximately 36 % of the emissions
in the Reserve “Icherisheher” are estimated to be within the power sector of the
city Over 70 percent of electricity consumption is accounted for public lighting
and municipality buildings Hence, major focus of the action plan is on the
electricity sector The actions presented under Scopes  are the sources of
emissions which Old City of Baku (Icherisheher) has  jurisdiction for
intervention Sustainable Energy Action Plan envisages programmed actions which
are designed to reduce CO2 emissions within the boundaries of the Old City
Introduction  CountryBackground The economic development of the country in the
last decade was strong with an averagegrowth rate of GDP of around 10% for the
period 2000–2005; in 2005–2007 it increased almostthreefold, reaching 28% on
average and falling down to 10% in 2008–2009 annually Oil andgas development and
export have been central matter for Azerbaijan’ economic growth The volumeof
production has increased due to visible progress in almost all the fields of
industry as well as inoil and gas, chemistry and oil chemistry, machinery, metal
processing, building materials andindustry  At present, Azerbaijan provides 100%
of its gross energy consumption through domesticproduction, which is currently
largely reliant on the exploitation of the country’ hydrocarbonreserves, namely
oil and natural gas Azerbaijan is, at the present time,  net exporter of oiland
natural gas There are  number of perspective fieldsin Azerbaijan that are under
development and it is expected that new exploration fields willpositively
contribute to an increase in the country’ oilproduction Securing long-term
energy independence is  stated policy goal for fostering economicgrowth However,
as the country is already energy independent and is  net energy exporter,the
momentum towards harnessing  renewable energy sources (RES) potential appears to
belinked to recent high international oil and gas prices The Azerbaijani
Government has adopted the State Programme for the Development of theFuel and
Energy Sector (2005–2015), which identifies and sets development targets for
thevarious sub-sectors within the energy sector along with  package of
specifically definedmeasures aimed at achieving theabovementioned targets and
goals within the prescribedperiod over the next 10 years The overall goal of the
state programme is to meet the electricpower, gas and other energy demands of
both thepopulation and economy fully throughthe continued development of the
fuel and energy sector There is limited competition due toexisting monopolies in
the gas and electricity sectors Azerbaijan joined the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)in the category of  non-Annex  country in
1995, and is also  signatory to other internationalagreements on climate change,
such as the Kyoto Protocol Its Climate Change Programme(CCP) focuses on three
main areas: the greenhouse gas (GHG) inventory, vulnerability andadaptation and
GHG mitigation and carbon financing The second national communicationon climate
changes was submitted to the UNFCCC in The renewable energy resources will help
Azerbaijan to reach to the next stage in its future development Azerbaijan is
known as  rich country which possesses renewable and alternative energy
potential and intends to increase the share of renewable and alternative energy
resources in the total energy production up to 20 percent until Moreover,
Azerbaijan possesses very fruitful natural conditions for elaborating renewable
energy resources At the outset, Absheron peninsula has got enormous potential
for wind power energy The speed of the wind is ranging between  -  /sec along
year which isconsideredas very good circumstance for the wind power generators
The Order of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan dated 2013 on
Improvement of Management System in the field of Alternative and Renewable
Energy in the country resulted in establishment of State Agency on Alternative
and Renewable Energy Resources of the Republic of Azerbaijan The Agency is
central executive body whichdeals with management and arrangement of the state
policy on Alternative and Renewable Energy and its efficient comsumption,
effective management and coordination of theactivities on Alternative and
Renewable Energy Resources and implementation of State supervision on these
activities within the Republic of Azerbaijan The Agency takes part in formation
of unique state policy on the related field and guarantees the realization of
this policy,enables the development of Alternative and Renewable Energy field
and establishment of its infrastructure, and ensures the application of
alternative and renewable energy in the economy and social field  The OldCityof
Baku  The Old City of Baku or Inner City (Icherisheher) is the historical centre
of Baku This small town has managed to preserve its ancient architectural and
cultural heritage throughout the centuries The Old Cityhas managed to preserve
its ancient architectural and cultural heritage throughout the centuries It has
been classified in 2000 as  World Heritage Site by UNESCO Nowadays historical
center of Baku – Icherisheher is under State’ Protection The area of the State
Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” is 22 hectares and encompasses
about 500 historical monuments There are 4300 residents living in Icherisheher,
several museums, theatres, hotels, handicraft shops and restaurants at the
disposal of residents and visitors, turns this ancient city into oneof the most
attractive destinations for tourist visiting Azerbaijan
LegislativeandInstitutionalFramework Among the three main priorities of
Azerbaijan’ environmental policies set by the Ministry of Ecology and Natural
Resources (MENR), one is the ‘Efficient Use of Natural Resources for Meeting the
Needs of Existing and Future Generations, Benefiting from Renewable Energy
Sources through Non-traditional Methods and Achieving Energy Efficiency’ The
Azerbaijani Government puts special emphasis on EE and relevant targets are set
through various state programs ‘The National Program on Environmentally
Sustainable Social and Economic Development for the period 2003–2010 recognizes
the rationalization of the use of non-renewable sources of energy as an
important factor in the implementation of environmental and sustainable
development The program proposes the following actions in relation to this
purpose: (cid:127) introducing highly efficient technologies in heat power
plants and optimizing the structure of the energy system; (cid:127) promoting
modern energy saving technologies in both production and non-production sectors;
and (cid:127) developing and implementing national and regional programs aimed
at better use of energy saving means in households The State Programme for the
Development of the Fuel and Energy Sector (2005–2015) targets the reduction of
losses and prevention of the theft and inefficient use of energy in order to
cover the electric power and natural gas demands It is stated that full payment
of the cost of electricity and natural gas  consumed is one of the factors that
would ensure efficient use of these resources The State Program on the Use of
Alternative and Renewable Sources (approved in 2004) also envisages more
efficient utilization of hydrocarbon energy sources as one of the objectives
Although the government sets the targets for an energy efficient economy, there
is no law nor secondary legislation specific to EE activities The basic elements
for the promotion of EE are captured in the Law on the Use of Energy Resources,
which took effect in Governance In order the long-term protection, conservation
and continuation of restoration of Icherisheher, as well as the intensification
and increasing systemization of this work has established  state agency -
Administration of the State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher”
under the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the decree of
the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan dated 10 February Administration
combines the function of  local executive power (municipal authority) and
central executive power agency Today the Administration is fully staffed and
functional, and has  entities within its structure that enable it to fulfill its
mandate Administration has full authority in the area in all the matters
relating to the city management, infrastructure, protection of monuments,
research and protection of the cultural heritage etc Administration is directly
reporting to the Cabinet of Ministers and its Director is being appointed by the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan The entire heritage area has been
declared  preserve in the domestic legislation In 2009 Protection Buffer Zone of
the State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” has been identified
and approved by the Decision of Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
Azerbaijan During the last  years the Administration has developed number of
strategic documents aimed at conservation and development of the city These
include – Conservation Master Plan, Integrated Area Management Action Plan, and
most recently Integrated High Level Economic Development strategy and action
plan Various international experts, architects and management consulting
companies were engaged for the development of these documents Conservation
Master Plan(CMP) was approved by the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of
Azerbaijan in November The Charter of the Administration of the State
Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” under the Cabinet of Ministers
of the Republic of Azerbaijan was approved by  Decree of the President of the
Republic of Azerbaijan on May 16, 2007, and the Administration has been
operating since that time In order to fulfill its duties, the Administration has
the authority to: prepare regulatory and legal acts concerning to the
reservedarea or participate in the preparation of such acts; ban the execution
of any renovation, rehabilitation, reconstruction, regeneration and construction
repair works not authorized by the Administration; issue mandatory instructions;
stop transfer for use, including the leasing of monuments under state
(municipal) ownership where such transfer has not been approved by the
Administration; suspend archeological and excavation works in the Reserve area;
set up structures and facilities providing services on  temporary and permanent
basis and generate income from their operation in compliance with legislation,
etc Charter on the Special Legal Regime Regulation of Buffer Zone of
Icherisheherhas been approved by the Cabinet of Ministers (September, 2011) It
has been prepared in accordance with the proposals of relevant state authorities
(namely, State Committee of Urban Planning and Architecture, Ministry of
Justice, National Academy of Sciences and the Executive Power of Baku) The
document stipulates special legal regime for buffer zone where all kind of
activities that may endanger the historical monuments are prohibited In order to
study scientific-technical achievements and advanced experiences related to the
Reserve the Scientific and Technical Council under the State Historical-
Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” is being created Significant conservation
and restoration works affecting public areas and facades of the public buildings
and squares has been carried out  Number of objects of tourist infrastructure
were developed and procured in order to respond to the growing number of
visitors to the Old City Fully computerized system of traffic management has
been developed and operated with the purpose to limit the maximum number of cars
that can access Old City at any given time  Socio-economicalcharacteristics
There are 4300 inhabitants of the Icherisheher Meanwhile, 22 percent of the
inhabitants are the youth The residential density of the people is 19460 capita
per km² There are 1023 apartments in 424 residential buildings in the area of
Icherisheher These buildings are classified as per their stroys as follows: -
One – stroyed building - 37 pieces  - Two – stroyed building - 286 pieces -
Three – stroyed building - 87 pieces - Four – stroyed building -  pieces - Five
– stroyed building -  pieces - Seven – stroyed building -  pieces Besides the
residential buildings, there are 39 administrative buildings ( museums,
diplomatic missions,  state agencies, 10 mosques,  public unions,  kindergarden
and  fine arts school), 341 commercial enterprises (28 hotels, 24 service
enterprises, 26 catering establishments, 15 groceries, 87 non-food product
stores,  banks, 141 offices, 11 exhibition halls,  workshops) The new vacant
places are created for ensuring the employment of inhabitants of the
Icherisheher These vacant places are mainly covers tourism sector and
craftsmanship In order to pave the way of development of traditional mastership
and create mastership blocks the rehabilitation of the houses had been
implemented Administration of the State Historical-Architectural Reserve
“Icherisher” along with the UK based Prince’ School of Traditional Arts
established “Icherisheher Centre for Traditional Arts” for reviving the
decorative applied fine arts types which are threatened to disappear Meanwhile,
there are  lot of work done to improve the services on public utilities In the
first time in Azerbaijan the selective transportation of household waste had
been applied in the Inner City In order to ensure the quick response on
applications of inhabitants of the “Icherisher” State Historical-Architectural
Reserve and improve the rendered service quality, the new online application
system has been created in the Housing Maintanance Service  The special measures
are carried out for reducing the engagement problems amongst the inhabitants of
Inner City In order to ensure the comforts and health of the inhabitants, the
special medical point was opened The Council of Elders consisting of persons
highly respected by the inhabitants, has been established and provided with
special office for paving the Council to organize its duties accordingly in
order to increase the role of inhabitanats in decision-making processes, to get
benefit from the experience of local inhabitants on construction, maintanace and
rehabilitation running in the area of “Icherisher” State Historical-
Architectural Reserve 10  Objective () andTargets Energy analysis and current
energy consumption trends demonstrate that the energy demand and electricity has
been growing in the last decade at around ,78% per year The objective of
reducing 20% the greenhouse emissions by 2020 to compare to the baseline year
2011 in global terms This is the main aim of the SEAP: to overcome the
increasing energy demand tendency and invert it to reach 20% reduction of the
green house gas emissions with respect to the baseline year The total emissionof
CO2 in 2011(baseline) was MtCO2, so 20% off that value means  reduction of MtCO2
by the year2020 Based on this calculation the overall objective of the SEAP is
to reduce  total of CO2from the baseline levels by Current framework and vision
for the future The replacement of electric energy by other sources, particularly
renewable energy sources, could lead to  considerable reduction in emissions The
potential sources of GHG (Green House Gas) in the oil and gas sector in
Azerbaijan are Azneft Production Unity, the HeydarAliyev Oil Refinery in Baku
and the AzerneftYag Oil and Gas Refinery, all belonging to the state oil company
(SOCAR) Every year,  million tons of GHG in CO  eq are emitted by SOCAR, by
operating companies and joint ventures in Azerbaijan  million tons ffthis amount
are associated gas Starting from the end of 2009, as  result of actions by
SOCAR, 600 thousand tons of emissions were utilized During oil extraction about
500 thousand tons in CO  eq of associated gas is released to atmosphere per
year, but by taking appropriate actions the GHG emission that result from the
release of associated gas can be reduced by  million tons (Second National
Communication to the UNFCCC, MENR, 2010) SOCAR has been taking regular actions
to deal with climate change It has established the Ecological Park in order to
meet the demand for trees and shrubs, and to inform the population about
environmental issues In order to meet part of the peak demand for electricity
from alternative energy sources and RES, four wind generators with 10 kW each
and solar panels with  total capacity of 20 kW have been installed as  pilot
project 11 With the purpose of implementing the utilization of low-pressure
associated gases at the Oil Rocks project within the CDM,  project documentation
developed jointly with the Gazprom Germany Consulting Company has been filed
with the Executive Council of the Kyoto Protocol on CDM for registration, and is
now in the process of verification After the completion of technical and
installation works, 200 million m3 of associated gases will be prevented from
being emitted into the atmosphere The plan to reduce the amount of associated
gases emitted by SOCAR and by the projects of SOCAR has been developed by SOCAR
jointly with the Partnership for Reduction of Global Gas Burning initiative of
the World Bank According to the status of the Administration of theState
Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher”, area as “historical and
architectural reserve”, all kinds of industry are prohibited in this area,
except small entrepreneurship such as cafes, tea houses, shops which mainly sell
historical and cultural handicraft illustrate Azerbaijani history, culture and
local traditions The main sources of greenhouse emissions in this area are
transport, electricity and gas supply There is no centralized heating system
functioning at the area of State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher”
and residents and organizations having offices here use energy and gas to warm
buildings in  cold season  Baseline Emission Inventory Baseline emissions were
calculated by defining following categories: Category  Municipality Buildings
Natural Gas Consumption Residential Buildings Natural Gas Consumption Tertiary
Building Category  12 Municipality Buildings Electricity Consumption Public
street lighting Residential Electricity Consumption Category  Municipality
Employee’ Service Transportation Fuel Consumptions Private and Commercial
Transport Emission reduction targets of municipality of the Old City towards
2020 are set by considering following:  In order to calculate the reliable
carbon emission inventory of the district the year 2011 is chosen as  base year
Data are taken from several sources For the building sector the data has been
gathered from Municipality own database  Electricity consumption rates of the
region has been given by the local stakeholder BAKIELEKTRIKSHEBEKE (the entity
which distributes electricity in Baku region)  Natural gas consumption which is
used in many areas for heating, cooking and etc for the year 2011 has been taken
from AZERIGAZ national gas distributor  Tertiary buildings contain hotels,
museums, office buildings etc  For the fuel consumption of fleet of the
municipality data has been taken from its own database  Public lightings are
also under jurisdiction of the Administration, so it has been shown in the
report and was included to the action plan Total baseline emissions calculated
was /CO2 The largest share of emissions belongs to Buildings and Facilities with
1001 /CO2 Emission levels for each sector provided in Figure  and  below 13 14
Note Emissions form Transport Sector is only 02% of total, hence, neglected in
the chart Private industry is not included in the objective of reduction of CO
emissions and therefore no any measures are planned for this sector  Naturalgas
Gasification of Icherisheher started in1950 “AzeriGaz” –national gas utility
company is the supplier of natural gas The gas distributionnetwork are regularly
maintained, and checked by relevant branch of “AzeriGaz” Total length of gas
pipeline network is 9038  of which 60 % laid underground There are no leakages
in gas distribution network reported in last ten years The gas consumption
tendency in State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” is given in
Table  Table1Natural gas consumption by State Historical-Architectural Reserve
“Icherisheher” () Natural gas consumption (thousand m3) Category 2011 2012 2013
Municipality buildings, 000 000 000 equipment/facilities Tertiary (non
municipal) 900 000 00 buildings, equipment/facilities Residential buildings 000
,085000 ,160,000 Total CO2 emissions from consumption of natural gas in baseline
year was2011 15  Buildingandfacilities At least 70% of the energy is used for
warming (water warming and heating) and cooling, that means that introduction of
different applications of renewable energy sources and using more
environmentally friendly technologies is very important condition to save the
current spending And, of course, it reduces the impact of greenhouse gas
emissions that the State Historical-Architectural Reserve “Icherisheher” exposes
to the environment Total area of administrative buildings is 6780,53 m2 and it
was the largest single source of CO2 emissions (1000 tons) in baseline year
(2011)  Transportation During past years, traffic had become  threat to the
UNESCO-listed World Heritage Sites: Cars and trucks damaged the narrow streets
of an area that was not designed for motorized traffic Exhaust fumes both
degraded the air quality of the district and threatened the historical
buildings, damaging their surfaces Moreover, vibrations caused by traffic harmed
their structures To counter these negative impacts, the district Reserve
launched  project in 2007 that aimed at finding  solution to the damages caused
by road traffic in IcheriSheher In September 2009, an automated traffic control
system was set up to strictly monitor vehicles going in and out of the district
The entrance into Icherisheher is regulated and limited by two gates on paid
basis, except for residents of the city and representatives of organizations and
firms having office space inside of the Icherisheher 16 During the summer before
the measure was put in place, the authorities progressively restricted traffic
and at the same time informed both car drivers and residents about the new
traffic regulation to be implemented The system enables the identification of
vehicles, records the vehicles entrance tothe district and gives access (or not)
to the vehicles, depending on the number of vehicles already present in the old
town The goal is to be able to manage the volume of vehicles inside the district
to protect monuments and historic buildings, to development tourism, and to
enable the safe and easy movements of pedestrians within the area Supplementing
the introduction of the access restriction, all roads in the historic center
were transformed into one-way roads Access to the district is controlled with
electronic cards There are two access gates, and the system is able to record
any car no matter which gate it uses to enter or exit Only car drivers who live
or work in the historical center have free access, as do public service vehicles
Magnetic access cards are issued to the following categories of vehicle users: ·
Ambulances, fire, police and emergency services enter for free, without cards,
without tickets · People living in the district get two free cards for private
cars 17 · Food delivery vehicles get one free card · Public institution vehicles
get two free cards · Cars used by museums and exhibition centers are provided
with one free card · Cars used by local businesses and facilities have to pay to
subscribe to  card The drivers of all other vehicles intending to enter the
district have to buy an -card before They can access the district on the
condition that the maximum number of vehicles driving in Icherisheher has not
been reached already The cost of the -card varies depending on the amount of
time spent on site, with  minimum of one hour The funds raised from the toll are
dedicated to staff housing, communal services and to the administration of the
district They are also used to finance the transportation system and pay the
staff responsible for managing the system As an additional feature, the software
used to run the system allows adjusting the maximum number of vehicles present
in the historical district As of today, it is kept at 450 vehicles When this
limit is reached, only people with permanent access cards can enter the district
In this case, information is displayed on the monitors at the entrance gate to
inform visitors that access is temporarily suspended for cars The implementation
of this system led to  six-to-seven fold reduction in the number of vehicles
entering the district The Administration of the State Historical-Architectural
Reserve “Icherisheher”continues to study and learn from experiences in foreign
countries to improve the system Generally, the number of cars on the roads in
Baku has increased during the last decade, and exhaust fumes obviously have
negative impact on the environment, particularly on the historical buildings of
"Icherisheher" For the convenience of visitors and residents in the old town,
local authorities are currently also evaluating the option of introducing
electric cars The Administration of the State Historical-Architectural Reserve
“Icherisheher” was the first in Azerbaijan among municipalities starting using
electro cars to reduce greenhouses emissions and promote energy efficiency 10
electro cars are owned by municipality which mostly used for transportation of
tourists during excursions and study tours and Municipality plan to increase the
number of this type of cars by 2020 in accordance to funds budgeted for this
purpose 18 The Administration of the State Historical-Architectural Reserve
“Icherisheher” has  fleetof vehicles which used on daily basis to perform tasks
which are under responsibility of this organization The following vehicles owned
byof the State Historical-Architectural ReserveAdministration “Icherisheher”
Number and type of cars owned by the “Icherisheher” Administration including
fuel type and engine size provided below in Table  Table Number and type of cars
owned by the IcheriSheher municipality including fuel type and engine size  Type
of car Number Fuel Engine size Monthly Km average  1800 – 2000 km BMW  Gasoline
3000 m3  1800 – 2000 km Nissan Teana  Gasoline 2500 m3  1800 – 2000 km Hyundai
Sonata  Gasoline 2400 m3 1800 – 2000 km 2400 m3 1800 – 2000 km 2400 m3 1800 –
2000 km 2000 m3  1800 – 2000 km Nissan Sunny  Gasoline 2500 m3  Microbus,
Hyundai 1500 – 1800 km  Diesel 2500 m3   km Fiat Doblo  Gasoline 1400 m3  2700 –
3000 km Chevrolet  Gasoline 1690 m3   km  Diesel 2771m3 Isuzu waste disposal
truck 2771m3 4570m3  Mitsubishi Dump truck  2000-2500km Diesel 4750m3 19 3900m3
3900m3 10 Gazel cherry picker  hours  Gasoline 2890m3 11 Excavator Terex  hours
Diesel 65 kv 12 BobCat   hours  Diesel 74, kv 13 Tractor New Holland  hours
Diesel 60 kv Parking in Icherisheher has  limited space and allowed in only
locations designated by “Icherisherer” Administration officially and marked by
signposts at the territory of Reserve In the baseline year total emissions from
transport category was only  ton including those form private cars 20
Electricity The major electricity supplier of Icherisheher is
“BakiElektrikShebeke” –subsidiary of government utility company Provision of
electricity to the consumers in Icherisheher is delivered by the following
electric substations: 21 Table  List of Substations  Address of electric Number
of Capacity in Entrance substations in Icherisheher transformer Watts current
Watts  10000 13  Rzayeva street  1000 + 1000  10000 24 Boyuk Gala street  1000
10000 12 Zeynalli street  630  10000 12 Sabir street  630 + 1000  10000
Magomayev street  630  OutdoorLighting 22 Public street lighting (PSL) comprises
of two parts: ) Street lighting and ) facade lighting for buildings Total
electricity consumption by PSL facilities in base year (2011) was 473900 Kw
hours Outdoor lights operate for 13 hours daily providing lighting for public
Table  Outdoor lighting data in Icherisheher Type of Bulb Number Total Capacity
in Operation Watts hours per day Luminescent 1109 410 13 Metal halide 681 500 13
77 1500 13 High Pressure Sodium The state of technological infrastructure of
“Icherisheher” Administration is presented in Annex1  Heatingsystem There is no
heating system exist in “Icherisheher” area and all buildings are heating by
electricity of gas during cold season  Planned Actions and Measures for the
Duration of Plan  LongTermAction Planned actions and measures for the full
duration of the plan until  Construction of new gas distribution networks It is
recommended to develop  hydraulic scheme of theIcherisheher gas supply, taking
into consideration the workload of new consumers This would enable reliable
supply of gas to consumers over the long term  Promotion of energy efficient
products and services Following three actions will be undertaken by Old City
administration to support energy efficient product and services: 23 · The
Administration of Icherisheher will introduce requirements of energy efficiency
criteria in tender conditions for all services and infrastructures in
municipality area · The Administration will promote annual city competitions to
identify business and institutions that have achieved highest performance
indicators of social and economic development · The Administration will award
green prize to any manufacturer, business for installation of renewable energy
facility and use less traditional sources of energy The Administration of
“Icherisheher” plans to save 100,000 Kwh of energy through above mentioned
measures This is equivalent of 89 tons of CO2  ShortTermAction Administration of
“Icherishsher” will take short-term actions with quick impacts on the reduction
of emissions given below:  LED bulbs for Outdoor lighting Outdoor lighting
account for  % of total emissions with its lion share in electricity consumption
The Administration of Old City plans to replace all outdoor lighting bulbs with
more efficient LED bulbs 24 Assessment undertaken by the Administration proved
that this would enable to save approximately 303,900kwhper year LED bulbs are
proven to have up to 30,000 hrs of lifespan and are the most efficient
technology available in the market All-LED based outdoor lighting will consume
only 170,000 KW hrs of electricity versus 473,900 Kwh consumed in base year The
detailed description of proposed bulbs for outdoor lighting is provided in Annex
Public street lighting (PSL) comprises of two parts: ) Street lighting and )
facade lighting for buildings Total electricity consumption by PSL facilities in
base year (2011) was 473900 Kw hours Outdoor lights operate for 13 hours daily
providing lighting for public Assessment undertaken by the Municipality proved
that this measure would enable to save approximately 303,900 kwh per year which
is equivalent of 271 tons of CO2 per year which accounts for 48% of the target
Sensorsinbuildings People do not occupy spaces for  large percentage of time,
and are not diligent about controlling the lighting in their spaces both during
the workday, and after hours and weekends This applies to both public spaces as
well as personal spaces The majority of this energy waste occurs during the
weekdays, not during the weeknights or over the weekends This pattern of energy
waste is particularly suited to control by occupancy sensors, which not only
prevent runaway operation after typical business hours, but also capture savings
during the business day Although the majority of observed savings opportunities
occurred during the weekday, the peak savings contributions from occupancy
sensors for several space types did not fall within the typical peak utility
billing periods (early afternoon) or peak commercial building demand periods (10
to  ) This suggests that while sensors may help to save expensive kilowatt-
hours, they would have  variable effect at reducing  building’ peak demand,
given their variable performance in when they provide high levels of savings
among the various space types This would be  useful topic of additional
research, where assigning specific kilowatt-hour rates to each kilowatt-hour
saved would yield more accurate indication of the economic benefits of
installing sensors within these various space types Finally, modeling control
scenarios with - to 20-minute time delay periods indicated savings potentials
that were within the ranges suggested by the industry estimates The time delay
settings used for these 25 analyses showed that energy savings can range from
between % and 13% depending on the application and on which time out setting is
used In addition, the highest savings were obtained in the restroom application
(47% to 60%), and the lowest in the break rooms (17% to 29%) Thus, the time
delay selection can greatly impact energy savings Although these savings are
significant they do not consider the increased maintenance lamp and labor
replacement costs that could result due to more frequent lamp switchingApprox 80
sensors can be installed which would enable to save 100,000 Kwh per year which
will enable to save 89 ton of CO2 per year  TransportSystem Among energy saving
actions in transportation sector of Icherisheher could be further limitation in
number of cars allowed to entrance to the city 26 Besides, Administration of
“Icherishsher” consider different options for placement of environmental check
point services at entrances to the Municipality to control greenhouses emissions
exhausted by cars engine before they will enter to the city In case emissions
from the car will exceed standards the owner of the car will be informed and
driving of the car in Reserve area will be banned Among other possible measures
resulting from this investigation it might be creation of new park&ride systems,
promoting using of environmentally sound transportation and development of
bicycle system Nowadays, any city cannot be sustainable in terms of mobility if
does not create favorable conditions for the bicycle as the cleanest and
healthiest mean of transport Modern cities are replacing their cars for bikes
and closing the city centers to the cars The Administration of “Icherisheher”
plans to provide series of informative campaigns for promotion of usage of
bicycle in Icherisheher with involvement of professional sportsmen’ and to
design locations for bicycles also, especially in locations where intensive
traffic is observed All measures listed above will result in reduction of  tons
of CO2 27  Residentialbuildings The total area of residential buildings is 45000
which mostly consist of the old buildings with more than  years of history
Administration of “Icherisheher” carries out all necessary maintenance
activities during year based on local residents requests  houses maintained
annually and most works are related with renovation of the roofs, renovation of
window, different kinds of lagging activities Renovating of windowscarried out
by the Administration of “Icherishsher” upon request of residents All windows
are made of wood and in order to maintain the cultural value of the buildings,
hence only wooden windows are installed Nevertheless, insulation measures such
as filling the gaps in windows by insulation materials shall bring energy saving
and CO2 emission reductions It is planned to apply this measure to 50 houses,
area of repaired windows estimated at 170  With this measure the estimated saved
energy is 14 MWh/year and the estimated reduction of CO  is tCO2 28 Renovation
of roofs Ceiling and roofs are accounted generally for 20% of energy loss in
buildings Administration of “Icherishsher” plans to renovate 3343 m2of roofing
during SEAP implementation period Majority of residential buildings have flat
roofs and renovation works include sealing the roof with insulation materials It
is estimated that this measure will enable to achieve  MWh saving per annum on
electricity and respectively 48 tCO2  Public activities with citizens and
stakeholders  Publicawarenessprograms Administration of “Icherisheher” carries
out intensive public campaign to promote renewable energy sources, energy saving
technologies and energy efficiency actions, especially among children and youth
at least four times in  year During of the public campaign in reserve area the
lecturers, art completions and song contest organized by the Administration to
promote sustainable energy development, 20% emissions reduction commitment for
citizens 29  Bicycleculturepropagandaactions 30 Last years the Government of
Azerbaijan demonstrate  strong will to introduce bicycle riding culture in
Azerbaijan by organization of international competition on bicycle riding,
installation of long distances for bicycle riding in Baku Boulvar and in other
most populated areas of Baku and other cities The Administration of
“Icherisheher” also demonstrates high will for introduction of bicycle riding
cultures in inner city by public campaign with involvement of famous musicians,
sportsmen, scientists who prefer bicycling and organization of youth bicycle
riding competition throughout year 31  Publiccampaignandnetworking The
Administration of “Icherisheher” once in  year in International Day of the Earth
switch off electricity for one hour to consume energy and demonstrate solidarity
to energy saving ideology widely propoganded by politicians and leading
international community All public activities are expected to result in 150MWh
of saved energy leading to 135 tons of CO2 saving 32  Administrative structure
of SEAP Implementation The Administration of “Icherisheher” demonstrated strong
will and allocated necessary resources for design SEAP and administrative
support of further actions to implement and monitoringThe SEAP will be
coordinated by the Administration of “Icherisheher” that will define and assign
responsibility of the execution of actions necessary to fulfill SEAP tasks and
coordinate other stakeholders’ activities in this filed once the SEAP has been
approved by the Plenary of the Administration of “Icherisheher”Violation or
failure to fulfill the goals results into administrative sanctions The overall
estimated budget is under process until all the measures to be taken are
properly estimated and defined The financing of the actions is foreseen through
Administration local budget, national programs of energy savings, other
financing sources The administrative structure for SEAPimplementation is given
below 33 Administrative structure of SEAP implementation Organizing structure
Head of the Administration Housing-Communal and Maintenance Service Working
Group for SEAP implementation Area Development and Property Management
Department Transportation Department International Cooperation and Cultural
Realations Department Scientific Cultural Center Scientific Practical
Restoration Atelier Finance- Economy Department 34  MonitoringandEvaluation The
Administration of “Icherisheher” conducts monthly monitoring of energy
consumption It will continue the monitoring of energy consumption in the context
of SEAP targets Targets achievement will be monitored on monthly basis and
degree of achievement will be recorded The monitoring is planned to be
implemented through staff of internal Sustainable Energy Working Group allocated
by Head of the Administration of “Icherisheher” as well as by the feedback
obtained from periodical meeting of the internal and external committees It is
planned that Internal Sustainable Energy Working Group will be formed for
coordinating the execution of SEAP under supervision of Head of Administration
of the “Icherisheher” This Group will regularly monitor, evaluate and coordinate
energy saving measures implemented under SEAP, provide communication among
different stakeholders groups involve into actions and report results on
quarterly and annual basis to general public and Head of the Administration of
“Icherisheher”  10 Conclusion SEAP is first of its kind to be implemented in
AzerbaijanThe Administration of “Icherisheher” will pioneer SEAP with targeted
savings of 602 tons of CO2 by It shall take actions to save over 602 tons of CO2
before 2020 which is more than required (20%) reduction amount of  Main source
of reductions will be outdoor lighting where inefficientlight bulbs will be
replaced with LED lamps Administartion will pay special attention to public
campaigns for raising awareness of citizens about benefits of energy saving
actions Campaigns will be designed to target both commercial and non- commercial
residents of Icherisheher Promotion of energy efficient products will be
supported by new procurement policy calling for energy efficient product and
services SEAP will be implemented in close cooperation with national utility
companies as well as with administration of Executive Power of Baku The
Administration of “Icherishsher” will record and report the achievement of SEAP
Table  below summarizes the SEAP actions: 35 CO2 Saving Name of Action Energy
saving Cost of Measures (thousandMWh) (Tons) (USD) 100 89 ,000 Promotion of
energy efficient products and services 300 271 120,000 LED bulbs for Outdoor
lighting 100 89 ,000 Sensors in Buildings 23  ,800 Transport system improvements
15 18 819,000 Residential Building Improvements (roof and windows) Public
Campaigns 150 135 35,000 Total 23 992,800 36 11 ANNEXES Scheme of State of
technological infrastructure of the Administration of “Icherisheher” STATE OF
TECHNOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURES GAS LINES WATER LINES TELEPHONE LINES SEWERAGE
SYSTEM ELECTRICITY NETWORK 37 Annex  Energy resources consumed by the
Icherisheher in 2011 FINAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION [MWh] Category Fossil fuels
Electricity Total Natural gas Diesel Gasoline BUILDINGS, EQUIPMENT/FACILITIES
AND INDUSTRIES: Municipal buildings, equipment/facilities 969,800 600,000
Tertiary (non municipal) buildings, equipment/facilities 638,920 89,900   729
Residential buildings 435,880 17400,000   88 Municipal public lighting 473,910
91 Industries (excluding industries involved in the EU Emission trading scheme -
ETS) Subtotal buildings, equipments/facilities and industries 2518,510 18089,900
20608,410 TRANSPORT: Municipal fleet   ,028 ,707 ,734 Public transport
Private and commercial transport   ,138 ,883 ,021 Subtotal transport   ,166 ,590
,755 2518,510 18089,900 ,166 ,590 20610,165 Total 38  PublicLightingSolution
SEAP Proposal Type of Capacity in Operation hours per year Number Annual
Consumption (kwh) Bulb Watts @ 13 hr/ LED 24  4745 LED 10  4745 LED 13  4745 795
LED 200  4745 8541 LED 27 10 4745 15 LED 129 12 4745 26 LED 430 13 4745 55 LED
192 14 4745 56 LED 51 18 4745 91 LED 11 30 4745 85 LED 22 10 4745 14 LED 20 4745
35 LED 30 4745 25 LED  50 4745 949 LED  150 4745 75 LED 23 500 4745 LED 70 10
4745 LED 185  4745 775 39 LED 26 10 4745 LED 230 14 4745 LED 60 15 4745 LED 65
20 4745 LED 45 30 4745 75 Total 40 Energy action plan of the Administration
“Icherisheher” Expe Local Responsible cted Energy KEY Estimated Expected
Expected renewable CO2 department, CO2 saving SECTORS actions/mea costs energy
renewable energy reduction person or Implementati redu target sures saving
energy production target company (in on [start & ction per & fields of per per
production target per case of end time] per sector action per field of
action/mea measure per measure per sector sector [] involvement mea [MWh] action
sure [MWh/] [MWh/] [MWh] in 2020 of 3rd parties) sure in 2020 in 2020 [/] BUILDI
NGS, EQUIP MENT / FACILI TIES & INDUST RIES: 41 Municipal Icherisheher  _USD 100
89 : ___ buildings, Installation Municipality … ,000___ … … : ___ equipmen of
sensors … … /facilities in the … buildings … Tertiary (non municipal) buildings,
equipment /facilities Residenti Action : Municipality  : USD 15 18 al Renovation
of 300,000 buildings of windows Icherisheher/ : USD Action : 219,000 Renovation
… of roofs … Municipal Replaceme IcheriSheher  USD 300 271 public Municipality
120,000 nt of all lighting outdoor lighting bulbs with 42 Lead bulbs Industries
(excluding industries involved in the EU Emission trading scheme - ETS) & Small
and Medium Sized Enterprise  (SMEs) Other - please specify: ________ ________
________ ________ __ ________ 43 ________ ________ ________ ________ ________
______ TRANS PORT: Municipal Transport : : : : ___ : ___ : ___ fleet system
__________ __________ ________ : ___ : ___ : ___ improveme __ __ ____ … … … nts
: : : … __________ __________ ________ __ __ ____ … … … Public transport Private
and commerci al transport Other - please specify: 44 ________ ________ ________
________ __ ________ ________ ________ ________ ________ ________ ______ LOCAL
ELECT RICITY PRODU CTION: Hydroelect Action : : : : : ___ : ___ : ___ ric power
_________ __________ __________ ________ : ___ : ___ : ___ ___ __ __ ____ … … …
Action : : : : _________ __________ __________ ________ ___ __ __ ____ … … … …
Wind 45 power Photovolta ic Combined Heat and Power Other - please specify:
________ ________ ________ ________ __ ________ ________ ________ ________
________ ________ ______ LOCAL DISTRI CT HEATIN 46  / COOLI NG, CHPs: Combin Act
: ___ : ___ : ___ : : : ed Heat ion : ___ : ___ : ___ ______ _____ __ and : … …
… ______ _____ __ Power __ : __ __ __ ______ : __ __ ______ _____ __ __ … _____
__ __ __ : __ … __ Act __ ion __ : __ __ __ __ __ __ … __ __ __ … District
heating 47 plant Other - please specify: ______ ______ ______ ______ ______ ____
______ ______ ______ ______ ______ ______ ______ ______ ______ LAND USE PLANNI
NG: Strategic Action : : : : : ___ : ___ : ___ urban _________ __________
__________ ________ : ___ : ___ : ___ 48 planning ___ __ __ ____ … … … Action :
: : : _________ __________ __________ ________ ___ __ __ ____ … … … … Transport
/ mobility planning Standards for refurbishm ent and new developm ent Other -
please specify: ________ ________ ________ ________ __ ________ ________ 49
________ ________ ________ ________ ______ PUBLIC PROCU REMEN  OF PRODU CTS AND
SERVIC ES: Energy Action : : : : : ___ : ___ : ___ efficiency _________
__________ __________ ________ : ___ : ___ : ___ requireme ___ __ __ ____ … … …
nts/standa Action : : : : rds _________ __________ __________ ________ ___ __ __
____ … … … … Renewabl  energy requireme nts/standa 50 rds Other - please
specify: ________ ________ ________ ________ __ ________ ________ ________
________ ________ ________ ______ WORKI NG WITH THE CITIZE NS AND STAKE HOLDE 51
RS: Advisor Action : : : : : ___ : ___ : ___  ____________ __________ ________
__________ : ___ : ___ : ___ service Action : __ ____ __ … … …  ____________ : :
: … __________ ________ __________ __ ____ __ … … … Financi al support and
grants Aware Public USD 35000 150 135 ness awareness raising program to and
promote local renewable networ energy king sources, energy saving technologies
and energy efficiency actions; 52 Trainin USD ,000 100 89 Promotion of  and
energy educati efficient on products and services Series included in  of
awareness informa raising tive activites campai gns for promoti on of usage of
bicycle in Old City OTHER SECTO () - Please specify: 53 ______ ______ ______ ___
Other - Action : : : : : ___ : ___ : ___ Please _________ __________ __________
________ : ___ : ___ : ___ specify: ___ __ __ ____ … … … ________ Action : : : :
________ _________ __________ __________ ________ ________ ___ __ __ ____
________ … … … … __ ________ ________ ________ ________ ________ ________ ______
TOTAL: 54