© IRENA 2019 Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely
used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that
appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder
Material in this publication that is attributed to third parties may be subject
to separate terms of use and restrictions; therefore, appropriate permissions
from these third parties may be required before any use of such material About
IRENA The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental
organisation that serves as the principal platform for co-operation,  centre of
excellence,  repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge,
and  driver of action on the ground to advance the transformation of the global
energy system IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all
forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean,
solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access,
energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity  ISBN -- Citation:
IRENA (2019), Renewables Readiness Assessment: Azerbaijan, International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi About the RRA  Renewables Readiness
Assessment (RRA) is  holistic evaluation of  country’ conditions that helps to
identify the actions needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment
This is  country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support
and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders
While the RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each
country determines the best mix of renewable energy sources and technologies to
achieve national priorities The RRA is  dynamic process that can be adapted to
each country’ circumstances and needs IRENA has continually refined its
methodology for the RRA process based on experience in  growing range of
countries and regions For more information:  Acknowledgement This report was
prepared by IRENA in close collaboration with the Government of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, as represented by the Ministry of Energy (MoE) and the State Agency
for Alternative and Renewable Energy Sources (SAARES) Special thanks are also
due to numerous officials, especially those from Azerenergy OJSC, Azerishiq OJSC
and Azalternativenerji LLC This report benefited from the inputs of various
experts, most notably Jahangir Afandiyev (Consultant), Matteo Governatori
(European Commission), Adil Hanif (European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development), Alasgar Hasanov (MoE), Veronika Krakovich (European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development), Nazim Mammadov (United Nations Development
Programme Azerbaijan), Jamil Malikov (SAARES), Maxime Meftah (European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development), Gianluca Sambucini (United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe) and Adrian Steiner (European Commission) IRENA colleagues
including Abdulmalik Oricha Ali, Francisco Boshell, Dolf Gielen, Diala Hawila,
Vanessa Interiano, Sean Ratka and Carlos Ruiz also provided valuable guidance
and input Contributing authors: Prasoon Agarwal (IRENA), Gürbü Gönü (IRENA),
Anuar Tassymov (IRENA), and Katarina Uherova Hasbani (Consultant) Report
available for download:  For further information or to provide feedback:
publications@irenaorg Disclaimer This publication and the material featured
herein are provided “as is”, for informational purposes All reasonable
precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material
featured in this publication Neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents,
data or other, third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty,
including as to the accuracy, completeness, or fitness for  particular purpose
or use of such material, or regarding the non-infringement of third-party
rights, and they accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of
this publication and the material featured therein The information contained
herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is
it an endorsement of any project, product or service provider The designations
employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of
any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries         FIGURES IV TABLES IV BOXES IV
ABBREVIATIONS  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY VII 01 INTRODUCTION 01  Country background 03
Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 02 ENERGY CONTEXT 05 07  Energy sector
Electricity sector    Institutional structure    Strategic framework    Legal,
regulatory and policy framework  Energy tariffs II 03 RENEWABLE ENERGY
DEVELOPMENT  Drivers of renewable energy deployment    Current status and
potential    Renewable energy related laws under preparation    Economics of
renewable energy    Human and institutional capacity   04 KEY CHALLENGES AND
RECOMMENDATIONS  Legal and regulatory framework    Policy support mechanisms
Renewable energy financing      Long-term energy planning    Grid regulation for
renewable energy    Technical knowledge and raising awareness   REFERENCES
Annex : Overview of entities in the energy sector Annex : Technical assistance
projects in the renewable     energy sector III FIGURES                Share of
energy products in TFEC, 2010–2017 (ktoe) 06 Figure  Share of electricity
consumption by sector, 2017 07 Figure  Simplified scheme of electricity flow
within the country’ power system 09 Figure  Overview of existing renewable
energy permitting procedures 12 Figure  Wind speeds at 100  hub height (in /) 18
Figure  Annual global horizontal solar irradiation (GHI in kWh/m2) 19 Figure
Overview of renewable energy investments (million USD), 2005–2015 21 Figure
TABLES Economic indicators 01 Table  Energy balance in 2010–2017 (ktoe) 05 Table
Share of final energy consumption by sector, selected years, 2010–2017 06 Table
Annual energy subsidies, 2015–2017 06 Table  Electricity generation by source
(GWh) 07 Table  Imports and exports of electricity (GWh), 2015–2017 08 Table
Overview of ten strategic tasks for the energy sector 10 Table  Tariffs for
electricity (28 November 2016) 13 Table  Installed power generation capacities
(MW), 2017 17 Table  Renewable energy resource potential 17 Table 10 List of
public buildings with small PV systems installed 20 Table 11  BOXES Azerbaijani
Service and Assessment Network 12 Box  Resilience and security of electricity
supply 16 Box  Yeni Yashma wind park 18 Box  Baku Waste-to-Energy Plant 20 Box
Gobustan Experimental Polygon and Training Centre 22 Box  IV            Asian
Development Bank ADB Combined Heat and Power CHP Feed-in Tariff FIT Gross
Domestic Product GDP Greenhouse Gases GHG  Gigawatt GW Gigawatt-hour GWh
International Renewable Energy Agency IRENA Kilometres km Thousand tonnes of oil
equivalent ktoe Kilovolt kV Kilowatt kW Ministry of Energy MoE Megawatt MW
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action NAMA Nationally Determined Contribution
NDC Power Purchase Agreement PPA Purchasing Power Parity PPP Photovoltaic PV
Renewables Readiness Assessment RRA State Agency on Alternative and Renewable
Energy Sources SAARES Total Final Energy Consumption TFEC Tonnes of oil
equivalent toe Total Primary Energy Supply TPES Terawatt TW Terawatt-hour TWh
Variable Renewable Energy VRE Watt peak Wp   Caucasus mountain, Xinaliq
(Khinalug) Photograph: Shutterstock VI EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Azerbaijan is  fast-
developing economy, mostly driven by developments in the oil and natural gas
sectors, with  GDP per capita that has risen from USD  237 in 1990 to USD  147
in However, GDP growth has slowed due to the substantial drop in oil prices in
recent years, resulting in the devaluation of the national currency and  fall in
GDP from USD 75 billion in 2014 to USD 41 billion in In the same year, the oil
sector still accounted for about  third of GDP In recent decades, the country
has undergone  steady diversification of its economy, with the share of
secondary economic activities growing from almost 33% of GDP in 1990 to 52% in
2016, while primary activities decreased from 29% in 1990 to % in Considering
the volatility of oil prices, there is  pressing need to further diversify the
economy of Azerbaijan and move towards  modernised energy system The Strategic
Roadmap on National Economic Perspectives (approved by Presidential Decree on
December 2016) calls for an increase in the share of non-oil sector foreign
direct investment (FDI) from % to % by 2025, and an increase in the share of
non-oil sector exports from USD 200 per capita in 2016 to USD 450 by 2025 and
USD  200 by Renewable energy could play an important role in supporting this
drive for economic diversification Globally, the goal to limit the rise in
global temperature to well below  degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels
requires that renewables provide for two-thirds of energy consumption and 86% of
power generation by This transformation would also deliver  growth in global GDP
of % and  % increase in global employment, compared to  business-as-usual
scenario (IRENA, 2019) Azerbaijan is  country with vast potential for renewable
energy development The country has excellent wind and solar resources and
significant prospects for biomass, geothermal and hydropower With  view to
unlocking this potential, the government has already set  target of adding 420
MW of renewable energy capacity by Driven by this target, the country has
proceeded to deploy projects using engineering, procurement and construction
(EPC) contracts Practical deployment has been limited, however, compared to the
scale of the country’ available resources and long-term ambitions  higher share
of renewable energy in the energy mix can offer multiple benefits beyond
economic diversification Renewable energy can act as  catalyst for new
employment opportunities in  country traditionally dominated by oil and gas,
providing avenues for technological innovation and opening new sectors for
economic value creation and associated GDP growth Furthermore, the accelerated
deployment of renewable energy, coupled with continuing improvements in energy
efficiency, could decrease domestic consumption of oil and gas, providing
opportunities to generate additional revenue through exports and reduce domestic
subsidies Given the projected increase in energy demand in Azerbaijan, renewable
energy also provides  technical solution to deploy power generation capacity
more rapidly due to the relatively shorter lead times for project construction
compared to conventional sources VII Azerbaijan is working towards conducting
renewable energy auctions In this regard, the Ministry of Energy is undertaking
steps, including on-the-ground measurements, to define and prioritise zones with
high renewable energy resource intensity, Eight zones (five wind and three
solar) with total capacity of 750 MW have already been identified Preliminary
assessments on ownership and designation of lands, potential environmental
impacts and existing infrastructure have been conducted in these areas
Renewables also offer the most prominent low carbon solution to meeting
Azerbaijan’ climate targets The country has committed to reducing its GHG
emissions by 35% by 2030, measured from the 1990 base year set in its Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement, which emphasises the
use of alternative and renewable energy sources to achieve this target To
support Azerbaijan in unlocking its renewable energy potential, this report
presents nine recommendations that provide  solid basis for creating  more
conducive investment environment for renewable energy: Set up  dedicated
financing mechanism to address off-taker risk Adopt  renewable energy law
Azerbaijan could benefit from creating facilitation mechanisms for financing
renewable energy projects that will enable the development of the renewable
energy market, especially in its initial phases Dedicated financing facilities
for renewable energy projects could alleviate some of the barriers to this
development and enhance the country’ attractiveness to both local and
international project developers and investors  dedicated law could provide
overall direction to the renewable energy sector in Azerbaijan and significantly
contribute to the development of  local market for renewables Such  law would
serve as an important reference point for renewable energy market players by
providing  clear and reliable long-term perspective Currently, the Ministry of
Energy of the Republic of Azerbaijan, with the support of an international
consulting company, is developing  draft law on the use of renewable energy
sources in power generation One option is to create  dedicated fund to support
renewable energy projects, which could be capitalised through  levy on
conventional energy sources and disbursed through  robust off-taker arrangement
The Government of Azerbaijan could also consider creating  risk mitigation
facility to encourage investment Such  facility could provide guarantees for
viable projects and collaborate with local banks to help build their knowledge
of, and capacity for, renewable energy project financing The law will cover all
key elements of  sound legal and regulatory framework for renewable energy by
defining the most appropriate sources and technologies based on the existing
technical potential in Azerbaijan In addition, the law could also allocate roles
and responsibilities to relevant government entities Streamline permitting
procedures for renewable energy Adopt  standard power purchasing agreement (PPA)
Permitting requirements and procedures could be streamlined under the renewable
energy law to provide reference and direction for any future amendments The
overarching principles for the design of permitting procedures are simplicity,
transparency and the flexibility to adapt to regulatory and market changes
Drafting and publishing  standard PPA for renewable projects will help to reduce
the risk perceived by the private sector and improve transparency and
predictability in Azerbaijan’ renewable energy market Robust PPAs can improve
the economics of renewable energy projects, while suboptimal PPAs, on the other
hand, may increase the costs of procurement The establishment of  ‘one-stop
shop’ system for renewable energy projects could be considered to simplify and
streamline the permitting process Publishing permit procedures online, alongside
information on the different steps to take, would increase transparency for
developers and investors The Ministry of Energy, in collaboration with an
international consulting firm, has developed  draft standard PPA that considers
best practices and reflects close consultation with stakeholders Negotiations
with private sector companies are underway to start implementing pilot projects
through the PPA Enhance the procurement of renewable energy Develop long-term
energy scenarios  holistic approach to the design of support mechanisms for
renewable energy, encompassing power and non- power sectors, will be beneficial
to the development of renewables in Azerbaijan Given the country’ varied
renewable energy potential, tariff support could be tailored to different
technologies and end-uses To identify the optimal energy mix and inform policy
decisions accordingly,  detailed long-term planning exercise could be undertaken
for energy demand in the electricity, industry, residential, commercial,
agricultural and transport sectors VIII This helps to ensure the quality and
standardisation of equipment, as well as the fair treatment of generators and
operators with regard to grid connection, while also maintaining system
stability and reliability If the potential for electrification, energy
efficiency and renewable energy penetration is to be fully assessed, Azerbaijan’
energy planning requires  deeper focus on non-power sectors, such as heating and
cooling, and transport The establishment of  country-wide grid code could
improve overall grid management, which will have  positive impact on the
development of renewable energy by reducing the perceived technical risks for
investors and developers The Ministry of Energy, with the support of the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the involvement of
consulting firm, has implemented  project, “Strengthening the grid to support
renewable energy projects in Azerbaijan”, to identify potential of renewable
energy resources and opportunities for integrating them into the grid Such
analysis will assess the costs and benefits of different renewable energy
technologies (solar, wind, bioenergy, etc), including their potential for market
penetration and optimal scale of deployment This requires an assessment of the
technical and economic renewable energy potential by technology to outline
future scenarios with increased shares of renewable energy There is also  need
to comprehensively assess current energy infrastructure, focusing on aspects
such as the country’ power grid and the investments needed for grid upgrades
Adopt  long-term renewable energy target Raise awareness and develop  capacity
building strategy Targets enhance the transparency of the policy-making process
by providing  common information base to all stakeholders, thereby fostering
public support When backed by supportive policy and investment frameworks,
targets can be instrumental in indicating the envisioned trajectory of market
growth, thereby helping to anchor medium and long-term expectations By giving
sense of trajectory and growth, they can contribute to lowering deployment costs
and establishing  supply chain utilising local industry The government could
devise  long-term programme of activities to increase general awareness of, and
capacity for, renewable energy, targeted at state institutions, local
enterprises and citizens Such  in programme could also training curricula, with
focus on building local skills in operation and maintenance to enhance
employment opportunities Additionally, certification and training on various
renewable energy applications and related technologies for both power and non-
power uses may be beneficial integrate certifications While Azerbaijan has
already approved its renewable energy target for 2020, the government is
considering  longer-term target to increase the share of renewable energy in
power generation up to 30% by This could offer better long-term clarity for the
private sector and investors, thereby encouraging the development of new
projects To realise the potential of renewables in multiple uses, targets would
need to be set for the heating, cooling, transport and power sectors Government
institutions could benefit from specialised capacity building on renewable
energy policy and regulation, and evaluation techniques for renewable energy
projects For the private sector, courses could be offered explaining
opportunities for setting up renewable energy enterprises, including information
on available government support schemes and partners Increased understanding of
the benefits of renewable energy and how they are relevant to the overall
economic situation in Azerbaijan could be useful for the wider public Develop
and implement  grid connection code with standards for variable renewable energy
integration Annually the Ministry of Energy and the State Agency for Alternative
and Renewable Energy Sources (SAARES) implement activities to raise public
awareness on the use of renewable energy and the production of carbon- free
electricity The Government of Azerbaijan could provide the mandate for relevant
organisations to develop  grid connection code for variable renewable energy
(VRE) in consultation with all relevant actors The function of  grid connection
code including VRE is to provide technical requirements for wind and PV plants
when connecting to  country’ electricity grid IX Baku, Azerbaijan Photograph:
Shutterstock   INTRODUCTION  Country Background The Republic of Azerbaijan is
located in the southern Caucasus region It is bordered by the Caspian Sea to the
east, Armenia and Georgia to the west, the Russian Federation to the north and
Iran to the south The population was approximately 10 million in 2019 with about
45% still living in rural areas Baku is the capital and the largest city, with
population of about  million Azerbaijan is  fast-developing economy, largely
oriented toward developments in the oil and natural gas sectors, and achieved
its highest economic growth at the beginning of the 2010s Its GDP per capita (in
current USD) increased from USD  237 in 1990 to USD  147 in However, GDP growth
has slowed since the plunge in oil prices in The subsequent erosion of oil
prices has resulted in the devaluation of the national currency and led to  fall
in the country’ GDP from USD 75 billion in 2014 to USD 41 billion in The oil
sector still accounted for about one third of GDP in The country’ unemployment
levels have remained stable; 63% of the population was unemployed in 2010,
falling to 03% in In recent decades, the country’ economy has undergone
significant diversification (Table )the relevant opportunities and constraints
Given both the current global economic slowdown and the fact that oil prices
remain volatile and well below their mid-2008 peak, there is  pressing need to
further diversify the economy of Azerbaijan, and therefore to move towards
modernised energy system This is compounded by the fact that oil production has
been progressively declining, having reached its peak in 2010 (IEA, 2015) Table
Economic indicators 2010 2015 2016 2017 2018  843  500  881  147  721 GDP per
capita (current USD) 79 05 -06 -28 41 GDP growth (annual %) Agriculture,
forestry and fishing, value added (% of GDP) 54 18 61 61 25 Industry (including
construction), value added (% of GDP) 99 89 56 70 21 Manufacturing, value added
(% of GDP) 81 99 93 70 82 Services, value added (% of GDP) 22 65 32 12 24
Source: World Bank Development Indicators            According to the Strategic
Road Map on National Economic Perspectives (approved by Presidential Decree on
December 2016) the target Indicators are: :             () increasing the share
of non-oil sector’ FDI from the current % to % by 2025; and (ii) increasing the
share of non-oil sector exports from the current USD 200 per capita to USD 450
per capita by 2025 and USD  200 per capita by Renewable energy could play  role
in supporting Azerbaijan’ drive for economic diversification Globally, the
transformation of the energy system that aims to limit the rise in global
temperature to well below  degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels requires
that renewables provide for two-thirds of energy consumption and 86% of power
generation by 2050, adding % to GDP and  % increase in global employment,
compared to  business-as-usual tradjectory (IRENA, 2019) Azerbaijan’ adoption of
the Strategic Road Map for the development of utilities, approved by the
Presidential Decree of  December 2016, which lays out  long-term roadmap for the
development of renewables in the country (see section ), therefore represents
timely step towards energy transformation   Renewables Readiness Assessment
(RRA) The RRA process in Azerbaijan has produced the following outputs: • an
analysis of the existing policy environment and The International Renewable
Energy Agency (IRENA) developed the Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) as
tool for carrying out comprehensive evaluations of the conditions for renewable
energy deployment in particular countries The RRA is  country-led, consultative
process It provides  venue for multi- stakeholder dialogue to identify
challenges to renewable energy deployment and to devise solutions to existing
barriers Short and medium-term recommendations are presented to governments to
guide the formation of new policies or the reform of existing policies to
achieve  more enabling environment for renewable energy renewable energy market;
• identification of the critical and emerging issues associated with renewable
energy development; and •  set of recommendations for taking advantage of the
opportunities revealed by the policy analysis and extensive consultations with
numerous stakeholders The co-ordinated approach employed to produce this RRA
helps in setting priorities, in consultation with bilateral and multilateral
cooperation agencies, financial institutions and the private sector, for
implementing the recommended actions For Azerbaijan, the RRA process has been
led by the Government of Azerbaijan, with technical support from IRENA, and has
greatly benefitted from stakeholder input These stakeholders include the
Ministry of Energy, transmission and distribution utilities, power project
developers, development partners, financial institutions, civil society and
academia The consultative process was initiated at an expert consultation
workshop held in Baku on 31 May– June The workshop was based on  background
paper describing the challenges and opportunities for renewable energy
development During this two-day event, experts discussed the state of renewable
energy in Azerbaijan, as well as various challenges and possible solutions Their
insights informed  draft report presented in the follow-up validation workshop
held on 16 October 2018, which was jointly organised by the State Agency for
Alternative and Renewable Energy Sources (SAARES) and IRENA In addition, the
analysis benefitted from bilateral interviews with key stakeholders and from the
Renewable Energy Hard Talk in Azerbaijan organised by the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) in October Photograph: Shutterstock
ENERGY CONTEXT  Energy sector Azerbaijan is  net energy exporter The country
exports oil, natural gas and electricity Azerbaijan meets its energy needs
through domestic production, which is currently largely reliant on the
exploitation of the country’ hydrocarbon reserves – namely oil and natural gas
Proven oil reserves in the Caspian Basin – which Azerbaijan shares with Russia,
Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan and Iran – were reported at seven billion barrels in
2018 (OPEC, 2018) and are comparable in size to North Sea reserves several
decades ago Table  illustrates that Azerbaijan exports five times its own total
final energy consumption (TFEC) The decrease in the primary production of
renewables and waste relates to fluctuating hydropower generation and reduced
usage of wood as  feedstock for energy use Reduced wood usage can be attributed
to improvements in district heating and installation of gas-fired water heaters
Table  Energy balance in 2010–2017 (ktoe) 2010 2014 2015 2016 2017 68 61 61 59
57 Primary production, including: 52 43 42 42 39 Crude oil (with NGL) 15 17 17
17 16 Natural gas Renewables and waste Net imports of all energy products - 54 -
45 - 45 - 44 - 40 12 15 15 15 15 Total energy supply - - - - - Transformation
processes Energy industry own-use  Total final energy consumption Source: State
Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan (2018)  Energy consumption Energy subsidies
is concentrated in Table , TFEC As shown in households, as well as the
transport, industry, and construction sectors, in order of importance The share
of households decreased between 2010 and 2017 from 50% to 41%, while the share
of the transport, industry and construction sectors increased from 37% to almost
45% over the same period The decrease in the share of residential consumption is
the result of  combination of factors – most notably the surge in energy
consumption in the industry and transportation sectors The growing energy
consumption in these end-use sectors highlights their critical importance in
Azerbaijan’ transition to sustainable energy Azerbaijan still has  sizable
energy subsidy system in place The cost of the energy subsidy was equivalent to
almost % of GDP in 2016, with an average energy subsidy estimated at USD 130 per
capita (see Table ) The total value of subsidies almost doubled in the period
between 2014 and 2016 from USD 751 million to USD  269 million In 2015 and 2016,
more than half of the subsidies were provided to the electricity sector through
support to oil and gas energy sources, while subsidies to renewable energy were
negligible Figure  Share of energy products in TFEC, 2010–2017 (ktoe) Heating
has  major role in determining the country’ energy mix, particularly in industry
and households for space heating and cooking Azerbaijan uses both individual and
district heating solutions, the latter typically comprising small decentralised
heat supply systems where each apartment block is connected to  central boiler
using natural gas Currently, the vast majority of households in Azerbaijan use
gas-based central heating or stoves District heating is managed by the state-
owned supply operator Azeristiliktechizat, with only limited changes to its
energy mix or infrastructure upgrades thousand toe 10,000 ,000 ,000  515  469
454  515 ,000  374  141  324  052 ,000  642  754  936  961 ,000  430  616  910
142 ,000 ,000 ,000  367  546  348  283  616  829  312  629 ,000  2011 2012 2013
2014 2015 2016 2017 2010 Natural gas Petroleum products Heat Electricity The
share of the various energy products in TFEC is presented in Figure  Natural gas
and petroleum clearly dominate the mix, representing more than 80% of the TFEC
Renewable sources and municipal waste remain below % of the TFEC Renewables and
municipal waste Source: State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan (2018) Table
Share of final energy consumption by sector, selected years, 2010–2017 Economic
sector 2010 2011 2014 2015 2016 2017 12% 13% 16% 16% 18% % Industry and
construction 25% 27% 31% 29% 26% % Transport % % % % % % Agriculture, forestry
and fishing % % % % % % Commerce and public services 50% 47% 39% 41% 44% %
Households Source: State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan (2018) Table
Annual energy subsidies, 2015–2017 Subsidies per year, USD million Energy type
or technology 2015 2016 2017 Oil Electricity Natural gas  Total • • 47 Average
subsidisation rate (%) • • 209 Subsidy per capita (USD/person) • •  Total
subsidy as share of GDP (%) Source: IEA (2017)   Electricity sector The
Azerbaijan electricity system has  substantial amount of overcapacity in the
generation sector The system peak load in 2017 was  509 MW, while the installed
capacity, excluding the Shirvan TPP, is around  000 MW, which provides
considerable opportunity for electricity export Azerbaijan has  100%
electrification rate The country currently has about  141 MW of total installed
capacity; this is dominated by thermal power, which constitutes about 60% The
Azerbaijan TPP – the largest power plant with  capacity of about  400 MW (oil-
based) – industry design requirements for reliability and economy The remaining
thermal power plants are modern, mostly operating on combined-cycle gas turbine
technology Among renewables, hydropower has the highest installed capacity ( 134
MW in 2019) followed by wind (66 MW), biomass (38 MW) and solar photovoltaic (33
MW) Electricity consumption is being refurbished to meet An overview of the
country’ electricity consumption by sector is provided in Figure  Households,
and commerce and public services, are the two largest consumers of electricity,
with  combined share of 89% of total consumption in The third largest consumer
is industry, driven by non-ferrous metallurgy, iron and steel metallurgy, and
food processing industries Electricity generation More than 80% of the total
electricity produced by Azerenerji, the state-owned power generation and
transmission company, comes from thermal power plants Of these, combined-cycle
power plants provide over 40% of total electricity production Hydropower plants
provide for about –10% of electricity generation demand Table  presents
electricity generation data by source The system has excess power generation
capacity Figure  Share of electricity consumption by sector, 2017 Source: State
Statistical Committee, Table  Electricity generation by source (GWh) Source 2010
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 15 17 21 21 23 22 22 22 Thermal  Hydro  - -
Wind - - -    Solar PV - - - Biomass 18 20 22 23 24 24 24 24 Total Source: State
Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan (2018)  The project was based on an analysis
of the power systems of the three countries Azerbaijan and Georgia have excess
generating capacity, while Turkey has rapidly growing demand for electricity
Electricity trading Azerbaijan conducts cross-border electricity trading with
neighbouring countries, mainly exporting electricity to Georgia and Turkey
Azerbaijan is  net exporter of electricity and exported about  billion kWh in
2016 and 2017, leveraging its excess electricity generation capacity During the
first year of Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey (AGT) project operations, Turkey was the
main trading partner for Azerbaijan’ electricity exports (totalling about 800
million kWh) In 2017, Georgia took the lead with  purchase of 900 million kWh of
electricity from Azerbaijan Electricity exports account for approximately % of
the country› electricity production In general, electricity exports accounted
for about % of the total exports of Azerbaijan in USD value in 2017, amounting
to USD 51 million The electricity trade with Iran is roughly balanced, while the
export–import balance with Georgia, Russia and Turkey is positive Table  shows
Azerbaijan’ electricity exports and imports Table  Imports and exports of
electricity (GWh), 2015–2017 Country 2015 2016 2017 Import (GWh) Iran    Georgia
Turkey Russia Total Export (GWh) Iran Georgia  Turkey Russia 265  Total Source:
MoE, (2017 ,2016 ,2015)  The Azerbaijan–Georgia–Turkey Project (“AGT Power
Bridge”) was initiated by Azerenerji JSC (generation and transmission system
operator of Azerbaijan), GSE JSC (TSO of Georgia) and TEIAS (TSO of Turkey) in
2009 for electricity delivery from Azerbaijan to Turkey though Georgia
Institutional structure The Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory Agency (AERA) was
created by Presidential decree on 22 December 2017 with the objective of
pursuing energy sector unbundling and preparing tariffs for approval by the
Tariff Council Azerbaijan’ institutional landscape in the energy sector is still
evolving The energy sector has undergone several phases of restructuring since
Azerbaijan’ independence in the early 1990s, focusing mainly on the power sector
Structure of the power sector The power sector was originally  fully vertically
and horizontally integrated monopoly, except for distribution and supply in the
Baku region, which was  municipal entity managed by Baku Networks Company
(Bakielektrikshebeke OJSC) On 10 February 2015, Azerishiq JSC was created to
take over the responsibilities and roles of Bakielektrikshebeke OJSC, and later
became the national power distribution company Key institutions The Ministry of
Energy oversees state policy and regulation in the energy sector, including
renewable energy The Ministry also has control over state-owned enterprises The
main function of the Ministry of Energy is to ensure the country’ energy
security, participating in the formation of the state policy for energy sector
development and its implementation The Ministry of Energy is also responsible
for the licensing of power generation, transmission, distribution and sale, as
well as import and export activities The Ministry has  dedicated department that
is responsible for increasing the deployment of energy efficiency and renewable
energy policies Azerenerji OJSC is responsible for generation and transmission
of electricity in the country, including coordination of power substations
controlled via  national dispatch centre, as well as high voltage power
transmission lines of 110, 220, 330, 500 kV and their dispatch control tools
Azerenerji OJSC introduces new technologies to ensure extension of generation
capacity and rehabilitation of high voltage power lines in the country At the
same time, it conducts energy exchange operations with foreign countries The
State Agency on Alternative and Renewable Energy Sources (SAARES) was
established by  Presidential Decree on July 16, 2009, and was subsequently
tasked with driving the development of the country’ renewable energy resources
and related projects The status of the Agency was altered by Presidential Decree
No 464 of 14 January In recent years, Azerenerji has implemented  large- scale
investment programme to add new – and upgrade existing – generation and
transmission capacity All investments in the distribution network are
implemented by Azerishiq, which carries out large scale rehabilitation of
infrastructure and works on the electrification programme for residential
communities An overview of power flows is detailed in Figure  The Tariff Council
determines and regulates retail and wholesale tariffs for electricity, gas,
central heating services and refined petroleum products The Council was
established in May 2005 and implements state regulations on prices and service
fees pertaining to public services and their collection in cooperation with
central and local executive bodies as well as public organisations The Council
is chaired by the Minister of Economy; representatives of several ministries and
agencies are also appointed members of the Council In addition, there are  few
private companies operating small hydropower stations and wind power stations,
as well as solar home systems Azguntex LLC is  government-owned company that
manufactures solar panels and LED lamps Figure  Simplified scheme of electricity
flow within the country’ power system Generation Transmission Distribution
Supply Consumption Azerenerji Azerenerji  kV Azerrishig  kV Azerrishig -35 kV
SAARES, wind & solar PV plants Consumers Private small HPP and wind power
plants, Biomass plants, Autoproducers Source: INOGATE Technical Secretariat, for
short-term, The roadmap was outlined including an Action Plan of measures, (up
to 2020), medium-term (2020–2025) and long-term (post-2025) periods Structure of
the district heating sector Azeristiliktechizat is the national district heating
operator The district heating in Azerbaijan typically comprises small
decentralised heat supply systems serving  number of apartment blocks from
single gas-fired boiler house With regards to renewable energy, the strategy
sets  target of 420 MW by 2020, which includes 350 MW of wind, 50 MW of solar
and 20 MW of bioenergy The strategy also includes  long-term vision for 2025 and
beyond; however, no specific targets are set beyond The key actors involved in
the electricity and natural gas sectors of Azerbaijan, with relevance to the
purposes of the present analysis, are listed in Annex   Strategic framework This
long-term vision establishes  framework for  wide series of measures and
sectoral reforms that include the development of  favourable climate for
attracting investments in renewable energy (mainly wind and solar); distributed
power generation by consumers for self-sufficiency and the installation of
rooftop PV panels; and the development of bioenergy and geothermal resources In
July 2015, the Minister of Energy of Azerbaijan approved  set of ten priority
directions that aim to introduce market-based operations in the electricity and
natural gas sectors, with  view to attracting private investment (Table ) The
market reforms aim to harness competitive market forces to achieve energy prices
that reflect actual costs and thereby increase economic benefits for the whole
country The development of distributed generation is also planned, using solar
PV, small combined heat and power (CHP) stations, and small wind turbines At the
consumer level, the long-term vision envisages improved energy efficiency in the
industrial and commercial sectors, and the development of infrastructure for
electric vehicles The development of six of these ten strategic tasks have been
supported by international development partners (see Annex  for  list of
projects implemented in support of these strategic priorities) The strategic
roadmap for the development of utilities (electricity, heating, water and gas)
in the Republic of Azerbaijan was approved by the Presidential Decree of
December 2016, “About approval of the strategic roadmaps for the national
economy and main economic sectors” Table  Overview of ten priority directions
for the energy sector Ten strategic tasks for the energy sector Preparation of
strategy for the energy sector development of the country in the next 25–30
years Development of 15–20 year state program for the efficient use of energy
resources, the improvement of end-user energy efficiency and the use of
alternative energy sources Development of  -year state program for energy sector
development (1st Five-year Strategic Development plan) Development of the draft
law on the regulated internal market for electricity Development of the draft
law on the regulated internal market for natural gas Development of the draft
law on an ‘on-grid code’ for electricity Development of the draft law on an
independent energy regulator governing the internal energy (electricity and gas)
markets Development of the draft law on an ‘on-grid code’ for natural gas
Restructuring of power system structures (Azerenerji, Azerishiq) based on the
new subjects of the market provided by the legislation Creation of  flexible
tariff system, reflecting and distributing the interests of end consumers and
other market actors (-factor), and based on the costs of products and services
10  Legal, regulatory and policy framework Additional legal and regulatory
documents The power sector is also regulated by  number of byelaws (mainly the
Cabinet of Ministries Decrees concerning various rules and procedures for
operations) There are  number of bye-laws aimed at promoting the use of
renewable energy through special concessions, including the following: The legal
and regulatory framework of the Azerbaijan power sector has evolved over the
past 20 years In that period, some elements of legal and regulatory frameworks
have been updated to account for intended changes to their structure and
administration, such as the drive to introduce  competitive power market through
the unbundling of the vertically integrated market and greater private sector
participation The energy sector of Azerbaijan is governed by legislation that
was drafted during the period 1998–The key elements of the legislation are
summarised below • The State Program on the Use of Alternative and Renewable
Energy Sources, adopted in 2004, aims to: ) determine the potential of
alternative energy sources in the production of electricity; ) increase the
efficiency of national energy sources; ) guarantee national energy security; )
decrease CO2 emissions; and ) support job creation via renewable energy sector
development Law on Energy Resources Utilisation (30 May 1996) • March 2014
amendments to the Cabinet of Ministers decrees: “Rates of custom duties on
export–import operations in Azerbaijan Republic” and “List of goods exempted of
VAT imported to Azerbaijan Republic territory” The import of equipment,
facilities, parts and tools used in the renewable energy industry and in
achieveing energy efficiency are exempt from customs duties and VAT The Law on
Energy Resources Utilisation determines the legal, economic and social basis of
state policy in the field of energy resource utilisation and regulates the
relations between the state and the legal entities in this field The Law
includes provisions on the certification and standardisation of energy consuming
installations, facilities, etc It also states that independent electric and
thermal power producers may use the state power supply system to transport
produced energy under negotiated terms • Decree of the Cabinet of Ministers “On
determination of electricity production and power limits for the commissioning
of electrical installations” – no 482 of 24 November According to this decree,
special permits for alternative and renewable energy power plants are required
only for power plants with  capacity of more than 150 kW, and for hydropower
plants and biogas power plants with  capacity of more than 500 kW Law on Power
Industry ( April 1998) The Law on Power Industry provides the legal background
for the generation, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity and
heating It mainly aims to ensure rational utilisation of power resources as well
as environmental protection The Law appoints the Ministry of Energy as the
authority responsible for licensing and regulating electricity generation,
transmission, distribution, sale, and import–export activities • The permitting
procedure for renewable energy remains complex, with  number of steps and
fragmented division of responsibilities across Ministries and local
administration Figure  outlines this process Law on Heat and Electric Power
Plants ( March 2000) This Law determines the legal framework for the design,
construction and operation of power plants including independent power plants
The purchase of electricity generated by small power plants is guaranteed
without limitations Any natural or legal entity has the right to construct,
rehabilitate and operate power plants, and activities related to “industrial
power plants” ( excluding small power plants) must be licenced by the Ministry
of Energy The Law also provides for the process and conditions of negotiated
access and connection of such licenced facilities to the grid The legal and
regulatory framework has evolved to drive  more competitive power market   small
power plant is defined in Azerbaijan as one with  capacity of between 50 kW and
10 MW for hydropower plants and between 10 kW and 100 kW for wind power plants
11 Figure : Overview of existing renewable energy permitting procedures
Permission for construction from: • Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources •
Ministry of Health • Ministry of Emergency cases Permission for land use from
local authorities   Permission for connecting to the network from Azerishiq /
Azerenerji OJSC Issuance of  permit to produce electricity from Ministry of
Energy   Issuance of  commissioning act for power generation from the Azerbaijan
Energy Regulatory Agency * *Additionally,  Power Purchase Agreement must be
concluded with Azerishiq           Box : Azerbaijani Service and Assessment
Network The Azerbaijani Service and Assessment Network (ASAN) is  state agency
for public services to the citizens of Azerbaijan The agency’ goal is to make
services more easily accessible to citizens using modern technologies The ASAN
service is based around  ‘one-stop-shop’ principle, where ten government
entities and about 30 private companies provide services in  public–private
partnership :             The President of Azerbaijan has already approved the
rules for the use of electricity through the Decree of  April 2017 “on
simplification of procedures of electricity supply for existing or new
constructed facilities of entrepreneurs” The decree sets out the rules for the
preparation of technical specifications and design estimates for existing or
under-construction facilities with the required capacity of up to 150 kW
(including 150 kW from the existing  kV network) and connection to the power
supply network Consumers can easily request such connections through the ASAN
service 12  Energy tariffs Depending on the specification of the services,
tariffs are determined on the basis of the expenses necessary to recover costs
and generate profits This is  methodology used for the calculation of prices
(tariffs) for all services and goods regulated by state There is no dedicated
methodology for the calculation of tariffs for electricity The latest tariffs
were approved by Resolution of the Tariff Council no 17 of 28 November 2016 on
the Regulation of Electricity Price Rates in the Republic of Azerbaijan and are
shown in Table  Tariffs for electricity and heating are regulated by the state
in Azerbaijan, specifically purchase prices from producers; wholesale prices;
retail prices and import– export prices (for electricity) There are no access
tariffs for generation/retailing and transmission/distribution The Tariff
Council has the power to set tariffs for any kind of renewable energy Feed-in
tariffs have been set for wind, mini hydro and other renewable energy
technologies There is no difference in tariffs between cogeneration and
standalone power systems The regulated entities ( Azerenergji and Azerishiq) are
required to provide economic justification for the expenses recovered by the
tariffs The calculated tariffs are reviewed by the Tariff Council and published
upon approval The country has set specific tariffs for renewable energy, namely
94 US cents per kWh for small hydropower; 23 US cents for wind; and up to 35 US
cents for other renewable energy technologies Azerbaijan is contemplating the
possibility of competitive procurement as  mechanism for the discovery of
appropriate tariffs in this context Table : Tariffs for electricity (28 November
2016) TARIFFS FOR  KWH, AZN/US CENTS3 NAME OF SERVICE Purchase from producer
(94 US cents) Private small hydropower stations  (23 US cents) Wind power
stations  (35 US cents) Other renewable energy  (35 US cents) Wholesale
Enterprises of the chemical and aluminium industry, mining ore based steel
foundries, with direct energy supply from 35 kV and 110 kV lines and for
production purposes, with average monthly consumption not less than  million kWh
( US cents) Day (08:00–22:00)  (65 US cents) Night (22:00–08:00)  (11 US cents)
Transit transmission Retail Residential  ( US cents) For monthly consumption
less than 300 kWh ( US cents) For monthly consumption more than 300 kWh  ( US
cents) Non-residential Source: Tariff Council of Azerbaijan Republic (2016)
Note: exchange rate of USD/AZN =  13 Photograph: Shutterstock Photograph:
Shutterstock 14  RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT Azerbaijan is  country with vast
potential for the development of renewable energy The country has excellent wind
and solar resources and sizable potential for biomass, geothermal and hydropower
With  view to unlocking this potential, the government has set  target of adding
420 MW of renewable energy capacity by Driven by this target, the country has
proceeded with the deployment of projects under engineering, procurement and
construction (EPC) contracting arrangements for use of renewables However,
practical deployment has been limited compared to the scale of available
resources and the country’ long-term ambitions  Drivers of renewable energy
deployment The country’ leadership highlights the importance of diversifying the
economy and decreasing its dependence on the oil and gas sectors in its
Strategic Road Map on National Economic Perspectives In this context, the
increased share of renewable energy in the energy mix can offer multiple
benefits, including improved welfare and job creation, energy security, economic
diversification and associated increases in GDP Renewable energy can act as
catalyst for new employment opportunities in  country traditionally dominated by
oil and gas by providing new avenues for technological innovation and new
sectors for economic value creation The country’ rich experience in the oil and
gas sector offers  good starting point for the introduction of renewable based
technologies For example, elsewhere, oil and gas industry experience has been
used in the successful development of geothermal potential in Canada, while in
Norway, the expertise gained from off-shore oil and gas infrastructure have been
leveraged to develop the off-shore wind industry In the case of Azerbaijan, the
State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) – the wholly state-owned
national oil and gas company – is an important actor in the country’ energy
sector While it maintains its focus on conventional energy sources, SOCAR has
already installed wind and solar PV in the Tagiyev oil and gas field and is
considering renewable energy options for supplying power to off-shore facilities
Furthermore, the accelerated deployment of renewable energy, coupled with
continuing improvements in energy efficiency, could decrease domestic
consumption of oil and gas, thereby providing an opportunity to generate
additional revenues through exports and lower domestic subsidies 15 Renewables
also offer the most prominent low carbon solution to meeting Azerbaijan’ climate
targets The country has committed to reducing its GHG emissions by 35% by 2030
compared to the 1990 base year specified in its Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement The NDC already emphasises the use
of alternative and renewable energy sources to achieve this target Box :
Resilience and security of electricity supply Azerbaijan encountered  massive
blackout during – July 2018, leaving large parts of the country without
electricity and in some cases without water supply Thirty-nine cities and
districts across the country were affected The blackout was associated with
significant heat wave and  parallel explosion at the sub-station of  thermal
power plant in Mingachevir city The development of renewable energy could also
contribute to energy system resilience in Azerbaijan (see Box ) For example,
distributed renewable energy systems, combined with increased use of battery
storage, can enhance security of supply Given the projected increase in national
energy demand, renewable energy also provides  technical solution to the need
for rapid power generation capacity deployment, owing to relatively shorter lead
times for project construction when compared to conventional sources The
government has allocated significant amounts of investment in improvements to
its electricity infrastructure over the past 15 years and activities related to
energy security and system resilience are continious The July 2018 blackout
highlighted the need to build  stronger, more resilient power system in
Azerbaijan, in which renewables can play an important role This provides an
opportunity to further enhance the business case for renewable energy
Photograph: Shutterstock 16  Current status and potential As of 2017, Azerbaijan
has  267 MW of installed renewable power capacity, of which  132 MW is hydro, 35
MW solar, 62 MW wind and 38 MW is biomass (See Table ) At present, Azerbaijan
has  modest share of renewable energy in its TFEC, fluctuating between  peak of
% in 2010 to % in One explanation for this variance is the seasonal and year-on-
year changes in hydropower production that have ranged from  446 million kWh in
2010 to only  746 million kWh in Azerbaijan has exceptional wind and solar
resources and significant bio/waste, geothermal and small hydro potential SAARES
estimates of renewable energy technical potential are presented in Table The
share of renewable energy in non-power uses has remained consistently low and
represented % of TFEC in Table : Installed power generation capacities (MW),
2017 Power plants State power companies /auto-producers/ independent power
producers Thermal Hydro Solar Wind Biomass Total Azerenerji JSC  881  055 - - -
935 Nakhchivan State Energy Agency 147 68 22 - - 237 Auto-producers (BP, SOCAR,
Azersun Holding) 722 - - - - 722 Tamiz Shahar JSC - - - - 37 37 Azerishiq JSC -
- - 52 - 52 Azalternativenergy LLC - - 13   16 Private wind and hydro power
plants -  -  - 17 Total (MW)  750  132 35 62 38  017 Share (%)    100 Source:
MoE (2019a) Table 10: Renewable energy resource potential The share of renewable
energy in non-power uses has remained consistently low Renewable energy
Technical potential (MW) Wind  000 Solar 23 040 Bio/waste 380 Small hydro 520
Source: MoE (2019b) 17 This potential is reflected in the government’ target of
350 MW of new capacity by By the end of 2017, MW were installed with MW operated
by Azerishiq JS,  MW by Azalternativenergy LLC, and  MW by the private sector
Azerbaijan continues to develop several projects including the ongoing Absheron
wind project and the recently launched Yeni Yashma wind farm (see Box )
Hydropower Hydropower has traditionally maintained  solid position the country’
energy mix Among renewables, hydropower had the highest installed capacity of
131 MW in 2017, compared to  750 MW of thermal power capacity The resources are
located alongside rivers such as the Kura and its tributaries, the Araz, streams
terminating at the Caspian Sea, and irrigation canals in Azerbaijan also has
well developed small hydropower generation sector (comprising the Sheki, Mughan,
Zeykhur, Gusar, Nyugedi, Chinarly, Balakan, Guba and Zurnabad power plants) with
the presence of independent power producers as well as autoproducers generating
power for consumption in their own facilities Small-scale hydro-power generation
is still being added such as the  MW Balakan facility in Box : Yeni Yashma Wind
Park The Yeni Yashma Wind Park is the first project of its kind demonstrating
Azerbaijan’ potential in this renewable energy technology The Yeni Yashma park
was constructed with 20 Fuhrlander FL  500 wind power turbines with an installed
capacity of 50 MW The wind power park is located in the Khizi region, in the
Yeni Yashma settlement north of Baku Seasonal conditions affect hydropower
generation, which has fluctuated from  peak of  GWh in 2016 to  low of  GWh in
While hydropower is subject to seasonal fluctuations, however, its substantial
share in the country’ electricity system offers  strong basis for supporting the
integration of future solar and wind power generation capacity Ownership of the
project was transferred from SAARES to Azerishiq OJSC, which was entrusted with
responsibilities related to the commissioning of the project, and it began
operating in October As of November 2018, Yeni Yashma is the largest operating
wind park in the south Caucasus Wind energy Azerbaijan has excellent wind
resources, especially in coastal areas along the Caspian Sea (Figure ) According
to SAARES analysis, the potential for wind is estimated at  000 MW Figure : Wind
speeds at 100-meter hub height (in /) Source: IRENA (-) Disclaimer: Boundaries
and names shown on this map do not imply any official endorsement or acceptance
by IRENA 18 Solar energy           Azerbaijan has an estimated solar energy
potential of 23 040 MW The annual number of sunshine hours varies between  400
and  Global horizontal irradiation (GHI) is in the range of  387 to  534 kWh/m²
for most of the territory The direct normal irradiation ranges from  095 to  534
kWh/m² with most of the territory under  387 kWh/m² :             There are four
solar PV installations with an installed capacity of more than  MW Nakhchivan
Solar Power Plant has  capacity of 22 MW Additionally, plans call for the
construction of five solar power stations at  MW capacity each and one solar
power station of  MW As of the end of 2017, MW of solar PV was installed across
the country, including at social establishments and on the roofs of various
public buildings An example of such projects is the Sport Centre in Masally,
which has  PV installation of 70 kWp The system is owned by Azalternativenerji –
public company – and all related administrative and financial procedures have
been developed within SAARES Table 11 lists some additional examples Figure :
Annual gobal horizontal solar irradiation (GHI in kWh/m2) Source: IRENA (-)
Disclaimer: Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply any official
endorsement or acceptance by IRENA 19 Table 11: List of public buildings with
small PV systems installed LOCATION CAPACITY OF PV SYSTEM STATUS  Five schools
and two medical facilities in Baku city 130 kW Completed  Boarding school, the
Turkan settlement 132 kW Completed Six schools and six kindergartens in
settlements for internally displaced persons in Bilasuvar   100 kW Completed
Sports centres in the Boradigah settlement of Masally region 70 kW Completed
Sports complex in the Khojavend settlement of the Beylagan region 70 kW
Completed  Sports centre in the Goytapa settlement of Jalilabad region 100 kW
Planned Sports centres in the villages of Bash Goynuk, Sheki region, and Zarat,
Siyazan region  100 kW each Planned  SOS children' village in Khatai district of
Baku city 82 kW Completed  Social building, Sabirabad city 18 kW Completed
Source: SAARES (2016a) Bioenergy Box : Baku Waste-to-Energy Plant Azerbaijan has
an estimated technical potential of 380 MW for biomass and waste-to-energy
Currently, bioenergy is mostly utilised in the form of traditional biomass,
largely for heating and cooking in remote areas In addition, there is
significant potential for generating energy from household biodegradable waste,
and the Baku Waste-to-Energy Plant (Box ) demonstrates ongoing government
efforts to realise this potential The construction of this plant is based on the
framework of “The Comprehensive Action Plan about the improvement of ecological
situation in the Republic of Azerbaijan for the years 2006– 2010” It was
constructed based on  design– build–operate arrangement with CNIM ,  French
industrial engineering contractor and equipment manufacturer The total cost of
design–build works for the plant is estimated at EUR 346 million The plant
design is based on 20 - year operation and 500 000 tonnes of municipal waste per
year The plant is located in the Balakhani settlement and features two
incineration lines, each with  capacity of 250 000 tonnes and  power generation
capacity of GWh per year Plant construction was enabled by  Decree of the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan in 2008, which allocated responsibility
for the collection and transportation of any solid household waste, regardless
of its origin of generation, to Baku municipality It was inaugurated in 2012 and
complies with local and European environmental protection standards 20
Renewable energy related laws under preparation  Economics of renewable energy
The state budget is the main financing source for the development of renewable
energy in Azerbaijan According to SAARES, between 2005 and 2015, AZN million was
invested in selected energy sources, including solar PV and heat pumps, wind,
small hydro, biomass and waste (see Figure ), of which AZN 820 million – or 83%
– were from public investments In accordance with Presidential Decree No 1209 of
29 May 2019 “On the acceleration of the reforms in the energy sector of the
Republic of Azerbaijan”, the development of the draft law on “Use of renewable
energy sources in power generation” was initiated The draft law defines the main
principles of state policy relating to renewable energy power generation It has
been developed with the support of the Norwegian company DNV GL The draft law
provides for additional concessions on tax and duties, feed-in-tariffs, off-
taker obligations and other support mechanisms, such as for foreign direct
investment and scientific research The current investment climate is not
favourable to energy efficiency and renewable energy lending because of high
interest rates The interest rate of the Central Bank of Azerbaijan spiked in
2016 from below % at the beginning of the year to more than 14% by the end of
the same year In October 2018, the Central Bank lowered the upper limit of its
interest rate cap to 75% • The draft law on “Efficient use of energy resources
and energy efficiency” was prepared with technical assistance from the Energy
Charter Secretariat, under the EU4Energy4 programme and was submitted to the
Ministry of Energy in The draft law has subsequently been presented to the
Cabinet of Ministers for review after co-ordination with related state agencies
number of international organisations are active in Azerbaijan, given its
importance to regional and global energy markets Partners actively pursuing
projects in the country include the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the
International Energy Charter, the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), the European Union (EU) and the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID) However, development partners have so far
contributed to the renewable energy sector mostly through technical assistance,
with limited direct investments in renewable energy projects Also with
assistance from the EU, drafting of  standard PPA for renewable energy was
initiated in late Figure : Overview of renewable energy investments (million
AZN), 2005–2015 Biomass and waste Biomass and waste Hydropower Hydropower Wind
Wind PV and heat pumps PV and heat pumps Source: SAARES (2016b)  See:  21  Human
and institutional capacity Box : Gobustan Experimental Polygon and Training
Centre SAARES is taking steps to create the basis for skills and expertise
development As part of these efforts, students of several higher education
institutions in Azerbaijan – such as the Azerbaijan State University of Oil and
Industry, and the Azerbaijan State University of Architecture and Construction –
have the opportunity to conduct field studies at Azalternativenergy LLC , the
Gobustan Experimental Polygon and Training Centre (see Box ) and associated
solar installations The Gobustan Experimental Polygon and Training Centre
(GELTC) owns and operates the first hybrid-type renewable energy power plant
built in Azerbaijan that includes wind, solar and biogas The facility has three
wind turbines (each  MW),   MW solar power plant and   MW biogas power plant The
complex integrates  regulation and control facility,  water reservoir,  testing
area (polygon),  laboratory and  training centre as  showcase and capability-
building hub for renewable energy in Azerbaijan  renewable energy engineering
training and research centre has been created within the Baku Higher Oil School
The main purpose of this centre is to develop recommendations for the efficient
use of renewable energy, train qualified renewable energy specialists and
participate in the dissemination of knowledge in this field The complex was
built in 2011 to contribute to the energy supply for Gobustan city (Phase ) and
the wider Gobustan region (Phase ) While Phase  has been commissioned and is in
operation, additional power generation capacities will be required for Phase
Hence, the Gobustan facility combines  pilot and showcase facility with training
and offers practical experience in the development and operation of renewable
energy technologies  Azalternativeenergy LLC was established in It is
subordinate to SAARES and operates according to its Charter The present business
of Azalternativeenergy LLC includes the design, engineering, construction and
management of renewable energy power stations, as well as the generation,
distribution, purchase and sale of the energy from renewable energy sources
(solar, wind, biomass, thermal water, water flow, waste and other renewable
sources) 22           :      /              23 Photograph: Shutterstock 24  KEY
CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS This section presents  set of short- to medium-
term recommendations to address key challenges and support the development of
the renewable energy market in Azerbaijan These recommended actions focus on
providing  solid basis for creating  more conducive investment environment for
renewable energy At the same time, the government is already making progress
towards the realisation of these actions  Legal and regulatory framework The
existing legal and regulatory framework for energy in Azerbaijan is covered by
several laws on energy, electricity, heating and the use of energy resources
that also include specific provisions for the use of renewable energy There are
several secondary legislations regulating specific aspects of electricity
generation from renewable energy, such as investment protection, environmental
protection and taxation However, the country does not have  dedicated,
comprehensive law governing the various aspects of renewable energy development
This creates challenges for market entrants when navigating legal and regulatory
requirements, resulting in delays in the development of new projects and
increased perception of risk among investors  complex and ambiguous permitting
procedure further hinders the development of renewable energy Action : Adopt
renewable energy law  dedicated law could provide overall direction to the
renewable energy sector in Azerbaijan and significantly contribute to the
development of  local market for renewables Such  law would serve as an
important reference point for renewable energy market players by providing
clear and reliable long-term perspective The law should ideally cover all key
elements of  sound legal and regulatory framework for renewable energy, starting
with the definition and types of sources and technologies based on the existing
technical potential in Azerbaijan It could also outline elements related to
government support mechanisms and principles of grid management relating to
renewable energy Furthermore, the law could provide the grounds to specify and
simplify procedures for private sector investments, especially with respect to
permitting Effective enforcement of  renewable energy law requires an
appropriate institutional framework and administrative capacity, such as an
independent regulator with responsibility for the oversight of contract
enforcement Thus, the law could also allocate roles and responsibilities to
relevant government entities Current status: In accordance with Presidential
Decree No 1209 of 29 May 2019, “On the acceleration of the reforms in the energy
sector of the Republic of Azerbaijan”, the development of the draft law on “Use
of renewable energy sources in power generation” has been initiated At the time
of publication for this report, the draft law had reached the approval phase 25
Action : Streamlining the permitting procedure for renewable energy Therefore,
the methodology for setting energy (and renewable energy) tariffs in Azerbaijan,
both power and non-power, has been suboptimal for supporting renewable energy
market development Permitting requirements and procedures could be streamlined
under  renewable energy law to provide  clear source of reference, as well as
future direction should any amendments be applied The overarching principles for
the design of permitting procedures are simplicity, transparency and the
flexibility to adapt to regulatory and market changes The current methodology,
which is applied to all government services, requires economic justification for
the expenses recovered; however, renewable energy requires  differentiated
approach to address the nascent nature of the sector in Azerbaijan and the
inherent issue of high upfront investment and lower operational costs One
instrument that could serve as an effective price discovery mechanism is
auction; however, this would need to be designed in  way that attracts investors
and incites competition while also ensuring that projects are delivered As
starting point, land plots for renewable energy project development could be
allocated in zones with accessible connectivity to basic infrastructure, such as
the electricity grid, water and roads Furthermore, the establishment of  ‘one-
stop-shop’ system for renewable energy projects could be considered to simplify
and streamline the permitting process and facilitate better co-ordination of
internal administrative processes and permitting requirements Such  system
should have the necessary decision-making powers to facilitate the different
steps of the process that will allow the acquisition of permits Action : Enhance
the procurement of renewable energy There is  need to identify support
mechanisms that would facilitate the transition towards  functioning renewable
energy market Feed-in tariffs are critical to support the initial development of
national renewable energy market However, as the market matures further, the use
of auctions could offer the possibility of procuring renewable energy at lower
prices through market-based price discovery There are  number of prerequisites
for this approach to be applied, including stable policy and regulatory
frameworks and  high degree of competition in the market Publishing procedures
for obtaining permits online, with information on the steps required – including
the necessary documentation, expected timelines and the responsible government
institutions – would provide more transparency to developers and investors
Current Status: Renewable energy project developers require permission for power
plant construction, land use and power generation, in accordance with
internationally accepted standards  holistic approach to the design of key
support mechanisms for renewable energy, encompassing both power and non-power
sectors, would be beneficial for the development of renewables in Azerbaijan
IRENA’ report, Renewable energy auctions:  guide to design, provides
comprehensive overview of design options for countries considering auctions
(IRENA 2015b)  Policy support mechanisms Low energy tariffs, especially due to
fossil fuel subsidies, constitute one of the main barriers to the development of
renewable energy in Azerbaijan Pricing fossil fuels below international market
prices hinders the deployment of renewable energy in power generation as well as
in end-use sectors such as heating, cooling and transport Renewable energy
tariffs in Azerbaijan currently range between 94 and 35 US cents Combined with
the overall complexity of current policy frameworks, these tariff levels do not
justify favourable decisions on project development from domestic or
international investors is working Current Status: Azerbaijan towards conducting
renewable energy auctions In this regard, the Ministry of Energy is undertaking
steps, including on-the-ground measurements, to define and prioritise zones with
high renewable energy resource intensity Eight zones (five wind and three solar)
with total capacity of 750 MW have been already identified Preliminary
assessments on ownership and designation of lands, potential environmental
impacts, and existing infrastructure have been conducted in these areas The
project “Assistance in designing and implementing renewable energy auctions in
Azerbaijan”, is being implemented with the support of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) Tariff regulations are currently not
adapted to reflect the specific case of renewable energy, which has  different
cost structure in terms of high initial capital expenditures (CAPEX) and
relatively low operating expenditures (OPEX) 26  Renewable energy financing
Given the lack of interest from local banks in financing renewable energy
projects, the government of Azerbaijan could also consider creating  risk
mitigation facility to encourage investment Such  facility could provide
guarantees for viable projects and collaborate with local banks to help build
their knowledge and capacity on renewable energy project financing Underlying
market barriers and perceived high risks constrain the financing of renewable
energy projects in Azerbaijan Dedicated credit lines for energy efficiency and
renewable energy investment are limited and market absorption is low Potential
projects are hampered by the lack of primary and secondary legislation as well
as the lack of awareness concerning the benefits of renewable energy Another
option could be the provision of aggregated support for smaller projects to help
the renewable energy market to take-off Aggregating smaller projects allows for
the streamlining of the due diligence process and access to larger pools of
investment for local projects For more insights, see IRENA’ report, Unlocking
renewable energy nvestment: The role of risk mitigation and structured finance
(IRENA 2016b) While measures have been recently implemented to align its banking
sector regulations with international norms, renewable energy projects continue
to face challenges in terms of access to capital in Azerbaijan due to lack of
liquidity in the local banking system and high interest rates – which can be as
high as 30% per annum on local currency Collateral requirements from local banks
are demanding and make local financing very costly compared to more developed
renewable energy markets Current status: The draft law on “Use of renewable
energy sources in power generation” includes the application of guaranteed
tariffs, active consumer support and other promotional mechanisms Currently, in
addition to the existing investment promotion mechanism, the Ministry of Energy
has submitted proposals to the government regarding additional concessions on
tax and customs Another critical element in attracting private investors
increased bankability of into the sector through renewable energy projects is
the power purchase agreement (PPA), which is an important contract that governs
the sale and purchase of power and provides long-term clarity on roles,
responsibilities, costs, revenues and associated risks However, Azerbaijan does
not have  standard PPA for renewable energy, which increases the perceived risk
among renewable energy developers and investors Action : Adopt  standard power
purchasing agreement (PPA) Drafting and publishing  standard PPA for renewable
projects will help to reduce perceived risk within the private sector and
improve transparency and predictability in Azerbaijan’ renewable energy market
Robust PPAs can improve the economics of renewable energy projects, while
suboptimal PPAs, on the other hand, may increase the costs of procurement Action
: Establish  dedicated financing mechanism to address off-taker risk Azerbaijan
could benefit from creating facilitation mechanisms for the financing of
renewable energy projects that will enable development of the renewable energy
market, especially in its initial phases Dedicated financing facilities for
renewable energy projects could alleviate some of the difficulties and enhance
the country’ attractiveness for international and local project developers and
investors While the inherent features of PPAs vary depending on the specific
country, there are some standard elements that  robust PPA can include to
provide assurances to developers and investors, including the following: • Price
in currency value per kWh of electricity produced, with  price adjustment
mechanism to account for inflation and currency risk With  view to de-risking
renewable energy projects,  dedicated financing mechanism overseen by  credit
worthy institution could facilitate access to cheaper capital One option is to
create  dedicated fund to support renewable energy projects, which could be
capitalised through  levy on conventional energy sources and disbursed through
robust off-taker arrangement • Tenure, based on number of years (preferably in
the range of 20 years) • Supply commitment, which can depend on the type of
technology and may vary from annual to daily, improving predictability for both
parties • Additional elements such as coverage of policy/ regulatory risks,
dispute settlement and ownership provisions will further increase transparency
and increase the attractiveness of Azerbaijan to developers and investors   27
long-term energy scenarios The development of could help address the issue of
integrating variable renewables into the power grid in the medium - to long-
term, thereby allaying the technical concerns of generators, grid operators and
distributors More insights are included in IRENA’ report, Planning for the
renewable future: Long-term modelling and tools to expand variable renewable
power in emerging economies (IRENA 2017) For more details on key clauses in
PPAs, refer to the IRENA Project Navigator In addition, IRENA, jointly with the
Terrawatt Initiative (TWI), launched the Open Solar Contracts initiative to
provide standardised, open- source legal documentation solutions to simplify and
streamline contractual processes and facilitate solar power project development
Current status: The Ministry of Energy, in collaboration with an international
consulting firm, has developed  draft standard PPA that considers best practices
and reflects close consultation with stakeholders Negotiations with private
sector companies are underway to start implementing pilot projects through the
PPA Current status: As part of national power sector planning, the country has
been carrying out assessments to account for energy demand growth, the supply
network, scheduling and dispatch In line with renewable energy development,
efforts are underway to identify zones with high potential and assess the
infrastructure needed to ensure smooth integration into the power system  Long-
term energy planning Azerbaijan has  framework in place for planning its long-
term overall energy sector development; however, existing planning processes
could be updated to reflect the needs of the nascent renewable energy sector
Energy planning covers several aspects, often starting with the development of
national vision and long-term targets for the energy sector within  wider
regional and global context Integrating long- term planning with Azerbaijan’
overall energy sector strategy could stimulate the country’ renewable energy
market development and improve its attractiveness to investors Action : Adopt
long-term renewable energy target While Azerbaijan has already approved
renewable energy target for 2020,  robust target for the 2030 horizon and
possibly beyond could offer more long- term clarity for the private sector and
investors as well as encourage the development of new projects Targets enhance
the transparency of the policy-making process by providing  common information
base to all stakeholders, thereby fostering public support Action : Develop
long-term energy scenarios When backed by supportive policy and investment
frameworks, targets can be instrumental in indicating the envisioned trajectory
of market growth, thereby helping to anchor medium and long-term expectations By
giving  sense of trajectory and growth, they can also contribute to lowering
deployment costs and establishing  supply chain utilising local industry (see
IRENA’ report, Renewable energy target setting, 2015a) To identify the optimal
energy mix and inform policy decisions accordingly,  detailed long-term planning
exercise could be undertaken for energy demand in the electricity, industry,
residential, commercial, agriculture and transport sectors In order to fully
assess the potential for electrification, energy efficiency and renewable energy
penetration, Azerbaijan’ energy planning requires  deeper focus on non-power
sectors, such as heating and cooling, and transport Policies supporting
renewable energy development adopted by countries around the world are mostly
focused on the power sector, with relatively few countries providing support for
renewables in end-use sectors To realise the potential of renewables across
sectors, targets need to be set across heating, cooling, transport and power
Such analyses will assess the costs and benefits of different renewable energy
technologies (solar, wind, bioenergy, etc), including their potential for
penetration and optimal scale of deployment To this end, an assessment of
technical and economic renewable energy potential by technology is required to
outline future scenarios with increased shares of renewable energy There is also
need to comprehensively assess current energy infrastructure, focusing on
aspects such as the country’ power grid and the investments needed for grid
upgrades Current status: Beyond the 420 MW target for 2020, the government is
considering  longer-term target to increase the share of renewable energy in
power generation up to 30% by To achieve these ambitious targets for 2020 and
2030, the implementation of auctions has been identified as the main priority 28
Grid regulation for renewable energy The process of developing  national
variable renewable energy grid code includes number of elements, such as
preparation of technical studies, data collection and assessment of country-
specific aspects, as elaborated in IRENA’ report, Scaling-up variable renewable
power: The role of grid codes (IRENA 2016a) Grid codes set the rules and
technical requirements for power system and energy market operation They serve
dual policy goals: on one hand, they provide assurances of reliability, quality
and security of supply; while on the other, they create technical conditions for
the gradual growth of variable renewable energy Azerbaijan faces challenges
related to technical regulation for the grid connection of renewable power
generation units There is currently no applicable grid code in place which
defines the technical requirements for the integration of renewable energy and
provides  reference point for renewable power generators Current status: The
Ministry of Energy, with the support of EBRD and the involvement of  consulting
firm, has implemented  project, “Strengthening the grid to support renewable
energy projects in Azerbaijan”, to identify potential of renewable energy
resources and opportunities for integrating them into the grid           From
the perspective of the grid operator in Azerbaijan, the variable nature of some
renewable energy resources – such as wind and solar PV – creates  challenge for
their integration into the grid, thereby slowing down the development of
renewable energy Rules for acquiring grid connections, grid codes, dispatch
priorities and curtailment compensation are some of the critical issues that may
affect early projects in the development of  national renewable energy programme
:             Action : Develop and implement  grid connection code with
standards for variable renewable energy integration The Government of Azerbaijan
could provide  mandate to relevant organisations to develop  grid connection
code for VRE in consultation with all relevant actors The function of  grid
connection code including variable renewable energy is to provide technical
requirements for wind and PV plants when connecting to  country’ electricity
grid This helps in ensuring the quality and standardisation of equipment, and
the fair treatment of generators and operators concerning grid connection, while
also maintaining system stability and reliability The establishment of  country-
wide grid code could improve overall grid management, creating positive effects
on the development of renewable energy by reducing the perceived technical risks
for investors and developers This may also facilitate regional integration and
enhance electricity exports, which is relevant for Azerbaijan, given its
overcapacity of electricity generation 29  Technical knowledge and raising
awareness Action : Raise awareness and develop  capacity–building strategy
initial inroads While Azerbaijan has made into developing local capabilities in
renewable energy, the scale of planned renewable energy development (in line
with the 2020 target and beyond) requires  broad and deep understanding of the
full life cycle of renewable energy projects and the associated knowledge and
skill requirements In Azerbaijan, there is  limited existing skill base in the
areas of renewable energy policy making, technologies, and technical and project
development Moreover, the wider public is not fully aware of the range of
benefits offered by renewable energy The government could plan  long-term
programme of activities to increase general awareness and capacity on renewable
energy, targeting state institutions, local enterprises and citizens Such
programme could also integrate certifications in training curricula, with  focus
on building local operation and maintenance skills to enhance employment
opportunities Government institutions could benefit from specialised capacity
building on renewable energy policy and regulation, and evaluation techniques
for renewable energy projects For the private sector, courses could be offered
explaining opportunities for setting up renewable energy enterprises, including
information on available government support schemes and partners Additionally,
certification and training on various renewable energy applications and related
technologies for both power and non-power uses could be useful Given the targets
set by the government for renewable energy uptake, substantive efforts are
needed to build capacity and develop skills among employees of the central
government and local institutions ( financial entities) Raising awareness of
policy and regulatory fundamentals for renewable energy and its benefits in
terms of economic and social development in Azerbaijan is an important element
in scaling up renewables Greater awareness of the benefits of renewable energy
and how these apply to the overall economic situation in Azerbaijan could be
helpful among the wider public An awareness campaign could be organised through
series of information activities, especially in regions with high potential for
renewable energy development In addition, various other formats could be
designed to raise awareness, such as campaigns on social media, competitions and
challenges for students in schools, higher institutes of learning and
universities, as well as local events in selected towns and cities Private
sector stakeholders interested in entering the renewable energy market could
benefit from capacity building relating to the latest technology developments
and future trends, as well as business models and case studies from abroad
Azerbaijan’ existing training facilities, such as the Gobustan Experimental
Polygon and Training Centre, could be leveraged for this purpose Institutes of
higher learning may also be encouraged to offer courses on topics related to
renewable energy Current status: The Ministry of Energy and the SAARES implement
activities on an annual basis to raise public awareness about the use of
renewable energy and the production of carbon-free electricity Furthermore, the
Ministry of Energy is strengthening its co-operation on renewables with
international private companies and partners to promote investments The growing
number of signed memoranda of understanding (MoUs) between the Ministry of
Energy and foreign partners is  clear indication of the strong interest in
developing renewables in Azerbaijan Throughout 2018 and 2019,  series of
consultative events was held on the theme “Public-private partnership in the
development of renewable energy legislation”, with the objective of obtaining
feedback from stakeholders, including international companies, financial
institutions and local stakeholders, on the proposed legislation process Efforts
are needed to build capacity and develop skills among government employees 30
REFERENCES IEA (International Energy Agency) (2017), “World Energy Outlook”,
Energy Subsidies Database, IEA, Paris,  weo/energysubsidies/ (accessed  October
2019) MoE (Ministry of Energy) (2019a), “List of Power Plants of Azerbaijan’
power system and IPPs”, Ministry of Energy, Baku,  content&view=article&id=313
(accessed  October 2019) IEA (2015), “IEA policies beyond IEA countries: Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia”, IEA, Paris,
countries/kazakhstan/energy-policies-beyond-iea-countries- eastern-europe-
caucasus-and-central-asia-9789264211513-en htm MoE (2019b), “Long-Term Capacity
Expansion Planning with  High Share of Renewables in Azerbaijan Republic”,
presented by Nurangiz Farajullayeva, Ministry of Energy, at the IRENA Central
Asia Workshop on Long-Term Capacity Expansion Planning with  High Share of
Renewables, 14 March 2019, MoE, Nur-Sultan,  long-term-capacity-expansion-
planning-with--high-share- of-renewables INOGATE Technical Secretariat (2016),
“Preparation of  concept note and  roadmap for the setup of an independent
energy regulator, towards the development of the country’ energy market”,
INOGATE final report, MoE, (2015, 2016, 2017), Annual Reports, Ministry of
Energy, Baku,  (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), “Global energy
transformation:  roadmap to 2050”, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  energy-transformation--
roadmap-to-2050-2019Edition OPEC (Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries) (2018), “Annual Statistical Bulletin of the Organisation of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries”, 53rd edition, OPEC, Vienna,  IRENA (2017),
“Planning for the renewable future: Long-term modelling and tools to expand
variable renewable power in emerging economies” , IRENA, Abu Dhabi, www irena
org/publications/Jan/Planning-for-the-renewable- future-Long-term-modelling-and-
tools-to-expand-variable- renewable-power SAARES (State Agency on Alternative
and Renewable Energy Sources) (2016a), “The use of alternative and renewable
energy sources”, SAARES, Baku,  merged-69584552?ref= IRENA (2016a), “Scaling up
variable renewable power: The role of grid codes”, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/IRENA_Grid_ Codes_2016pdf SAARES (2016b),
“Opportunities and challenges for the development of the renewable energy in
Azerbaijan”, presented by Jamil Malikov, SAARES, at the Seventh International
Forum on Energy for Sustainable Development, 20 October 2016, SAARES, Baku,
pp/gere/gere3_BakuOct2016/20_IRENA_CIS/Malikovpdf IRENA (2016b), “Unlocking
renewable energy investment: The role of risk mitigation and structured
finance”, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
IRENA_Risk_Mitigation_and_Structured_Finance_2016pdf State Statistical Committee
(2018), “Energy of Azerbaijan: Statistical Yearbook”, State Statistical
Committee, Baku,  energy-zip (accessed 07 October 2019) IRENA (2015a),
“Renewable energy target setting”, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  Energy-Target-Setting
Tariff Council (2016), Resolution N17, 28 November 2016, Tariff Council, Baku
(accessed 07 October 2019) IRENA (2015b), “Renewable energy auctions:  guide to
design”, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,  Jun/Renewable-Energy-Auctions--Guide-to-Design World
Bank (), “World Development Indicators”, World Bank, Washington, DC,
org/data/reportsaspx?source=world-development- indicators&Type=TABLE&preview=on#
(accessed 07 October 2019) IRENA (-), “Global Atlas for Renewable Energy”, DTU
Global Wind Dataset  km onshore wind speed at 100 metres height, IRENA, Abu
Dhabi IRENA (-), “Global Atlas for Renewable Energy”, ESMAP, World Bank 1km
Global Horizontal Irradiation, IRENA, Abu Dhabi 31 Annex : Overview of entities
in the energy sector INSTITUTIONS AT GOVERNMENT LEVEL The Ministry is
responsible for the design and implementation of state policy and regulation in
the energy sector, mainly concerning natural gas production, transportation,
processing, distribution and supply; electricity generation, transmission,
distribution and supply; and energy saving and energy efficiency Moreover, the
Ministry controls relevant state-owned enterprises Ministry of Energy This is
the implementing body for energy prices, service fees and collections across all
regulated entities in the economy The Council is chaired by the Ministry of
Economic Development and has 12 members Tariff Council SAARES was established
following  Presidential Decree on July 16, 2009, and was subsequently tasked
with driving the development of the country’ renewable energy resources and
related projects The status of the Agency was altered by  Presidential Decree No
464 of 14 January State Agency on Alternative and Renewable Energy Sources
(SAARES) This recently established Agency (December 2017) is the Public Legal
Entity under the Ministry of Energy in charge of bringing utility services in
line with the requirements of the market economy; achieving sustainable
development by further improving control mechanisms; maintaining transparency
and flexibility in energy supply; and ensuring accessibility of these services
for entrepreneurs Energy Regulatory Agency STATE BODIES AND INSTITUTIONS
Electricity generation and transmission Azerenerji JSC Electricity distribution
and supply Azerishiq JSC District heating Azeristiliktejhizat JSC SOCAR is
involved in all aspects of the petroleum industry associated with prospecting,
exploration and development of oil and gas fields; preparation for refinery and
transportation of oil and gas condensate; and oil-chemistry products in onshore
and offshore areas of the Republic, as well as the sale of their derivatives in
domestic and foreign markets SOCAR is able to meet the demand of the Republic
for oil and oil-chemistry products and exports to international markets State
Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) Natural gas extraction, processing,
transmission, distribution and supply Azerigas Electricity generation,
transmission, supply and distribution in the territory of the Nakhchivan
Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan (regional energy exchanging with Turkey and
Iran) State Energy Agency of the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic of Azerbaijan
Under the structure of the State Agency on Alternative and Renewable Energy
Sources, this 100%-state-owned company was established to implement renewable
energy projects; generate, transmit and distribute electricity from alternative
and renewable energy; and provide construction and engineering services to both
the government and the private sector Azalternativenergy LLC PRIVATE ENERGY
COMPANIES Electricity generation and sale Private small hydropower stations
Electricity generation and sale Private wind power stations Electricity
generation from municipal waste Tamiz Shahar JSC 32 Annex : Technical assistance
projects in the renewable energy sector PROJECT FOCUS DONOR BENEFICIARY European
Commission, EU4ENERGY, Energy Charter Secretariat Support for the development of
the Long-Term Energy Strategy of Azerbaijan (inception phase) Ministry of Energy
Support for developing  draft law on the electricity market compliant with the
EU Third Energy Package Ministry of Energy USAID Development of the legal and
regulatory framework for the expansion of the renewable energy sector Ministry
of Energy European Commission Development of the legal and regulatory framework
for the expansion of the renewable energy sector Ministry of Energy EBRD Support
for the implementation of renewable energy auctions in Azerbaijan Ministry of
Energy EBRD Regional TA project on improving energy statistics and policy
developments in the countries of Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia
State Statistical Committee, Ministry of Energy European Commission, IEA
“Azerbaijan: Preparing  Power Sector Financial Recovery Plan” TA project
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Finance ADB Support for the establishment of an
independent energy regulator governing internal energy (electricity and gas)
markets and preparation of the draft law “On Independent Energy Regulator”
Ministry of Energy, Energy Regulatory Agency EBRD Grid code development Ministry
of Energy ADB 33 34      RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
:         Novermber 2019 Please adjust the spine base on the   thickness of the
inside pages