Co-funded by the European Union Azerbaijan 2021 Energy Policy Review Co-funded
by the European Union Azerbaijan 2021 Energy Policy Review INTERNATIONAL ENERGY
AGENCY The IEA examines the full spectrum of energy issues including oil, gas
and coal supply and demand, renewable energy technologies, electricity markets,
energy efficiency, access to energy, demand side management and much more
Through its work, the IEA advocates policies that will enhance the reliability,
affordability and sustainability of energy in its 30 member countries,
association countries and beyond IEA member countries: IEA association
countries: Australia Austria Belgium Canada Czech Republic Denmark Estonia
Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Japan Korea Luxembourg
Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovak Republic Spain
Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom United States Brazil China India
Indonesia Morocco Singapore South Africa Thailand The European Commission also
participates in the work of the IEA Please note that this publication is subject
to specific restrictions that limit its use and distribution The terms and
conditions are available online at  Source: IEA All rights reserved
International Energy Agency Website:          Foreword The International Energy
Agency (IEA) has been conducting in-depth peer reviews of the energy policies of
its member countries – and of other countries – since 1976, and it recently
modernised these reviews to focus on some of the countries’ key energy
transition and security challenges Azerbaijan is one of the focus countries of
the EU4Energy programme, which is carried out by the IEA and the European Union
along with the Energy Community Secretariat and the Energy Charter Secretariat
The other EU4Energy focus countries are Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan The
programme is designed to support the goals and aspirations of the 11 focus
countries to implement sustainable energy policies and foster co-operative
energy sector development at the regional level As part of this programme, the
IEA conducts in-depth reviews of each focus country Azerbaijan’ oil and gas
production continues to support the country’ economy and energy supply and
provide most of its exports and government revenue However, many major oil and
gas importing countries have recently pledged to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
to net zero by mid-century, adding an extra element of uncertainty to the long-
term economic outlook for countries like Azerbaijan that are heavily dependent
on hydrocarbon exports To help Azerbaijan respond to its energy sector
challenges, this report proposes several ways it can make both its energy supply
and consumption more efficient and diverse The review recommends that Azerbaijan
transition gradually from its current system – which is government-owned and
-operated, vertically integrated, and subsidised – to competitive markets with
significant private sector participation and cost-covering energy prices The
withdrawal of subsidies should, however, be accompanied by support measures for
the country’ economically vulnerable citizens Such  transition would attract new
market entrants and new investments, including to develop Azerbaijan’
significant solar and wind energy resources These measures would also help limit
greenhouse gas emissions This in-depth review aims to guide Azerbaijan in its
energy sector reforms and help it achieve its energy policy goals of making the
most of its abundant resources and providing affordable, secure and clean energy
to its population                 ENERGY INSIGHTS Foreword   Executive summary
11 Scaling down the long-term importance of oil and gas 11  path to  more
efficient, dynamic and sustainable energy system 12 Gas and electricity market
reform 13 Securing larger electricity supplies 15 Using energy more efficiently
15 Energy research, development and innovation merit additional effort 16
Further energy data improvements 17 Key recommendations 17  General energy
policy 19 Country overview 19 Energy supply and demand 21 Energy production and
domestic supply 22 Energy consumption 23 Energy sector governance 25 Key
policies and reform efforts 27 Energy statistics 30 Assessment 31
Recommendations 33 ENERGY SECURITY  Oil and natural gas 35 Overview 35 Supply 36
Exploration and production 39 Trade 44  TABLE OF CONTENTS State oil and gas
revenue 51 Demand 52 Regulation 54 Domestic operations and infrastructure 57
Security of supply 61 Assessment 61 Recommendations 65  Electricity69 Overview
69 Supply and demand 69 Electricity sector structure and reform 75 Networks 78
Prices and tariffs 80 Security of supply 82 Assessment 84 Recommendations 88
District heating 91 Overview 91 Supply and demand 91 Regulation and prices 92
Modernising DH infrastructure 94 Assessment 95 Recommendations 97 ENERGY SYSTEM
TRANSFORMATION  Energy and climate change 99 Overview 99 CO2 emissions from fuel
combustion  100 Institutions  103  Table of Contents:  Energy efficiency: Page:
111  Renewable energy : Page: 129  Energy research, development and
demonstration: Page: 145 TABLE OF CONTENTS ANNEX : International Energy Agency
Shared Goals  158 ANNEX : Acronyms, abbreviations and units of measure  160 LIST
OF FIGURES, TABLES AND BOXES Figures Map of Azerbaijan 20 Energy production,
supply and consumption by fuel and sector, 2019 21 Primary energy production by
source,  22 Total energy supply by source,  22 Breakdown of TES by source in
selected countries, 2018 23 Total final consumption by sector,  24 Total final
consumption by source and sector, 2019 24 Crude oil and NGL production,  42
Figure  Natural gas production,  43 Figure  Figure  Crude oil and condensate
exports by country,  45 Figure  Oil product net trade by country,  46 Figure
Oil product net trade by category,  46 Azerbaijan’ oil and gas infrastructure 50
Figure  Figure  Oil supply by sector,  52 Natural gas supply by sector,  53
Figure  Natural gas prices for households in selected countries, 2019 56 Figure
Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Azerbaijan’ electricity supply and consumption,
70 Breakdown of electricity generation by source, 2019 71 Electricity generation
by source,  71 Breakdown of electricity generation by source in selected
countries,  2019 72 Azerbaijan’ electricity trade by country,  74 Electricity
consumption by sector,  Azerbaijan’ monthly electricity generation, January
2015-January 2020 75 Electricity sector structure 76 Residential electricity
prices in Azerbaijan and selected countries, 2019 82 Figure  Figure  Figure
Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  District heat generation by source,  92 District
heat consumption by sector,  92 Figure  Greenhouse gas emissions by sector,
100 CO2 emissions from fuel combustion by sector,   100 Figure  Figure
emissions and main drivers,   101 Energy-related CO intensity in Azerbaijan and
selected countries, 2019  102 Figure  CO intensity in Azerbaijan and selected
countries,   102 Figure  CO  Figure  CO intensity of power and heat generation
in Azerbaijan and   selected countries,   103   Figure  Figure  Energy
consumption and its drivers,   112 Final energy consumption by sector,   112
TABLE OF CONTENTS Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  Figure  TFC
per capita in Azerbaijan and selected countries, 2018*  113 TFC in the
residential sector by source,   114 TFC in transport by source,   115 TFC in
industry by source,   115 TFC by manufacturing industry subsector, 2019  116
Decomposition of energy consumption in manufacturing,   117 TFC in the primary
sector and services by source,   117                Figure  Figure  Figure
Figure  Renewable energy shares in Azerbaijan’ energy system,   130 Renewable
energy in Azerbaijan’ TES,   130 Bioenergy supply by source and use by sector,
2019  131 Renewable energy share of TES in Azerbaijan and selected countries,
2018  131 Renewable energy in Azerbaijan’ electricity generation,   132
Renewable energy in electricity generation in Azerbaijan and  selected
countries, 2018  132 Phases of variable renewable energy integration and their
key  challenges  133 Solar energy potential in Azerbaijan  134 Figure  Figure
Wind energy potential in Azerbaijan  135 Figure  Figure  Figure  Tables
Azerbaijan energy subsidies,  (in real 2019 USD million) 30 Azerbaijan’ initial
and remaining oil and gas reserves, 2019  (in million barrels of oil equivalent)
38 Azerbaijan oil and natural gas export revenues,  51 Natural gas tariffs in
Azerbaijan 56 Table  Table  Installed electricity generating capacity (GW) 73
Table  Electricity transmission network capacity, 2018 78 Table  Azerbaijan
electricity tariffs, 2020 81 Table  Excise tax rates for passenger vehicles,
2019  120 Boxes Box  Box  Box  The status of national borders in the Caspian Sea
43 The Sangachal oil and gas terminal 47 SOCAR 58 Box  Box  The July 2018
Mingachevir blackouts 83 Elements of successful power market reforms 85 Box
Azerbaijan’ NDC measures to mitigate energy-related GHG emissions  104 Box  Key
barriers to energy efficiency in Azerbaijan  119                 Executive
summary Oil and gas exports continue to dominate Azerbaijan’ economy and provide
the majority of government revenue Although they are plentiful, the long-term
outlook for fossil fuel resources (and therefore for government revenue) is
becoming uncertain in light of recent commitments by major importing countries
to achieve net-zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by This report proposes
several ways to increase the efficiency of domestic energy supply and usage to
respond to this challenge In essence, it recommends that Azerbaijan transitions
gradually from its current system – which is government-owned and -operated,
vertically integrated and subsidised – to competitive markets with significant
private sector participation and cost-covering energy prices Of course, subsidy
withdrawal would need to be accompanied by support measures for financially
vulnerable citizens Such  transition would help diversify the economy away from
oil and gas exports while attracting new market entrants and new investments,
including in renewable energy These measures would also help reduce GHG
emissions These recommendations actually support efforts that are already under
way Prompted by the oil price shock of , the government recently drafted several
reform proposals, and many new laws are awaiting approval Laws governing the
electricity and gas sectors since the 1990s will be revised, and specific
legislation on energy efficiency and renewable energy will be introduced In
addition, the country’ first specific energy strategy is nearing completion The
government has furthermore decided to diversify foreign direct investment away
from oil and gas and towards infrastructure and industry, and it has already
taken steps to improve Azerbaijan’ investment climate Scaling down the long-term
importance of oil and gas Oil and natural gas bring in around 90% of Azerbaijan’
export revenues, and they finance around 60% of the government budget They also
supply 98% of primary energy and more than 90% of the country’ electricity Oil
and, more recently, gas have been largely responsible for the remarkable rise in
living standards in Azerbaijan since the late 1990s Azerbaijan has succeeded in
creating  stable upstream oil and gas investment climate and has become an
important and reliable oil and gas exporter  major achievement of international
significance is the recently completed Southern Gas Corridor (SGC) that supplies
gas from Azerbaijan’ Shah Deniz  field to Europe through Turkey The SGC gives
Azerbaijan  new source of gas export revenues while helping Europe diversify its
gas supply routes and improve gas security as its domestic production continues
to 11  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY decline The IEA expects European gas import demand to
rise by around 45 billion cubic metres per year (bcm/) by [] With capacity
increases, the SGC could transport twice the 16 bcm/ production of the Shah
Deniz  field, which could lead to Azerbaijan becoming  regional gas hub Although
oil and gas will remain major sources of wealth for Azerbaijan in the short and
medium terms, two factors in particular indicate  less important role for them
in the long term The first is that oil production, which dates to the mid-19th
century, has been in decline since Although natural gas production, which became
significant in the 2000s, continues to increase, total export revenues are
falling due to lower oil production The oil price shocks of  and 2020
highlighted the risks of short-term fuel price fluctuations and strengthen the
case for further long-term efforts to diversify the economy Second, the emerging
global push for clean energy will inevitably affect oil and gas demand Several
of the world’ largest energy importers (the European Union, Japan and South
Korea) have recently pledged to reduce GHG emissions to net-zero by 2050, and
China is aiming for the same by These targets therefore imply little demand for
oil or gas without carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) three decades
from now Technology breakthroughs and policy changes may further accelerate this
transition, and competition for export opportunities among producing countries
may well intensify, increasing the risk of many oil and gas assets becoming
stranded Managing the costs of new developments is crucial to Azerbaijan’ future
success as an internationally competitive producer, and reducing the carbon
footprint of production is also likely to be necessary The State Oil Company of
the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR), the country’ national oil company, is targeting
to eliminate gas flaring completely in 2021 and is also successfully working to
reduce methane emissions The potential of using CCUS to enhance oil recovery and
produce hydrogen from natural gas should also be studied The IEA encourages the
government to continue working closely with the leading oil and gas sector
companies operating in the country to reduce sectoral emissions The government
has recognised the need to reduce economic dependence on oil and gas exports
Efforts to modernise and increase oil refining and petrochemical production have
been successful and continue to produce improvements SOFAZ, the State Oil Fund
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, could stimulate further diversification  path to
more efficient, dynamic and sustainable energy system It is critical to increase
efficiency, attract new entrants and investments, and diversify the energy
supply in Azerbaijan’ current energy system in which gas, electricity and heat
are supplied by financially burdened monopolies at strongly subsidised prices
Policy responses should therefore include energy tariff reform, electricity and
gas market reform, greater renewable energy use and higher energy efficiency []
IEA (2020), Gas 12  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The level of energy prices is central to
attract investment and encourage citizens to use energy efficiently As part of
the country’ social policy, the government sets domestic end- user prices for
electricity, natural gas and oil very low, often below the full cost of supply
The IEA estimates that in 2019, Azerbaijan’ implied subsidies for oil, natural
gas and decline        The tariff system includes cross-subsidies between
consumer groups and energy carriers as well as direct subsidies from the state
budget The low price of natural gas in particular creates distortions For
example, it discourages the use of renewable energy for electricity production
and, as it favours individual gas boilers for space heating, it inhibits the use
of potentially more efficient system solutions such as district heating and
cooling, electricity and heat pumps Low oil prices meanwhile encourage the use
of large, inefficient cars that are often acquired second-hand, and the effects
of this may intensify as car ownership becomes more common        Subsidised
tariffs do not encourage residential and industrial consumers to use energy more
efficiently, even though it would make economic sense for the country as  whole
Tariff reform should therefore be central to Azerbaijan’ energy sector reform
efforts The oil and gas saved through improved efficiency or through
substitution by renewable energy could be exported at much higher prices or
turned into higher-value-added petrochemicals Furthermore, the GHG emissions
avoided would help the country meet its Paris Agreement climate target (see
below) To reduce subsidies in the longer term, more emphasis should be placed on
explaining to the public that blanket energy subsidies are  highly regressive
measure that benefits mainly the well-off These subsidies should be phased out
gradually and replaced by support mechanisms that protect vulnerable groups Gas
and electricity market reform Azerbaijan would also benefit from more dynamic,
efficient and environmentally and financially sustainable electricity and gas
markets The IEA therefore strongly encourages the government to intensify
efforts to unbundle monopoly operations, increase competition and attract
private investment to build new infrastructure and modernise the existing system
Reforming the tariff system and phasing out gas subsidies to enable cost
recovery and fair competition across all power and heat technologies is
essential To ensure that reforms are socially acceptable, this complex task
requires careful action to protect vulnerable consumers It also requires
continuous education and training efforts to guarantee that enough people have
the planning capabilities and skills necessary to deliver the reforms
efficiently and effectively  campaign to improve public awareness of the reasons
for energy policy changes and the benefits of future reforms is also needed
Electricity demand in Azerbaijan is set to grow in the years and decades ahead
The whole population has access to affordable electricity, and wider
electrification is expected to raise demand considerably from the currently low
500 kilowatt hours (kWh) per capita per year The country needs  more dynamic
electricity sector, and investments in new and more efficient generating
capacity and electricity grids are essential The IEA welcomes the government’
determination to reform the electricity system and gradually move from  state-
dominated, vertically integrated system to  more dynamic, efficient and
environmentally sustainable one The challenge now is to deliver it 13  EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY Azerbaijan’ 2016 Strategic Roadmap recognised the need for electricity
reform, and several reform proposals have been drafted These include the draft
laws on electricity, on the role of the regulator in energy and public
utilities, and on the use of renewable energy in electricity generation The IEA
urges the government to adopt the pending legislation and proceed to implement
an ambitious electricity market reform for the benefit of the country and its
economy The government should first focus on the issues of governance and
financial viability Tariffs and subsidies should be reformed to enable full cost
recovery and encourage investments in power sector development, which should
help reduce operating costs and improve generation, transmission and
distribution efficiency To enable the energy sector to allocate resources more
efficiently, the IEA furthermore urges the government to reform and gradually
abolish subsidies for natural gas in electricity generation The government
should also focus at the outset on setting specific policy objectives for
secure, efficient and clean electricity system Although Azerbaijan has enough
gas resources to generate all the electricity it needs for decades to come, it
is also in the enviable position of having hydropower and significant solar and
wind power potential As solar and wind technology costs have declined
dramatically in recent years, tapping into their potential would allow the
country to save its natural gas for export at the same time as reducing domestic
GHG emissions In this context, the IEA welcomes the government’ ambition to
raise the share of renewable energy in total generating capacity from 16% in
2018 to 30% in 2030, and congratulates it on its first power purchase agreements
(PPAs) for  240-megawatt (MW) wind farm, signed in late 2020, and 230 MW of
solar power capacity, signed in early When the time comes for the government to
consider renewable energy targets beyond 2030, it should take account of both
the economic potential of renewable energy and the scope for other policies and
measures to meet energy policy goals Cost-effectiveness should be  key criterion
for choosing among policy options: for example, it may be less costly to meet
longer-term energy policy goals by increasing energy efficiency than by building
new generating capacity To meet electricity market reform objectives, policies
and measures must provide for unbundling, third-party access to grids,
transparent wholesale markets, and partial privatisation of monopolies It
follows that Azerenergy’ generating assets should be effectively unbundled from
its transmission grid ownership and grid operations At the same time,
transmission and distribution tariffs should be separated from energy supply
tariffs to enable the use of performance-based incentives, while electricity
generation should be opened up to competition and wholesale and retail markets
created There is  strong case for undertaking such  broad and complex reform
gradually The first step should be to remove entry barriers for new participants
and begin to institute unsubsidised cost-based economic dispatch of power plants
to increase efficiency This should be quite feasible, since – aside from
autoproducers – almost all generating capacity is owned by Azerenergy To
increase competition, some of Azerenergy’ generating assets could be privatised
The emphasis should be on privatisation as  means of increasing competition and
operational efficiency rather than as an end in itself, with full privatisation
unlikely to be necessary to achieve the desired goals For example, in many
European countries the state remains the majority shareholder in electricity
generators that operate in competitive wholesale markets New entrants could be
entirely private or based on public-private partnerships, 14  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
provided that barriers to market entry are removed An important point to
consider relates to raising the share of variable solar and wind power capacity
As the government plans to attract investment through long-term PPAs,  mechanism
should be designed to integrate PPAs into the future wholesale market        The
establishment of the regulator in 2017 was  major step in electricity market
reform Since the Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory Agency (AERA) remains closely
overseen by the Ministry of Energy, just like the electricity sector monopolies
Azerenergy and Azerishiq, it will be essential to grant it the legal right to
take binding decisions and issue recommendations This also applies to its work
in natural gas and district heating        Securing larger electricity supplies
Having an uninterrupted supply of electricity is critical for  modern society In
their efforts to ensure electricity security, many IEA member countries have
found it useful to put in place  comprehensive framework, supported by laws,
regulations, policies and measures that address generation, transmission,
distribution and supply challenges The IEA urges Azerbaijan to consider  similar
framework approach that takes account of electricity infrastructure needs and
long-term network development The government should ensure that it has
sufficient personnel qualified to carry out the tasks required under the
framework It should also organise emergency response exercises, as they have
proven effective in boosting preparedness and response capability in other
countries An electricity security framework should cover the areas of fuel
security, resource adequacy, operational security and governance Azerbaijan’
fuel supply appears secure, as the country has significant natural gas resources
and is about to diversify by investing in renewable energy generation Resource
adequacy is supported both by generating capacity that is set to expand and is
already able to meet twice the peak demand, and by cross-border connections In
addition, efforts to modernise networks are under way to keep up with growing
network demands The July 2018 blackouts demonstrated that several domains of
operational security require improvement, as does the area of governance,
including legislation, institutions and regulation Furthermore, the electricity
security framework should include targets and indicators that are regularly
monitored and reviewed to measure progress and help ensure that electricity
security is maintained and improved Using energy more efficiently As other
countries with legacy infrastructure and subsidised energy prices, Azerbaijan
has plenty of scope to improve its energy efficiency The IEA strongly encourages
the government to recognise that greater energy efficiency can benefit the
economy, reduce pollution and create additional jobs, and to rapidly adopt the
laws, strategies, policies and measures needed to realise this potential Strong
policies on energy efficiency will become increasingly relevant because more
buildings will be constructed, more appliances and equipment sold, and more
vehicles purchased in the years and decades ahead  long- term approach is
therefore needed to keep the country on an environmentally sustainable energy
pathway Instead of subsidising energy use for everyone, the government should
focus social policy measures on those in real need while gradually switching to
more efficient energy use As 15  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY part of its targeted support
measures, it could, for example, launch programmes to replace the least
efficient household appliances (refrigerators, washing machines, etc) with new,
highly energy-efficient models, offering subsidies for the least well-off As
renovations to improve the energy efficiency of the existing building stock,
especially residential and public buildings, would also save energy while
benefitting citizen health, the case for introducing financing mechanisms for
energy-efficient housing is strong The government should also ensure that
residential buildings comply with energy efficiency regulations In many IEA
countries, compliance is verified by public sector building inspectors, which is
an approach Azerbaijan’ government should consider Experience in IEA member
countries shows that minimum energy performance standards are among the most
effective and cost-efficient energy efficiency policy instruments The government
should therefore introduce stringent standards across all sectors to cover
buildings, vehicles, appliances and equipment These standards should be
underpinned by an effective energy efficiency audit mechanism It should also
update the standards regularly and, when applicable, accompany them with energy
labelling Azerbaijan’ population, half of which still lives in the countryside,
is expected to continue growing, urbanising and becoming wealthier The country
will thus need to build more urban infrastructure in the coming decades,
including new heating systems Space heating is currently based on individual
boilers that burn subsidised gas However, modern district heating and cooling
(DHC) systems, combined with more efficient electricity generation, heat pumps,
waste heat use and thermal storage, could offer  solution that is more efficient
and cost-effective while reducing CO2 emissions As transport sector oil use more
than tripled between 2000 and 2018, energy and climate considerations should be
integrated into long-term transport and urban development policies so that
Azerbaijan does not become locked into inefficient and energy-intensive private
car-dominated urban structures For example, if private car ownership in
Azerbaijan were to increase to the current European Union (EU) average, the
country’ car fleet would expand almost fourfold to five million Expansion of the
Baku metro in recent years has improved public transport availability, but
further replacement of private vehicles with public transport, walking and
cycling would improve air quality and reduce noise and congestion, especially in
the Greater Baku area, which is home to almost half the population and half the
country’ vehicles Tackling the rise in transport fuel demand (unrestrained by
prices or taxes) and the hike in natural gas use (subsidised in all sectors) is
also necessary for Azerbaijan to achieve its Paris Agreement goal of reducing
net GHG emissions by 35% from 1990 to In 2018, the latest year for which data
are available, net GHG emissions were % above the 2030 target Cutting GHG
emissions from oil and gas production would also reduce total GHG emissions
considerably Energy research, development and innovation merit additional effort
Energy research, development and innovation (RDI) is necessary to help
Azerbaijan maintain and improve its economic competitiveness, and to enable
diversification away 16  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY from oil and gas For these reasons,
the IEA encourages the government to step up its energy RDI efforts
significantly       Further energy data improvements  Reliable data is the basis
of sound policymaking The IEA congratulates the State Statistical Committee of
the Republic of Azerbaijan (SSC) for improving energy efficiency data collection
and monitoring, and it encourages the SSC to further develop national energy
statistics to improve data coverage and quality and to inform policy decisions
Key recommendations The government of Azerbaijan should:  Finalise laws and
plans for which approval is pending as soon as possible, and ensure their
effective implementation based on clearly designated responsibilities and
accountabilities, with adequate resources  Diversify the domestic energy mix to
gradually reduce oil and gas dependence  Institute further structural energy
reforms in  phased manner to develop competitive markets based on prices that
reflect the full energy supply cost, and to ensure transparent and non-
discriminatory grid access; support reforms by measures that guarantee the
energy regulator’ independence and capacity, and aid the most vulnerable
citizens  Take steps to increase the efficiency of energy supply and use, and
incorporate energy and climate considerations into long-term urban development
and transport plans to limit energy demand growth  Develop an integrated long-
term strategic plan for energy and climate change that incorporates and builds
on reform measures to date, and that aims to deliver the country’ nationally
determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement, including through the
use of renewable energy 17         General energy policy        Key data (2019
provisional) TES: Mtoe (natural gas %, oil %, hydro %, other* %), +% since 2008
TES per capita:  toe (world average 2018:  toe) TES per unit of GDP: 110 toe USD
million PPP (world average 2018: 111 toe/USD million PPP) Energy production:
Mtoe other* %), -% since 2008 (oil %, natural gas %, hydro %, * Includes
bioenergy, waste, wind, solar PV and heat from heat pumps Country overview
Located in the southern Caucasus region, the Republic of Azerbaijan (hereafter
‘Azerbaijan’) is bordered by the Caspian Sea to the east, Armenia and Georgia to
the west, the Russian Federation (hereafter ‘Russia’) to the north and Iran to
the south The Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, the country’ exclave on the
southwestern side of Armenia, also has  short border with Turkey Azerbaijan has
an area of around 87 000 km2, and its population of million has grown at  rate
of around %/ in recent years Baku is the country’ capital and largest city
Azerbaijan’ economy is driven by the oil and gas sector, which accounts for
around 90% of the country’ exports and % of its GDP, depending on oil prices
Export revenues from oil, and increasingly from gas, have brought Azerbaijan
significant wealth and raised the country’ standard of living Oil and gas sector
dominance has led to heavier economic dependence on industry and construction (%
of GDP in 2018) than on services (%) The dynamics of the oil and gas sector
influence economic growth considerably, both through industrial activity and
consumer spending linked to employment and salaries Agriculture provides % of
GDP, but still almost 40% of all jobs Nominal GDP grew almost ninefold to USD 75
billion from 2004 to 2014, driven by oil and gas export revenues (World Bank,
2020a) However, the global oil price collapse of  forced Azerbaijan to devalue
its currency against the USD, and its nominal GDP in USD terms dropped by half
from 2014 to The government decided to accelerate the implementation of policies
to diversify the economy, and in 2016 President Ilham Aliyev approved
development policy framework to devise strategic roadmaps for the main sectors
of the economy 19  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY GDP growth returned in 2017, and in
2019 rose to USD 48 billion in nominal terms, with GDP per capita reaching USD
800 (World Bank, 2020a) The global Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 then caused oil
demand to fall and its price to drop sharply According to the Central Bank of
Azerbaijan, the country’ GDP contracted % in 2020 (CBA, 2021) The 2020 oil price
shock reconfirmed the need for private-sector-led and productivity- based
development and diversification in Azerbaijan, and recently announced
decarbonisation targets in  growing number of oil and gas importing countries
also point to this conclusion The economy can still be much further diversified,
however, and dependence on the oil and gas industry is likely to persist for
years Nevertheless, Azerbaijan is relatively well equipped financially to deal
with economic challenges At the end of January 2021, the combined assets of its
sovereign wealth fund SOFAZ (USD billion, mostly very liquid) and the central
bank’ foreign exchange reserves (USD  billion) were worth more than 100% of GDP,
while at the end of 2019 government debt amounted to 19% of GDP (CBA, 2021;
SOFAZ, 2021; Fitch Ratings, 2020) The country’ stated objective is to diversify
foreign direct investment (FDI) away from oil and natural gas (50% of FDI
between 2003 and 2017) and towards infrastructure and industry (mining,
metallurgy and cement) Azerbaijan has significantly improved its investment
climate by strengthening the institutional, regulatory and operational
environment for companies According to the World Bank’ Doing Business report,
Azerbaijan climbed to 34th out of 190 countries in 2020, up from 57th in 2018
(World Bank, 2020b) Map of Azerbaijan IEA All rights reserved 20  GENERAL ENERGY
POLICY       Energy supply and demand This section offers  general overview of
topics that are presented in more detail in subsequent chapters of this report
As Azerbaijan is  major oil and natural gas producer, these two commodities
dominate the country’ exports and domestic energy supply (Figure ) Overall,
Azerbaijan produces around four times the energy it consumes and has one of the
world’ highest levels of energy self-sufficiency In recent years, it has
exported almost 90% of its oil production and over 40% of its natural gas
Azerbaijan’ domestic energy supply (TES) is based on natural gas (66% in 2019)
and oil (33% in 2019) Natural gas is used to generate most of the country’
electricity and heat (over 90% in 2019) Crude oil is refined locally to satisfy
most of the nation’ oil product consumption, and local production is about to
expand following  refinery upgrade that is now under way It is noteworthy that
no coal is used in the country The residential sector is traditionally the
largest final energy consumer, responsible for 32% of final consumption (TFC) in
2019, with households consuming energy mostly in the form of natural gas (80% of
total household consumption in 2019) Energy consumption in the transport sector,
which has more than tripled since 2000, accounted for 26% of TFC in 2019, almost
all in the form of oil (just under 99% of total transport consumption in 2019)
Industry was also responsible for around 26% of TFC, with oil as its main energy
source (50% of the sectoral total in 2019) Services and the primary sector
together accounted for 16% of TFC in 2019, increasingly in the form of natural
gas (39% of the sectoral total) Although the government has not yet prepared
long-term energy scenarios examining future supply and demand, it is expected to
do so when formulating the Long-Term Development Strategy of the Energy Sector
of the Republic of Azerbaijan under  presidential decree of 29 May 2019 on
Acceleration of Reforms in the Energy Sector of the Republic of Azerbaijan
Energy production, supply and consumption by fuel and sector, 2019 Mtoe 70
Bunker fuels* 60 Other** 50 40 Exports (net) Electricity 30 Natural gas 20
Bunkering, transformation and losses 10 Industry Transport Commercial
Residential Oil  Production TES TFC (by fuel) TFC (by sector) IEA All rights
reserved Oil and natural gas dominate energy production, exports and domestic
supply * Includes international aviation and marine bunker fuel Not included in
TES ** Includes hydro, bioenergy, waste, wind, solar PV and heat Note: Mtoe =
million tonnes of oil equivalent TES = total energy supply TFC = total final
consumption of energy Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021,  21
GENERAL ENERGY POLICY Energy production and domestic supply Both oil and gas
have  long history in Azerbaijan, but production surged to new levels in the
mid-2000s when the Azeri-Chirag-Gunashli oil block, the Shah Deniz gas field and
their related export infrastructure began operations (see Chapter ) Oil
production peaked in 2010, while gas production appears set to continue
increasing at least until  (Figure ) Overall, total energy production in 2019
was almost three times higher than in 2000, at million tonnes of oil equivalent
(Mtoe) Primary energy production by source,  Mtoe 70 60 Others* 50 40 Oil 30 20
Natural gas 10 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All
rights reserved Azerbaijan’ oil and gas production began to surge in the
mid-2000s * Includes hydro, bioenergy and waste, wind, solar PV and heat pumps;
not visible at this scale Source: IEA (2020), World Energy Balances 2020,  Total
energy supply by source,  Mtoe 18 16 Other* 14 12 Hydro 10  Oil    Natural gas
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ TES increased an average % per year from 2000 to * Includes
bioenergy, waste, wind, solar PV and heat pumps; not visible at this scale Note:
Electricity trade not included Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021,
TES – dominated by oil and gas – declined rapidly in the first years after the
collapse of the Soviet Union It has grown relatively modestly since then (+41%
since 2000; Figure ), with energy efficiency improvements and structural change
in the economy largely offsetting the impact of increased economic activity From
2008 (before the global financial crisis) to 2019, TES increased only 15% to
reach Mtoe Growth resulted mostly from 22  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY natural gas
consumption (up by around  Mtoe or 16% since 2008), mainly in the service sector
Oil consumption rose 14% from 2008, with the transport sector responsible for
most of the increase       Figure  compares Azerbaijan’ TES composition with
that of other economies Fossil fuels accounted for over 99% of the country’
domestic energy production in 2019, compared with the world average of 81%
(2018), but Azerbaijan was unusual in not using coal: all its fossil fuel use
was in the form of oil and natural gas         Breakdown of TES by source in
selected countries, 2018 Switzerland Norway Tajikistan Austria Bulgaria
Kyrgyzstan Armenia Ukraine Romania Georgia Croatia Republic of Moldova World
Turkey Serbia EU4Energy average* Russian Federation Belarus Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan Azerbaijan Kazakhstan Turkmenistan % 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Coal Peat
Nuclear Wind Solar** Oil Natural gas Hydro Bioenergy and waste Geothermal IEA
All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ TES is among the world’ most fossil fuel-
intensive * Covers Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan **
Includes solar PV, solar thermal, wave and ocean power, and other power
generation ( from fuel cells) Note: Electricity trade not included Source: IEA
(2020), World Energy Balances 2020,  Energy consumption Although Azerbaijan’ TFC
declined strongly in the 1990s, it has risen more than 60% since From before the
global financial crisis in 2008 up until 2019, TFC increased by 37% to reach
Mtoe (Figure ) 23  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY The residential sector has
traditionally been the largest energy consumer In 2018, it accounted for 32% of
TFC, followed by transport and industry (both 26%) and the service and primary
sector (16%) Since 2008, transport has accounted for 46% of TFC growth, more
than any other sector Total final consumption by sector,  Mtoe 12
Services/other* 10 Industry**  Transport  Residential   2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ TFC increased
65% from 2000 to 2019, mostly as  result of growth in the transport and
residential sectors * Includes commercial and public services, agriculture and
forestry ** Includes non-energy consumption Source: IEA (2020), World Energy
Balances 2020,  Natural gas is the largest source of TES, but  major share of it
is transformed into electricity and heat That leaves oil as the main source of
Azerbaijan’ TFC, at 42% in 2019, while natural gas accounted for 40% (Figure )
Electricity accounted for 15% of TFC and district heat for % Oil is the primary
energy source in transport and industry, while natural gas is the main fuel in
the residential sector and is also increasingly important in the service sector
Total final consumption by source and sector, 2019 Industry* 50% 31% 13% % Oil
Transport 99% % Natural gas Residential 80% 16% % Electricity District heat
Services/other** 20% 39% 38% % % Bioenergy and waste Total 42% 40% 15% % % 20%
40% 60% 80% 100% IEA All rights reserved Oil and natural gas dominate
Azerbaijan’ TFC * Includes non-energy consumption ** Includes commercial and
public services, agriculture and forestry Note: For ease of readability, shares
of less than % are not shown Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021,  24
GENERAL ENERGY POLICY       Energy sector governance The Presidential
Administration, the Cabinet of Ministers and the Ministry of Energy (MoE) are
the energy sector’ main government institutions, while individual subsectors are
controlled by several state-owned monopolies, including SOCAR (oil refining,
natural gas distribution and supply), Azerenergy (Azerenerji, electricity
generation and transmission), Azerishiq (electricity distribution and supply)
and Azeristiliktejhizat (district heat)         Executive Executive power is
held by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, and the president assembles
Cabinet of Ministers to organise the work of the executive authorities The
Cabinet of Ministers is an executive body accountable directly to the president
The MoE is the central executive authority responsible for implementing state
policy and the various regulations, orders and decrees issued by the government
for the energy sector The MoE board, approved by the Cabinet of Ministers, has
the authority to issue orders within its area of competence, meaning most
domains within the energy sector except tariff regulation, which is under the
authority of the Tariff Council The Tariff Council determines the retail and
wholesale tariffs for electricity, gas, district heat and refined petroleum
products as well as purchase tariffs for renewable electricity The Minister of
Economy is the chairman of the Tariff Council, and members include the deputy
ministers of Finance, Justice, Energy, Transport, Communication and Information
Technologies, Agriculture, Health, Education, Labour and Social Defence of the
People, the vice-chairmen of the committees of Customs and of State City
Building and Architecture and the deputy chairman of the State Tax Service In
December 2017, the Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory Agency (AERA) was established
under the MoE AERA regulates producers, transmission operators, distributors,
suppliers and consumers in the fields of electricity, district heat and gas
supply; undertakes energy market analysis; proposes restructuring measures; and
develops the investment climate Eventually, after approval of the draft Law on
the Regulator, all functions related to calculating and approving energy tariffs
will be transferred from the Tariff Council to AERA The draft law was submitted
to the Cabinet of Ministries for inter-ministerial consultations in July In
September 2020, the President of Azerbaijan signed  decree establishing the
State Agency for Renewable Energy Sources The new agency will report to the MoE
The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources is  central executive body
implementing state policy on environmental protection It maintains environmental
safety, monitors the extraction of natural resources and their conservation in
the country and takes measures to avert damage to natural ecological systems
from economic or other activities The Ministry of Emergency Situations is
responsible for emergency response mechanisms in all sectors of the economy Its
mandate includes emergencies arising from natural and man-made disasters and
fire, as well as emergencies involving power systems, utility systems,
hydropower facilities, oil and gas production and processing plants and main
pipelines 25  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY The State Statistical Committee of the
Republic of Azerbaijan (SSC) is responsible for official energy statistics and
meets regularly with the MoE to discuss data findings and potential additional
information needs Legislative The Azerbaijani legal system is based on civil law
and founded on the country’ Constitution International agreements in which
Azerbaijan is one of the parties constitute an integral part of the legislative
system When there is disagreement between normative legal acts (except within
the Constitution and acts accepted by way of referendum) and international
agreements in which Azerbaijan is one of the parties, the provisions of the
international agreement prevail The legislative body of Azerbaijan is the
National Assembly (Milli Məclis in Azerbaijani),  unicameral parliament whose
125 deputies are directly elected for  five-year term The most recent elections
for the National Assembly were held in February Under the Constitution, those
having the right to submit drafts of laws and other questions for consideration
by the National Assembly are: deputies of the National Assembly, the President
of the Azerbaijan Republic, the Supreme Court, citizens’ groups presenting at
least 40 000 signatures, the Prosecutor' Office and the National Assembly (Ali
Majlis) of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic Drafts of laws are submitted to
the president for signing within 14 days of their acceptance Laws and decrees of
the National Assembly become valid from the date of their publication unless
otherwise specified within the law or decree Main energy legislation Azerbaijan’
energy legislation dates mostly from the second half of the 1990s The 1998 Law
on Energy is  framework law regulating the exploration, development, production,
processing, storage, transportation, distribution and use of all “energy
materials and products” Any person planning to carry out energy activities must
obtain special permission from the MoE based on an energy contract or an
application submitted prior to project initiation Article  of the 1998 Law on
Energy defines Azerbaijan’ energy policy, which includes the following
objectives:  effective production, transportation, distribution, storage, use
and safety of energy products  creation of infrastructure to efficiently
provide energy to all consumers and create new jobs; establishment of
competition and minimal monopoly conditions in the energy sector; organisation
of energy sector activities based on various types of ownership, long-term
contracts and permits; creation of favourable conditions for local businesses
producing high-quality products; and creation of favourable conditions for the
application of efficient and environmentally safe technologies  conservation of
energy resources, waste reduction, efficient energy consumption and the use of
renewable energy sources  reduction of negative environmental impacts  in case
of energy shortages, subsidy provision for producers and consumers to increase
energy efficiency 26  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY  creation of favourable legal and
economic conditions for investments  development of state energy programmes
number of other laws are also in force, all adopted in the second half of the
1990s  The 1996 Law on the Use of Energy Resources defines the legal, economic
and social foundations of state policy in the use of energy resources, as well
as general policy implementation measures        The 1998 Law on Subsoil
regulates oil and gas exploration, use, protection, safety and control in the
field of the use of mineral resources, including oil reserves, located in
Azerbaijan and the Azerbaijani sector of the Caspian Sea shelf The 1998 Law on
Gas Supply regulates the production, processing, transportation, storage,
distribution, sale and use of all types of gas Oil and gas exploration and
production projects involving international partners operate almost exclusively
under production sharing agreements (PSAs), each of which has the status of
separate law (see Chapter ) The main laws dealing with electricity are the 1998
Law on the Use of Energy Resources, the 1998 Law on Electric Power Industry and
the 1999 Law on Electricity and Heating Plants Under the 1998 Law on Electric
Power Industry and its subsequent revisions,  permit is required for the
production, transmission, distribution and sale of electricity, as well as its
import and export, unless otherwise specified by law Azerbaijan does not yet
have individual laws on renewable energy or energy efficiency, but such laws
have been drafted and are now (April 2021) being approved Key policies and
reform efforts With oil and natural gas exports being the government’ main
source of revenue, the energy sector is the driving force behind Azerbaijan’
economic development Completion of the geopolitically important Southern Gas
Corridor between Azerbaijan and Europe has opened another source of gas export
revenue In the domestic energy sector,  major issue is the need to transition
from  government- owned and -operated vertically integrated, subsidised system
to competitive markets with  large measure of private sector participation
Significant economic and energy efficiency potential thus remains untapped The
country’ energy mix is heavily concentrated on fossil fuels, with oil and gas
accounting for more than 98% of total supply While supply security is not
concern, heavy fossil fuel reliance results in high greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions, and it also exposes the country to fuel price fluctuation risks In
addition, investments are needed to modernise ageing infrastructure Along with
oil and gas, the electricity sector has  leading role in Azerbaijan’ social and
economic development Large investments in power generation and transmission
since 2009 have improved power supply quality remarkably Electricity generation
is now sufficient to cover domestic demand, and the power system is capable of
supplying electricity of acceptable quality to almost the entire population
Setting energy prices at the 27  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY optimal level, however,
is critical to attract investment and to encourage citizens to use energy
efficiently With its excellent solar and wind resources and significant
prospects for biomass, geothermal and hydropower, Azerbaijan has strong
renewable energy potential Practical deployment has been limited, however,
considering the scale of available resources and the country’ long-term
ambitions Renewable energy, together with energy efficiency, also offers the
most promising low- carbon solution to meet Azerbaijan’ climate targets In its
nationally determined contribution (NDC) under the Paris Agreement, the country
committed to reduce its GHG emissions 35% from the 1990 level by The government
is also working to meet the UN’ 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), among
which SDG  (access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy
resources) is  priority for Azerbaijan; this should synergise with efforts to
achieve the Paris Agreement goal Reform efforts and planned laws Azerbaijan
established laws for the electricity and gas sectors in the 1990s, but it does
not yet have specific legislation for areas such as energy efficiency and
renewable energy, nor does it have an explicit energy strategy However, the
government recently drafted several reform proposals and approval is pending for
many new laws They are discussed in more detail in the corresponding chapters of
this report Reform momentum was triggered by the impact of oil price shocks on
the national economy Following both the  global financial crisis and the  oil
price collapse (and resultant sharp oil export revenue losses), the government
began promoting economic diversification In 2012, the government tabled the
development strategy Azerbaijan 2020: Look into the Future to foster non-
hydrocarbon-based economic growth In 2016, strategic road maps on the national
economy and 11 individual sectors were adopted in response to the steep decline
in global oil prices They include economic development strategies and action
plans for ,  long-term outlook to 2025 and  vision beyond They also target
annual average GDP growth of % to The 2016 Strategic Roadmap for the Development
of Utilities (electricity, heat, water and gas) sets several specific strategic
targets, such as sustainable and efficient utility sector regulation, the
production of fully diversified and environmentally clean electrical power, the
establishment of efficient and effective gas distribution infrastructure, the
installation of sustainable and reliable heating supply systems, and lower water
supply losses It also calls for gradual transition to  liberal market model
based on enhanced competition, unbundling, establishment of  wholesale market
and  higher share of renewable energy The roadmap was updated in July Although
many laws have been drafted in the past couple of years, they have yet to be
adopted In May 2019,  presidential order approved the document “Acceleration of
Reforms in the Energy Sector of the Republic of Azerbaijan” It proposes various
reforms, such as the promotion of renewable energy and private sector investment
in renewables, the preparation of  long-term energy sector development strategy,
higher gas and heat system efficiency, and gradual opening of the electricity
market to competition 28  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY It also envisages the drafting
of four new laws:        on  regulator for the energy sector and utility
services  on using renewable energy resources for electricity production  on
the gas supply (revision of the 1998 law)  on the energy sector (revision of
the 1998 law)    draft Law on Electricity, modelled on EU laws, targets gradual
market reform by The government plans to permit independent generators to enter
the sector and acquire existing power plants or build new ones (see Chapter )
Furthermore,  draft Law on the Efficient Use of Energy Resources and Energy
Efficiency has been prepared with the assistance of Energy Charter experts
National Action Plan on Energy Efficiency has also been prepared under the
EU4Energy Programme (ECS, 2020) For technical assistance with energy sector
reform, the government has been working in partnership with donors,
international organisations and consultants, including the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the
European Union (EU), the United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) and the World Bank Tariffs and subsidies The domestic energy sector’
financial viability is  major issue Investments are needed to modernise and
expand electricity, heat and gas infrastructure, but incentives have been
weakened by  lack of competition and low end-user tariffs Under the country’
social policy, end-user prices for electricity, natural gas and oil are very low
The tariff system includes cross-subsidies between consumer groups and energy
carriers as well as direct subsidies from the state budget Natural gas pricing
particularly creates distortions For example, it discourages the use of
renewable energy for electricity production, heat pump adoption, and the
installation of system solutions including the combined generation of district
heating, cooling and electricity – all of which offer potential efficiency gains
and CO2 emissions reductions Meanwhile, low oil prices favour large, inefficient
cars that are often acquired second-hand Low end-user prices imply considerable
subsidies (Table ) The IEA user price-gap methodology can be employed to
estimate subsidies for fossil fuels consumed directly by end users or as inputs
for electricity generation In Azerbaijan’ case, natural gas and oil subsidies
make up the difference between export prices and end-user prices,  the
opportunity cost of pricing domestic energy below international market levels
For electricity, the subsidy is the difference between the reference price and
the end-user price Since 2015, implied subsidies for oil, gas and fossil-fuelled
electricity have all increased significantly, reflecting higher oil and gas
export prices In 2019, Azerbaijan’ implied subsidies amounted to USD  billion,
or % of the country’ GDP The average subsidisation rate was 43%, for  total of
USD 190 per inhabitant 29  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY Azerbaijan energy subsidies,
(in real 2019 USD million) 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 140
477 569 691 181 28 273 741  131 977 Oil 264 296 352 427 326 591 699 757 956 483
Electricity 468 595 578 594 483 544 550 581 835 448 Gas 871  368  498  712 990
162  522  079  922  909 Total Source:  Moreover, network tariffs for gas and
electricity are based on  “cost-plus” methodology that does not encourage
utilities to make their services more cost-efficient On the contrary, this
calculation method provides  perverse incentive for utilities to raise their
operational costs to justify additional regulated revenue The financial burden
of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the energy sector is increased by
significant labour surpluses Removing these structural constraints would require
targeted and fiscally more efficient, explicit subsidy mechanisms (ADB, 2020)
Role separation could benefit both the government and SOEs The World Bank
proposes clear distinctions among the state’ roles as owner, policy maker and
regulator The aim should be for the state to separate decision-making from
ownership responsibilities and act as an engaged and professional owner of its
assets, while granting the SOEs operational independence (World Bank, 2017) In
addition, better corporate governance could significantly raise SOE
competitiveness and profitability OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of
State-Owned Enterprises offers helpful international benchmarks Energy
statistics Detailed, complete, timely and reliable statistics are essential to
support energy and climate decision-making in any country In Azerbaijan, the SSC
is responsible for collecting, validating and disseminating official energy
statistics Statistical data are open and in the public domain The SSC also meets
regularly with the MoE to discuss and share findings from the latest annual
energy data Other relevant entities are invited to participate in this event,
making it  platform for dialogue and information-sharing among national data
providers and users Since 2007, Azerbaijan’ official energy balance has been
presented in accordance with international standards and methodology; the SSC
actively participated in the working group developing the guidelines Energy data
are also shared with relevant international organisations: annual statistics
with the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) and the IEA, and monthly oil
and gas data with the Joint Organizations Data Initiative (JODI) The first
household energy consumption survey was carried out in 2008 and was repeated in
greater detail in 2017 to enable the development of energy efficiency indicators
for the residential sector Thanks to these surveys, data on solid biomass
consumption are considered very reliable The SSC took on the task of compiling
energy efficiency indicators in 2018, and having  national energy balance
aligned with international standards greatly facilitates its work 30  GENERAL
ENERGY POLICY Some indicators are already available for the industry sector, and
the household energy end-use consumption survey conducted in 2018 has also
allowed the development of residential sector to assess and monitor in
developments accordance with the latest medium-term statistics strategy, the SSC
is collecting disaggregated transport activity data, which will greatly help
develop energy efficiency data in that sector       indicators These data are
essential largest energy-consuming sector Furthermore, in Azerbaijan’
According to  presidential decree approved in 2018, an “integrated information
system of public utility services” (IISPUS) is to be created, with the MoE as
operator The system will encompass metadata for public utility services
(including natural gas, electricity and district heating) as well as an open
data management system accessible to all stakeholders (energy providers,
consumers and the regulator) Assessment Since the IEA in-depth review of 2015,
Azerbaijan has remained  source of stable and uninterrupted oil and gas supplies
for diversified export markets  major achievement has been completion of the
Southern Gas Corridor and the launch of gas supply flows from the Shah Deniz
field to several European countries Azerbaijan’ government and state- owned
SOCAR were instrumental in realising this internationally significant project In
the domestic energy sector, the government has taken important steps to develop
its legal and regulatory climate, diversify its energy mix, and strengthen its
energy security:   Strategic Road Map for the Development of Public Utility
Services (Electricity, District Heat, Water and Natural Gas) in the Republic of
Azerbaijan was approved by the president in 2016 and updated in July It set
several strategic targets, including for sustainability and efficiency   new
electricity law was drafted in concordance with  presidential decree in 2017 and
aligned with the UE Third Energy Package  The Energy Regulatory Agency was
established in  The document “Acceleration of Reforms in the Energy Sector of
the Republic of Azerbaijan” was approved by presidential order in It deals with
reforms involving the promotion of renewable energy, efforts to increase energy
efficiency, preparation of  long-term energy sector development strategy, and
proposals for  planned transition to market- based competition in the power
sector  This 2019 order resulted in the preparation of draft laws on  regulator
for the energy sector and utilities services; on boosting the use of renewables
for electricity production; on promoting energy efficiency; and on gas supply In
addition, the government has signed and ratified the Paris Agreement, and its
NDC is to reduce GHG emissions 35% from the 1990 level by To this end, it has
outlined climate change mitigation actions in  number of sectors including
energy, and the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources is preparing both
national strategy for climate change and  national low-carbon strategy The
government has also taken steps to meet growing electricity demand and
strengthen energy security by commissioning new power plants Around  gigawatts
(GW) of capacity have been commissioned in the past ten years, with much of it
coming online recently 31  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY An immediate priority is to
ensure that the draft laws and reforms currently under consideration in several
areas are finalised and then implemented effectively, with clearly defined
details on what is to be done and when; which parties are responsible for
delivery; and whether the necessary resources are available Current focus is
primarily on what needs to be achieved by Important as this is, it also arguable
that an integrated long-term strategy is needed – one that builds on the various
strategy documents and plans currently under consideration, provides longer-term
plans through 2040 or 2050, and brings together all the various strands of work
on energy and climate change Such  plan would be strengthened by private sector
and other external stakeholder consultations; by instituting carefully planned
governance arrangements based on close cross-government co-ordination; and by
including clear targets and indicating how they are to be delivered There is
also scope to build on progress already made and undertake structural reforms to
develop competitive markets This might best be done on  phased basis, bearing in
mind the difficulties of moving from subsidised to market prices, and
accompanied by measures to provide appropriate support for the most economically
vulnerable citizens Competitive markets would help attract private sector
investment and send price signals reflecting future cost changes Targeted
subsidies could still be provided to not only protect society’ most vulnerable,
but to support carefully directed government objectives such as the promotion of
new renewables and energy efficiency (market prices alone would encourage this
transition in the first place) One priority should be to ensure transparent and
non-discriminatory access to the grid, as this is  prerequisite for  competitive
power market and for attracting overseas investment in new generation capacity
These changes will inevitably generate demand for new skills and capabilities in
variety of fields, for example in emissions measurement; energy and climate
modelling; renewables, co-generation and trigeneration; and heating and cooling
Developing these skills in consultation with the private sector as well as
schools, universities and research organisations – backed by the necessary
financial resources, of course – should help minimise the risk that future
capability gaps would impede progress, and should also create new skilled jobs
Improving energy data use Reliable data is the basis for sound policymaking
Since the 2015 IEA review, the SSC has improved energy efficiency data
collection and monitoring and has also expanded public access to user-friendly
energy information The SSC is to be congratulated on the steps it has taken
Given additional resources, it should be possible to raise the coverage of
energy efficiency data for the main sectors of the economy (residential,
transport and industry) as well as increase the level of data disaggregation To
support priority energy efficiency policies, stakeholders (the SSC and the MoE)
should clearly define responsibilities, compile  list of missing key indicators
and formulate an action plan to fill the data gaps This exercise should also
clarify who will estimate data between surveys, and how to maximise synergies
with existing data collection mechanisms to avoid increasing respondent burden
Once the IISPUS project is finalised, its energy consumption data could inform
these estimates After the Law on the Efficient Use of Energy Resources and
Energy Efficiency has been adopted, it is expected that secondary legislation
will define obligations and responsibilities 32  GENERAL ENERGY POLICY for
monitoring the impact of its measures The IEA encourages the SSC to continue
participating actively in the inter-agency working group related to the laws to
ensure that monitoring mechanisms meet international standards       The MoE is
one of the main users of official energy data, as is the Ministry of Ecology and
Natural Resources, which uses it to formulate the energy module of the national
GHG inventory Leading academic programmes dealing with long-term energy
modelling should also be considered important stakeholders and users of national
energy data Data available in electronic formats facilitates information-sharing
among authorities, as does close communication among energy data users Having
the main stakeholders actively involved in the biannual consultative meetings
would spur further development and use of energy statistics in the country,
supporting the government’ objectives in the areas of energy efficiency, long-
term energy modelling and GHG emissions reductions         Recommendations The
government of Azerbaijan should:  Build on existing policy work and plans with
view to developing an integrated long- term strategic plan for energy and
climate change, ensuring effective co-ordination among all relevant government
ministries and agencies as well as consultation with the private sector, higher
education bodies and other stakeholders  Take the necessary action to rapidly
finalise the draft laws and plans currently under consideration, including those
for energy efficiency and renewables co-generation and trigeneration, and ensure
their effective implementation based on clearly defined responsibilities and
accountabilities, with adequate resources  Take steps to assess and build the
capabilities and skills needed in the future, including through education and
training, and improve public awareness of the reasons for energy policy changes
and their benefits  Further develop the national energy statistics system to
improve data coverage and quality and to inform policy decisions by: Ensuring
(with the help of the SSC) that appropriate data are available for energy
planning and for energy efficiency indicator development (for the residential,
transport and industry sectors) > > Defining appropriate progress-monitoring
mechanisms in secondary energy efficiency legislation through dialogue between
the MoE and the SSC, while also clarifying related responsibilities > Developing
the biannual stakeholder meeting between the MoE and the SSC so that it provides
flexible platform for dialogue among all the main data providers and users,
including academia > Completing the IISPUS project and adopting it as the main
instrument of electronic data governance for public utility services 33  GENERAL
ENERGY POLICY References ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2020), Reforms,
Opportunities, and Challenges for State- Owned Enterprises, ADB, Manila CBA
(Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan) (2021), Statistical Bulletin 12,
07759fc3336d1b8b0d8436279pdf (cbaraz) ECS (Energy Charter Secretariat) (2020),
In-Depth Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan,
ECS, Brussels Fitch Ratings (2020), Fitch revises outlook on Azerbaijan to
negative; affirms at 'BB+', negative-affirms-at-bb--IEA (International Energy
Agency) (2021), World Energy Balances 2021,  SOFAZ (State Oil Fund of the
Republic of Azerbaijan) (2021),  and-statistics/recent-figures World Bank
(2020a), Azerbaijan country information, dataworldbankorg/country/AZ World Bank
(2020b), Ease of Doing Business in Azerbaijan,  World Bank (2017), Republic of
Azerbaijan: Corporate Governance and Ownership of State-Owned Enterprises, WB,
Washington, DC 34                Oil and natural gas Key data (2019 provisional)
Oil production*: Mt (78 Mb/), -% since 2008 Net oil exports*: Mt (65 Mb/) (no
imports, exports Mt) Net oil product exports: 90 Mt (02 Mb/) (imports  Mt,
exports  Mt) Share of oil: % of domestic energy production, % of TES, % of
electricity generation, % of TFC Oil consumption by sector**:  Mt (transport %,
industry %, services %, other energy %, power and heat generation %, residential
%) Gas production***: bcm, +% since 2008 Net gas exports: bcm, +125% since 2008
Share of natural gas: % of domestic energy production, % of TES, % of
electricity generation, % of TFC Gas consumption by sector: bcm (power and heat
generation %, residential %, other energy %, industry %, services %, transport
<%) * Includes condensates and NGLs ** Excludes international marine bunkers ***
Marketable quantity,  excluding quantities re-injected, vented or flared
Overview Azerbaijan depends on crude oil for most of its export and government
revenue Developments in global oil demand and prices are therefore critical for
the country Oil production began in the mid-19th century but has been in decline
since Natural gas is also important to Azerbaijan’ economy In contrast to oil,
natural gas production, which became significant in the 2000s, continues to
increase Efforts to modernise and increase oil refining and petrochemicals
production have been successful and are continuing Oil and gas resources are
plentiful, but the long-term outlook for exports – and therefore for government
revenue – is uncertain, as major importing countries have recently committed to
net-zero GHG emissions by Domestically, oil and gas continue to provide almost
all primary energy, including around 90% of electricity generation The state-
owned State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan 35  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Republic
(SOCAR) controls almost all segments of the sector and the government sets
retail prices very low by international standards Incentives are needed for
investments to modernise pipelines and improve efficiency Supply History of
Azerbaijan’ oil and gas production Azerbaijan is one of the first places in the
world to have produced oil regularly The history of its oil and gas sector can
be split into five distinct phases: early history (to 1870), first oil boom (),
onshore boom in the Soviet era (), offshore boom in the Soviet era (), and the
third oil boom (1991 onwards) Active local production and trade of light and
dark crude oil has been documented as early as the 10th century, initially
around the Absheron Peninsula and later in Baku as well as Balakhany In the 16th
century, some 500 oil wells were dug by hand to depths of as much as 35 metres
() in Baku alone Azerbaijani oil was transported and sold in Europe, Turkey, the
Northern Caucasus, Iran and Central Asia The world’ first modern oil well was
drilled in Absheron, Bibiheybat, in 1846, 13 years before the first US oil well
in Pennsylvania New well drilling technologies opened new fields and boosted oil
production As the number of operating companies multiplied, Azerbaijan
introduced its first oil industry regulations and concession auctions in After
almost  decade in Azerbaijan, Bank Rothschild founded the Caspian-Black Sea Oil
Company in 1886 and controlled 42% of Baku’ oil exports by Azerbaijani
production rose from 20 thousand barrels per day (kbd) ( million tonnes/year
[Mt/]) in 1883 to  kbd ( Mt/) in , accounting for over 50% of world production
Rising oil volumes required infrastructure In 1859, the country built its first
oil refinery1 and by 1867 some 15 oil refineries were operating The first ever
oil pipeline to connect the Baku refineries to the Balakhany oil fields (12 km)
was commissioned in 1878, and by 1898 some 230 km of pipes linked refineries to
oil fields The Baku-Batumi railway was commissioned in 1883 to export crude oil
and oil products to Europe The Baku-Batumi pipeline was completed in Oil
production subsequently fell to around 150 kbd ( Mt/ in ) under the pressures of
war, revolution and other shocks On the eve of the Soviet nationalisation of
Azerbaijan’ oil industry in 1920, oil production had deteriorated to 60 kbd (
Mt/), and it fell further to 50 kbd in 1921 ( Mt/) At the time, the oil industry
comprised some 270 oil producing enterprises, 49 small and mid-sized drilling
firms, 25 refining companies, and over 100 mechanical, repair and other
businesses The first of two peaks in drilling during the Soviet era delivered
large onshore discoveries Oil output rose steadily to 470 kbd (Mt) in 1941,
accounting for 76% of Soviet oil production Output then quickly slid to an
average 240 kbd (Mt/) in , as the USSR transferred Azerbaijan’ oil engineers to
develop fields in Central Asia The second Soviet-era drilling peak came in the
early 1950s and opened up offshore exploitation, as some of the first techniques
for offshore drilling and infrastructure were   combination of distillation and
cooling plants for the extraction of kerosene 36  OIL AND NATURAL GAS
established in Azerbaijan In 1950, the Oil Rocks field (Neft Dashlari), some 50
km offshore at  depth of -25 , was commissioned2 and several other oil and gas
fields followed Oil Rocks involved 300 km of causeways ("Estacada") linking
fixed production platforms and serving to both support pipelines and carry
supplies Output in the Oil Rocks field peaked in  at around 150 kbd ( Mt/) when
total Azerbaijani production reached 430 kbd (Mt/)               Until 1970,
offshore work depths did not exceed 40  Subsequent investment in offshore
equipment extended depths to 70  and eventually to 350  in the late 1970s and
early 1980s at fields such as Chirag, Kapaz, and Gunashli (Gunashli currently
produces more than 60% of SOCAR' oil) Production from new offshore fields slowed
but did not stop the steady decline in aggregate Azerbaijani output that began
after  and lasted until 1995 (except for  brief recovery in ) Overall,
production stagnated and slowly declined to 410 kbd (20 Mt/), or % of the Soviet
Union’ output in Declines continued until the recession following Azerbaijani
independence (post-1991), when oil production fell to 200 kbd (10 Mt/) (Ciarreta
and Nasirov, 2010) Following collapse of the USSR, Azerbaijan adopted  new oil
and gas strategy aimed at boosting the country’ economy In September 1994, SOCAR
and  BP-led consortium of international energy companies (organised as the
Azerbaijan International Operating Company – AIOC) signed  30-year () production
sharing agreement (PSA) called the Contract of the Century to develop the
supergiant Azeri-Chirag-Gunashli (ACG) block In September 2017, the PSA was
extended to the end of In 1996, the government signed  further PSA for
developing the Shah Deniz gas field with another BP-led consortium (including
SOCAR and five other companies) The combined contracts revitalised the oil and
gas sector, attracting massive international investments and increases in oil
and gas revenues for the country In 2006, construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-
Ceyhan (BTC) pipeline to transport oil from Baku to the Mediterranean
substantially facilitated the access of Caspian Sea oil resources to the world
oil market More recently, the construction of natural gas pipelines through
Turkey to the European Union has unlocked access to Caspian gas resources and
yielded Azerbaijan associated export revenues while allowing associated gas
condensate production to rise Reserves Azerbaijan’ remaining commercial liquid
reserves (crude and condensate) are typically indicated to be  billion barrels
(bbl) (BP, 2020) However, the Wood Mackenzie consultancy suggests they may
amount to only 11 billion bbl and explains that official data tend to be
optimistic and often include some sub-commercial volumes (Wood  Well No  was
drilled to 942  in depth in the Neft Dashlary formation in November 1949 and was
commissioned to produce 100 tonnes () of oil per day, laying the foundations for
offshore oil production  Gum-Deniz, Sangachal-Divanni-Deniz-Khara-Zira Island,
Bulla-Deniz, Darwin pitcher, Kurovdag, Mishovdag, Kursanga, Garabaghly, Galmaz,
Garabagh and others  13 leading oil companies (AMOCO, BP, Delta, Exxon, Itochu,
Lukoil, McDermott, Pennzoil, Remco, SOCAR, Statoil, Turkish Petrol and UNOCAL)
from eight countries (Azerbaijan, Japan, Norway, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Turkey,
the United Kingdom and the United States)  The participating interests in the
extended PSA are BP (37%), SOCAR (25%), MOL (57%, acquired from Chevron in
2020), INPEX (31%), Statoil (27%), ExxonMobil (79%), TPAO (73%), ITOCHU (65%)
and ONGC Videsh (31%)  The current participating interests in the PSA are BP
(%),TPAO (19%), SOCAR (%), Petronas (%), Lukoil (10%) and NIOC (10%) 37  OIL AND
NATURAL GAS Mackenzie, 2020) Azerbaijan’ natural gas reserves in 2019 have been
estimated at between 630 billion cubic metres (bcm) (Wood Mackenzie) and  800
bcm (BP), with OPEC giving  relatively central value of  718 bcm (OPEC, 2020) At
2019 gross production levels (780 kbd for oil and bcm for natural gas, according
to SSC, 2020a), this equates to  reserve life (reserves divided by annual gross
production) of  years for oil and  years for natural gas (Table ) Azerbaijan’
oil and gas reserves are located mainly in the South Caspian basin, split
between the Kura Intermontane depression and the South Caspian depression The
former includes most of the onshore fields and the shallow-water offshore fields
The latter contains the deeper water reservoirs, which have almost all of
Azerbaijan' significant remaining resources with exploration and development
potential (Wood Mackenzie, 2020) The shallow waters of the Absheron-Pribalkhan
trough, off the Absheron Peninsula, contain most of Azerbaijan’ liquid reserves
in  few large fields There are also some onshore resources in the Gobustan
trough, but these account for around only % of oil reserves Azerbaijan' gas
reserves exist both as non-associated offshore gas deposits and as associated
gas at offshore oil fields (onshore reserves are insignificant) Most of the
reserves are concentrated in the Absheron-Pribalkhan trough and the South
Caspian deep-water sub-basin Azerbaijan’ initial and remaining oil and gas
reserves, 2019 (in million barrels of oil equivalent) Remaining reserves 2020
Reserve life (years) Recoverable Production 2019 (SSC) Produced* Wood Mackenzie
Wood Mackenzie Wood Mackenzie BP BP BP 18 625 21 520 14 520  105  000 280 15 25
Liquids  525 24 045  095  430 19 950 252 18 79 Gas Total 27 150 45 565 18 615
535 26 950 512 17 53 * Based on Wood Mackenzie (2020),  Sources: BP (2020),
Statistical Review of World Energy 2020; Wood Mackenzie (2020), Azerbaijan
upstream summary,  27; SSC (2020a), Energy of Azerbaijan Onshore fields
(including the onshore Absheron peninsula, one of the world’ oldest oil
provinces) account for around only % of total Azerbaijani output today They have
suffered heavy depletion over many decades of development Nevertheless, onshore
reserves offer some limited upside potential through rehabilitation and deeper
exploration Offshore fields now offer the greatest potential for the future The
shallow-water Absheron province is the main productive oil play, and its
remaining prospective resources lie to the south of the peninsula Multiple
fields have been discovered there in the past 50 years, including the ACG
(around 70% of both current oil production and remaining commercial oil
reserves), Gunashli (around 10% of current oil production), oil at Gum Deniz,
gas at Bahar, and large discoveries at Oil Rocks (Wood Mackenzie, 2020) Outside
of the Absheron-Pribalkhan trend (where the ACG field is), offshore oil
exploration has been disappointing Offshore commercial fields offer further
prospects for the development of gas resources, notably at Shah Deniz Phase  and
in the form of ACG non-associated gas In the north and west of the Absheron
peninsula, minor oil discoveries have been made, some of which yielded gas
(including SOCAR’ Nakhichevan field) 38  OIL AND NATURAL GAS While
underexplored, the centre and south of the Caspian have revealed significant
structures at water depths of 30- 000 , containing mainly gas and condensate The
area’ significant gas potential was confirmed by discoveries at the Shah Deniz
gas field (around 80% of remaining commercial gas reserves, according to Wood
Mackenzie), and at Umid in 2010 and Absheron in 2011 (discovered in 500  of
water)               Exploration and production Licensing: Production sharing
agreements and risk service contracts Azerbaijan’ oil and gas resource
development since 1991 has depended on licensing international oil companies
(IOCs) Azerbaijan does not allocate exploration and development licences through
routine competitive licensing rounds; instead, SOCAR has directly negotiated
almost all contracts It has arranged licences annually since 1991, except in
2003, 2006, 2013 and It conferred the first 25 licences in the 10 years from
1991 to 2000, after which activity slowed and the next 25 licences were awarded
from 2001 to Following the first contract relinquishment in 1999, companies had
relinquished 17 licences by Exploration remains active, with several exploration
and appraisal wells planned (both on- and offshore) In Azerbaijan, upstream
projects involving international partners operate almost exclusively under PSAs
(also called production sharing contracts [PSCs]), but recently risk service
contracts (RSCs) have also been awarded Prior to the ground-breaking ACG PSA in
1994 (often referred to as the Contract of the Century), Azerbaijan used joint
venture (JV) contracts, but none have been issued since 1998 and all previous
JVs were converted to PSAs by Through SOCAR, the state holds  direct interest in
all PSAs of % The first RSC was awarded in 2017 (offshore Umid-Babek), with
second following in 2018 (offshore Karabagh) Each individual PSA and RSC is
ratified by the parliament and the president and has the status of  separate law
PSAs and RSCs share common attributes: they both grant foreign oil companies
exclusive rights to explore  defined area and to make discoveries; neither
confers  right to title over the oil produced; both deduct production costs to
determine net profit for sharing; and neither surrenders sovereignty over
resources The foreign partner assumes all risks and costs (carrying SOCAR
through the initial investment phases) and, if it makes  commercial discovery,
has those costs reimbursed plus  share of the production  PSA remunerates
companies in oil (cost oil and profit oil), while an RSC remunerates companies
with cash for costs and profit oil PSA and RSC terms include signature bonuses
paid to the state, commerciality bonuses in the event of  commercial discovery,
production bonuses when  commercial discovery comes into production, fixed cost
recovery (excluding bonuses), and profit splits based on  sliding-scale recovery
factor No royalties are payable, and crude oil (for cost recovery and profit
sharing) is valued at the netback value (weighted average price for quarterly
export sales adjusted for transportation costs) Azerbaijan has respected the tax
stability  The -factor defines the sliding scale that divides remaining
production after cost recovery between the contractor and the government  =
cumulative net income / cumulative investment, where cumulative net income =
cumulative capital cost recovery + cumulative financing cost recovery +
cumulative contractor' profit share, and where cumulative investment =
cumulative capital costs incurred 39  OIL AND NATURAL GAS of grandfathered PSAs
(Wood Mackenzie, 2020), with the terms of taxation set out in PSAs unaffected by
any subsequent changes in Azerbaijan’ tax regime Any associated gas is supplied
to SOCAR free of charge under PSA terms, but recent contracts allow for
reassessment of the terms in the event of  non-associated gas discovery Most
Azerbaijani PSAs have an exploration phase that lasts three years and imposes
minimum work plan (environmental and site surveys, defined numbers of 3D seismic
surveys, and  defined number of exploration wells) PSAs may have an optional
two-year extension, contingent on drilling more wells If exploration results in
commercial discovery, the government usually awards  25-year development phase
(plus  negotiable five-year extension) The development phase begins with the
preparation of  work programme that has to be undertaken within three years of
the date the commercial discovery is announced Subject to SOCAR’ approval, PSA
or RSC contractors may assign all or part of their interest to third parties
They can also give up their contract area to SOCAR, with 90 days’ notice and
once all obligations have been fulfilled or against payment of an equivalent sum
to SOCAR Contract holders are not charged VAT but must pay  10% withholding tax
Tax rates for foreign subcontractors vary and are defined separately for
individual PSAs Drilling Onshore drilling has historically fallen to SOCAR
Between 1986 and 1996, SOCAR’ activity (both onshore and offshore as well as in
maintenance) declined significantly because of insufficient funds SOCAR failed
to develop discoveries (such as ACG), expand production, or further its
exploration programme However, SOCAR’ financial resources recovered following
Azerbaijani independence and the arrival of IOCs It made its first major
offshore deep-water discovery in 2010 (the Umid field) Offshore drilling in
Azerbaijan involves significant complications, notably deep reservoirs ( 000-
000 , roughly twice the depth of onshore fields), high pressures (typically over
500 psi, or 586 bar), and unconsolidated seabeds IOCs drilled 18 offshore
exploration wells between 1991 and 2018, of which only two resulted in
commercial discoveries (the Shah Deniz and the Absheron gas condensate fields)
Furthermore, the services sector for the oil and gas industry has continually
constrained exploration and development, and it has taken almost three decades
to build up offshore drilling facilities Insufficient deep-water facilities and
concentration of service providers in just  few companies have imposed long lead
times before first production, particularly for deepwater projects Semi-
submersible rigs are essential both for deepwater exploration and appraisal
activity and for developing complex projects (such as Shah Deniz and Absheron)
To manage the post-independence scarcity of drilling facilities, early offshore
operators (four companies) formed the first “Rig Club” to share two rigs (Dada
Gorgud and Istiglal) This was not enough to prevent persistent rig shortages,
however, so SOCAR pressured international operators for assistance, resulting in
initial upgrades (Istiglal in 1999, at  cost of USD 210 million, and Dada Gorgud
in 2000, worth USD 36 million) followed by further modernisation Dada Gorgud is
now capable of drilling to  620  in water depths of up to 475 , and Istiglal
(which was further upgraded in ) can drill to  620  in water 40  OIL AND NATURAL
GAS up to 700  deep for over-pressured formations The Istiglal upgrades
permitted development of the Shah Deniz field               In 2003,  new semi-
submersible rig, the Maersk Explorer, was added (drilling to  140 , in water
depths of up to  000 ), and in May 2017 Azerbaijan’ Caspian Drilling Company
completed the Heydar Aliyev (at  cost of more than USD  billion),  semi-
submersible sixth-generation rig capable of withstanding up to  400 atmospheres
of pressure at water depths of up to  000  While the rig spudded its first well
in 2018 for Total' Absheron EPS, it will facilitate deepwater activity in
general and help free up other drilling resources Azerbaijan’ operators also
occasionally arrange to use  small fleet of jack-up rigs operating elsewhere in
the Caspian Oil production Azerbaijan’ oil production peaked at just over
million barrels per day (mbd) in 2009- 2010 (of which around 40 kbd was gas
condensate) and then gradually declined to 780 kbd in 2019 (of which 60 kbd is
condensate and 17 kbd is natural gas liquids [NGLs]) (Figure ) Development of
the ACG field has sustained output growth since 1997, and it continues to supply
most of Azerbaijan’ oil In 2010, ACG production amounted to 828 kbd, or around
80% of the country’ total oil supply, but by 2019 it had fallen to 540 kbd,
representing around 70% of the total (IEA, 2020a) ACG’ peak thus fell well below
the  mbd expected by BP in 2006 (BP, 2006) Azerbaijan has agreed to several
voluntary output cuts in recent years In December 2016, it joined other non-OPEC
producers to co-operate with OPEC in efforts to stabilise the oil market (later
formalised in  Charter of Cooperation or Declaration of Cooperation, signed on
July 2019) On that occasion, Azerbaijan agreed to cut output by 20 kbd for six
months (from  baseline value of 796 kbd in October 2016) as part of broader non-
OPEC cuts of 558 kbd and OPEC cuts of  mbd starting  January Since then, OPEC
and non-OPEC countries have regularly extended their Declaration of Cooperation
at biannual OPEC/non-OPEC meetings In 2020, as part of the OPEC+ response to the
Covid-19 impact on oil demand, Azerbaijan agreed to cut production from 720 kbd
in October 2019 to an average of 580 kbd from June to December In 2021, OPEC+
has reduced the production cuts, enabling Azerbaijan to gradually increase its
production to 620 kbd in July Future oil production will depend upon managing
the decline of the ACG field, the development of condensate and NGL production
from offshore gas discoveries, and future exploration success To manage falling
ACG production, BP (the operator) is investing in short-cycle brown- field
opportunities at ACG The company is also investing in  new production platform
(Azeri Central East [ACE]) to ramp up production to  peak of 100 kbd in the
mid-2020s, briefly stabilising overall ACG output The new investment follows
extension of the PSA in 2017 to end-The development of offshore condensate
production in recent years has slowed the decline in Azerbaijani oil output,
reflecting the preponderance of gas discoveries in new developments ( Absheron,
Shafag Asiman and Babek) Despite additional condensate from offshore gas
projects (notably Shah Deniz  and Absheron Deep Water), overall liquids
production will continue to fall as output from ACG declines 41  OIL AND NATURAL
GAS Figure  Crude oil and NGL production,  Mt 12% 60 Natural gas liquids* 10% 50
% 40 Crude oil % 30 Share of NGLs in total production (right axis) % 20 % 10
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 20182019 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ crude oil production has been in gradual decline since peaking in
2009-*Gas condensates from Shah Deniz are included in natural gas liquids data
Note: 2019 data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021
(database),  Companies have also shown renewed interest in onshore and near-
shore exploration Although smaller than the deepwater fields, onshore prospects
tend towards higher-value liquids; projects do not depend upon semi-submersible
offshore rigs with limited availability; and any discoveries can be more readily
fast-tracked for development (Wood Mackenzie, 2020) BP signed  PSA with SOCAR in
December 2014 to jointly explore and develop potential prospects in the shallow-
water area around the Absheron Peninsula up to the margins of the Caspian basin
in water depths of up to 40  and potential reservoir depths of  000- 000  This
PSA gives BP  50% interest as operator BP has since committed to drill
exploration wells in three prospective areas Gas production Azerbaijan has three
main sources of gas: ) the Shah Deniz field, the country’ largest gas resource
(around 19 bcm output in 2020); ) associated gas from the ACG block, which is
provided free to SOCAR under the PSA; and ) volumes produced by SOCAR from the
Shallow-Water Gunashli field and other smaller fields Shah Deniz phase  started
production in 2006 and quickly made Azerbaijan an important producer of gas as
well as oil It allowed the country to halt gas imports from Russia and rapidly
become  regional gas exporter Initially, Shah Deniz  could produce around 10
bcm/ of natural gas and around 50 kbd of condensates In 2014, action was taken
to remove bottlenecks, increasing production capacity to bcm/ The construction
of Shah Deniz  started in 2014 and the first gas was delivered in July Shah
Deniz  is ramping up to produce 16 bcm/ in the early 2020s (Figure ) Shah Deniz
is the gas source for the Southern Gas Corridor (SGC) project, which will take
Caspian gas across Georgia and Turkey to Europe The 16 bcm/ maximum production
has been sold under long-term contracts to Turkey ( bcm) and Greece, Bulgaria
and Italy (10 bcm) SOCAR announced in 2018 that  phase  was being considered for
Shah Deniz, but it is not yet clear whether this will go ahead (Caspian News,
2018; Wood Mackenzie, 2020) 42  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Figure  Natural gas
production,               bcm 30  25 20 Associated gas 15 10 Non-associated gas
2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 20182019 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ natural gas production is set to continue increasing to at least  as
the Shah Deniz  and Absheron projects ramp up Notes: 2019 data are provisional
Graph covers marketable quantity,  excluding quantities re-injected, vented or
flared Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Two other
recent discoveries appear set to boost longer-term Azerbaijani gas production:
Umid and Absheron (deepwater) Umid, commissioned in 2012, currently produces
modest volumes, and SOCAR has so far not succeeded in attracting IOC partners
for its expansion Absheron, fast-tracked via  small-scale early-production
scheme (as  single subsea well), is expected to begin production in 2022 and
reach  bcm in 2023 (reserves are estimated at 350 bcm of gas and 350 mb of
condensate) Subsequently,  larger-scale Phase  project will expand output Box
The status of national borders in the Caspian Sea The legal status of national
borders in the Caspian Sea has  direct impact on offshore oil and gas
development as well as on the development of trans-border infrastructure,
notably oil and gas pipelines crossing the Caspian The five Caspian states
(Azerbaijan, Islamic Republic of Iran (hereafter ‘Iran’), Kazakhstan, Russia and
Turkmenistan) signed the landmark Convention on the Legal Status of the Caspian
Sea in August 2018, almost 30 years after the breakup of the Soviet Union The
Convention establishes  special legal regime for the Caspian Sea, distinguishing
between the legal treatment of its surface and seabed (subsoil) It also provides
framework for future bilateral or trilateral talks, as well as environmental
protection measures, and allows construction of subsea pipelines under
agreements only between affected countries (Article 14), obviating the need for
approval by all Caspian states The Convention should allow the resolution of
various territorial claims by the Caspian states, as most states have ratified
it (Turkmenistan in December 2018, Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan in February 2019,
and Russia in October 2019) Only Iran has not ratified the Convention
Independently of the Convention, Russia, Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan agreed on
demarcations of their respective maritime borders in the north Caspian Sea
(based on the median line principle) through individual agreements between 1998
and 2003, and they signed  trilateral accord in 2003-The agreement specifically
includes development 43  OIL AND NATURAL GAS of three blocks straddling the
Russia-Kazakhstan border (Khvalynskoye, Kurmangazy and Tsentralnoye), specifying
50 split between the two countries Other Russian-Kazakh trans-median geological
structures must be developed under separate agreements and will require  50 JV
when disputed South Caspian Sea border delimitation remains in dispute, but
framework for future bilateral talks exists, since Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan
have both agreed to the median line principle, although their maritime border
remains undefined The Azerbaijan- Turkmenistan maritime border has  potentially
greater impact on the oil and gas industry The signing of  memorandum of
understanding between Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan in January 2021 on joint
exploration and development of the Dostluk (Friendship) field (formerly
Serdar/Kapaz) is  positive development It also paves the way to potentially
developing the Trans-Caspian Gas Pipeline to deliver Turkmen gas to Azerbaijan
and Europe Both Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan have border disputes with Iran,
which refuses to support the median line principle and does not recognise the
Russian-Kazakh-Azerbaijani trilateral accord Further exploration and development
of deepwater offshore prospects will support the expansion of gas production
Prospects include further development of discovered resources of non-associated
(deep) gas at ACG, Babek (SOCAR-operated) and Shafag Asiman (BP-operated) (Wood
Mackenzie, 2020) As with oil, lead times from discovery to first gas production
could be long due to deepwater service facility constraints Major gas export
expansion would also require new gas processing facilities and pipeline
extension The ramp-up in Shah Deniz  and Absheron production looks set to lift
Azerbaijani gas production in 2019 by around  bcm/ to an initial peak of around
28 bcm/ in 2022-After  slight dip in subsequent years, new development (Babek,
Umid, and Absheron Phases  and ) could push output from  up by 10% to  new peak
in 2030 (Rystad Energy, 2020) Development of Shah Deniz  would further augment
output Trade Crude oil trade Azerbaijan exports only one single crude quality,
the relatively light sweet grade Azeri Light (° API and 14% ) In 2019,
Azerbaijan reported total exports of Mt of crude and condensates Exports peaked
at around 44 Mt in  and have declined steadily since then, following Azerbaijan’
falling crude production (Figure ) The decline accelerated slightly in 2019
after the country adhered to the OPEC/Non-OPEC Declaration of Cooperation that
obliged it to cut output, and exports fell further in 2020 as these cuts were
expanded 44  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Figure  Crude oil and condensate exports by
country,               Mt 50  France 40 Germany 30 Israel Italy 20
Others/unspecified 10 Total 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 IEA All
rights reserved Azerbaijan’ export destinations are diversified, but most are in
Europe and the Mediterranean region Note: 2019 data are provisional Source: IEA
(2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Over 80% of Azerbaijan’ crude
exports were delivered to destinations in Europe in 2019, with Italy receiving
39%, Germany 11% and the Czech Republic % Around 19% of crude exports went to
non-European destinations, with China accounting for slightly over % and Canada
for around % Other export destinations close to Europe include Tunisia and
Israel, and other destinations in Asia include major refiners such as India,
Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand Most of these exports are loaded at the Ceyhan
terminal in Turkey Minor volumes move to European destinations through the
Russian pipeline system (around  Mt in 2019, mostly delivered to Austria) or are
loaded from ports in Georgia (see Figure  map) Oil product trade Oil product
trade amounted to  Mt in Azerbaijan’ net product surplus has progressively
eroded over the past decade (Figure  and Figure ) With rapid growth in car use,
gasoline demand has outstripped refinery production since 2014 and moved the
country from being  net gasoline exporter to  modest net importer (around 280
kilotonnes [kt] in 2019) In addition to premium gasoline, which is not produced
in the country, net imports include some heavy fuel oil For other major oil
products, Azerbaijan is balanced or is  net exporter 45  OIL AND NATURAL GAS
Figure  Oil product net trade by country,  Mt Net imports  Turkmenistan -  Italy
Turkey -  Georgia -  Russian Federation -  Others/unspecified -  Net trade -
Net exports -  2005 2007 2017 2019 2009 2011 2013 2015 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ oil product trade is relatively balanced and regional Note: 2019
data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),
Figure  Oil product net trade by category,  Mt Net imports  Motor gasoline Fuel
oil -  LPG -  Jet kerosene -  Petroleum coke -  Gas/diesel oil -
Others/unspecified -  Net exports Net trade -  2005 2007 2009 2011 2017 2019
2013 2015 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ domestic refineries meet demand
for most products, excluding premium gasoline Note: 2019 data are provisional
Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Refining policy has
focused on meeting domestic gasoline demand, and the resulting surplus products,
mainly gasoil and kerosene, create export opportunities More generally, SOCAR
imports products to cover local needs during peak seasonal demand, periods of
refinery maintenance or refinery outages Oil export infrastructure Although much
of Azerbaijan' oil and gas infrastructure dates from the Soviet era, its export
infrastructure was diversified after independence in the 1990s and 2000s in
response to large new upstream projects Foreign investment has been critical for
building the new export routes and maintaining the legacy pipeline network,
which remains in need of intensive repairs Oil is exported through three
pipelines and by rail Crude oil is mostly delivered by the BTC pipeline to
Ceyhan, Turkey, and by the Western Route Export Pipeline (WREP) to Supsa, 46
OIL AND NATURAL GAS Georgia, but the Northern Route Export Pipeline (NREP) to
Novorossiysk, Russia and rail connections to the Batumi and Kulevi terminals on
the Black Sea coast of Georgia are also used (SOCAR Trading, 2020)
The  768-km BTC links the Sangachal terminal (Box ) to the Ceyhan marine
terminal in Turkey It has  capacity of  mbd The BTC was inaugurated in May 2005
and its first oil reached Ceyhan in May While it mainly transports oil from ACG
and condensate from Shah Deniz, it also carries oil from Kazakhstan and
Turkmenistan BP operates the Azerbaijani and Georgian sections of the pipeline,
and BOTAS International Limited the Turkish section The 833-km WREP (Baku-Supsa
pipeline) has  capacity of 150 kbd It was completed in 1999, following an
intergovernmental agreement with Georgia signed in The WREP is owned by the AIOC
and operated by BP The  330-km NREP has been operating since 1983, and
originally transported crude oil from Grozny (Russia) to Baku for processing In
1997, the pipeline was reversed and upgraded to pump crude from the Sangachal
terminal to the port of Novorossiysk in the Black Sea basin The pipeline was
then used to export ACG crude until 2007 when this oil shifted to the BTC
pipeline SOCAR continues to use the 105-kbd NREP to diversify export outlets,
but volumes averaged around only 25 kbd in  (Wood Mackenzie, 2020) The pipeline
is operated collaboratively by Russia’ oil pipeline operator, Transneft, and
SOCAR Cross-border rail infrastructure can transport around 280 kbd of crude
oil, condensate and refined products to Georgia' Black Sea ports of Batumi,
Kulevi and Poti, and to Kars in Turkey Usage has fallen well below capacity,
however, as competitive pipeline options are preferred The Baku-Tbilisi-
Batumi/Poti rail line (built in 1883, repaired and restored in 1999) is used by
SOCAR and by ACG producers not belonging to the BTC Pipeline consortium; it is
also used for gas condensate from Shah Deniz The Baku-Kulevi line was
commissioned in Kazakh crude and Turkmen oil products are transported on both
lines to the Georgian ports Azerbaijan' Caspian ports and terminals regularly
trans-ship Central Asian crude and refined products to the Black Sea (via
pipeline or rail, mainly from SOCAR’ 10 Mt/ Dubendi Oil Terminal, which is 50 km
northeast of Baku) and to the Mediterranean (crude via the BTC pipeline) Despite
requiring multiple transfers between tankers, pipelines and rail, the routes are
competitive with exports via Russia because, unlike in the Transneft system,
they segregate the crude, preserving its quality-linked value Box  The Sangachal
oil and gas terminal Sangachal is one of the world' largest oil and gas
terminals, and it is the critical hub of Azerbaijan’ oil and gas sector It
receives, processes, stores and exports crude oil and gas from all BP-operated
assets in the Caspian basin, particularly from ACG and Shah Deniz It also
receives third-party oil from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan The terminal is
located in  600-hectare area on the Caspian Sea coast 55 km south of Baku It is
owned by the Azerbaijani International Operating Company and operated by BP 47
OIL AND NATURAL GAS The Sangachal terminal was built in two phases: the Early
Oil Project (EOP) and the Sangachal Terminal Expansion Programme (STEP) EOP,
built in , handles oil from the Chirag offshore field Housing four crude storage
tanks (kb each), it can process, store and export 120 kbd of crude via pipeline
to Supsa and Novorossiysk STEP significantly expanded the terminal’ capacity to
receive, process and store oil from the Azeri and Deepwater Gunashli sections of
the ACG field, and to receive and process gas from the Shah Deniz field It
houses three crude oil storage tanks of 880 kb each, together with the ACG oil
processing facilities It also accommodates the head pump station of the BTC oil
pipeline and the compressor of the Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum gas pipeline (also known
as the South Caucasus Pipeline [SCP]) In 2018, the terminal was further expanded
to accommodate gas from Shah Deniz The terminal can process  mbd of crude and
store around  mb ( mb maximum) It can also process around 50 million cubic
metres per day (mcm/) (bcm/) of gas (30 mcm/ from Shah Deniz and 20 mcm/ from
ACG) During the first three months of 2020, the Sangachal terminal exported
about 735 kbd of crude and condensate (640 kbd via the BTC and around 95 kbd
through the WREP) BP indicates that processed gas during this period amounted to
51 mcm/ Most of it was exported via the SCP and SCP expansion system, but some
of it was fed into the national gas grid Sources: BP (2019), Sangachal terminal,
are/operationsprojects/terminals/sangachal_terminalhtml; BP (2018), Work on
Sangachal terminal expansion project completed by 95%,  Gas trade The
Azerbaijani gas market and gas trade remained modest until 2007, when Shah Deniz
was commissioned Since then, gas supply has expanded rapidly Azerbaijan has
developed its own natural gas use, with around 96% of the population today
having access to gas, and has put pipeline infrastructure in place for gas
exports After the commissioning of Shah Deniz , the Azerbaijani gas market
developed rapidly, and Azerbaijan transitioned from being  net gas importer
(from Russia) to  regional exporter, with exports going to Georgia and Turkey
(via the SCP) as well as to Russia () Sharply rising domestic demand and  surge
in exports (from  bcm in 2007 to  bcm in 2011 and  bcm in 2015) tightened the
Azerbaijani gas balance in 2016 and 2017, forcing the country to import gas from
Russia and Turkmenistan (via Iran) to meet domestic demand as well as its rising
export obligations to Georgia and Turkey The launch of Shah Deniz  in 2018
enabled Azerbaijan to reduce gas imports and expand exports The seasonality of
Azerbaijani gas demand is likely to continue to create periodic domestic supply
shortfalls, sustaining some import volumes Imports from Turkmenistan fell from
bcm in 2017 to  bcm in 2019, while those from Russia increased from  bcm in 2017
to around  bcm in 2018 and dropped again to  bcm in Exports reached bcm in 2019,
notably to Turkey through the newly launched Trans- Anatolian Pipeline (TANAP)
Azerbaijan also exports gas to Georgia ( bcm in 2018, 48  OIL AND NATURAL GAS
including gas from Shah Deniz and SOCAR' own fields) Exports are set to increase
another  bcm/ by  as gas production ramps up (see earlier section on gas
production)               Azerbaijan’ Nakhichevan exclave has imported gas under
swap agreement with Iran since 2004, in which Baku supplies gas to Iran’
isolated northwest border city of Astara (disconnected from Iran’ gas grid) and
Iran transits 85% of it to Nakhichevan while retaining 15% as payment-in-kind
for its role In 2020, Turkey and Azerbaijan fast-tracked  new pipeline to
Nakhichevan through eastern Turkey (planned since 2010) with  capacity of around
bcm/ (over four times the region' consumption) The pipeline will not begin
operating until 2022 at the earliest (Eurasianet, 2020) Gas export
infrastructure The SGC dominates Azerbaijan’ gas export infrastructure The
project was planned to transport Caspian gas to Europe, initially from Shah
Deniz , and potentially later from the broader Caspian region Azerbaijan signed
an initial Joint Declaration on the SGC with the European Union in January 2011
and committed to the long-term supply of about 10 bcm/ of gas (ECS, 2011) The
600-km SGC pipeline system comprises four parts: the Shah Deniz  gas field; the
SCP expansion from the Sangachal terminal to Georgia; the TANAP from Turkey’
border with Georgia to its border with Greece; and the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline
(TAP) from Greece’ border with Turkey across Albania and under the Adriatic Sea
to Puglia in Italy SOCAR and BP are key shareholders in each of the four parts
of the SGC, but several other national and international energy companies also
hold shares in them The SGC, which was  priority energy project for the European
Union, has now been successfully completed The 16-bcm/ TANAP was commissioned in
2018 and the 10-bcm/ TAP in November 2020, and their capacity can be doubled
with additional investments Gas deliveries to Italy began at the end of December
In late 2011, the European Union began negotiations with Azerbaijan and
Turkmenistan on developing  Trans-Caspian pipeline to transport Turkmen gas to
Europe through Azerbaijan and Turkey Despite negotiations reportedly ongoing,
other neighbouring countries have yet to support the project (see Box ) No
natural gas is currently transited through the territory of Azerbaijan 49  OIL
AND NATURAL GAS Figure  Azerbaijan’ oil and gas infrastructure IEA All rights
reserved Azerbaijan also exports gas to Georgia, for which it is the main gas
supplier SOCAR exports the gas via  legacy Kazi Magomed-Kazakh pipeline, which
was commissioned in 1970 and extended to Tbilisi in The -bcm/ pipeline was
originally used to deliver Russian and Turkmen gas to Azerbaijan and also to
Georgia and Armenia In 2010, the pipeline was reversed to export Azerbaijani gas
under  five-year gas sales agreement that was cut short at the end of 2014 (IEA,
2020b) Azerbaijan’ pipeline system has been connected with Iran’ through the
Kazi Magomed- Astara line since The line was used as part of  swap to deliver
Iranian gas to the Soviet Union, which exported an equivalent amount to Europe
The capacity was bcm/ Azerbaijan reversed the line in 2006 to allow exports to
Iran (- bcm/) to supply the Nakhichevan exclave through swaps 50  OIL AND
NATURAL GAS              State oil and gas revenue  Crude oil, oil products and
natural gas account for around 60% of the government budget revenue and 90% of
Azerbaijan’ annual export revenue The State Oil Fund of the Republic of
Azerbaijan (SOFAZ) alone has provided around half of the government’ revenue in
the past decade From 2010 to 2019, its share ranged from % in 2017 to % in 2013
and the median was % (SOFAZ, 2019) The oil and gas sector share in 2019 totalled
59%: in addition to SOFAZ transfers, it included taxes paid by SOCAR and the
foreign contractors of the ACG and Shah Deniz PSAs The government established
SOFAZ in 1999 as  sovereign wealth fund for oil industry revenues The main
objective of SOFAZ is to accumulate and efficiently manage oil and gas revenues
by transforming depletable hydrocarbon reserves into assets in non-oil sectors,
both domestically and internationally, which, in turn, generate perpetual income
for both current and future generations According to its rules, SOFAZ is to save
and invest 25% of the peak oil and gas revenues it receives To date, most of its
revenues have been used to fund the government budget, but total assets grew
from USD 22 billion to USD 43 billion between 2010 and 2019, and they generated
an average annual rate of return of % As of January 2021, SOFAZ held assets of
USD billion, almost equalling the country’ GDP In 2019, SOFAZ’ revenues totalled
AZN billion (USD billion) and expenditures AZN billion (USD  billion) The
revenues were mostly from the sales of oil from ACG (USD  billion) and gas and
condensates from Shah Deniz (USD  billion) The state share of the ACG profit oil
is fixed at 75%, while its share of Shah Deniz gas is based on  sliding-scale
recovery factor defined in the PSA Revenues also included returns from SOFAZ’
investments (USD  billion), bonus payments (USD 45 billion) and other oil and
gas sales revenue, transit fees and acreage fees (USD 069 billion in total)
Transfers to the government budget accounted for 98% of SOFAZ’ expenditures,
while the rest was used for social projects and SOFAZ’ administrative expenses
(SOFAZ, 2019) The share of oil and gas in Azerbaijan’ export revenues is
relatively stable, ranging from 90% to 94% during 2014-Growing volumes of gas
exports increased its share of export revenues from % in 2014 to 13% in 2019,
while declining volumes and unit prices of crude oil reduced its share from 83%
in 2014 to 74% in 2019 (Table ) Azerbaijan oil and natural gas export revenues,
Exports (USD bn) 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Crude oil Oil products
Natural gas       Oil and gas, total 51  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Share of total AZ
exports, % 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Crude oil 83 75 79 79 80 74 Natural gas
11    13 Oil and gas, total 94 90 90 90 91 90 Source: SSC (2020b), The Foreign
Trade of Azerbaijan Demand Oil demand In 2019, oil consumption in Azerbaijan was
Mt (Figure ) Excluding power and heat generation, it rose by just over 47%
between 2008 and Most of the growth came from the transport sector, where oil
consumption increased 51% over the period The government does not publish energy
scenarios, but it is reasonable to assume that oil demand in transport will
continue to rise as car ownership increases The transport sector (mostly road
transport) remains by far the largest oil-consuming sector, using 62% of the
total in Road transport consumption is split roughly 60 between motor gasoline
and diesel Industry consumption has increased slightly in recent years and
accounted for around 28% of the total in The service sector and agriculture
accounted for another %, with the remainder attributed to the residential and
energy sectors Until 2009, fuel oil was  major source of power and heat
production, but it has since been phased out Following  2002 presidential
decree, most oil-fired power plants were modernised and switched to natural gas
However, fuel oil can still be used in emergencies In fact, some fuel oil had to
be imported to run power plants during  because of natural gas shortages In
2019,  tiny amount of oil was still used in power and heat generation Figure
Oil supply by sector,  Mt Residential   Power and heat generation  Other energy*
Services/other**  Industry   Transport 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
2016 20182019 IEA All rights reserved Transport demand increased Azerbaijan’ oil
consumption over the past decade, while its use in power and heat plants became
marginal * Includes non-specified consumption in the energy sector ** Includes
commercial and public services, agriculture, forestry and fishing Note: Total
consumption includes international aviation (which does not appear in TES) and
excludes international marine bunkers Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances
2021 (database),  52  OIL AND NATURAL GAS              Gas demand Natural gas is
the main source of primary energy in Azerbaijan, accounting for two-thirds of
the total in As the country’ gas production has increased, so has gas demand,
reaching bcm in 2018 and bcm in 2019 (Figure ) Natural gas has taken the place
of fuel oil in power and heat plants, and today it accounts for more than 90% of
the country’ electricity generation The government’ policy of expanding the gas
network to reach the whole population has led to inexpensive gas becoming the
main heating fuel Demand is seasonal: it is lowest in May and June (around  bcm
per month) and highest in December-February (around - bcm per month)  Figure
Natural gas supply by sector,  bcm 14 Transport 12 Services/other* 10
Industry**  Other energy***  Residential  Power and heat generation 2000 2002
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 20182019 IEA All rights reserved Gas demand
in Azerbaijan is dominated by power and heat plants, followed by households *
Includes commercial and public services, agriculture and forestry ** Includes
non-energy consumption *** Includes the energy sector’ own consumption and
losses in oil and gas production Note:  bcm equals 85 Mtoe Source: IEA (2021a),
World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Power generation and co-generation8
accounted for around 49% of Azerbaijani natural gas use in 2019, the
residential, service and tertiary sectors combined for 33%, industry for %, the
energy industry itself for around % (oil and gas extraction, refining and
pipelines), and petrochemical feedstocks for less than % Losses amounted to over
% of total gas supplied to the Azerbaijani market While the figure for losses is
down from  peak of 12% in , it is well above the % global average Although gas
use in transport remains very limited, SOCAR has developed compressed natural
gas vehicle fuels in the Baku area, helping cut oil product imports and reduce
fuel costs for drivers Out of Baku’  200 buses, around 600 run on compressed
natural gas (CNG) (Azernews, 2020)  Co-generation refers to the combined
production of heat and power 53  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Regulation Laws The two
main segments of Azerbaijan’ oil and gas sector are export-oriented production
and the state-controlled domestic market The main laws governing oil and gas
development and operations were adopted in the 1990s and include (ECS 2011): 
The 1996 Energy Resources Law, which sets out the social, economic and legal
bases of state policy relating to use of energy resources  The 1998 Subsoil
Law, covering subsoil resources in Azerbaijan and within the Azerbaijani sector
of the Caspian Sea (including, but not limited to, oil and gas) It governs the
exploration, use, protection, safety and supervision of the use of subsoil
resources, and it stipulates that no person or legal entity may engage in oil or
gas exploration and production without  licence Moreover,  production licence
must be issued for  particular subsoil block  The 1998 Energy Law, which
complements the Subsoil Law It regulates the exploration, exploitation,
production, processing, storage, transportation, distribution and use of all
“energy materials and products”, including oil and gas It stipulates that the
production rights for  specified block are granted exclusively on the basis of
contract, detailing the terms and conditions of such  contract and the procedure
for its conclusion  The 1998 Law on Gas Supply, concerning all types of gas in
Azerbaijan (including natural gas) and regulating the industry in various areas,
including production, processing, transportation, storage, distribution,
marketing and use  The 1998 Law on Natural Monopolies (amended in 2001), which
regulates natural monopolies in relevant commodity markets and their relations
to consumers and state bodies It applies particularly to monopolies involved in
pipeline transportation, storage and distribution of natural gas  The 1992 Law
on the Protection of Foreign Investment, covering the purchase/lease of rights
to land and natural resources It deals with the creation of enterprises and
representative offices wholly owned by foreign investors, and with their
participation in JVs with Azerbaijani citizens or organisations It guarantees
foreign investors the right to repatriate earnings and profits, after payment of
all taxes and duties, and provides protection against subsequent adverse changes
to legal or regulatory regimes (though not for legislation on taxation, military
defence, national security or environmental protection)  The 2009 Law on the
Application of Special Economic Regulations to Oil and Gas Activity for Export
Purposes, which provides economic incentives for Azerbaijani suppliers of goods
and services for oil and gas projects outside the country As part of the 2019
push for energy sector reform (see Chapter ), the Ministry of Energy (MoE) is
preparing  revision of the 1998 Law on Gas Supply that would include  phased
transition to  gas supply market with the aim of improving overall sector
performance The Law on the Regulator is also pending approval Once in force, it
will empower the Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory Agency (AERA, established in 2017)
to regulate natural gas and other utility operations 54  OIL AND NATURAL GAS
Regulatory bodies Since the early 1990s, Azerbaijan has been transitioning
gradually to separate policy, regulatory oversight and industry operations in
the oil and gas sector Before the Fuel and Energy Ministry (FEM) was created in
2001, SOCAR itself, since its creation in 1992, had been in charge of regulating
the oil and gas industry, while the President of Azerbaijan directly controlled
SOCAR and made all final decisions on contracts with foreign investors When the
FEM came into being in 2001, it was given jurisdiction over the state-owned
energy companies (SOCAR and Azerenergy) and the authority to prepare
legislation, determine energy policy, set tariffs and ensure energy security
While FEM negotiated PSAs, SOCAR still signed the final agreements  The MoE was
created in 2013 to replace FEM and was given expanded powers to issue licences
as well as oversee state enterprises and ensure they follow the state' interests
It was also put in charge of preparing, negotiating and monitoring PSAs as well
as signing subsoil agreements This division of responsibilities was intended to
address potential conflicts of interest with SOCAR that had previously existed
It is not clear, however, whether the MoE is fully exercising these powers yet
(Wood Mackenzie, 2020) With the establishment of AERA in December 2017 and the
pending Law on the Regulator, the government is taking steps to more clearly
separate energy policymaking and oversight of the state-owned monopoly This is
consistent with the market reform objective of the pending revision of the Law
on Gas Supply (see above) Retail tariffs The Tariff Council sets the wholesale
and retail prices of all oil products and natural gas (and electricity and
district heat) except for imports of premium gasoline, the price of which is
determined by retailers Retail prices for oil products and natural gas are not
directly linked to the international market While various methods exist to set
energy tariffs, they are generally determined based on  “cost-plus” methodology
By international standards, gasoline and diesel prices in Azerbaijan are very
low, but they are in line with those of many other producing countries Retail
oil prices are changed relatively seldom, and the changes appear to lack
transparency, despite their substantial impacts on consumers In January 2015,
the Tariff Council increased the retail price per litre of AI-92 gasoline from
AZN 70 to AZN 72 (USD 42) and that of diesel from AZN 60 to AZN 62 (USD 36) In
July 2017, at the request of SOCAR, the Tariff Council increased the retail
price per litre of AI-92 gasoline by AZN  to AZN 90 (USD 52) In July 2020, SOCAR
hiked the price of imported premium Euro-95 gasoline from AZN  to AZN  per litre
to align it with import costs (Ona, 2020) The Tariff Council raised the retail
price of RON-92 gasoline to AZN  (USD 59) and that of diesel to AZN  (USD 47)
per litre in January Natural gas tariffs have been relatively stable and are
among the lowest in the region (Figure ) There were few price adjustments during
, and the latest changes relate to the introduction of “inclining block tariffs”
The preferential limit for residential gas tariffs was increased from  500 cubic
metres per year (m3/) to  700 m3/ in December 2016 and further to  200 m3/ in
May As  result of these changes, more than  million subscribers and more than
million citizens are now in the lowest price category, and the proportion of gas
subscribers in this category has increased from 70% to 85% 55  OIL AND NATURAL
GAS Like many other producer countries, the Azerbaijani government subsidises
citizens and businesses by providing low-cost energy, particularly low-cost
natural gas All consumers, irrespective of income, benefit from the low
regulated gas tariffs However, restricting energy prices to below market levels
leads to inefficient energy use and weakens incentives to invest in improvements
and stop leaks in gas transportation and the distribution grid The IEA measures
the cost of fossil fuel subsidies in Azerbaijan and other exporting countries as
the difference between export prices and domestic end-user prices This price-gap
analysis therefore puts the cost of Azerbaijan’ annual oil subsidies at around
USD 900 million and gas subsidies at around USD 600 million in  (see Chapter )
For example, the average gas export price in 2019 was USD 190 (AZN 330) per  000
m3, which was significantly higher than the tariffs for domestic consumers
(Table ) Natural gas tariffs in Azerbaijan Tariff (AZN/ 000 m3), incl VAT
Service No  Natural gas processing   Transportation of natural gas (per 100 km)
Wholesale price to the distributors 75  Retail price of natural gas  Residential
customers  with annual consumption up to  200 m3 100  with annual consumption
higher than  200 m3 200  Non-residential customers 200  Electricity generators
(consuming at least 10 mcm/month) 120 USD  = AZN 70 Source: Tariff Council
(2021), Processing, transportation, wholesale and retail tariffs of natural gas
Figure  Natural gas prices for households in selected countries, 2019 USD
PPP/MWh 140 120 100 80 60 40 20  IEA All rights reserved Gas prices for
households in Azerbaijan are very low by international standards Notes: PPP =
purchasing power parity MWh = megawatt hour Source: IEA (2021b), World Energy
Prices 2021 (database),  56  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Domestic operations and
infrastructure               Midstream Oil transportation and storage SOCAR owns
and operates Azerbaijan' domestic crude oil pipeline system, which comprises
over 770 km of onshore and  975 km of offshore pipelines and nine pump stations
Overall, Azerbaijan has some  mb of storage capacity for crude oil, condensate
and oil products, equalling less than ten days of their combined production The
storage is for operational purposes, and most of the capacity is at the
terminals of Sangachal ( mb) and Dubendi ( mb) Other storage facilities include
Ali-Bairamly (four tanks of 35 kb each), Dashgil (two tanks of 140 kb each),
Puta (six tanks of 35 kb each) and Surakhany (six tanks of 35 kb and three tanks
of 14 kb each) Gas transportation and storage SOCAR subsidiary Azerigaz owns and
operates the domestic gas pipeline system and implements the state programme of
expanding gas supply to the country' municipalities The gas supply system
includes around  500 km of trunk lines and more than 36 000 km of low- and
medium-pressure distribution grids,  compressor stations and 150 gas
distribution stations In 2019, around  700 km of new lines were added, and 680
km of the existing grid (less than % of the total length) refurbished Losses
remain high by international standards at more than % of total gas supplied
Azerbaijan has two underground gas storage facilities, both in depleted gas
reservoirs: the -bcm Galmaz (75 km south-west of Baku) and the -bcm Garadagh In
May 2019,  new compressor station at Galmaz boosted storage capacity by  bcm and
pumping capacity by 30% to 13 mcm/day, helping to meet demand during peak winter
periods and facilitating the transportation of Azerbaijani gas Gas storage also
helps minimise the effects of any production outages SOCAR is considering action
to expand total capacity at Galmaz and Garadagh to  bcm by increasing operating
pressures Downstream In addition to oil and gas production, storage and
transportation, SOCAR is involved in oil refining, gas processing and
petrochemicals production at several locations It also has  monopoly in gas
retail, but not in oil retail, where there is market competition SOCAR has
modernised and expanded its production facilities in recent years, and it is
planning  major integrated oil, gas and petrochemical complex (OGPC) in
Garadagh, close to the Sangachal terminal (see Box ) 57  OIL AND NATURAL GAS Box
SOCAR The Azerbaijani government created SOCAR in 1992 to manage oil and gas
production, refining, exports and imports on behalf of the state Today, SOCAR is
the country’ largest company in terms of tax revenue, employment and
international presence SOCAR explores for oil and gas; produces, transports,
processes and refines oil, gas, and gas condensate; negotiates contracts the
state; markets oil products and for petrochemicals in both domestic and
international markets; and supplies natural gas to industry and the public in
Azerbaijan It has  domestic market monopoly in natural gas and in oil refining
and oil product distribution It also has subdivisions and trusts operating as
corporate entities (SOCAR, 2020) Overseas, SOCAR owns  refinery in Turkey, has
oil product marketing activities in several countries (Georgia, Turkey, Romania,
Switzerland, Germany and Ukraine) and international oil trading offices SOCAR
holds the state’ stakes in all upstream PSAs and RSCs in Azerbaijan as well as
in oil and gas export pipelines Other international partners in the PSAs often
carry SOCAR' financial obligations through one or more contract phases ( the
exploration phase) It also participates in around 30 JVs, such as the Caspian
Drilling Company (offshore drilling operations), Cross Caspian Oil and Gas
Logistics LLC, Azfen (construction), Baku Shipyard LLC, BOSShelf LLC (offshore
construction), Oil and Gas ProServ LLC, SOCAR Foster Wheeler Engineering
Service, SOCAR KBR, and SOCAR Petrofac The state company’ oil output has
averaged around 150 kbd since 2016, equivalent to roughly 20% of Azerbaijani
output Its production is relatively stable, and its share in overall production
has been rising slightly SOCAR’ oil production costs averaged USD 37/bl in 2018,
up % from SOCAR’ gross natural gas output has averaged around  bcm/ since 2016,
or  bit more than one-fifth of Azerbaijani output SOCAR’ revenues, which come
mainly from the ACG and Shah Deniz fields, amounted to USD 49 billion in 2019,
with  net profit of USD 382 million International sales and trading (conducted
through SOCAR Trading in Switzerland) accounted for 76% of total revenues By
product category, most revenue (61%) came from crude oil sales, % from oil
products, % from petrochemical products, and % from natural gas (SOCAR, 2020)
The Azerbaijani state continues to provide financial and strategic support to
SOCAR The government supports the company through investments, subsidies, loans
and tax breaks, and by facilitating the raising of capital In turn, SOCAR pays
taxes, invests and supplies oil and natural gas domestically at prices that the
government sets substantially below world market prices In his August 2020
speech about liberalising the economy, President Aliyev called for broader
reforms in the sphere of privatisation (BRI, 2020)  In Geneva, London,
Singapore, Dubai and Houston, plus several other representative offices 58  OIL
AND NATURAL GAS Oil refining              SOCAR has recently concentrated its
refining operations at the Heydar Aliyev Refinery (HAR) northeast of Baku and
closed and demolished the older Azerneftyag refinery in the city of Baku The HAR
has  capacity of  Mt/, or around 130 kbd For the past 10 years, total refinery
runs have fluctuated from 115 kbd to 130 kbd, averaging 120 kbd  The HAR
produces liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), gasoline, kerosene and diesel, primarily
for the domestic market, as well as low-sulphur coke Its output meets most
Azerbaijani needs for heavy fuel oil and light products, except for small shares
of gasoline and kerosene The HAR also provides feedstock for the Azerikimya
complex in Sumgayit, north of Baku To accommodate closure of the Azerneftyag
refinery and to add bitumen blowing capacity to maintain asphalt production, HAR
capacity is being expanded The renovation project, which includes upgrading as
well as expansion, is expected to be completed in 2023 and increase throughput
up to  Mt/, or 150 kbd (SOCAR, 2021) It will reduce import requirements and
boost gasoline and diesel quality from Euro  to Euro , which will also help
improve air quality in and around Baku (BRI, 2020) The upgrades will ensure HAR’
reliable operations for another 15 years – long enough to integrate an entirely
new refinery at the gas processing and petrochemicals production complex planned
to be constructed in Garadagh (see below) Gas processing and monetisation
Azerbaijan’ gas processing capacity has been expanded to accommodate its rise in
gas production, and it now totals around 25 bcm/ Gas is processed at two
facilities: the Sangachal terminal (around 18 bcm/; see Box ) and Garadagh (
bcm/) The Garadagh gas processing plant is linked to  -bcm gas storage facility,
and both are operated by SOCAR The Garadagh plant produces dry gas, natural
gasoline, butane,  propane-butane mixture, heavy condensates, and other products
(SOCAR, 2020) Despite several expansions and upgrades since being commissioned
in 1961, it is now relatively old and there are plans to replace it with  new
10-bcm/ plant in the Garadagh OGPC (see below) Having ample gas supplies has
allowed Azerbaijan to develop industrial activities to monetise the gas at three
facilities: the SOCAR Methanol plant (also in Garadagh) and the SOCAR Azerikimya
and SOCAR Carbamide complexes in Sumgayit There are plans to replace the
Sumgayit complexes with new capacity to be built at the Garadagh OGPC  The
SOCAR Methanol plant was commissioned in It has  capacity of  kt/ of high-purity
methanol Production is mostly exported to Turkey, Western Europe and the
Mediterranean region (SOCAR, 2020)  The SOCAR Azerikimya complex holds an
ethylene-polyethylene plant (EP-300) and  polymer plant as well as an isopropyl
alcohol production unit It also produces steam and electricity (32 MW capacity)
Plant modernisation in  boosted production capacity and product quality, and in
2018 the complex produced over 337 kt of products such as polyethylene,
ethylene, propylene, liquid and heavy pyrolysis resin, butane- butylene
fractions and absolute isopropyl alcohol Around 70% of production is exported,
including to Turkey, Russia, the Caucasus, Central Asia, Eastern and Western
Europe, China and Viet Nam (MENAFN, 2019) 59  OIL AND NATURAL GAS  The SOCAR
Carbamide fertiliser complex was commissioned in January It will gradually
increase production to 2023, when it is expected to use around 435 mcm/ of
natural gas to produce 400 kt/ of liquid ammonia and 650 kt/ of granulated urea
Around 70% of its production will be exported, while the remaining 30% is
expected to entirely eliminate the need to import nitrogen fertilisers (Globuc,
2019) Garadagh oil, gas and petrochemical complex SOCAR is planning to build an
integrated OGPC in Garadagh, 15 km south of Baku The complex would be built in
phases, with the first one comprising  gas processing plant (10 bcm/) and
several petrochemical plants:  gas-powered ethylene pyrolysis plant (610 kt/),
propylene plant (130 kt/) and  polyethylene plant (600 kt/) as well as Butene-
and Hexene- plants and  heat and power plant The complex plans to use the NGLs
recovered from gas plants as  low-cost feedstock SOCAR has not made  final
investment decision on the project  possible second phase would include an oil
refinery complex able to produce Euro -compliant diesel and gasoline The
integrated complex is designed to increase the hydrocarbon sector’ production
capacity, improve product quality, expand product range and generally raise the
value- added revenues Azerbaijan derives from its oil and gas resources It would
also enable SOCAR to shut down and demolish old facilities in Baku and Sumgayit,
which would make the areas available for urban development and reduce potential
health risks to the population Retail oil market Unlike retail gas supply,
retail oil supply is not under  monopoly Retail prices for diesel and RON-92
gasoline are set by the government, but prices for imported RON-95 follow
international market rates Azpetrol is the largest retail oil supplier, with 94
fuel stations at the end of 2020, while Lukoil has around 70 and SOCAR has 35
(Petrolplaza, 2020)  growing number of fuel stations also offer CNG Retail gas
market The domestic gas market has been operated by SOCAR’ subsidiary Azerigaz
since The company transports, distributes and markets natural gas in Azerbaijan,
and, through its Gas Export Department, it also exports SOCAR gas to Georgia,
Iran and Russia In 2019, the company transported  total of bcm within or outside
the country, supplying  247 000 natural gas customers – 31 000 of which are non-
residential, including the gas- fired power plants that generated 92% of
Azerbaijan’ electricity in All the natural gas prices are set by the government
(the Tariff Council) at  very low level by international standards (Finans,
2019) In  recent move, the government adopted on 28 December 2020  decision to
restructure the domestic natural gas supply The decision entrusts the state-
owned company Azercontract with organising natural gas purchases from producers
and its transportation, distribution and sale to the domestic consumers from
January According to the decision, Azercontract will buy natural gas from
producers and sell it to Azerigaz for domestic use 60  OIL AND NATURAL GAS
Security of supply  The Ministry of Emergency Situations, established in 2005,
is responsible for emergency response mechanisms in all sectors of the economy,
including oil and gas production and processing facilities and main pipelines
SOCAR has its own emergency response system for emergency situations As  net
exporter of oil and gas with domestic refining and storage capacity, Azerbaijan
has not developed emergency storage or stock monitoring systems The country has
mitigated the risk of supply/demand shocks by diversifying its export routes and
its oil product import sources Assessment Azerbaijan’ economy and energy supply
depend heavily on oil and gas The two fuels bring in around 90% of the country’
export revenue and finance around 60% of the government budget They also supply
98% of primary energy and more than 90% of the country’ electricity Oil and,
more recently, gas have been largely responsible for the significant increase in
the living standards in Azerbaijan since the late 1990s At the same time, their
dominance of the economy has left the country exposed to swings in global oil
prices After the oil price decline in  resulted in  contraction of GDP, the
government launched measures to stimulate other sectors of the economy These
efforts are gradually bearing fruit, with non-petroleum economic activity rising
to 59% of GDP in The global economic recession of 2020 and the collapse in oil
prices in spring 2020 underline the importance of further efforts to diversify
the economy The government is also preparing to reform the gas and electricity
markets to increase economic efficiency The major question is how to increase
efficiency, attract investments and new entrants and diversify the energy supply
in the current context of heavily subsidised natural gas prices Role of gas set
to increase as oil production declines Oil production, which had already begun
in the mid-19th century, peaked at over  mbd of crude and 40 kbd of gas
condensate in , and has gradually declined since then By 2019, crude production
had fallen to 779 kbd, only partly offset by growth in condensate output to 80
kbd In 2020, as part of the OPEC+ response to the Covid-19 impact on oil demand,
Azerbaijan agreed to cut production from 720 kbd in October 2019 to an average
of 580 kbd from June to December In 2021, OPEC+ has decreased the production
cuts, enabling Azerbaijan to gradually increase its production to 620 kbd in
July In contrast to the decline in oil production, natural gas production
continues to increase Most gas comes from the Shah Deniz field, where Phase
production started in the mid- 2000s and helped turn the country from  gas
importer into an exporter Production started at Shah Deniz  in 2018, and the
field will reach full production – around 16 bcm/ – by 2022, helping lift the
country’ total output from 24 bcm in 2019 to around 28 bcm/ in 2022-Further
increases from other fields towards 2030 are foreseen Shah Deniz ,  development
of international significance, is the gas source for the SGC project, which
transports Caspian gas across Georgia and Turkey to Europe The 16 bcm/ 61  OIL
AND NATURAL GAS maximum production has been sold under long-term contracts to
companies in Turkey ( bcm) and Greece, Bulgaria and Italy (10 bcm) Gas
deliveries to Italy, the SGC’ final destination, began at the end of Overall,
the SGC is  remarkable achievement, and SOCAR is one of its key shareholders
Azerbaijan is an important and reliable gas exporter that, through the SGC, has
helped Europe diversify its gas supply routes and improve gas security This is
significant, as domestic production in Europe is steadily declining at the same
time as the IEA anticipates European demand to rise importantly, by around 45
bcm/ by 2025 (IEA, 2020c) With capacity increases, the SGC could transport twice
what Shah Deniz  can produce, which could open the way to Azerbaijan becoming
regional gas hub Azerbaijan’ interconnected gas system and the seasonal swings
in its gas demand add to this potential Azerbaijan has succeeded in creating
stable upstream oil and gas investment climate: PSA terms have been maintained
and companies have had tax stability The best example is the ACG contract area
(developed under the 1994 Contract of the Century between the government and
BP-led consortium), which is the source of around 70% of the country’ crude oil
production and more than USD 140 billion in government revenue since 1997
(Azernews, 2019) It also contains almost 70% of the country’ remaining
commercial liquids In 2017, Azerbaijan reached  major milestone when it extended
the ACG PSA from 2024 to the end of 2049, an additional 25 years At 2019
production levels, Azerbaijan’ oil reserves will last for up to 25 years and its
gas reserves for up to 79 (see Table ) However, despite projects to develop
natural gas and condensate production in upcoming years,  steady decline in
liquids output seems likely without significant reforms to make oil exploration
and production more attractive Azerbaijan’ future success as an internationally
competitive producer will depend on how well it manages the costs of new
developments The focus should be on collaborative access to resources and
contracting strategies as well as local capability development, notably in
digital technologies In addition, an important emerging factor is the
environmental footprint of production (see below) In the short and medium term,
Azerbaijan’ position as  gas exporter may become stronger, with domestic
production in Europe declining faster than demand and many IOCs indicating that
they will gradually switch their focus from oil and gas to clean energy and
electricity However, the long-term outlook for exports – and therefore for
government revenue – is uncertain, as importing countries increasingly adopt
ambitious policies to limit GHG emissions Global push for clean energy will
affect oil and gas revenues Several of the world’ largest energy importers (the
European Union, Japan and South Korea) have recently pledged to reduce GHG
emissions to net-zero by 2050, and China is aiming for the same by These targets
imply little demand for oil or gas without carbon capture, utilisation and
storage (CCUS) three decades from now Technology breakthroughs and policy
changes in other importing countries may further accelerate this transition, and
competition for export opportunities among producing countries may well
intensify, raising the risk of many oil and gas assets becoming stranded 62  OIL
AND NATURAL GAS The government should prepare Azerbaijan’ economy and its own
finances for an eventual decline in oil and gas revenues It has acted with
foresight and saved around one-quarter of its revenue in the sovereign wealth
fund, SOFAZ, which holds assets equivalent to around 100% of the country’ GDP
However, if oil and gas revenue inflows to SOFAZ were to dry up, outflows to the
government budget at the current rate would deplete the fund in just six years
To enlarge its financial buffer, the government could consider saving  higher
share of oil and gas revenues in the fund and find ways to raise the relatively
low average rate of return (%/ from 2010 to 2019) of the fund’ investments
In its efforts to manage Azerbaijan’ oil and gas resources, the government could
look to Norway for inspiration It is worth noting that, while natural gas fuels
almost all electricity production and space heating in Azerbaijan, Norway
exports practically all the gas it produces, generating almost all its
electricity from renewable sources and using that electricity to heat its
buildings Azerbaijan has excellent untapped renewable energy potential and could
consider aiming for something similar (see Chapter ) Azerbaijan’ 2030 target of
roughly doubling the share of renewable energy to 30% of total electricity
generating capacity is  welcome move in the right direction The government
should also prepare for the possibility of importing countries gradually placing
stricter requirements on the GHG intensity of oil and gas production SOCAR
succeeded in eliminating gas flaring altogether in 2020 (see Chapter ), and it
is also working to reduce methane emissions with its partner companies and in
its own activities An additional way to reduce GHG intensity would be to
integrate low-carbon electricity into oil and gas production The IEA encourages
the government to continue working closely with leading companies operating in
the country’ oil and gas sector to reduce sectoral emissions to help meet
Azerbaijan’ 2030 climate targets Most of the IOCs operating in Azerbaijan have
set net-zero targets; for example, BP will have to implement measures to reduce
emissions associated with production and consumption in Azerbaijan The
government should therefore develop  strategy that encompasses IOC plans to
discover what it would mean for the country To increase value-added production
from Azerbaijan’ oil and gas resources, SOCAR has recently increased and
modernised its petrochemicals capacity, helping to eliminate imports, create new
exports and reduce local pollution This work continues with plans to construct
the Garadagh integrated OGPC As the complex would replace facilities currently
located close to cities, it would improve the safety and air quality of those
populations and the IEA therefore encourages constructing the OGPC Beyond being
used to produce petrochemicals, natural gas could also be converted into fuels
such as hydrogen, using CCUS to avoid emissions As hydrogen is increasingly
being recognised as  decarbonisation option, its global demand may begin to grow
quickly, potentially providing an opportunity for Azerbaijan to diversify its
exports Because CCUS technology could be used both to help mitigate CO2
emissions from gas processing and oil refining and to enhance oil recovery, its
potential in Azerbaijan should be studied One further way to increase oil and
gas revenue is to raise the efficiency of domestic transportation, distribution
and use Reducing leakage by investing in pipelines would help, as would reducing
currently high oil and gas subsidies: this would encourage energy efficiency
investments, save energy for other uses and strengthen incentives for clean 63
OIL AND NATURAL GAS energy use in electricity and heat generation Opening the
domestic market to competition would also encourage more efficient operations
Domestic market reform would yield multiple benefits Domestically, oil and gas
provide 98% of primary energy, and gas is used for more than 90% of electricity
generation SOCAR controls all segments of the oil and gas sector apart from
retail oil supply Efficiency could be increased by introducing competition,
reforming tariffs to at least cover supply costs and eliminate cross-subsidies,
and abolishing SOCAR’ role in social and employment policy To improve sector
performance, the IEA encourages the government to consider transitioning
gradually to  liberalised domestic market, particularly for gas As  very welcome
first step, the regulator (AERA) was established in December Next, in the
interests of transparency, the government should ensure AERA’ independence from
the MoE, the policy maker, and grant it the legal right to take binding
decisions and issue gas market rules and network codes, including on tariffs The
government is preparing to revise the Law on Gas Supply, and the IEA encourages
it to model gas market reform on international best practices At minimum,
network operations should be separated from gas production and sales, and non-
discriminatory third-party access to the network should be allowed The level of
ambition and the pace of reform need to be consistent with electricity market
reform measures, given that subsidised gas is the dominant fuel for electricity
production and that low tariffs on gas used for power generation make renewable
energy and efficiency measures less appealing Even lower gas prices for
households disincentivise other heating options, such as gas-based combined
generation of power, district heating and cooling (see Chapter ) Regardless of
how open the market is, it is essential that regulations enable operational
profitability As in many other producer countries, Azerbaijan’ government has
chosen to subsidise citizens and businesses by providing low-cost energy in the
form of oil, natural gas, electricity and district heat This tariff policy leads
to the inefficient use of natural resources that could (and should) be better
used elsewhere The availability of artificially inexpensive gasoline and diesel
encourages citizens to purchase inefficient vehicles, and the impacts of this
policy will become more obvious – and the implied subsidies larger – as the car
fleet continues to expand In the gas sector, subsidies help gas outcompete
other, potentially more efficient, options for generating heat and electricity
(see Chapters  and ) Gas tariffs that do not cover costs not only constrain
SOCAR/Azerigaz financially, they undermine incentives to improve gas networks
and, if markets are opened to competition, discourage new entrants The currently
low tariffs reduce SOCAR’ profits and the autonomy of its decision-making, as
does the retention of significant labour surpluses To help improve the financial
viability of SOCAR, and that of Azerbaijan’ domestic energy supply in general,
the government should gradually eliminate state-owned energy companies’
involvement in social protection and employment policy Instead of subsidising
oil and gas prices for all consumers, the government should provide direct
support to low-income and vulnerable ones Paying  fair market price would
motivate consumers to use energy more efficiently and provide  clear incentive
for suppliers to improve productivity Oil and gas saved through improved
efficiency could be exported at much higher prices or turned into higher- value-
added petrochemicals 64  OIL AND NATURAL GAS              Recommendations  The
government of Azerbaijan should:  Prepare for potentially large swings in
fossil fuel revenues and for  decline in oil and gas income in the long term by
actively pursuing efforts to diversify the economy and the range of goods and
services that are exported Upstream  Manage costs for new developments to keep
the sector internationally competitive, focusing on collaborative access to
resources and contracting strategies as well as local capability development,
notably in digital technologies  Work closely with the world’ leading companies
present in Azerbaijan’ oil and gas sector on reducing sectoral emissions to help
meet Azerbaijan’ 2030 climate targets Domestic market  Consider the case for
gradual transition to liberalised domestic markets for oil and gas, which would
help incentivise investment in new gas developments  Ensure the independence of
the regulator in the interests of transparency and give it the power to issue
gas market rules and network codes  Gradually shift the burdens of social
support and subsidisation away from SOCAR to enable it to focus on its corporate
role, and instead provide government support directly to low-income and
vulnerable consumers  Accelerate the renovation of ageing oil and gas pipelines
to reduce losses and raise their performance to international standards 
Accelerate the Garadagh integrated OGPC project to enable the closure of
existing facilities near urban centres 65  OIL AND NATURAL GAS References
Azernews (2020), President Aliyev urges highest standards in country’
transportation system [UPDATE],  Azernews (2019), BP reveals Azerbaijan'
revenues from ACG,  %20the,Georgia%20and%20Turkey%20Bakhtiyar%20Aslanbayli BP
(2020), Statistical Review of World Energy 2020,  BP (2019), Sangachal terminal,
are/operationsprojects/terminals/sangachal_terminalhtml BP (2018), Work on
Sangachal terminal expansion project completed by 95%,  BP (2006), BP in
Azerbaijan,  sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/investors/bp-ic-azerbaijan-
fieldtrip-presentation-slides- sept06pdf BRI (Baku Research Institute) (2020),
SOCAR: Big problems at the largest company in Azerbaijan,  azerbaijan/ Caspian
News (2018), Azerbaijan to dig deeper beneath Caspian and open Shah Deniz
energy field,  caspian-open-shah-deniz--energy-field-2018---46/ Ciarreta,  and
Nasirov (2010), Analysis of Azerbaijan oil and gas sector,  ECS (Energy Charter
Secretariat) (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, ECS, Brussels ECS (2011), Follow-up In-Depth Review of
the Investment Climate and Market Structure in the Energy Sector, ECS, Brussels
Eurasianet (2020), Turkey to build gas pipeline to supply Nakhchivan,  Finans
(2019), “Azəriqaz”: “Payız-qış mövsümündə təbii qaza olan gündəlik tələbat
milyon kubmetrdir” – MÜSAHİBƏ,  tebii-qaza-olan-gundelik-telebat--milyon-
kubmetrdir-musahibehtml Globuc (2019), SOCAR to increase carbamide production,
to-increase-carbamide-production IEA (International Energy Agency) (2021a),
World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  IEA (2021b), World Energy Prices 2021
(database),  IEA (2020a), Oil Market Report, OECD/IEA, Paris IEA (2020b),
Georgia 2020 Energy Policy Review,  (2020c), Gas 2020,   OIL AND NATURAL GAS
MENAFN (Middle East North Africa Financial Network) (2019), SOCAR' Azerikimya
Production Union eyes to increase output next year,  output-next-year
Ona news agency (2020), Gasoline AI-95 price rise in Azerbaijan,  (Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) (2020), Annual Statistical Bulletin 2020,
OPEC, Vienna Petrolplaza (2020a), Azpetrol opens new fuel station in Azerbaijan’
capital Baku,  (2020b), SOCAR reaches 35 fuel stations in Azerbaijan,  Energy
(2020), UCube Country Fact Sheet: Azerbaijan SOCAR (State Oil Company of the
Azerbaijan Republic) (2021),  (2020), SOCAR website,  socar SOCAR Trading
(2020), Azeri light marketing & export options,  SOFAZ (State Oil Fund of the
Republic of Azerbaijan) (2019), Annual Report 2019, SOFAZ, Baku SSC (State
Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan) (2020a), Energy of Azerbaijan 2020, SSC,
Baku SSC (2020b), The Foreign Trade of Azerbaijan SSC, Baku Tariff Council of
the Republic of Azerbaijan (2021), Processing, transportation, wholesale and
retail tariffs of natural gas,  Wood Mackenzie (2020), Azerbaijan upstream
summary, Wood Mackenzie, Edinburgh 67                Electricity Key data (2019
provisional) Total generation: TWh, +% since 2008 Generation mix: natural gas %,
hydro %, bioenergy and waste %, wind %, oil %, solar PV % Net exports: 35 TWh
(exports 49 TWh, imports 14 TWh) Installed capacity:  GW Consumption: TWh
(residential %, services %, industry %, energy sector %, agriculture %,
transport %), +% since 2008 Overview Azerbaijan’ electricity supply relies on
the country’ ample natural gas resources The electricity system is dominated by
state-owned monopolies, and the government sets all wholesale and retail prices
Investments are needed to modernise and expand generating capacity and networks
to ensure security of supply and enable electricity demand growth Electricity
market reform is being undertaken to attract private sector investment and
increase efficiency, and several laws and other legal instruments have been
drafted and are awaiting approval Meanwhile, the country’ significant solar and
wind power potential could be harnessed to meet several energy policy goals
simultaneously The government has recently set  target for renewable energy to
provide 30% of generating capacity by 2030, around twice the current share
Supply and demand Over the past 15 years, increased domestic natural gas
production has led to the installation of new gas-fired generating capacity to
replace oil-fired capacity and to meet expected electricity demand growth Today,
more than 90% of Azerbaijan’ electricity is generated at flexible natural gas
plants and network losses have fallen from % of total supply in 2015 to less
than 10% in Electricity consumption has grown only modestly (averaging % per
year since 2013), and the country has also begun to use its generating capacity
for exports (Figure ) 69  ELECTRICITY Electricity supply per capita in
Azerbaijan is around  500 kilowatt hours (kWh)/year, or roughly 30% lower than
the global average of around  500 kWh/year Although the government does not
publish scenarios on electricity trends, per capita electricity supply is set to
expand in the medium to long term, with global technology trends pointing to
increasing electrification of the economy Figure  Azerbaijan’ electricity supply
and consumption,  TWh 30 Imports 25 20 Production 15 Network losses 10  Exports
Final consumption -  - 10 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019
IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ electricity consumption has remained
relatively stable in recent years, while network losses have declined and
exports increased Note: 2019 data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World
Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Generation Azerbaijan’ gross electricity
generation reached terawatt hours (TWh) in 2019, up 20% from Natural gas is the
main source of electricity, at 92% in 2019 (ten-year average 88%) Hydropower
accounted for % (ten-year average %) and other renewable sources (solar, wind
and waste) for % of total generation (Figure ) Co-generation1 plants generated
TWh of electricity, or 31% of the total in In the first eight months of 2020,
electricity generation was % lower than during the same period in The decline
can be linked to the impact of Covid-19 on economic activity, but the decline is
mild compared with other countries (MoE, 2020c)  Co-generation refers to the
combined production of heat and power 70  DISTRICT HEATING Figure  Breakdown of
electricity generation by source, 2019               % % Natural gas Hydro
Others* % IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ electricity mix is dominated by
natural gas * Includes bioenergy and waste, wind, oil and solar PV Note: 2019
data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),
major switch from mostly fuel oil-based generation to natural gas started in the
early 2000s Since then, the share of oil in the electricity supply has dropped
rapidly, and fuel oil is currently used only as an emergency fuel (Figure )
Figure  Electricity generation by source,  TWh 30 Waste* 25 Wind and solar* 20
15 Oil 10 Hydro  Natural gas Net trade -  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan has phased out oil use in
electricity generation * Not visible at this scale Note: 2019 data are
provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Because
of the dominance of natural gas, Azerbaijan’ reliance on fossil fuels for
electricity far exceeds the global average of around two-thirds (Figure ) 71
ELECTRICITY Figure  Breakdown of electricity generation by source in selected
countries, 2019 Tajikistan Kyrgyzstan Austria Georgia Croatia Ukraine Armenia
Romania Bulgaria Turkey Russian Federation EU4Energy average* Serbia Uzbekistan
(2018) Kazakhstan Azerbaijan Azerbaijan Republic of Moldova Belarus Turkmenistan
(2018) % 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Oil Natural gas Coal Peat Nuclear Bioenergy and
waste Hydro Wind Solar** Geothermal IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan can
reduce its heavy reliance on gas by increasing solar and wind power generation *
Covers Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan ** Includes solar photovoltaic
(PV), solar thermal, wave and ocean power, and other power generation ( from
fuel cells) Note: 2019 data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy
Balances 2021 (database),  Capacity Azerbaijan’ installed generation capacity
stood at  gigawatts (GW) at the end of Gas-fired power plants accounted for
around 83% of the total, followed by hydropower plants (HPPs) at 15% (Table )
All large HPPs are connected to reservoirs, but none has pumped storage
facilities The combined capacity of solar PV and wind power totalled  GW in
Total capacity has increased by  GW from 2005, or by half Around 90% of these
capacity additions are gas-fired However, further capacity additions are on the
way  385-megawatt (MW) modular gas- fired power plant in the Gobu district is
expected to be commissioned in The 36-MW Ordubad HPP in the Nakhchivan
Autonomous Republic is also under construction, and the Ministry of Energy (MoE)
is in talks with international energy companies about building  private
combined-cycle gas turbine (CCGT) of up to 550 MW 72  DISTRICT HEATING
Azerbaijan has also started to focus on exploiting its significant solar and
wind power potential (see Chapter ) After an international bidding competition,
the MoE signed  power purchase agreements (PPAs) for 240 MW of wind power in
December 2020 and for 230 MW of solar in March The build-own-operate (BOO)
contracts come with 20- year power purchase agreements The Ministry is also
preparing auctions for another  GW of renewable electricity capacity
Table  Installed electricity generating capacity (GW) Energy source 2005 2010
2016 2017 2018 2019 Hydro 97 00 11 11 13 14 Solar PV - - 02 03 03 04 Wind - 00
02 02 07 07 Combustible fuels 29 50 77 79 60 40 Oil - - 01 01 03 03 Gas 29 50 76
78 56 36 Bioenergy and waste - - 04 04 05 05 26 50 91 94 83 64 Total capacity
Note: 2019 data are provisional Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021
(database),  State-owned Azerenergy owns around 85% of the country’ generating
capacity, including the  400-MW gas-fired Azerbaijan Thermal Power Plant (TPP)
and the 424-MW Mingachevir HPP in Mingachevir,  key city for electricity
generation In total, 92% of all installed capacity belongs to state-owned
companies Private companies, mainly autoproducers at oil and gas facilities, had
capacity of around 600 MW in According to the Energy Charter Secretariat (ECS),
peak demand in the Unified Energy System of Azerbaijan ( without the Nakhchivan
Autonomous Republic) was around  700 MW in Thus, the system’ installed capacity
of around  800 MW exceeds domestic demand considerably This is due partly to the
unanticipated slowdown in economic growth (and therefore in electricity demand)
that followed the oil price drop of  (ECS, 2020) As  result, capacity factors
for TPPs are rather low According to the SSC, they averaged % from 2011 to 2019,
ranging from % in 2017 to % in 2012 (SSC, 2020) Azerbaijan’ electricity system
is thus dominated by relatively new CCGT and gas engine plants that are
underutilised Prioritising the use of the most efficient power plants and,
correspondingly, avoiding the use of the least efficient ones, would raise
fleet-wide plant efficiency In fact, the Energy Charter Secretariat has
calculated that making electricity generation more energy-efficient would save
the sector around two billion cubic metres (bcm) of gas per year and would also
reduce CO2 emissions by  million tonnes (Mt) per year (ECS, 2020) 73
ELECTRICITY Imports and exports Azerbaijan has electricity interconnections with
Georgia, Turkey, Russia and Iran In 2019, the country exported  TWh and imported
TWh, resulting in net exports of  TWh, or around % of total generation (Figure )
Azerbaijan became  net exporter in 2007, and since 2016 has increased its
exports notably, thanks to the commissioning of the Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey
(AGT) Power Bridge line It currently exports electricity mostly to Georgia
Figure  Azerbaijan’ electricity trade by country,  Net imports TWh  Islamic
Republic of Iran  Turkey  Russian Federation  Georgia -  Others/unspecified -
Net trade Net exports -  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 20182019
IEA All rights reserved The surge in Azerbaijan’ gas production since 2007 has
helped it become  net exporter of electricity Note: 2019 data are provisional
Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Consumption
Electricity consumption totalled TWh in 2019, one-quarter more than in 2008, but
relatively unchanged since 2014 (Figure ) The residential sector accounted for
30% of the total and the service sector for 29% From 2008 to 2019, commercial
sector electricity consumption rose 72% while residential use actually fell 14%
as  result of  tariff increase in 2016, the installation of meters and more
assiduous bill collection The commercial sector is expected to drive demand in
the medium term Industry was the third-largest electricity consumer, at 20% of
the total (+36% since 2008), followed by energy industries (14%, +178% since
2008) and agriculture (%, +79% since 2008) Electricity consumption for
transport, which accounted for just % of the total, has decreased by one-third
since 2008 as rail travel has declined 74  DISTRICT HEATING Figure  Electricity
consumption by sector,               TWh 25  Transport 20 Agriculture* Energy**
15 Industry 10 Services***  Residential 2007 2010 2013 2016 2019 IEA All rights
reserved While service and industry electricity consumption in Azerbaijan has
risen quickly, household use has been falling since * Includes forestry **
Includes oil and gas extraction, oil refineries and unspecified energy sectors
*** Includes commercial and public services Note: 2019 data are provisional
Electricity consumption data starting in 2007 are available in an
internationally comparable format Source: IEA (2021a), World Energy Balances
2021 (database),  Electricity generation is closely linked to domestic demand,
which peaks in winter for heating (the peak month is January) and in summer for
cooling (the peak occurs around July) (Figure ) Historically, the winter peak
(averaging  150 gigawatt hours (GWh)/month) has been higher than the summer peak
(around  000 GWh/month) Figure  Azerbaijan’ monthly electricity generation,
January 2015-January 2020 TWh      Jan-15 Jul-15 Jan-16 Jul-16 Jan-17 Jul-17
Jan-18 Jul-18 Jan-19 Jul-19 Jan-20 Azerbaijani electricity demand peaks in
winter for heating and in summer for cooling Sources: SSC (2020) Electricity
sector structure and reform Azerbaijan is at an early stage of liberalising its
electricity sector The state-owned vertically integrated monopolies Azerenergy
and Azerishiq continue to dominate the sector and the government still sets the
wholesale and retail electricity prices, but  new electricity market law
promoting liberalisation was drafted recently and its approval is now pending 75
ELECTRICITY Azerenergy (Azerenerji OJSC) owns and operates all power plants,
except for  few small renewable energy facilities and some industrial
autoproduction capacity (Figure ) It also owns and operates the transmission
system Meanwhile, Azerishiq OJSC owns the distribution networks and operates
distribution, supply and other customer services (connection, metering and
billing) in the regional networks of Aran, Baku, Canub, Garb, Markazi Aran,
Shimal and Shimal Garb In the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic, transmission and
distribution systems are directly operated by the Nakhchivan Energy Authority
Azerishiq OJSC (formerly Bakielektrikshebeke OJSC,  Baku Electric Company), was
created in 2015 when the government passed Azerenergy’ distribution assets and
functions to this new company as the first step towards market reform Figure
Electricity sector structure Azerbaijan’ electricity sector is dominated by the
state-owned companies Azerenergy and Azerishiq Note: State Agency on Alternative
and Renewable Energy Sources (SAARES) power plants are owned by Azeralternative
LLC, as SAARES was abolished in Azerenergy also operates at the 110-kilovot (kV)
level Source: INOGATE Technical Secretariat (2016) as modified by IRENA (2019)
Azerenergy and Azerishiq receive government budget support to implement part of
their capital expenditure programmes According to the MoE, state capital
investments from 2015 to 2019 amounted to USD 397 million for Azerenergy and USD
601 million for Azerishıq The companies need this government financial support
both because their tariffs are set at  level that keeps services affordable and
because they have significantly more employees than they need for optimum
efficiency, as state-owned enterprises often serve social protection and
employment policy purposes (ADB, 2020) The 1998 Law on the Power Industry
provides the legal basis for the electricity sector It sets out some provisions
for third-party access so that Azerenergy can purchase electricity from other
generators, and other entities can buy electricity from Azerenergy (or other
state companies) and sell it to end-consumers in their own grids or through the
state transmission system In practice, these arrangements account for around %
of electricity generation The 2016 Strategic Roadmap Following the global oil
price decline in  and the subsequent recession in Azerbaijan, its government set
out to reform the economy, drawing up plans for the electricity sector as part
of this task The 2016 Strategic Roadmap for the Development of 76  DISTRICT
HEATING Utilities (electricity, heating, water and gas) called for  gradual
transition to  liberal market model based on enhanced competition, unbundling,
establishment of  wholesale market and expanding the share of renewable energy
The Roadmap included  development strategy to 2020,  long-term outlook to 2025
and  vision beyond 2025 (GoA, 2016)               The Roadmap proposed
eliminating end-user subsidies and introducing differentiated end- user tariffs
for different times of the day It also included several quantitative targets for
2020, including for example to reduce distribution losses, add  GW of
conventional power plant capacity and 420 MW of renewable electricity capacity,
and increase the efficiency of combined-cycle power plants from 47% to 50%
Following  recommendation in the Roadmap, the Azerbaijan Energy Regulatory
Agency (AERA) was established in December AERA reports to the MoE and covers the
electricity, natural gas and heat sectors Its functions include licensing and
the development and submission of proposals on tariff design and methodology Its
precise roles and responsibilities will be clarified in the Law on the Regulator
for which adoption is pending (see next section) Since 2016, generating
efficiency has continued to improve, network infrastructure has been modernised
and the bill collection rate has increased Nevertheless, many of the suggested
reforms have yet to be implemented, and the three key electricity sector
challenges identified by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 2016 remain valid:
improving operational and financial efficiency; restoring and maintaining high
levels of service throughout the country; and establishing  sustainable cost
recovery financing mechanism (ADB, 2016b) Current reform plans The Order of the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the Acceleration of Reforms in the
Energy Sector of the Republic of Azerbaijan was adopted in May 2019 to boost
reform efforts It broadly reiterates the 2016 market reform ideas and sets
timetables for preparing electricity sector laws and regulations According to
the MoE, the government’ aim is to establish  transparent, competitive and open
electricity market to which access will be allowed on  fair and equal basis
Government subsidies and expenditures will gradually be eliminated and renewable
energy used to diversify the electricity supply and reduce dependence on natural
gas (MoE, 2020a) The government drafted several laws for electricity market
reform that were awaiting adoption in December 2020, including on the
development of the electricity market; on the role and responsibilities of the
regulator in energy and public utility services; and on the use of renewable
energy in electricity generation (see Chapter ) Agreements for power purchases
and sales, investments, transmission network connections and land leases have
also been drafted with the help of international consultants (MoE, 2020b) The
Law on the Regulator, modelled on the EU Third Energy Package, sets out the
regulator’ main activities as tariff setting, licensing, market monitoring, and
settling disputes and customer claims Proposals have also been drafted for
tariff methodology and for accelerating reforms in the heating sector Business
models for co-generation of power and heat and trigeneration of power, heat and
cooling are also covered in the draft Law on Electricity (see Chapter ) 77
ELECTRICITY The draft Law on Electricity draws on international experience and
envisages gradual market liberalisation by It provides  legal framework to
progressively unbundle Azerenergy and allow independent generators to enter the
sector and acquire existing power plants or build new ones, while safeguarding
energy sustainability and security In preparation for unbundling generation
assets and functions from transmission, and for possible privatisation,
Azerenergy’ power plants will be separated into individual companies  plan has
also been drafted to privatise the renewable electricity capacity of
Azeralternative LLC (16 MW) and some modular thermal capacity, while public-
private partnerships are planned for building gas-fired capacity (MoE, 2020a)
The MoE has also stated that the government aims to raise the share of renewable
energy in total electricity generation capacity to 30% by 2030, roughly doubling
the 2018 share of 16% The Ministry has identified eight potential areas for the
construction of solar and wind power facilities ( MW each) and plans to use
auctions to choose project participants It has also signed memorandums of
understanding (MoUs) to co-operate on renewable energy ventures with 11 large
companies, including BP, Equinor, Total, Masdar and ACWA Power (MoE, 2020b) In
January 2020, the MoE signed implementing agreements with ACWA Power to build,
own and operate 240 MW of wind capacity and with Masdar for 230 MW of solar
capacity Project agreements, including 20-year PPAs, were signed in December
2020 with ACWA Power and in March 2021 with Masdar (see Chapter ) Networks
Transmission and distribution Azerbaijan’ high-voltage network totals around
800 km:  505 km at 220 kV; 31 km at 230 kV;  542 km at 330 kV; and 477 km at 500
kV (Table ) The network has 93 high- voltage substations Although the
distribution system’ voltage is generally below 110 kV, in some cases both the
transmission system operator (TSO) and the distribution system operator (DSO)
operate at the 110-kV level The total installed capacity of the substations
operated by the DSO Azerishiq exceeds 10 000 megavolt amperes (MVA) Table
Electricity transmission network capacity, 2018 Number of substations 70 Voltage
(kV) Number of lines Length (km) Capacity (MVA) 110 189  325  335 220 29  505 13
223 230  31 - - 330 24  542   745 500  477   667 Source: Azerenergy (2020),  to
reduce network losses are delivering results From 2015 to 2019, the percentage
of transmission losses in total electricity supply fell from % to %, and
distribution losses from % to % (SSC, 2020) Azerishiq is carrying out  programme
to rehabilitate distribution network substations and lines, replace low-quality
customer 78  DISTRICT HEATING service lines and install smart meters across the
country The programme, designed to run from 2016 to 2022, is backed by  USD 750
million loan from the ADB                government working group on network
strengthening and integration was established based on the May 2019 presidential
order to accelerate energy sector reforms It has identified international
standards covering energy system management, power transmission, relay
protection and automation, and network strengthening (MoE, 2020b) the
requirements for The German company VPC has been contracted to determine
technical options to increase the share of renewable energy in electricity
generation capacity to 30% by It has been studying network connection
opportunities for pilot projects and to determine measures for network
integration and strengthening (MoE, 2020b; see Chapter ) Cross-border
connections Azerbaijan’ power system is interconnected with those of Georgia,
Turkey, Russia and Iran Cross-border flows are operated and metered by
Azerenergy and governed by bilateral agreements Azerbaijan’ electricity system
Integrated Power System/Unified Power System (IPS/UPS), as is Georgia’ Iran will
be synchronised with the IPS/UPS once grid compatibility studies have been
completed in 2021 (FNA, 2020) is synchronised with Russia’ Azerbaijan has two
cross-border connections with Georgia: the 500-kV (700 MW) Samukh-Gardabani and
the 330-kV Agstafa-Gardabani lines The 500-kV line is part of the AGT Power
Bridge The lines from Azerbaijan to Georgia and from Georgia to Turkey were all
completed in 2013 and power transmission started in second 330-kV connection
being added to the 330-kV (670 MW) Agstafa-Gardabani line is expected to become
operational in 2022 (IEA, 2020b) With Turkey, Azerbaijan has three cross-border
connections in the Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic: the 154-kV Igdir-Babek  and
lines and the -kV Adaliq- Sadarak Cross-border capacity with Russia is around
350 MW and the main connection is the 330-kV Yashma- Derbent line; the other
connection, the 110-kV Yalama-Bilici line, is seldom used Negotiations are under
way to develop  second 330-kV Absheron-Derbent air transmission line with Russia
as well as  Russia-Azerbaijan-Iran electricity corridor Azerbaijan’ five cross-
border connections with Iran are the 330-kV Mugan line, the 230-kV Imishli and
110-kV Astara-Astara lines, owned by Azerenergy, and the 132-kV Araz-Araz and
132-kV Julfa-Julfa lines, owned by the Nakhchivan Energy Authority Mugan, the
main connection, began operations in Total cross-border capacity with Iran is
600 MW (MoE, 2020)  220-kV Masalli connection is also being constructed System
operation Azerenergy’ Central Dispatching Department (CDD) operates Azerbaijan’
transmission system It uses  supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
system to manage, control and optimise the system in real time 79  ELECTRICITY
Azerbaijan does not yet have  network code for its transmission and distribution
systems, but one is being prepared ( draft code was issued for stakeholder
review in early 2020) The network code is expected to set the rules and
technical requirements for electricity system and market operations, serving to
ensure supply reliability, quality and security and enable gradual variable
renewable energy expansion Prices and tariffs The Tariff Council sets
electricity prices for generators and consumers in  variety of categories (Table
) In practice, the tariffs for producers are feed-in tariffs for small renewable
electricity producers, while the wholesale electricity tariff is what the DSO
Azerishiq pays to the TSO Azerenergy for electricity The wholesale tariff thus
includes payments for electricity generated at Azerenergy’ large hydro and
thermal power plants, for feed-in tariffs for small producers of renewables for
electricity, and for electricity transmission to the distribution network The
transit tariff is what Azerishiq pays for the transmission of electricity from
its three wind power plants The several energy-intensive industries that are
supplied directly from the transmission network are also eligible for daytime
and night-time tariffs On the retail side, block tariffs apply to residential
consumers and  flat-rate tariff to all other consumers, regardless of category,
voltage or capacity Because residential electricity tariffs are  social policy
instrument (like residential natural gas and district heat tariffs), they do not
reflect the true cost of service Twice in recent years the government has raised
the consumption threshold for the lowest tariff ( the category with the highest
implied subsidies) In late 2016, it increased the threshold from 250 kWh/month
to 300 kWh/month, and in April 2020 it was temporarily raised to 400 kWh/month
for two months in relation to the Covid-19 economic downturn Of Azerbaijan’
million electricity customers at the end of 2018, those with monthly use of less
than 300 kWh were responsible for 28% of total electricity consumption,
according to the government The tariff system also provides implicit cross-
subsidies from urban to rural customers: even though retail electricity tariffs,
which include compensation for distribution, are the same across the whole
country, it costs Azerishiq much more to supply rural customers than urban ones
Essentially, demand per customer is lower and capital costs higher in the
countryside This type of cross-subsidisation that reflects social policy
designed to support rural communities is common in many countries in which the
state is  major shareholder in electricity supply companies (ADB, 2016a)
Overall, the electricity tariff system includes and implies sizeable consumer
subsidies Azerenergy’ and Azerishiq’ financial reports are not made public, but
the IEA has used the commonly applied price-gap methodology to estimate that
electricity subsidies from 2015 to 2019 averaged USD 700 million per year, due
mainly to subsidies to keep natural gas prices low (see Table  in Chapter ) For
example, Azerbaijan’ natural gas export price averaged USD 190 (AZN 323) per
000 m3 in 2019, but the price charged domestically for natural gas for
electricity generation was much lower at only AZN 120 per  000 m3 80  DISTRICT
HEATING Table  Azerbaijan electricity tariffs, 2020              Service Tariff
(AZN/kWh, including VAT)   Tariffs for producers  Small hydropower 05  Wind
power 055  Other alternative and renewable energy 057  Wholesale tariffs 057
Energy-intensive industry (chemicals, aluminium and steel enterprises with
monthly consumption of at least  GWh)  Daytime (08::00) 058  Night-time (22::00)
028  Transit 02  Retail tariffs  Residential  Monthly consumption up to 300 kWh
07  Monthly consumption more than 300 kWh 11  Non-residential 09 Note: AZN  =
USD 59/USD  = AZN Source: Tariff Council (2020), Elektrik enerjisinin ölkədaxili
tarifləri,  Metering has helped improve the financial performance of the
electricity sector While Azerenergy started  programme to install pre-paid end-
user meters in 2007, Azerishiq took it over in 2015 and the expectation is that
all consumers will soon be equipped with smart meters Collection rates reached
more than 94% in 2018,  major improvement from around 50% in International
comparison shows that in purchasing power parity (PPP) terms, Azerbaijan’
residential electricity price is relatively low, but still higher than in
Georgia, its main electricity export destination (Figure ) 81  ELECTRICITY
Figure  Residential electricity prices in Azerbaijan and selected countries,
2019 USD PPP/MWh 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 IEA All rights reserved Despite
being subsidised, Azerbaijan’ residential electricity prices are higher than in
its main electricity export destinations Source: IEA (2021b), World Energy
Prices 2021 (database),  Security of supply Azerbaijan has improved its
electricity supply security over the past decade with major investments to
modernise generation and strengthen the east-west transmission system
Construction of gas-fired generation capacity has curtailed the electricity
shortages that used to be common Electricity supply security relies on use of
the country’ abundant domestic natural gas as the default energy source and on
the establishment of adequate national generation capacity In 2019, Azerbaijan
had  GW of capacity,  GW of which was gas-fired, while peak demand was around
GW At the same time, more network infrastructure needs to be modernised, and the
country continues to lack governance and operational security protocols and
measures for electricity security Out-of-date technologies and equipment have
decreased the reliability and efficiency of energy system operations, while the
lack of electricity supply reliability has been one of the government’ main
energy security concerns The July 2018 countrywide blackout particularly
revealed the urgent need to improve the electricity system’ ability to maintain
reliability and respond to emergencies (see Box ) After this blackout, the
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan set new priorities for Azerenergy to
restore the power system’ generating capacity, modernise the substations and
increase the transmission system’ load capacity In 2018, the MoE and the German
company VPC launched  broad programme to meet these goals, and by the end of
2019, 485 MW of lost power had been restored through power plant rehabilitation
Azerenergy, which is still implementing the programme (destined to end in 2021),
intends to restore  000 MW of lost power capacity (MoE, 2020a) Pending
electricity market reforms also aim to boost security of supply by improving the
power sector’ financial viability and investment capacity However,  regulatory
framework for monitoring power quality had yet to be introduced as of September
According to AERA, draft rules have been submitted to the government to approve
the calculations of the System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) and
the System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) The draft rules also 82
DISTRICT HEATING cover the methodology for calculating consumer compensation for
exceeding the threshold levels of these indicators (ECS, 2020)               Box
The July 2018 Mingachevir blackouts On - July 2018, Azerbaijan was hit by two
blackouts that left most of the country without electricity, and in some cases
without water, for several hours Thirty-nine cities and districts across the
country were affected Azerenergy, the plant’ owner and operator, stated that the
blackouts were caused by  sudden increase in electricity demand for air
conditioning during  strong heat wave and  simultaneous explosion at the
Mingachevir thermal power plant’ substation in north- western Azerbaijan
However,  government investigation found rather different causes At the plant
level, they included the continued use of outdated equipment and  disregard for
technical and security norms Within the electricity system, capacity to
compensate for power disruptions was insufficient, and the responsible
organisations had been focusing mainly on individual initiatives rather than on
implementing the country’ strategic development plan The blackouts revealed
major areas for improvement at several levels The think tank Center for Economic
and Social Development (CESD) recommended that the technical functioning of the
country’ power plants and electricity system be improved, that its electricity
supply be diversified and that its electricity generation and network systems be
better integrated Furthermore, Azerbaijan’ economy and state-owned enterprises
need to prepare for electricity risks and the entities responsible for
maintaining electricity security (such as Azerenergy) need to be better
organised and co-ordinated CESD also pointed out that the state funds allocated
to developing and strengthening the electricity system had been spent
inefficiently and improperly monitored Source: CESD (2018), Azerbaijan’
countrywide electricity blackout: Problems, causes, and results,  the concept of
electricity security is being broadened to also respond to three emerging
challenges: the clean energy transition, cyber security and climate change
Technology developments and climate change mitigation efforts are spurring an
electricity supply transition from centralised, vertically integrated systems of
relatively few large, dispatchable thermal power plants to more diversified
capacity types and sizes that include variable solar and wind power in
particular While cyber security concerns are linked with the increasing
digitalisation of electricity supply systems, the need for demand-side measures
is also rising as connected devices, electric vehicles and behind-the-meter
distributed energy resources become more prevalent Finally, mounting evidence
indicates that electricity system infrastructure needs to be better adapted to
climate change impacts such as heat waves and droughts, and the associated
reductions in water availability (IEA, 2020b) These emerging electricity
security concerns are likely to become increasingly relevant for Azerbaijan 83
ELECTRICITY Assessment Azerbaijan’ electricity demand is set to rise in the
years and decades ahead Although the entire population has access to affordable
electricity, the current supply level of around  500 kWh per capita per year is
relatively low – and expanding electrification will only increase demand To
maximise the benefits of electricity for the population, investments are
required in new and more efficient generating capacity and electricity grids The
country needs  more dynamic electricity sector and could model transformation on
international best practices that demonstrate how to develop competitive
electricity wholesale and retail markets The IEA welcomes the government’
determination to reform the electricity system by gradually transitioning from
state-dominated vertically integrated system to  more dynamic, efficient and
environmentally sustainable one The challenge now is to deliver this
metamorphosis Market reform The need for electricity reform was recognised in
the 2016 Strategic Roadmap, and several proposals have been drafted, including
the draft laws on electricity; on the role of the regulator in energy and public
utilities; and on the use of renewable energy in electricity generation The IEA
urges the government to adopt the pending legislation and to implement ambitious
electricity market reforms for the benefit of the country and its economy
International experience suggests that reform approaches should be shaped by
country’ specific political and economic context, be tailored to achieve desired
policy outcomes, and offer multiple institutional pathways to achieve the
desired outcomes (see Box ) The government should first focus on governance
issues and financial viability Tariffs and subsidies should be revised to enable
full cost recovery, and to encourage investment in power sector development and
RD& Reforms of this kind should help reduce operating costs and improve
generation, transmission and distribution efficiency Specific policy objectives
should also be set for  secure, efficient and clean electricity system Although
Azerbaijan has enough gas resources to generate all the electricity it needs for
decades to come, it is also in the enviable position of having excellent solar
and wind power potential Technology costs for solar and wind have declined
dramatically, making it more inviting for the country to tap into their
potential and save more natural gas for exports and for petrochemical
production, for example To enable the energy sector to allocate resources more
efficiently, the IEA urges the government to also reform and gradually abolish
subsidies for natural gas in electricity generation At the same time,
diversifying electricity generation to include more renewable energy would help
limit CO2 emissions, in line with Azerbaijan’ commitment under the Paris
Agreement In this context, the IEA welcomes the government’ plans to raise the
share of renewable energy in total generating capacity from 16% in 2018 to 30%
84  DISTRICT HEATING              Box  Elements of successful power market
reforms  From its recent analysis of power market reforms around the world, the
World Bank has identified ten elements for success: Power sector reforms should
be designed according to the enabling conditions of each country and oriented
primarily towards achieving better sector outcomes  Every power sector reform
design needs to be thoroughly grounded in the political realities of the
specific country to which it pertains  Greater emphasis should be placed on
building institutional capacity for power sector planning and associated
implementation  Generation plants should be procured through  transparent and
competitive process, with as much contractual flexibility as the context allows
 Unbundling should not be the highest priority in countries where more
fundamental financial and governance challenges persist; it should be undertaken
primarily to facilitate deeper reforms  Wholesale power markets remain  viable
option for countries that have all the foundational measures in place; others
may derive greater benefit from regional trade  Greater efforts should be made
to strengthen the corporate governance and managerial practices of state-owned
utilities  The regulatory framework needs to be adapted to reflect the
institutional context and accommodate emerging technological trends  Private
sector participation in distribution should be considered only when enabling
conditions are met  Achieving the 21st-century goals of universal access and
decarbonisation will require additional reform measures targeted explicitly at
these objectives Source: Foster and Rana (2020), Rethinking Power Sector Reform
in the Developing World Policies and measures are needed to meet electricity
market reform objectives, for example to provide for unbundling, third-party
access to grids, transparent wholesale markets, and partial privatisation of
monopolies If reform is to be successful, it must ensure the effective
unbundling of Azerenergy’ generating assets from its transmission grid ownership
and grid operations It must also provide for non-discriminatory third-party
access to the transmission and distribution grids At the same time, transmission
and distribution tariffs should be separated from energy supply tariffs to
enable the use of performance-based incentives Electricity generation should be
opened up to competition, and wholesale and retail markets created This is best
done gradually The first steps should be to remove entry barriers for new
participants and to transition towards unsubsidised cost-based economic dispatch
of power plants to increase efficiency This should be quite feasible, since –
except for autoproducers – almost all generating capacity is owned by Azerenergy
increase competition, To the government should consider privatising some of
Azerenergy’ generating assets Emphasis should be on privatisation as  potential
means to increase competition and operational efficiency rather than as an end
in itself, and full privatisation will probably not be necessary to achieve the
desired goals For example, in 85  ELECTRICITY many European countries, the state
remains the majority shareholder in electricity generators that operate in
competitive wholesale markets New entrants could also be entirely private or
based on public-private partnerships, as long as market entry barriers are
removed An important point to consider relates to increasing the share of
variable solar and wind power capacity As the government plans to attract
investment through long-term PPAs,  mechanism should be designed to integrate
PPAs into the future wholesale market (see Chapter ) Gains from more efficient
generation and grid operations would limit the need to raise end- user prices,
and in any case social policy measures could be targeted to vulnerable customers
major step in Azerbaijan’ electricity market reform has been the establishment
of  regulator As AERA remains closely overseen by the MoE, just like the
electricity sector monopolies Azerenergy and Azerishiq, it will be essential to
grant it the legal right to take binding decisions and issue recommendations
Efficiency would be further increased by differentiating consumer tariffs by
time of use to encourage electricity consumption when it is less expensive, and
thus help businesses increase their competitiveness Time-of-use tariffs are
standard practice in many countries, as they provide an incentive for demand-
response applications, smooth the daily load curve, decrease peak loads and
reduce the need for additional capacity Dynamic end-user pricing could also
encourage utilities to innovate, for example in terms of demand-response
measures Electricity security Having an uninterrupted supply of electricity is
critical for  modern society In their efforts to ensure electricity security,
many IEA member countries have found it useful to put  comprehensive framework
in place, supported by laws, regulations, policies and measures that address
generation, transmission, distribution and supply challenges The IEA urges
Azerbaijan to consider  similar framework approach An electricity security
framework should include clear targets covering fuel security, resource
adequacy, operational security and governance It should also include indicators
to measure progress Azerbaijan’ fuel/energy source security appears sound, as
the country has significant natural gas resources and is set to diversify into
solar and wind power generation The country is also relatively well placed to
deal with resource adequacy, and it is building more power plants and cross-
border connections to supplement its generating capacity, which already is twice
as high as peak demand Furthermore, efforts to modernise Azerbaijan’ networks
are under way to keep up with growing demands Operational security challenges
are more of  concern While the gas-fired power plants that dominate generation
are relatively new and flexible, the 2018 blackouts demonstrated that
improvements are needed in several areas: system operations, emergency
protocols, resilience, co-ordination and communications, and situational
awareness Another key area to strengthen is governance, including legislation,
institutions and regulation 86  DISTRICT HEATING New risks for electricity
security are emerging in three areas: the clean energy transition ( grid
integration of variable renewable electricity), cyber security and climate
change (IEA, 2020b) The IEA recommends  five-point approach to respond to them:
Put the right framework and institutions in place: clearly establish
responsibilities, incentives and rules  Identify risks: undertake regular
systemwide risk analyses  Manage and mitigate risk: improve preparedness across
the electricity supply chain  Monitor progress: track, record and share
experiences  Respond and recover: cope with outages or attacks and benefit from
the lessons learned Energy policy makers should raise awareness of these three
risk areas and engage with all government agencies as well as stakeholders to
improve understanding and decide how to avoid and deal with complications To
help prevent electricity security emergencies, the government should carry out
emergency response exercises, as they have proven effective in boosting
preparedness and response capability in other countries In addition, the
government could devise probabilistic simulations to assess how various system
elements contribute to operational security related to solar and wind generation
variability, generator and transmission line outages, cross-border connection
availability, system reserve margins, load variability and demand response
Efficient system operations  decade of electricity sector changes lies ahead for
Azerbaijan as it implements market reforms and takes action to roughly double
the share of renewable electricity in total generating capacity by While the
government should assess electricity infrastructure requirements and prepare
long-term network development plans, it also needs to ensure that it has enough
people with the expertise necessary to accomplish this transformation Of
increasing concern is the grid integration of variable solar and wind power,
which will require greater electricity system flexibility While gas-fired
capacity will continue to provide flexibility, the government should also
prepare  general plan for ancillary services, including storage and demand
response An ancillary services market should be developed to allow energy-
intensive enterprises (such as aluminium and steel manufacturing) to participate
in  demand-response system As cross-border trade can also be  source of
flexibility and improved economic efficiency, the IEA is glad to note that
Azerbaijan has strengthened its cross-border connections The country intends to
significantly increase its electricity exports in the coming years, while trade
with hydropower-rich Georgia would allow seasonal imports of hydropower
generation Azerbaijan is modernising its transmission and distribution
infrastructure and has succeeded in reducing network losses in recent years
Modernising network infrastructure offers the opportunity to upgrade it and make
it smarter: installing smart meters, digital substations and sensor control and
operational systems would help raise efficiency It would also accommodate higher
shares of solar and wind power and prompt the adoption of cyber-security
protection measures Furthermore, it would encourage the use of 87  ELECTRICITY
demand-side response systems to reduce curtailments of solar and wind power
generation and support electric vehicle integration (IEA, 2020c) Finally,
Azerbaijan needs  network code to ensure electricity system stability and
reliability  code can facilitate the successful integration of increasing shares
of solar and wind power, and would also help ensure equipment quality and
standardisation The IEA therefore urges the Azerbaijani authorities to adopt the
network code that has been drafted as soon as possible Recommendations The
government of Azerbaijan should:  Support effective unbundling and develop
competitive electricity wholesale and retail markets, overseen by an independent
regulatory body with clear duties and appropriate powers, to enable third-party
access to the grid on non-discriminatory terms and to help attract private
sector investment  Consider the case for privatising elements of the country’
generating capacity and developing public-private partnerships to promote
competition and operational efficiency  Develop  transparent electricity
tariff-setting methodology that will incentivise investment in efficient power
sector development and RD&  Differentiate tariffs according to voltage level
and time of use  Develop and introduce  framework for short- and long-term
generation, transmission, distribution and supply security, supported by targets
and indicators to measure progress  Task the regulator and the TSO with
preparing  long-term network development plan, monitoring its implementation and
updating it regularly  Prepare  plan to develop ancillary services, including
storage and demand-side response, to maintain network stability and security 
Expedite the adoption of  network code for the electricity system, including
rules and standards for variable renewable energy integration 88  DISTRICT
HEATING References              ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2020), Reforms,
Opportunities, and Challenges for State- Owned Enterprises, ADB, Manila  ADB
(2016a), Economic analysis Power Distribution Enhancement Investment Program
(RRP AZE ), ADB, Manila ADB (2016b), Sector assessment (summary): Energy Power
Distribution Enhancement Investment Program (RRP AZE ), ADB, Manila Azerenergy
(2020), Energy transmission table,  (Center for Economic and Social Development)
(2018), Azerbaijan’ countrywide electricity blackout: Problems, causes, and
results,  (Energy Charter Secretariat) (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy
Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan, ECS, Brussels FNA (Fars News
Agency) (2020), Iran’ power grid soon to connect to Azeri, Russian grids,   and
Rana (2020), Rethinking Power Sector Reform in the Developing World, Sustainable
Infrastructure Series, World Bank, Washington, DC,  GoA (Government of
Azerbaijan) (2016), Strategic Roadmap for Development of Utilities Services
(Electric Energy, Heating, Water and Gas) in the Republic of Azerbaijan, GoA,
Baku IEA (International Energy Agency) (2021a), World Energy Balances 2021
(database),  IEA (2021b), World Energy Prices 2021 (database),  IEA (2020a),
Georgia 2020,  (2020b), Power Systems in Transition,  transition IEA (2020c),
World Energy Outlook 2020,  (2019), Energy Prices and Taxes 2019 (database),
INOGATE Technical Secretariat (2016), Preparation of  concept note and  roadmap
for the setup of an independent energy regulator, towards the development of the
country’ energy market – Activity completion report, as modified by IRENA
(2019), Renewables Readiness Assessment: Republic of Azerbaijan,  MoE (Ministry
of Energy) (2020a), The development of electric power engineering following
independence (the third stage, after 1991),  elektroenergetikanin-
inkisafi1991-ciilden-sonraki-ucuncu-dovr MoE (2020b), The development of the
renewable energy sector was  priority in the first half,  birinci-yarimilde-
prioritet-olub 89  ELECTRICITY MoE (2020c), Electricity production in the
country decreased in the eight months of current year,  enerjisi-istehsali-
azalib_3094 SSC (State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan) (2020), Energy of
Azerbaijan 2020, SSC, Baku Tariff Council of the Republic of Azerbaijan (2020),
Elektrik enerjisinin ölkədaxili tarifləri,  90                District heating
Key data (2019 provisional) Total generation: 33 Mtoe, +125% since 2008 Sources:
natural gas %, oil % Consumption: 32 Mtoe (industry %, residential %,
services/other %), +133% since 2008 Overview Azerbaijan uses natural gas for
around 99% of its space heating In the decades since the collapse of the Soviet
Union, the government has focused on expanding the natural gas grid to the whole
population, and district heating (DH) has become less important Detailed data on
the market shares of individual heating technologies in Azerbaijan are not
available, but individual gas boilers cover at least 80% of heating needs, owing
to generous subsidies for small-scale gas use However, DH continues to be
important in some sectors: in 2017, it provided heating services to 26% of
hospitals; % of preschools; % of schools; and % of residential buildings (ECS,
2020) Moreover, there is scope for it to figure more significantly in
Azerbaijan’ future energy system Combined with electricity and cooling
generation and heat pump and waste heat use, modern DH technology has the
potential to provide economically and environmentally attractive clean energy
Supply and demand Practically all Azerbaijan’ district heat is generated from
natural gas (Figure ) In 2019, district heat consumption amounted to 32 million
tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) (133% more than in 2008) (Figure ), or % of the
country’ total final consumption (TFC) Residential district heat use grew more
than fourfold from 2008 to 2019, while consumption in the energy industry
declined to almost zero The share of heat generated by co-generation1 plants
therefore decreased from 64% in 2008 to % in 2017 (ECS, 2020) Reversing the
declining trend of the past decade, the use of DH for process heat in the
chemicals/petrochemicals sector started in Co-generation refers to the combined
production of heat and power 91  DISTRICT HEATING All DH is supplied by the
state-owned monopoly Azeristiliktejhizat, which was founded in 2005 to improve
DH supply infrastructure that had been severely damaged in the first national
reform period after independence in The company operates 550 boilers in 51 of
the country’ 63 administrative regions In 2017, it supplied heat to  800
residential buildings, 291 schools, 150 kindergartens, 159 health sector
facilities and  188 other service sector premises (Azeristiliktechizat, 2020)
Figure  District heat generation by source,  Mtoe 40 Oil 30 Natural gas 20 10
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA All rights
reserved Virtually all of Azerbaijan’ district heat is produced from natural gas
Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Figure  District
heat consumption by sector,  Mtoe 40 Industry 30 Energy* 20 Services/other** 10
Residential 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA
All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ residential district heat consumption has grown
more than fourfold since * Includes oil and gas extraction and oil refineries **
Includes commercial and public services, agriculture and forestry Note: Heat
consumption data have been available in an internationally comparable format
since Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Regulation and
prices Unlike electricity and gas networks, DH networks are local and often
supplied by one producer that also owns the distribution grid DH networks are
typically subject to monopoly regulation to protect customers from paying
excessively high prices The 92  DISTRICT HEATING regulatory framework, which
affects both how prices are set and who has access to the DH network, can vary
from strict government regulation to free market competition with minimal
regulation               Azerbaijan and Hungary are examples of countries that
have strictly regulated DH markets, in which the end-user heat price (tariff) is
set directly or indirectly by the government DH companies are subsidised to
compensate for losses from heat tariffs that do not fully cover generation and
distribution costs In contrast, Sweden and Finland have unregulated DH markets,
in which DH has to compete with other heat sources such as direct electric
heating or heat pumps (IEA, 2019) In some cases,  regulator is responsible for
price-setting, often in conformity with  model of some kind These situations
tend to fit somewhere between strict government regulation and free market
pricing systems Prices can be regulated according to  cost-plus model, which
allows the heat supplier to cover its costs and obtain  reasonable return on its
investments (this is what happens in the Slovak Republic, for example) Another
model for price regulation puts  cap on the DH price and allows for any price
models below that cap The price cap can be based on best practice through
market benchmark, as in Denmark, or defined by an alternative heating
technology, as in Norway and the Netherlands (IEA, 2019; 2018) In Azerbaijan,
district heat prices are regulated by the Tariff Council and approved by the
government Current tariffs, which have been in force since December 2011 and
were reconfirmed in January 2017, apply to all DH systems in the country For
residential use, the tariff is AZN 15 per m2 of living area per month, and for
non-residential use it is AZN 25 per m3 of heated space per month For the
relatively few consumers with  heat meter, the tariff is AZN 30 per gigacalorie
(Gcal) Tariffs for hot water used to be set by the Tariff Council, but since
January 2017 they have been determined by Azeristiliktejhizat, which increased
the tariffs (per m3) for households from AZN  to AZN 92 and for non- households
from AZN  to AZN  (ECS, 2020) Importantly, natural gas tariffs in Azerbaijan
differ across consumer groups, which puts DH at  competitive disadvantage with
other heating technologies In 2019, gas prices per  000 m3 were AZN 100 for
small consumers (individual gas boiler users) and AZN 120 for electricity
generators, but AZN 200 for district heat generators (see Chapter )
Azeristiliktechizat does not publish its financial reports, but it is obvious
that current tariffs do not enable the company to make  profit, let alone
generate sufficient revenue for the investments needed to rehabilitate and
modernise the DH system According to the Law on the State Budget, the company
has consistently received state aid In , the aid was allocated as increases in
fixed capital (USD 51 million in total), and in 2013 as  subsidy (USD 27
million) Since 2014, state aid to Azeristiliktechizat has been categorised as
financial assistance (totalling USD 110 million from 2014 to 2019, or USD
million per year) (ECS, 2020) The current tariff methodology does not oblige or
encourage Azeristiliktechizat to reduce its operational costs or to improve the
efficiency of heat generation or distribution In fact, international experience
shows that this kind of tariff methodology may instead prompt utilities to
increase their costs to justify  greater need for regulated revenue 93  DISTRICT
HEATING Modernising DH infrastructure Azerbaijan’ DH infrastructure is in need
of modernisation Many boilers have low efficiency, and  substantial part of the
870-km distribution network requires refurbishment Modern technology offers many
new opportunities to raise the energy supply efficiency through integrated
district heating, cooling and electricity systems, but finding the financing
necessary for investments is difficult because of below-cost district heat
tariffs and subsidies for natural gas heating Azerbaijan does not have an
official strategy for the DH sector, or for the heating sector in general Since
2005 (subsequent to  2004 USAID technical assistance project),
Azeristiliktechizat has focused on abandoning large, Soviet-era centralised
systems and establishing smaller boilers in individual urban areas These smaller
boilers typically supply heat to  blocks of flats and are relatively highly
automated Distribution losses were relatively stable from 2010 to 2017 at % of
heat generated, and decreased to % in 2018 (SSC, 2019) However,  lack of heat
meters means that these figures are indicative only, calculated according to
formula Modernising existing DH systems would reduce thermal losses and water
leakage and decrease maintenance and repair costs Integrating heating, cooling
and electricity would also help optimise energy supply more generally Heating
and electricity systems can be integrated in several ways, for example through
co-generation or by using heat pumps to generate district heat From  given
electricity input, heat pumps can produce roughly three to four times more
energy in the form of heat, depending on the outdoor temperature and the
technology used They are thus an attractive heating option with no local
emissions of their own DH systems typically use large heat pumps DH systems can
also be used to generate cooling in absorption/adsorption chillers
(refrigerators that use heat instead of electricity to drive the cooling
process) With heat pumps, DH and district cooling (DC) can be generated in an
efficient and integrated process Combining DH and DC in an integrated district
energy network can deliver efficiency gains of % District energy is best suited
to densely populated areas that can exploit waste heat and provide flexibility
to the electricity grid through thermal inertia (IEA, 2020) DH and DC can also
be generated together with electricity through trigeneration, as is done, for
example, in the district heating and cooling (DHC) systems of Stockholm and
Helsinki In Azerbaijan, DHC could be used in the Baku area, for example, to
supply large residential buildings, industries, offices, commercial buildings
such as shopping malls, and public services such as hospitals As heat can also
be stored more easily than electricity, thermal storage could be used to
facilitate system balancing as more power is generated from variable wind and
solar resources (an emerging sector in Azerbaijan) In an open electricity
market,  DH supplier can also respond to price and demand signals by using co-
generation, heat pumps and thermal storage For example, in times of high
electricity demand, it can adjust DH generation to maximise power production and
use thermal storage to cover heat demand, while in periods of excess power, it
can mobilise more heat pumps to generate heat 94  DISTRICT HEATING When
modernising DH networks, equipping them with fourth-generation DH (4GDH) systems
would offer efficiency gains, as these low-temperature networks reduce the
supply temperature to around 50° in flow pipes from the producer and to 20° in
the return pipes to better match the heat demand profile Furthermore,  4GDH
network should be able to recycle heat from low-temperature sources and
distribute it with low losses in the network Lower temperatures also enable the
use of more waste heat, not only from industry but also from supermarkets and
data centres, as well as heat from renewable sources such as geothermal energy
and solar irradiation               Assessment Although Azerbaijan’ government
has successfully restored the DH system that was practically dismantled in the
1990s, for several reasons the system remains economically unviable Natural gas
subsidies favour individual gas boilers over other heating technologies, while
the state-owned DH monopoly Azeristiliktechizat needs to find revenues
infrastructure Nevertheless, the current lack of economic viability does not
mean that DH has little or no future Modern DH technology, combined with
electricity and cooling generation and heat pump and waste heat use, has been
proven an economically and environmentally attractive way to supply energy in
many IEA member countries, and could be in Azerbaijan also if certain energy
market reforms are carried out inefficient Soviet-legacy its ageing and to
modernise Gas price subsidies for residential consumers remain  major barrier to
DH development The household price for gas is only half what Azeristiliktechizat
must pay for gas to generate district heat As  result, individual gas boilers
are by far the most popular space heating technology in the country Many
apartments in multi-apartment buildings have voluntarily been disconnected from
the DH network and opted for individual natural gas or electric boilers instead
This compounds the challenge for DH systems, because the disconnection of
customers from the system leads to overcapacity, which in turn increases the
average cost of heat supply for final consumers At the same time, the consumer
tariff for district heat does not appear to reflect actual supply costs and is
too low for Azeristiliktechizat to generate the revenues needed to modernise the
Soviet-era infrastructure Thus, Azeristiliktechizat is subsidised from the state
budget to cover its losses (around USD 60 million from 2016 to 2019)
Furthermore, district heat prices remain the same throughout the year and for
all the country’ DH systems, and nominal prices have not been changed since The
government should therefore introduce cost-reflective consumption-based energy
tariffs that would enable Azeristiliktechizat to fully recover its costs and
compete on equal terms in the heat market Until such tariffs are introduced, the
viability of DH infrastructure could be maintained by avoiding any further
erosion of the DH customer base: the best way to do this would be to ensure that
the cost of natural gas for DH does not exceed the price for residential
consumers  more diversified and dynamic pricing approach that recognises
differences in heat loads and generating costs would also help save energy and
encourage the development of new business models Examples of numerous other
countries employing this type of approach may provide useful models for
Azerbaijan’ government 95  DISTRICT HEATING It is quite possible that DH could
become more attractive in Azerbaijan’ new and renovated urban areas As around
half of the nation’ population still lives in the countryside, its cities are
set to continue to grow, and new urban areas will need heating solutions In
addition to being an efficient and cost-effective option, DHC systems that
integrate electricity generation, heat pumps, waste heat use and thermal storage
would also help reduce CO2 emissions Establishing  more efficient integrated
energy system would also allow the country to save more natural gas for export
An upgraded system could be built gradually and should be more economically
viable than the current one, which is based on subsidised natural gas and
therefore ensures complete dominance of individual natural gas boilers, the
continuous need for DH subsidies, and the loss of potential gas export revenues
To identify heating sector opportunities, the government should develop  heat
map that includes existing DH capacities and waste heat from industry and power
generation It could then assess strategic investments in DH infrastructure
modernisation based on this heat map, and direct public and private investment
funds towards these areas The government should also evaluate cogeneration and
trigeneration potential, and introduce incentives or obligations to support them
It will also be critical to co-ordinate policies on DH, cooling, natural gas and
energy efficiency For example, incentives would be needed for  DH system with
overcapacity to improve the energy efficiency of its operations and promote
efficiency for end users While lower heat demand in  DH system could be
compensated for by additional new customers as more people move into urban
areas, this would require the establishment of undistorted competition among
heating options ( the abolishment of price subsidies for individual gas users)
Regulation should encourage heat supply innovation and integration with smart
and energy-efficient buildings, and incentives should be introduced to reward
gradually more efficient generation The government should also set efficiency
improvement targets for Azeristiliktechizat: additional options to boost the
company’ operational efficiency include restructuring and full or partial
privatisation An obvious way to increase efficiency is through metering, which
is currently absent throughout the DH chain Although the 1998 Law on Energy
stipulates that all energy supplied must also be metered, in reality DH network
losses are calculated through  formula that covers only living space, not the
full dwelling area The installation of meters and therefore enable
Azeristiliktechizat to track actual network losses, while consumers would
receive transparent information on what they are being billed for Replacing
boilers and pipes, and installing energy controls such as individual heating
substations and temperature- regulating valves, would also increase efficiency
To encourage further improvements, the government should also facilitate the
establishment of energy service companies implementation of consumption-based
billing would 96  DISTRICT HEATING              Recommendations  The government
of Azerbaijan should:  Implement  new regulatory framework for the heating
sector, one that promotes cost- effectiveness, competition, efficiency and
through sector integration, and encourages investment for these purposes
Achieving these ends would involve: flexibility, including > Transitioning to
system of cost-reflective consumption-based energy tariffs, which would enable
Azeristiliktechizat to fully recover its costs and compete on equal terms in the
heat market Introducing efficiency improvement targets for Azeristiliktechizat >
> Possibly restructuring Azeristiliktechizat, and fully or partly privatising it
to leverage private investment to modernise and rehabilitate DH > Promoting co-
generation at existing power plants  Consolidate and co-ordinate policies in
the areas of district heating and cooling, natural gas and energy efficiency,
and support the development and demonstration of efficient, integrated systems
to supply heating, cooling and electricity (trigeneration)  Improve the energy
efficiency of district heating through policies and programmes to > Replace old
and inefficient boilers with modern ones > Replace old pipes with modern, pre-
insulated ones Install meters throughout the system – from boiler exit meters to
building-level heat meters – and introduce compulsory apartment-level metering
for new buildings > Install energy controls, including individual heating
substations and temperature- regulating valves (TRVs) > > Racilitate the
establishment of energy service companies 97  DISTRICT HEATING References
Azeristiliktechizat (2020),  (accessed September 2020) ECS (Energy Charter
Secretariat) (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of the
Republic of Azerbaijan, ECS, Brussels IEA (International Energy Agency) (2021),
World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  IEA (2020), Energy Technology
Perspectives 2020,  technology-perspectives-IEA (2019), Energy Policies of IEA
Countries: Sweden 2019,  IEA (2018), Energy Policies of IEA Countries: Slovak
Republic 2018,  SSC (State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan) (2019),
Environment in Azerbaijan 2019, SSC, Baku 98                            Energy
and climate change Key data (2019 provisional) Total GHG emissions* without
LULUCF** (2018): MtCO2-eq Total GHG emissions* with LULUCF** (2018): MtCO2-eq
Energy-related CO emissions From fuel combustion: MtCO (+% since 2005, -% since
1990)  By fuel: natural gas %, oil %, other %  By sector: power and heat
generation %, transport %, residential %, commercial %, industry %, other energy
% emissions per GDP): 24 kgCO /USD (2015 PPP) (world average intensity (CO CO
26)    * For non-Annex  countries of the UNFCCC, recent data availability is
limited ** Land use, land-use change and forestry Overview Azerbaijan joined the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1995 and
ratified the Kyoto Protocol in As  Non-Annex  Party to the Convention, it did
not have to set  target for its GHG emissions, but it has nevertheless committed
to reduce them Its main measures in the energy sector have been switching from
oil to natural gas, increasing power and heat generation efficiency, and
limiting methane leaks from oil and gas production In October 2016, Azerbaijan
ratified the Paris Agreement and pledged to reduce its net GHG emissions to 35%
below the 1990 level by In 2018, Azerbaijan’ net GHG emissions, which include
net sink of  million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO2-eq) from LULUCF,
totalled MtCO2-eq, or % more than the 2030 target level Broken down by GHG, CO2
accounted for % of total emissions in 2018, CH4 for %, N2O for % and -gases for
% The relatively high share of CH4 is linked to the country’ significant oil and
gas production 99  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE By sector, energy-related emissions
accounted for 73% of Azerbaijan’ total GHG emissions (Figure ) Total GHG
emissions increased % from 2005 to 2018, while the share of energy-related
emissions decreased by six percentage points Figure  Greenhouse gas emissions by
sector,  MtCO -eq 80 Waste  70 Industry processes 60 50 Agriculture 40 30
Energy* 20 10  1990 2000 2005 2010 2014 2016 2018 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ total GHG emissions have risen less than 10% since * Includes fuel
combustion (for power and heat generation, and for industry, transport,
residential and commercial energy consumption), fugitive emissions from fuels
and the energy industry’ own consumption Sources: MENR (2018), Second Biennial
Update Report of the Republic of Azerbaijan; SSC (2020), Environment in
Azerbaijan 2020 (data for 2014, 2016 and 2018) CO2 emissions from fuel
combustion In 2019, Azerbaijan’ CO2 emissions from fuel combustion were Mt (+18%
from 2008) (Figure ) Power and heat generation, which relies on natural gas for
more than 90% of its primary energy, accounted for 36% of the total The
remaining emissions came from transport (24%), the residential sector (19%), the
energy industry, mainly oil and gas production and oil refining (%), the
commercial sector (%) and the manufacturing industry (%) Figure  CO2 emissions
from fuel combustion by sector,  MtCO 60 Other energy*  50 Industry** 40
Services/other*** 30 Residential 20 Transport 10 Power and heat generation 1990
1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2019 IEA All
rights reserved The highest portion of Azerbaijan’ CO2 emissions from fuel
combustion come from electricity and heat generation * Includes oil and gas
extraction, oil refineries, own use in electricity and heat generation, and
unspecified energy industry own use ** Includes construction and manufacturing
*** Includes commercial and public services, and agriculture, forestry and
fishing Source: IEA (2021), CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2021 (database),
100  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE The structure of Azerbaijan’ CO2 emissions by
sector has changed quite markedly since While emissions from power and heat
generation have declined 20%, those from transport have more than tripled (252%)
Emissions have virtually doubled (98%) in the residential sector and grown by
four-fifths (85%) in the oil and gas sector In contrast, emissions halved in
industry (-51%) from 2000 to 2018, but production capacity increases raised them
by over three-quarters (77%) from 2018 to The commercial sector’ emissions
developed in  similar manner, dropping by half between 2000 and 2018 (-48%) and
more than doubling from 2018 to 2019 (148%) Related energy use trends in these
sectors are analysed elsewhere in this report (see Chapters ,  and )
Azerbaijan’ CO2 emissions are driven by  set of factors that include population
changes and the structure and size of its economy These, together with the
technologies deployed, determine the economy’ energy intensity Because
Azerbaijan’ economy relies heavily on oil and gas exports, the country’ CO2
emissions are not strongly linked to its GDP (Figure ) Rather, emissions
correlate more strongly with electricity generation, which is based on natural
gas and is the highest- emitting sector Growing electricity consumption is in
turn linked with population increases (+25% since 2000) and economic activity
outside the oil and gas sector Figure  Energy-related CO emissions and main
drivers,  Index (2000 = 100)  400 GDP/ capita (PPP) 350 300 Electricity
generation 250 Population 200 CO emissions 150 100  CO /TES 50  TES/GDP 2000
2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved
Azerbaijan’ high share of oil and gas exports in GDP dampens the impact of GDP
changes on CO2 emissions Notes: TES = total energy supply PPP = purchasing power
parity GDP in constant 2015 USD prices at PPP Source: IEA (2021), CO Emissions
from Fuel Combustion 2021 (database),   Azerbaijan’ CO2 intensity of GDP, at 24
kilogrammes of carbon dioxide (kgCO2)/USD (2015 PPP) in 2019, is below the world
average (Figure ) This reflects the structure of its economy as well as its lack
of reliance on coal in electricity generation: over the past two decades, the
country’ power plants have been modernised and fuel oil has been replaced by
natural gas as the main energy source 101  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE Figure  CO
intensity in Azerbaijan and selected countries, 2019  kgCO /USD (2015 PPP)
IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ CO2 intensity is below the world average *
Covers Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan Note: When recent data are not
available, the year for the latest data are indicated in the chart Source: IEA
(2021), CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2021 (database),   intensity in
Azerbaijan and selected countries,  Figure  CO kgCO / USD (2015 PPP)   Russian
Federation   Non-Annex  countries (UNFCCC) Georgia    IEA total  Azerbaijan
European Union 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 IEA All rights
reserved Rapid GDP growth has helped reduce the carbon intensity of Azerbaijan’
economy Source: IEA (2021), CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2021 (database),
In 2018, Azerbaijan’ power generation sector emitted an average of 430 grammes
of CO2 per kilowatt hour (gCO2/kWh) of electricity (Figure ) The relatively high
carbon intensity reflects the high share (92%) of natural gas in power
generation In the short term, this could be reduced by increasing both the
efficiency of gas-fired power generation and the use of renewable energy, and by
introducing incentives to this end as part of electricity market reform (see
Chapter ) In the longer term, carbon capture and storage (CCS) could also be
viable option for Azerbaijan 102  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE Figure  CO intensity
of power and heat generation in Azerbaijan and selected
countries,   gCO /kWh  700 Non-Annex  countries (UNFCCC) Azerbaijan  600 500 IEA
total 400 Russian Federation 300 200 European Union 100 Georgia 2000 2002 2004
2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ power
sector carbon intensity is declining slowly, but various incentives could reduce
it further Source: IEA (2021), CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2021
(database),   Institutions The Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR)
is responsible for formulating environmental and climate policy, and its Climate
Change and Ozone Center co-ordinates the National GHG Inventory The Center has
four departments dedicated to: the GHG inventory; Climate Change Impact
Assessment; Adaptation; and Climate and Ozone GHG data is published in the
annual Environment in Azerbaijan report prepared by the State Statistical
Committee (SSC) The National Coordination Council on Sustainable Development,
set up in 2016 and headed by the deputy prime minister, brings together
representatives from various ministries to ensure that the country’ socio-
economic programmes and strategies conform to the UN Sustainable Development
Goals The Council includes  separate working group for environmental issues,
including climate change Policy Azerbaijan’ January 2017 Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC lays out the country’
climate policy objectives and planned mitigation policies and measures The NDC
defined the country’ first-ever quantitative target for GHG emissions:  35%
reduction from the 1990 level by Prior to submitting its NDC, as  Non-Annex
Party to the UNFCCC, Azerbaijan did not have an emissions target, and climate
policy received rather limited attention in government policy documents The
Azerbaijan 2020 vision from 2012 did, however, include  target to decrease
energy and CO2 intensities to the OECD average, and the 2016 strategic roadmaps
covering heavy industry and machinery, utilities, and manufacturing and
processing agricultural products listed several measures to address  In absolute
terms, the 35% reduction equates to  drop of MtCO2-eq from the 1990 level
excluding LULUCF (MtCO2-eq), or MtCO2-eq from 1990 level including LULUCF
(MtCO2-eq) 103  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE climate change These measures aimed to
increase energy and waste management efficiency, renewable energy production,
and the size of forested areas However, Azerbaijan does not yet have legal
instruments to support its goal to reduce GHG emissions It also has yet to adopt
laws on energy efficiency and renewable energy, and to develop plans for
introducing carbon pricing of any kind It also lacks  specific climate strategy,
although MENR, together with the UN Development Programme (UNDP), is now
preparing  national action plan to meet the NDC targets MENR has also begun to
formulate  national strategy for low-carbon development and has established
related working groups that bring together representatives of various ministries
and state agencies The 2017 NDC Azerbaijan’ 2017 NDC outlines climate change
mitigation actions for the electricity and heat, oil and gas, residential and
commercial, transport, agricultural, and waste sectors, as well as for LULUCF
They focus on technological improvements, but also include regulatory changes
and public awareness measures (see Box ) The NDC document also explicitly
mentions that declining global oil prices will constrain the country’ ability to
meet its pledge  key part of the Paris Agreement is establishing  common system
for the transparency of climate change mitigation Measurement, reporting and
verification (MRV) is central to effective NDC implementation Measurement is
needed to identify emissions trends and determine where to focus emissions
reduction efforts and to monitor progress Reporting and verification are
important for ensuring transparency, good governance, accountability, and the
credibility of results Sound MRV is also  precondition for introducing carbon
pricing Azerbaijan has plans for an MRV system that would apply to around 70
emitting facilities However, the government recognises that building an MRV
system will require greater institutional capacity within the government – which
means personnel must be trained to calculate emissions projections and verify
emissions – as well as increased know-how within companies It is for these
reasons that Azerbaijan has not yet introduced  national MRV system Instead, the
emitting companies have been measuring and reporting emissions themselves, and
the environmental administration under MENR has been analysing the reports and
verifying them through company inspections However, according to Azerbaijan’
2018 Second Biennial Update Report to the UNFCCC, the government suspended all
company inspections, including environmental ones, from 2015 to 2021 to
stimulate entrepreneurship (MENR, 2018) Box  Azerbaijan’ NDC measures to
mitigate energy-related GHG emissions Power and heat • develop legislative acts
and regulatory documents on energy • • • • raise awareness on energy efficiency
replace existing technologies in electricity and heat production with modern
ones reconstruct distribution networks and transmission lines implement
insulation works and applying modern lighting systems 104  ENERGY AND CLIMATE
CHANGE                          Oil and gas • apply new and modern
environmentally friendly processing technologies • produce fuel in line with
EURO- standards in  new refinery complex by 2019 and  strengthen the capacity of
the staff • modernise gas pipelines and gas distribution systems and take other
measures to decrease losses by up to % by 2020 and ensure the volume of
reduction complies with international standards by 2050 capture emissions to the
atmosphere from oil and gas production • • prevent gas leakages in oil and gas
processing and at distribution networks Residential and commercial sectors •
deploy control and measurement devices in electricity, heat and natural gas
systems on  massive scale • promote the use of energy-efficient light bulbs •
use modern energy-saving technologies in heating systems • organise public
awareness programmes on energy efficiency Alternative and renewable energy
sources • accelerate the use of renewable energy for heating, enhancing the use
of innovative technologies construct small hydropower plants (HPPs) on small
rivers, irrigation canals and water basins • • use biomass, solar power,
electric and heat energy, wind power, heat pumps and geothermal energy in all
sectors of the economy Transport • use environmentally friendly forms of
transport • • electrify railway lines and transition to alternating current (AC)
systems in traction • • develop underground transport and increase the number of
underground stations • eliminate traffic jams by constructing road junctions and
underground and surface increase the use of electric vehicles for public
transport improve and expand smart transport management systems pedestrian
crossings Source: UNFCCC (2017), Information to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) on the Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) of the Republic of Azerbaijan,  Limiting GHG emissions from
oil and gas production The outlook for oil and gas exports in  decarbonising
world is of critical strategic importance for Azerbaijan Oil and gas continue to
provide around 90% of the country’ export revenue, and completion of the Trans-
Adriatic Pipeline in late 2020 means that gas exports to the European Union are
set to increase significantly However, many importing countries are aiming to
move away from oil and gas use in the medium to long term The European Union
especially is striving to make its economy carbon-neutral by As 15% of global
energy-related GHG emissions come from the process of getting oil and gas out of
the ground and to consumers, it would be beneficial to reduce the GHG intensity
of oil and gas production as soon as possible Options that are likely to be
cost-effective 105  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE include minimising the flaring of
associated gases and venting of CO2, reducing methane emissions, and integrating
renewables and low-carbon electricity into new upstream developments Putting
price on methane emissions should encourage the oil and gas industry to limit
such emissions and recover methane, which could then be sold (IEA, 2020b; 2020c)
The State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) is part of the Zero
Routine Flaring by 2030 initiative launched by the World Bank and the UN in From
2011 to 2017, SOCAR reduced annual gas flaring from its operations by more than
600 million cubic metres (mcm) and is targeting to eliminate flaring completely
in The company is also working to reduce methane emissions to 95 mcm per year by
2022 under the plan "Reduction of associated gas emissions in SOCAR and projects
involving SOCAR for " In addition, it is planning to adopt in 2021  low-emission
development strategy to (MGP, 2021; SOCAR, 2020a) To make oil and gas production
more compatible with emissions reductions, facilities could be equipped with
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS), and the captured CO2 used more
extensively in petrochemical production or converted to zero-carbon fuels (
hydrogen) CCUS equipment could also help mitigate CO2 emissions from gas
processing and oil refining and aid enhance oil recovery (IEA, 2020a; 2020b) To
combat climate change and the pollution that threatens the environmental
sustainability of the Caspian Sea and Absheron Peninsula, in May 2020 SOCAR
initiated the Caspian Environmental Protection Initiative (CEPI) Global oil and
gas companies operating in Azerbaijan (BP AGT, Equinor Absheron AS and Total &
Absheron ) have also joined the CEPI The initiative brings these companies
together to share knowledge and experience, conduct joint research and implement
environmental activities in  co-ordinated manner (SOCAR, 2020b) Climate change
adaptation The government is preparing  national climate change adaptation plan
focused on the three priority areas of water, agriculture and coastal areas This
work, led by MENR and involving representatives of the relevant ministries and
state agencies, builds on adaptation measures for agriculture, water supply,
forestry, coastal communities, human health and tourism already identified in
Azerbaijan’ Third National Communication to the UNFCCC from For the energy
sector, the main concerns are linked to water availability, both to supply
cooling water to thermal power plants – which generated % of Azerbaijan’
electricity in 2019 – and for hydropower, which generated % Some of the key
climate change impacts on the country are expected to result from reduced water
availability as winter precipitation and snow-melt water decrease, surface and
groundwater resources diminish, summertime precipitation declines and drought
periods become longer/more frequent (Arent, 2018) 106  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Of the other major energy system impacts of climate change listed by the IEA
(IEA, 2016), several are particularly relevant for Azerbaijan:
 Higher temperatures increase transmission losses and reduce overall
transmission efficiency  Higher temperatures reduce the viscosity of
transported fuels  Higher temperatures increase cooling demand (mostly
affecting electricity) and reduce heating demand (involving heating fuels and
electricity)  Extreme events ( flooding, landslides) and erosion can damage
electricity networks as well as oil and gas pipelines Local air pollution
Transport is by far the largest source of air pollution in Azerbaijan According
to the SSC, it accounted for 85% of the country’ total air pollutant volume in
2018, up from 47% in 2005 and 78% in During this period (), total national air
pollutant emissions remained broadly flat (SSC, 2019) As transport was
responsible for more than three-fifths of the country’ total oil consumption in
2018, better fuel quality is the key to limit air pollution from this sector
Azerbaijan follows EU vehicle emission standards, and since April 2014 it has
been applying the Euro  standard, which sets emission limits for several
pollutants, including NOx and PM Ongoing modernisation of the Heydar Aliyev Oil
Refinery, which supplies almost all the country’ transport fuel, will enable it
to produce high-quality diesel and gasoline that meet the Euro  standard (see
Chapter ) Although electric vehicles offer significant potential to reduce local
air pollution, their numbers remain low in Azerbaijan In contrast with
transport, air pollution from stationary sources has fallen in the past 15
years, thanks to  switch from oil- to gas-fired power generation and to modern
technologies in oil and gas production Emissions could be reduced further by
increasing efficiency, saving energy and using alternative energy sources
Assessment Under the Paris Agreement, Azerbaijan’ NDC goal is to reduce net GHG
emissions 35% from 1990 to In 2018, its emissions (including LULUCF) stood at
MtCO2-eq – % below the 1990 level and % higher than the 2030 target According to
the most recent IEA data, in 2019 Azerbaijan’ CO2 emissions from fuel combustion
amounted to (+% since 2005, -% since 1990) Attaining the 2030 NDC target will
MtCO be complicated if the country does not tackle the rise in transport fuel
demand (unrestrained by prices or taxes) and expanding natural gas consumption
(subsidised in all sectors)  Since Azerbaijan currently does not have legally
binding climate targets or measures, the government should consider introducing
them, for example as part of revising the Law on Energy The government has,
however, outlined climate change mitigation actions for the power and heat, oil
and gas, residential and commercial, transport, agriculture and waste sectors
These measures primarily entail technological improvements to reduce negative
107  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE environmental impacts, together with some
regulatory changes and public awareness measures, but more concrete
implementation plans and policies are now needed to enact them Other actions
could also be considered For example, modernising the vehicle fleet by
instituting fuel efficiency requirements would help reduce air pollution and CO2
emissions, as would using the country’ valuable fossil fuel resources more
efficiently and increasing the use of its considerable untapped renewable energy
resources in power generation Fossil fuel subsidy reforms and revenue-neutral
carbon pricing could achieve these ends, making more oil and gas available for
export There is also  strong case for developing policies and strategies beyond
As more buildings will be constructed, more appliances and equipment sold, and
more vehicles bought in upcoming decades, strong energy efficiency policies will
be increasingly relevant, and the country will need  long-term approach to keep
it on an environmentally sustainable pathway With its population set to continue
to grow, urbanise and become wealthier, Azerbaijan will need to build more urban
infrastructure: energy and climate concerns should be an integral part of long-
term transport and urban development policies to avoid the lock-in of private
car-dominated, inefficient and energy-intensive urban structures For instance,
if private car ownership in Azerbaijan were to increase to the current EU
average, it would explode almost fourfold to  million (see Chapter ) The long-
term decarbonisation objectives of the European Union and many other countries
challenge Azerbaijan’ reliance on oil and gas for export revenue Further
measures are therefore needed both to reduce the CO2 intensity of oil and gas
production and to diversify the country’ economy Climate change could affect
Azerbaijan’ energy supply in several ways Abnormal heat could necessitate power
plant capacity reductions as well as reduce the availability of water for
cooling thermal power plants and for generating hydropower While higher
temperatures and stronger winds could complicate electricity transmission and
distribution, higher temperatures would also likely reduce energy demand in the
winter and raise consumption in the summer Encouragingly, MENR is preparing
National Strategy for Low-Carbon Development and  Climate Change Adaptation
Plan, and working groups made up of representatives from all the relevant
ministries and state agencies have been established To make policymaking more
effective,  system to measure, report and verify emissions should be introduced,
modelling capacity should be increased and co-ordination among the relevant
government ministries and other entities strengthened 108  ENERGY AND CLIMATE
CHANGE Recommendations                          The government of Azerbaijan
should:   Introduce legally binding obligations to limit GHG emissions in line
with the 2030 NDC and with plans beyond 2030, and to develop emissions
projections to show whether the country is on track to meet its emissions
reduction targets  Adopt  guiding policy document and action plan to enable the
country to meet its 2030 NDC, develop  Low-Emission Development Strategy
outlining plans to limit GHG emissions beyond 2030, and identify in these
documents the most cost-effective policies and measures to achieve their
objectives  Introduce  system for measuring, reporting and verifying GHG
emissions, and increase capacity to model them 109  ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE
References Arent,  et al (2018), “Key economic sector and services”, in AR5
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability Part : Global and
Sectoral Aspects Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Field,  et al (eds), Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge and New York, pp ,  IEA (International Energy
Agency) (2021), CO (database),  Emissions from Fuel Combustion 2021  IEA
(2020a), Sustainable Recovery,  IEA (2020b), The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy
Transitions,  and-gas-industry-in-energy-transitions IEA (2020c), Methane
Emissions from Oil and Gas,  emissions-from-oil-and-gas IEA (2016), Energy,
Climate Change and Environment 2016 Insights,  MENR (Ministry of Ecology and
Natural Resources) (2018), Second Biennial Update Report of the Republic of
Azerbaijan to UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, MENR, Baku MGP (Methane
Guiding Principles) (2021), Signatory Reporting SOCAR,  Principles_Reporting-
SOCARpdf SOCAR (State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic) (2020a), Annual
Sustainable Development Report 2019,
reports/Sustainable%20development%20report-pdf SOCAR (2020b), company website,
SSC (State Statistical Committee) (2020), Environment in Azerbaijan 2020, SSC,
Baku UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) (2017),
Information to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) on the Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) of the
Republic of Azerbaijan,  0Azerbaijanpdf 110                            Energy
efficiency Key data (2019 provisional) Total final consumption (TFC): Mtoe (oil
%, natural gas %, electricity %, district heat %, bioenergy and waste %), +37%
since 2008 TFC by sector: residential %, transport %, industry %, services/other
% TFC per capita:  toe (world average 2018:  toe), +20% since 2008, +41% since
2010 Energy intensity (TFC/GDP): 74 toe USD million PPP (world average 2018: 77
toe/USD million PPP), +% since 2008, +40% since 2010 Overview Population growth
and economic development are major drivers of energy demand From 2000 to 2019,
Azerbaijan’ GDP increased more than fourfold, largely owing to higher oil and
gas exports since the mid-2000s Its population expanded by almost one-quarter,
and total final consumption (TFC) of energy by almost two-thirds (Figure )
Azerbaijan’ use of energy increased 65% between 2000 and 2019 to reach million
tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe) Most (over 60%) of this growth resulted from oil
use in the transport sector more than tripling The country’ main energy sources
in 2019 were oil (42%), natural gas (40%) and electricity (15%) Since 2008,
transport has shown the strongest absolute growth (+70%), whereas consumption in
the residential sector (still the largest end consumer) increased only %
Industry consumption was essentially flat for  decade, but it jumped almost 30%
from 2018 to 2019 due to new economic activity Commercial consumption has also
increased rapidly in recent years (+118% since 2008), but from  low base (Figure
) Globally, while technologies and processes are becoming more efficient,
structural factors such as changes in transport modes and increasing floor area
per person are dampening the impact of these technical efficiency gains on
energy demand and slowing global energy intensity improvements This poses
challenge for Azerbaijan’ policymakers, as the country’ population is projected
to continue increasing Judging from other countries’ experiences, the quality of
the housing stock will improve as the population becomes wealthier Heating and
cooling devices are expected to become more efficient but also more numerous, as
are other household appliances 111  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Figure  Energy consumption
and its drivers,  Index (2000 = 100) 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 GDP*
TFC TFC / capita Population TFC / GDP* 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ final energy use has remained
quite stable in the past decade, both per capita and per unit of output *
Expressed in constant 2015 USD billion at purchasing power parity (PPP) Note:
Azerbaijan’ GDP includes  large share of oil and gas exports, the value of which
may fluctuate strongly year- on-year This may affect the accuracy of TFC/GDP as
an indicator of energy intensity and efficiency Source: IEA (2021), World Energy
Balances 2021 (database),  Figure  Final energy consumption by sector,  Mtoe
Residential  Transport   Industry*   Services/other**  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved TFC growth in Azerbaijan
(65% from 2000 to 2019) resulted mostly from increasing transport sector oil use
* Includes non-energy use ** Includes commercial and public services,
agriculture, forestry, fishing and non-specified consumption Note: Azerbaijan
has followed international standards for energy data collection since For
industry and the commercial sector, the pre-2007 definitions and time series are
not fully comparable with the current ones Source: IEA (2021), World Energy
Balances 2021 (database),  Energy intensity can be measured as TFC per capita,
and in 2019 Azerbaijan’ per capita TFC was  tonne of oil equivalent (toe), or
18% below the 2018 world average of  toe (Figure ) Energy intensity is often
also measured as TFC per GDP In 2019, Azerbaijan’ energy intensity per unit of
GDP at PPP was 74 toe per million USD – just below the 2018 world average of 77
toe per million USD However, the high share of oil and gas exports in GDP
constrain the usefulness of TFC/GDP as an efficiency indicator for Azerbaijan
(see note under Figure ) 112  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Figure  TFC per capita in
Azerbaijan and selected countries, 2018*                          toe/capita
IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ energy intensity is below the world average,
both per unit of output and per capita * Comparable data available for Note: TFC
does not include energy transformation Source: IEA (2019b), World Energy
Balances 2019 (database),  Trends by sector Residential In 2019, the residential
sector was the largest end user of energy, consuming  Mtoe and accounting for
32% of TFC The sector’ TFC has remained stable (+% since 2008), but its TFC
structure has continued to change, as natural gas use for space heating has
increased at the expense of electricity (Figure ) Today the gas grid reaches 96%
of Azerbaijan’ population thanks to the government’ grid expansion policy
Natural gas therefore made up 80% of residential TFC in 2019, up from 75% in
Electricity provided 15%, down from 19% in 2008, while district heat accounted
for % of residential TFC District heat in Azerbaijan is generated from natural
gas and its use in the residential sector more than quadrupled from 2008 ( rise
of 314%), but subsidies are significantly higher for gas used in residential
natural gas boilers than by district heat generators (see Chapter ) Residential
heating is dominated by individual natural gas boilers According to the SSC, 20%
of all dwellings were connected to  centrally driven heating system in 2019 and
% had hot water delivered through  district heating system Oil and bioenergy
(firewood) together accounted for less than % of residential TFC: firewood use
decreased 83% from 2008 to 2019 and oil by 90% mainly owing to the government’
policy to expand natural gas use Thus, almost four-fifths of dwellings were
individually heated in 2018, mostly by natural gas boilers but in some cases by
electricity 113  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Figure  TFC in the residential sector by
source,  Mtoe  Bioenergy   Oil  District heat   Electricity   Natural gas 2008
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved
Natural gas is Azerbaijan’ main energy source, as it is inexpensive and almost
the entire population has access to the grid Source: IEA (2021), World Energy
Balances 2021 (database),  Although residential sector TFC increased only
slightly from 2010 to 2018, by % (196 kilotonnes of oil equivalent [ktoe]), the
decomposition of energy consumption reveals that without energy efficiency
improvements, it would have been % (169 ktoe) higher in From 2010 to 2018,
changes in the sector’ structure raised its TFC by 65 ktoe, and increased
activity ( floor area expansion) boosted it another 299 ktoe (IEA, 2020c)
Transport Transport accounts for most of the increase in Azerbaijan’ TFC since
2000 (see Figure ) In 2019, it was the second-largest consuming sector (26% of
TFC) at  Mtoe, up 70% from 2008 (Figure ) The sector consumes oil for almost all
its energy needs (99% in 2019) Electricity made up around % of consumption in
2019 (down 31% from 2008), while natural gas use remains marginal Vehicle
ownership and transport volumes have expanded quickly in the past decade From
2005 to 2018, the total number of registered vehicles in Azerbaijan more than
doubled from 612 000 to  371 000 (an increase of 124%) (SSC, 2019a) Also during
this period, the number of passenger cars increased from 479 000 to  171 000
(+144%), while passenger cars ownership per thousand inhabitants rose from 56 to
The number of buses increased by only  000, or 15% In recent years () growth has
been slow, with the total number of vehicles rising by % Azerbaijan’ vehicle
fleet is rather old: in 2018, only % of all motor vehicles in the country were
less than five years old, while 77% were more than 10 years old, up from 50% in
Lorries and buses were older than the average, implying low fuel efficiency,
greater impact on the environment and high operational and maintenance costs
compared with new vehicles Around 40% of passenger cars imported into Azerbaijan
over the last decade were second-hand The total volume of public transport
roughly doubled (+113%) during , and all forms of travel (excluding railways)
expanded Since 2015, however, the increase has been only % In 2018, 88% of
passenger transport was by road (billion passenger- km, up from billion pkm in
2005), compared with only % by rail ( billion pkm, 114  ENERGY EFFICIENCY down
from  billion pkm in 2005) The Baku metro carried % of all passenger volume
(SSC, 2019a)                           The picture is similar for freight
transport In 2005, 44% of the country’ inland freight volumes were transported
by road, but by 2018 it had risen to 79% (equalling billion tonne-kilometres
[tkm]), while rail’ share dropped from 56% to 21% (to  billion tkm) Figure  TFC
in transport by source,  Mtoe  Natural gas*  Electricity*  Oil    2008 2009 2010
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’
TFC for transport is centred on oil and has grown more rapidly than for any
other sector * Not visible at this scale Note: Excludes international aviation
and navigation Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),
Industry In 2019, industry consumed  Mtoe, or 26% of TFC, virtually equal to
transport consumption (Figure ) Its TFC dropped notably in the aftermath of the
2008 economic crisis, bottoming out in 2010 and then rising to surpass the pre-
crisis level in Overall, TFC grew only % from 2008 to 2018 but jumped almost 30%
from 2018 to Figure  TFC in industry by source,  Mtoe  Bioenergy and waste*
District heat  Electricity  Natural gas   Oil 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA All rights reserved TFC in Azerbaijan’ industry
sector has exceeded the 2008 level, driven by oil use * Negligible Note:
Includes non-energy consumption Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021
(database),  115  ENERGY EFFICIENCY In recent years, oil consumption increased
from 42% in 2015 to 50% of the total in 2019, at the cost of natural gas, which
fell from 45% in 2015 to 31% in District heat consumption started in 2018 and
accounted for % of industry consumption in These consumption patterns mainly
reflect developments in the country’ petrochemical and cement sectors (SSC,
2019b) The petrochemical sector is expected to expand in upcoming years as the
government takes steps to diversify the economy away from oil and gas production
By subsector, the chemical and petrochemical industry is the largest energy
consumer, at 40% of the total in 2019 (Figure ) The other large energy users are
food processing and non-metallic minerals (mainly cement production) Figure  TFC
by manufacturing industry subsector, 2019 Chemical and petrochemical % % Food
and tobacco % 40% Non-metallic minerals Non-ferrous metals 21% Iron and steel
22% Other* IEA All rights reserved TFC in Azerbaijan’ manufacturing industry is
spread across several major subsectors * Includes machinery, textiles and
leather, paper, pulp and printing, wood and wood products, transport equipment
and unspecified industrial consumption Note: Excludes mining and quarrying and
construction Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Total
energy consumption in manufacturing increased by 229 ktoe (%) during 2010- The
decline in energy intensity reduced consumption by 270 ktoe, but changes in
manufacturing structure increased it by 185 ktoe and greater manufacturing
activity boosted it 315 ktoe (Figure ) The most significant energy efficiency
improvement was in the chemical subsector (151 ktoe), followed by the food
industry (73 ktoe) and iron and steel (64 ktoe) At the same time, higher energy
intensity increased energy consumption in the machine- building sector by 28
ktoe 116  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Figure  Decomposition of energy consumption in
manufacturing,                           ktoe 200  150 100 Activity Effect 50
Structure Effect - 50 Intensity Effect - 100 - 150 - 200 Food and tobacco
Chemical and petrochemical Non-metallic minerals Ferrous metals Machinery Other
IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ industrial energy efficiency improved the
most in the chemical and food industries and in iron and steel production
Source: IEA (2020b), Energy Efficiency Indicators,  and agriculture Energy
consumption in services and agriculture, forestry and fishing totalled  Mtoe in
2019, or 16% of the country’ TFC (Figure ) Figure  TFC in the primary sector and
services by source,  Mtoe  Bioenergy   District heat   Natural gas   Oil
Electricity 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 IEA All
rights reserved Electricity consumption drives growing energy demand in
Azerbaijan’ commercial sector Note: Includes commercial and public services,
agriculture, forestry and fishing Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021
(database),  From 2008 to 2019, TFC in services (both public and commercial)
increased by 720 ktoe, or 158%, reflecting the country’ overall economic
development In recent years, most of the energy consumed has come from
electricity ( average 66%), but in 2019 natural gas and electricity were on par
The decomposition of the change in TFC (+224 ktoe) reveals that energy intensity
accounted for 34 ktoe of the total change, and activity increase for 190 ktoe In
agriculture, forestry and fishing, TFC grew 64% from 2008 to 509 ktoe in 2019,
reflecting increased mechanisation of the sector Agriculture depends on oil for
most of its energy needs (63%), but also uses electricity (19%) and natural gas
(17%) The decomposition of the change in TFC in the sector shows that without
energy efficiency improvements, it 117  ENERGY EFFICIENCY would have been 42
ktoe (or %) higher in Increased activity during  raised TFC by 128 ktoe (IEA,
2020c) Policies and measures Azerbaijan has yet to adopt specific legislation,
strategies, action plans and targets for energy efficiency Many obstacles hinder
energy efficiency improvements (see Box ), and government institutions for
implementing energy efficiency policy also remain to be developed Nevertheless,
the situation is expected to improve soon: the government recently developed
draft energy efficiency law that is awaiting adoption and is also preparing
national energy efficiency action plan (see below) Existing energy legislation
refers to energy efficiency in rather general terms In the 1996 Law on the Use
of Energy Resources, it is included among the guiding principles for governing
the use of energy resources The 1998 Law on Energy, in turn, lists the
conservation of energy resources and the efficient use of energy among the
principal energy market policies In practice, energy efficiency has not been
particular area of focus for the government, and legislation passed to date has
had very limited impact, partly because end-use energy prices have been kept
very low and because minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) have not been
introduced Efficiency measures implemented in recent years have been financed
primarily by foreign donors, including the European Union and the European Bank
for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) In 2012, the government set  target to
improve energy efficiency 20% by 2020, but this goal was not supported by
strategy or legal framework The 2016 Strategic Road Map for the Development of
Utilities was more specific and has produced results It outlined the need for
greater efficiency in the gas, electricity and district heat sectors and aimed
specifically to reduce electricity distribution losses in Baku from % to % by
2020, and in the other regions from 12% to % It also aspired to reduce gas
distribution losses from % to % by 2020, and these efforts to reduce losses have
been quite successful (see Chapters  and )  draft Law on the Efficient Use of
Energy Resources and Energy Efficiency is in the process of adoption The draft
law was prepared by the Energy Charter Secretariat and the Ministry of Energy
(MoE) as part of the EU-funded EU4Energy programme and it is based on EU and
other international best practice It passed the inter-ministerial consultation
process in 2018 and was submitted to the Administration of the President in May
Once adopted, the law will define the legal, organisational and economic basis
for energy efficiency policies and measures The draft law covers the entire
energy chain: exploration and production, transportation, distribution, supply
and final use It also includes  requirement to develop  five-year national
energy efficiency action plan (NEEAP) The MoE started developing the NEEAP with
the support of the EU4Energy programme in May The structure effect is not
assessed for agriculture and services due to the absence of disaggregated
indicators within the sector 118  ENERGY EFFICIENCY On final use, the draft law’
areas of action are:                           Buildings: minimum energy
performance requirements (MEPRs) for new and renovated buildings; an energy
performance certification system; compulsory energy audits and energy managers
for non-residential buildings larger than 10 000 m2   Energy-related products:
energy labelling and ecodesign (energy performance) requirements  Industry:
energy audits; energy management systems (EMSs) and energy managers; the
promotion and development of energy services and an energy efficiency obligation
scheme Box  Key barriers to energy efficiency in Azerbaijan In its 2020 In-Depth
Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the Energy
Charter Secretariat identified several barriers to improving energy efficiency
in the country (ECS, 2020):  The country has no legislative framework or
targets for energy efficiency  Before 2016, political willingness to implement
energy efficiency reforms was lacking  Azerbaijan’ energy tariff policy is not
sustainable and does not create incentives to implement energy efficiency
measures and broader strategic targets, such as increasing energy exports  Non-
cost-reflective energy tariffs and the lack of  long-term energy tariff policy
cause consumers to be resistant to tariff increases  The MoE’ Energy Efficiency
and Ecology Department lacks sufficient human resources to introduce energy
efficiency policies  General awareness and knowledge about the multiple
benefits of energy efficiency are low Removing barriers such as these have
helped governments in other countries save energy and money, reduce harmful
emissions and create jobs Source: ECS (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy
Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan Buildings Specific policies and
measures to save energy in buildings have yet to be adopted For example, there
are no MEPRs for buildings or building components Although several energy audit
training programmes have been carried out in recent years, energy audits are
still not required Expertise in the sector is scarce, and awareness of the
benefits of energy efficiency refurbishments and of renewable energy
technologies ( solar thermal installations for hot water production) remains
low, hindering action Financing programmes to construct energy-efficient
buildings do not exist, partly because low subsidised energy prices lengthen the
payback period, reducing their attractiveness Low subsidised energy prices are
also part of the reason that construction companies have notactively considered
energy efficiency measures, and why consumers are not seeking energy-efficient
appliances Fortunately, the pending energy efficiency law is expected to fill
many of these gaps 119  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Comprehensive data on the energy
efficiency potential of the building stock are not available, but two studies
from the 2010s indicate that savings of around 50% are feasible The INOGATE ESIB
project, which undertook an energy audit of  common Soviet-era nine-floor
residential building in Baku, observed  specific energy demand of 210 kilowatt
hours per square metre (kWh/m2) per year for space heating and estimated that
around half of that energy could be saved Similarly, the NAMA project3 to
retrofit six State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) buildings
indicated  technical energy- saving potential of 58% (ECS, 2020) Transport
Although Azerbaijan does not have specific measures to increase energy
efficiency in transport, excise taxes on passenger cars and buses favour small
engines (Table ) However, incentives to purchase vehicles with an engine
capacity of less than  000 cubic centimetres (cm3) are not particularly strong,
while excise taxes do not consider the age of the vehicle or its emissions of
air pollutants or CO2 Transport costs are high in Azerbaijan, and limited
domestic connectivity outside of Baku continues to constrain rural residents’
economic prospects Azerbaijan’ road and rail networks need to be modernised, and
more money needs to be spent on maintenance so that the country can take better
advantage of its position on the Caspian Sea and its proximity to major markets
such as Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey (OECD, 2019) Road investments
dominate government spending on transport infrastructure, while inland waterway
transport infrastructure remains of significant but secondary importance Only %
of inland infrastructure spending benefits the country’ rail network (ITF, 2019)
Excise tax rates for passenger vehicles, 2019 Table  Engine capacity (cm3) Tax
rate AZN 30 for each cm3 Up to  000 AZN 600 + AZN  for each cm3 between  001 and
000 cm3 Up to  000 AZN  600 + AZN 13 for each cm3 between  001 and  000 cm3 Up
to  000 AZN 18 600 + AZN 35 for each cm3 between  001 and  000 cm3 Up to  000
AZN 53 600 + AZN 70 for each cm3 above  000 cm3 More than  000 Source: ECS
(2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy Efficiency Policy of the Republic of
Azerbaijan  The Energy Saving Initiative in the Building Sector in the Eastern
European and Central Asian Countries (ESIB), funded by the European Commission
and implemented from 2010 to Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs)
for low-carbon end-use sectors in Azerbaijan (2015–2019), funded by the Global
Environment Facility (GEF), UNDP and SOCAR  For example, the excise tax for
passenger car of  600 cm3 of engine capacity is AZN 480 (USD 282), but for
engine capacity of  500 cm3 it is AZN  100 (USD  824) 120  ENERGY EFFICIENCY
Azerbaijan has stressed the importance of measures to promote environmentally
friendly forms of transport Steps include introducing electric vehicles for
public transportation, electrifying railway lines, improving transport
management systems and metro transport ( increasing the number of metro
stations), eliminating traffic congestion by constructing road junctions, and
constructing underground and surface pedestrian crossings (OECD, 2016)
In recent years, public transport availability has been improved by Baku metro
and railway network expansions, and 300 compressed natural gas (CNG) buses were
also added to the Baku bus fleet Repair and electrification of the national
railway network have been carried out, and locomotives and rolling stock have
been modernised Efforts to increase economic efficiency have also improved the
environmental performance of Azerbaijan’ railways At the same time, however,
railway use has declined in absolute terms (SSC, 2019a) According to the World
Economic Forum, Azerbaijan ranks 27th of 141 countries in the category of
"quality of road infrastructure", 34th in the category of "railway density" and
11th in "efficiency of train services" Industry There are currently no estimates
of energy efficiency potential, and no targets or incentives to reduce energy
consumption in industry At the same time, low energy tariffs continue to
undermine the economic attractiveness of energy efficiency measures However, the
government is drafting  national action plan on energy efficiency The draft
suggests setting up  database on energy efficiency measures that would delineate
their potential and benefits, arranged according to industry subsector It also
includes the introduction of energy audits, applied energy management systems,
and  system for periodically reporting the results of efficiency measures In the
energy industry, several state programmes to install meters have been enacted to
reduce electricity and gas distribution losses, to increase power plant
efficiency and to prevent the theft and inefficient use of electricity They have
focused primarily on improving utilities’ financial viability Appliances MEPS
and energy labelling have proven highly effective policy tools to improve the
efficiency of new appliances, and although they are now used in over 80
countries, Azerbaijan has yet to introduce them The country needs to adopt
standards for devices and products (required for energy labelling) and establish
certification mechanism It also requires more specialists in this field The most
recent study on Azerbaijan’ energy-saving potential, carried out in 2015 by the
Center for Energy Efficiency (CENEF) and the Copenhagen Centre on Energy
Efficiency (C2E2), looked at replacing household appliances and lighting with
the most efficient options It concluded that these replacements could reduce
household energy consumption by % However, Azerbaijan’ relatively low energy
prices weaken the incentive to replace appliances According to SSC statistics on
the penetration of household appliances, the country is likely to experience
particularly rapid growth in dishwashers (available in % of households 121
ENERGY EFFICIENCY in 2017) and air conditioners (45% in 2017) Dishwashers reduce
hot water needs (and therefore energy consumption) compared with hand washing,
while air conditioners can significantly raise peak electricity demand in the
summer An example of successful technology deployment to increase energy
efficiency is the widespread installation of meters for electricity and gas
consumption in recent years They have helped reduce losses and promote more
rational energy use Assessment Like other countries that have legacy
infrastructure and subsidised energy prices, there is great potential for
Azerbaijan to use energy more efficiently The IEA strongly encourages the
government to view energy efficiency as  source of revenue, clean air and jobs,
and to quickly adopt the laws, strategies, policies and measures needed to
realise these possibilities Although Azerbaijan does not yet have specific
energy efficiency legislation, the government has been committed to developing
it in recent years In 2016, the president approved the Strategic Roadmap for
Development of Utilities Services (Electric Energy, Heating, Water and Gas) and
the parliament ratified the Paris Agreement Furthermore, the president is
expected to submit the draft Law on the Efficient Use of Energy Resources and
Energy Efficiency to the parliament soon, and the government is also developing
the country’ NEEAP There is  strong argument for taking rapid action on energy
efficiency, building on the draft legislation currently being considered and
bearing in mind Azerbaijan’ Paris Agreement pledge to reduce GHG emissions 35%
from 1990 to Experience in IEA member countries has demonstrated that MEPS are
among the most effective and cost- efficient energy efficiency policy
instruments The government should therefore introduce stringent standards across
all sectors (covering buildings, vehicles, appliances and equipment) and should
implement an effective energy efficiency audit mechanism to ensure compliance It
should also regularly update the standards and, when applicable, accompany them
with energy labelling In addition to regulating through stringent energy
efficiency standards, the government could do more to encourage investment in
energy-efficient equipment This would require changes to the tariff regulation
methodology Energy prices must be set at an optimal level to attract investment
and to encourage citizens to use energy efficiently However, Azerbaijan’ end-
user energy prices, which are set by the government, are currently among the
lowest in the region and do not reflect the full cost of supply (see Chapters
and ) In 2018, the country’ energy price subsidies were three times higher than
in 2010, totalling USD  billion or % of GDP, according to IEA estimates Such
subsidised tariffs do not encourage residential and industrial consumers to
improve their energy efficiency (IEA, 2019b), even though doing so would benefit
the whole country economically The oil and gas saved thanks to energy efficiency
measures could be exported for revenue, or simply used more efficiently
elsewhere for the good of the national economy Instead of subsidising energy for
everyone, the government should gradually switch to supporting more efficient
energy use For example, it could launch programmes to replace 122  ENERGY
EFFICIENCY the highest-consuming household appliances (refrigerators, washing
machines, etc) with highly energy-efficient new models Because low energy prices
are perceived  form of social aid in Azerbaijan, subsidy programmes could target
only those in real need                            strong statistical data
collection system is essential to monitor, evaluate and enforce energy
efficiency policies and measures The government should ensure the availability
of robust and meaningful disaggregated energy efficiency indicators by sector It
should also use the data to assess the energy efficiency potential of the
buildings, transport and industry sectors Another area that merits considerable
attention is energy efficiency capacity-building and training, which should be
co-ordinated both nationally and regionally Dedicated educational programmes
should also be launched at both levels Buildings and appliances The residential
and commercial sectors account for around half of Azerbaijan’ TFC They have
significant energy efficiency potential, as the energy performance of the
existing building stock is low and there are no MEPRs for new buildings and
appliances Disaggregated data for  more detailed analysis are needed The
economic benefits of retrofits are likely to be highest when projects focus on
the least efficient buildings and include both building envelope improvements
and heating equipment installation Raising building efficiency, through
retrofits and efficient construction installation of smart energy management
systems, helps improve energy system security and resilience by reducing energy
use (IEA, 2020a) that encourage electrification and the In line with the Energy
Charter Secretariat’ work to identify the main barriers to energy efficiency in
Azerbaijan’ buildings, the IEA encourages the government to:  Introduce
specific targets and MEPRs for energy efficiency in new and existing public and
residential buildings  Review and update standards for the thermal protection
of buildings  Increase awareness of the benefits of energy-efficient buildings
among decision makers, businesses and the general population  Introduce
financial incentives or state support to improve energy efficiency in buildings
 Increase awareness of no-cost or low-cost energy efficiency measures in public
and residential buildings  Introduce incentives for local municipalities and
owners of buildings to reduce energy consumption Energy codes and standards will
be essential to improve the energy performance and comfort of Azerbaijan’
buildings As the long-term benefits for consumers in terms of energy-cost
savings and health benefits are clear, there is  strong argument for introducing
financing mechanisms for efficient housing The government also needs to 123
ENERGY EFFICIENCY introduce energy efficiency standards for non-residential
buildings and dedicated energy efficiency programmes for commercial ones The
government should also ensure that residential buildings will comply with future
energy efficiency regulations It should consider the approach used in many IEA
countries, where compliance is verified by public sector building inspectors
Azerbaijan does not have MEPRs, energy labelling or financial incentives for
energy- efficient appliances The government should therefore introduce them,
starting with products that are less technically complex and that may offer the
highest energy savings for residential consumers, such as heaters, air
conditioners, dishwashers, washing machines and televisions, in addition to
lightbulbs MEPRs should also be applied to appliances used in industry and the
service sector As low electricity prices typically dampen consumer interest in
higher-efficiency appliances, tariff reform is needed Households and services
are the foremost electricity consuming sectors Measures to raise the efficiency
of electricity use as well as the level of electricity security include
modernising transmission and distribution systems, introducing MEPRs for
appliances, deploying energy management systems for buildings, and auditing
large buildings (government, residential and corporate) Transport TFC in the
transport sector, which has more than tripled since 2000, accounted for 26% of
the country’ TFC in The number of vehicles has more than doubled since 2005, but
ownership rates remain relatively low by international standards In 2018,
Azerbaijan had 119 passenger cars per  000 inhabitants, while the EU rate, for
example, exceeded 500 per  000 inhabitants Road transport energy consumption is
expected to continue rising rapidly in the medium term, as the country’ road
network is improved and people become wealthier Policy decisions are therefore
critical to ensure that the transport sector’ developmental pathway prioritises
sustainability and efficiency Practically all vehicles in Azerbaijan are
imported Around two-fifths are second-hand, and as the number of these imports
has been rising in recent years, older vehicles with lower energy performance
are having  significant impact on the sector’ energy consumption To improve
energy efficiency and limit air pollution, the government should set minimum
energy efficiency requirements for all vehicles imported and sold, including
second-hand ones Measures to raise Azerbaijan’ fuel prices and taxes – which are
among the lowest in the world – are critical to improve energy efficiency and
limit pollution and CO2 emissions from transport This could be done in  revenue-
neutral manner  scrappage system could also be considered for old light- and
heavy-duty vehicles and buses, as they tend to pollute more Projects to scrap
old vehicles have been carried out in recent years, and Azerbaijan does offer
incentives under certain conditions for the purchase of vehicles that use low-
carbon fuels, but specific subsidies for direct vehicle purchases appear to be
an expensive policy measure More ambitious policy attention should be given to
railway use, as increased rail transport could yield multiple benefits  positive
development is the commissioning of  new railway line connecting Baku to Ganja
in 2018, and policies and programmes promoting further 124  ENERGY EFFICIENCY
intercity rail travel should be considered  long-term regional vision could
include building  network of high-speed rail, as it is at least 12 times more
energy-efficient on average than air or road travel per pkm (IEA, 2019a)
Clearly, replacing private vehicle use with public transport, walking or cycling
improves air quality and reduces noise and congestion Those who would
particularly benefit from this transition are people living in cities with high
pollution, such as the Greater Baku area, where almost half of Azerbaijan’
population lives and nearly half of all its vehicles are registered Although
public transport availability has improved in recent years with expansion of the
Baku metro, it will be important to integrate public transport considerations
into urban planning to create  more sustainable and efficient transport system
as Azerbaijan’ population continues to urbanise Industry Industry accounted for
26% of Azerbaijan’ TFC in In absolute terms, industry sector TFC has fluctuated
over the past two decades and is 40% higher than in International practice shows
that price signals are the most effective way to incentivise industry to
implement energy efficiency measures, but Azerbaijan’ non-cost-reflective energy
tariffs do not provide them Its tariff design does not stimulate efficient use
of the electricity system because electricity prices do not depend on voltage
and capacity, and time- of-use pricing and peak pricing have not been instituted
for all consumers (ECS, 2020) Tariff reform is therefore also essential for the
industry sector As tariff reform would likely increase energy prices for
industry, including small and medium-sized enterprises, the government could
consider temporary measures to neutralise the impact of energy costs on
competitiveness, where necessary Investing in energy-efficient equipment could
quickly generate financial savings that would allow industries to spend more on
their core business operations As the IEA explains in its 2020 Sustainable
Recovery report, payback periods for investing in more energy-efficient
industrial electric motors, heat pumps for low-temperature process heat and
agricultural irrigation pumps are typically attractive Governments can encourage
energy efficiency investments by introducing mandatory state-level energy audits
and by offering financial incentives (tax deductions, guaranteed lending,
rebates, cash-for-replacement schemes) as well as specific incentives for energy
management systems and the training and hiring of energy managers (IEA, 2020a)
Azerbaijan’ government should consider including incentives such as these in its
draft energy efficiency law 125  ENERGY EFFICIENCY Recommendations The
government of Azerbaijan should:  Adopt  national strategy and action plan to
improve energy efficiency, ensuring all necessary support is provided through
new legislation; then implement and enforce the plan, reviewing all monitoring
and evaluation data regularly to assess progress, and adjust the plan as
necessary to deliver the strategy objectives  Ensure that robust and meaningful
disaggregated energy efficiency indicators are available for the buildings,
transport and industrial sectors to be able to monitor, evaluate and enforce
policies and measures  Assess the energy efficiency potential of the buildings,
transport and industrial sectors by aggregating existing data and by
international benchmarks  Introduce and enforce minimum efficiency
requirements, including for energy-using and energy-related products and new
buildings  Introduce measures to support renovation of the existing building
stock, especially residential and public buildings  Step up the development of
public transportation networks and continue to incentivise the purchase of low-
carbon vehicles  Take action to raise both industry and general public
awareness of the benefits of energy efficiency 126  ENERGY EFFICIENCY References
ECS (Energy Charter Secretariat) (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy
Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan, ECS, Brussels  IEA
(International Energy Agency) (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),
IEA (2020a), Sustainable Recovery,  IEA (2020b), Energy Efficiency Indicators,
IEA (2019a), The Future of Rail,  IEA (2019b), World Energy Outlook 2019,
outlook-IEA (2018), World Energy Outlook 2018,  ITF (International Transport
Forum) (2019), Transport performance indicators, ITF Transport Statistics
(database), ITF, Paris,  transport-statistics/transport-performance-
indicators_2122fa17-en OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development) (2019), Investment in sustainable infrastructure in Azerbaijan, in
Sustainable Infrastructure for Low-Carbon Development in Central Asia and the
Caucasus: Hotspot Analysis and Needs Assessment, Green Finance and Investment,
OECD Publishing, Paris OECD (2016), Financing climate action in Azerbaijan, OECD
Publishing, Paris SSC (State Statistical Committee of Azerbaijan) (2019a),
Environment in Azerbaijan 2019, SSC, Baku SSC (2019b), Industry of Azerbaijan,
SSC, Baku 127                            Renewable energy Key data (2019
provisional) Total renewable energy supply: 23 Mtoe (% of TES): hydropower 13
Mtoe (% of TES), bioenergy 08 Mtoe (%), wind 009 Mtoe (06%), solar 004 Mtoe
(02%) Total renewable electricity supply:  TWh (% of electricity generation):
hydropower  TWh (% of electricity generation), wind 11 TWh (%), waste 10 TWh
(%), solar 04 TWh (%) World renewable energy shares (2018): % of TES and % of
electricity generation Overview Azerbaijan has excellent renewable energy
potential In addition to being quite sunny and windy, the country also has
considerable hydro, bioenergy and geothermal resources, but its energy policy
has focused until recently on developing Azerbaijan’ significant oil and gas
resources This focus is changing, however: the government is now drafting
legislation to promote renewable energy and is aiming for renewable energy to
provide 30% of electricity generating capacity by 2030, roughly twice the
current share Major contracts to build wind and solar power capacity were signed
in early Supply The share of renewable energy sources (RES) in Azerbaijan’ total
energy supply (TES) has been stable – but low – since the 1990s The portion of
RES in electricity generation was higher during , ranging from % to 18% of total
generation This strong variation reflects the country’ changing hydrological
conditions and, in consequence, its hydropower output The dominance of
hydropower in RES leads to similarities in the patterns of RES in TES and RES in
total final consumption (TFC) (Figure ) Hydropower accounted for 59% of total
renewable energy supply in 2019, with the remainder coming mainly from municipal
waste and bioenergy (Figure ) With  combined installed capacity of 102 megawatts
(MW) in 2019, wind power and solar PV shares remain small, but the government
has indicated  strong desire to develop the sector Statistics for heat pumps
were available for the first time in 2018, showing  total installed capacity of
MW Heat pumps are also in the early stages of utilisation in the country 129
RENEWABLE ENERGY Figure  Renewable energy shares in Azerbaijan’ energy system,
12% 1990 10% 2000 % 2008 % 2019 % % Total energy supply Electricity generation
Total final energy consumption * IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan is in the
early stages of realising its significant renewable energy potential * Includes
direct use in TFC and indirect use through electricity and heat Source: IEA
(2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Figure  Renewable energy in
Azerbaijan’ TES,  Mtoe % 40 Solar* Wind* % 30 Bioenergy** % 20 Hydro % 10
Renewables share (right axis) 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
20182019 IEA All rights reserved Hydropower dominates Azerbaijan’ relatively low
renewable energy supply * Not visible at this scale ** Includes primary solid
biofuels and renewable waste Note: Mtoe = million tonnes of oil equivalent
Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Azerbaijan’
bioenergy supply totalled 12 Mtoe in 2019 and consisted of renewable municipal
waste and primary solid biofuels (Figure ) Municipal waste has been used since
2012 at the Baku solid waste incineration plant The plant can incinerate  Mt of
solid waste per year to generate around 200 gigawatt hours (GWh) of electricity
annually Solid biofuels are used mostly in the commercial and residential
sectors for space heating and, in some cases, cooking Following  peak in
hydropower generation, the supply of energy from renewables and waste has
declined since In addition to being caused by hydropower fluctuations, this drop
reflects the reduced use of wood for heating,  result of the government’ policy
to expand the natural gas network and promote natural gas as  clean and modern
heating option At less than %, the share of RES in Azerbaijan’ TES was well
below the world average in 2018 (Figure ) 130  RENEWABLE ENERGY Figure
Bioenergy supply by source and use by sector, 2019                           %
Energy transformation % Primary solid biofuels Services 46% Total supply 12 Mtoe
22% 54% Renewable municipal waste Residential 63% Industry IEA All rights
reserved The Baku waste incineration plant is the major user of municipal waste,
from which it generates electricity Source: IEA (2021), World Energy Balances
2021 (database),  Figure  Renewable energy share of TES in Azerbaijan and
selected countries, 2018 60% Bioenergy* 40% Solar Geothermal 20% Wind Hydro** %
IEA All rights reserved Azerbaijan’ share of renewables is far below the world
average because of the dominance of oil and gas in its TES * Includes solid
biofuels, renewable waste, liquid biofuels and biogases ** Includes hydropower
(excluding pumped storage) and tidal, wave and ocean energy Source: IEA (2021),
World Energy Balances 2021 (database),  Renewable electricity generation In
2019, Azerbaijan had  total installed renewable electricity capacity of  291 MW
Renewable energy accounted for 17% of the country’ total installed capacity and
for % (81 terawatt hours [TWh]) of its electricity generation Azerbaijan’
renewable electricity comes primarily from hydropower (Figure ) From 2008 to
2019, hydropower capacity increased by around 15% to  145 MW The major change
was the  refurbishment of the Mingachevir hydropower plant (HPP) and its
capacity upgrade from 284 MW to 424 MW Wind power capacity was 66 MW, of which
50 MW was added in 2018, and that of solar PV was 35 MW in 131  RENEWABLE ENERGY
Figure  Renewable energy in Azerbaijan’ electricity generation,  TWh  20% Solar*
16% Wind*  12% Bioenergy**  % Hydro  % Renewables share (right axis) 2000 2002
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 20182019 IEA All rights reserved Although
Azerbaijan’ solar and wind power shares remain insignificant compared with
hydropower, they are set to expand considerably * Not visible at this scale **
Includes renewable municipal waste Not visible at this scale Source: IEA
(2020a), World Energy Balances 2020 (database),  Azerbaijan’ share of renewables
in electricity generation in 2019 (%) was below the world average (25% in 2018)
(Figure ) Major new capacity additions (240 MW of wind power and 230 MW of solar
PV) are set to come online around 2022, which are expected to increase both the
total capacity and the share of renewable power generation Figure  Renewable
energy in electricity generation in Azerbaijan and selected countries, 2018 100%
Bioenergy* 80% Solar 60% Geothermal 40% Wind 20% Hydro** % IEA All rights
reserved The portion of renewables in Azerbaijan’ electricity generation is
below the global average but is expected to increase quickly * Includes solid
biofuels, renewable waste, liquid biofuels and biogases ** Includes hydropower
(excluding pumped storage) and tidal, wave and ocean energy Source: IEA (2020a),
World Energy Balances 2020 (database),  Increasing the share of variable
renewable energy (VRE) – namely solar and wind power – in electricity generation
will have implications for power system operations The IEA has identified six
phases of VRE integration, each with its own challenges and responses (IEA,
2017) (Figure ) With its minor solar and wind generation, Azerbaijan – like most
other countries today – is in Phase , in which VRE integration should not pose
any difficulties 132  RENEWABLE ENERGY Typically, challenges begin to emerge in
Phase , when solar and wind power reach 10% of total generation Azerbaijan’ gas
and hydropower plants are well suited to provide the system flexibility needed
at higher levels of solar and wind power generation
Figure  Phases of variable renewable energy integration and their key challenges
IEA All rights reserved As new solar and wind capacity begin to move Azerbaijan
towards Phase , its gas and hydro plants will provide the system flexibility
needed Source: Adapted from IEA (2018b), World Energy Outlook Renewable energy
potential Although  comprehensive atlas of Azerbaijan’ renewable energy
resources has not yet been published, several studies since the late 1990s have
indicated significant untapped potential, mainly for solar and wind energy, but
also for hydropower, biomass and geothermal resources Solar According to the
Ministry of Energy (MoE), Azerbaijan’ technical solar power potential is around
23 000 MW The country has  400 to  200 hours of sunshine per year and its annual
solar intensity is estimated at  500 kilowatt hours per square metre (kWh/m2) to
000 kWh/m2; both values are high compared with other countries The best
resources are in the central river valleys and in the north and northwest of the
country 133  RENEWABLE ENERGY Figure  Solar energy potential in Azerbaijan
Source: World Bank (2020a), Global Solar Atlas: Azerbaijan,  This map, adapted
by the IEA, was obtained from the “Global Solar Atlas ,  free, web-based
application is developed and operated by the company Solargis  on behalf of the
World Bank Group, utilizing Solargis data, with funding provided by the Energy
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) For additional information:  The
Works are licensed under the Creative Commons  Attribution International
license, CC BY  Wind Azerbaijan has around  000 MW of technical and around 800
MW of economic wind power potential according to the MoE Harnessing the economic
potential could generate around  TWh per year, which would conserve around 500
million cubic metres (mcm) of natural gas and avoid  Mt of CO2 emissions The
best resources are along the Caspian Sea, particularly on the Absheron
Peninsula, where wind speeds average around   per second and are higher than
that from January to April and from September to December (CIC, 2013; Kerimov,
Ismailova and Rahmanov, 2013) At the time of writing (October 2020), the MoE and
the regulator, along with the International Financial Corporation, were
preparing  roadmap for offshore wind in Azerbaijan The goal is to identify
potentially rich wind energy areas, their economic viability, network
connectivity and possible onshore and offshore environmental impacts 134
RENEWABLE ENERGY Figure  Wind energy potential in Azerbaijan
Source: World Bank (2020b), Global Wind Atlas: Azerbaijan,  This map, adapted by
the IEA, was obtained from the “Global Solar Atlas ,  free, web-based
application is developed and operated by the company Solargis  on behalf of the
World Bank Group, utilizing Solargis data, with funding provided by the Energy
Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) For additional information:  The
Works are licensed under the Creative Commons  Attribution International
license, CC BY  Hydropower Hydropower is currently Azerbaijan’ primary source of
renewable energy, but its potential has not been fully exploited Modernising
large hydropower installations would increase their capacity, and for small
hydropower, numerous small mountain rivers in various regions of the country
offer potential According to the MoE, the technical potential for small hydro is
520 MW, which could generate up to  TWh annually The MoE will prepare  strategy
to develop small hydropower, based on water potential, water shortages and the
country’ power generation needs (MoE, 2020) Water availability has recently
received government attention at the highest level (Eurasianet, 2020) Geothermal
The former State Agency on Alternative and Renewable Energy Resources (SAARES)
estimates Azerbaijan’ geothermal energy potential to be up to 800 MW Initial
studies indicate that Azerbaijan has 11 geothermal zones with water temperatures
ranging from 30° to 100° (ANAS, 2004) 135  RENEWABLE ENERGY Biomass and waste
With growth in agriculture, forestry, industry and services creating
opportunities for heat and electricity generation from biomass and waste, the
MoE estimates technical potential of 380 MW For instance, the more than  Mt of
solid domestic and industrial waste disposed of at waste treatment sites in
Azerbaijan annually could be used to generate heat and/or electricity in Baku
and other large industrial cities Institutions The MoE oversees renewable energy
policy Policy implementation was delegated to SAARES from 2009 to 2018, but the
agency was abolished in 2018 and its functions transferred to the MoE In
September 2020, the President of Azerbaijan signed  decree establishing the
State Agency for Renewable Energy Sources The new agency will report to the MoE
Policies and measures Azerbaijan’ energy supply relies on the country’ abundant
oil and natural gas resources, and interest in using renewable energy has begun
to increase only recently The government recognises that using more renewable
energy in power generation can help diversify the country’ energy sources as
well as divert natural gas from power generation to potentially more profitable
exports and use in petrochemicals, in addition to helping the country meet its
Paris Agreement climate objectives Azerbaijan does not have  specific renewable
energy strategy or action plan In 2014, SAARES drafted  national strategy on the
use of alternative and renewable energy sources for , but the document was not
formally adopted (ECS, 2020) However, the 2016 Strategic Roadmap for the
Development of Utilities (Electricity, Heating, Water and Gas) in the Republic
of Azerbaijan included the addition of 420 MW of renewable electricity capacity
by 2020: 350 MW of wind, 50 MW of solar and 20 MW of bioenergy The government is
aiming for renewable energy to provide 30% of electricity generating capacity in
the country by 2030, and in May 2020 the Cabinet of Ministers approved the
Action Plan on Attracting Additional Investments in the Renewable Energy Sector
(MoE, 2020) The role for renewable energy in heat supply is small, and no direct
involvement in transport is envisaged Draft renewable electricity law As of
October 2020, Azerbaijan did not have  regulatory framework for renewable
energy, except for specific purchase tariffs for certain types of renewable
electricity and tax exemptions for companies purchasing renewable energy
equipment and generating renewable energy (see section below) However,  law on
renewable electricity is in the works Following instructions from the Cabinet of
Ministers in March 2018, the MoE has prepared  draft Law on Renewable Energy
Sources in Electricity Generation The draft was to be submitted to the President
of the Republic of Azerbaijan by the end of May 136  RENEWABLE ENERGY The new
regulatory framework outlined in the draft law includes competitive bidding
processes for renewable electricity projects as well as support mechanisms such
as feed- in tariffs, and net-metering and net-billing schemes Rules for these
instruments have been drafted, as have templates for power purchase agreements
(PPAs) and connection agreements (ECS, 2020)                           Current
incentives The government offers tax and tariff exemptions to promote renewable
electricity generation and alternative energy production Qualifying companies
and entrepreneurs are exempt from customs duties and, for  period of seven
years, value-added tax for technical equipment and facilities They are also
exempted from paying property tax, land tax and half their income tax (Aydin,
2019) Azerbaijan’ electricity market is strongly regulated, and all electricity
tariffs, including purchase tariffs for RES generators, are set by the Tariff
Council For small hydropower, the tariff is AZN 05 (USD 029) per kWh; for wind
power it is AZN 055 (USD 032 US cents) per kWh; and for other renewable energy
it is up to AZN 057 (USD 034) per kWh Large hydropower is not eligible for
purchase tariff For comparison, the wholesale electricity tariff in Azerbaijan
has been AZN 057/kWh since Permitting Renewable electricity facilities are
granted permits in  four-step process First, local authorities award  land use
permit, then  construction permit is granted by the Ministry of Ecology and
Natural Resources, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Emergency
Situations Third, electricity generation is permitted by the MoE, and fourth,
permit for network connection is granted by the network owner (the transmission
system operator or the distribution system operator; see Chapter ) Current
projects In  significant development for Azerbaijan’ renewable energy sector, in
January 2020 the MoE signed implementing agreements for the country’ first two
independent power projects, under which ACWA Power of Saudi Arabia will build,
own and operate 240 MW of wind power, and Masdar of the United Arab Emirates
will develop, build and operate 230 MW of solar PV capacity The two companies
were selected in  three-stage process from the seven companies that submitted
proposals (ACWA, 2020; Masdar, 2020) The projects are backed by 20-year PPAs,
the details of which have not been disclosed The MoE and Azerenergy, the power
offtaker, signed the main project agreements, including the PPAs, with ACWA
Power in December 2020 and with Masdar in March The MoE expects the USD 400
million projects to generate  TWh of renewable electricity per year, save more
than 300 mcm of natural gas that would otherwise be used for power generation,
reduce CO2 emissions by more than  Mt and create hundreds of jobs The wind power
capacity is to consist of 40 turbines of  MW each, 17 of which (102 MW) will be
built in Pirakashkul in the Absheron region and 23 (138 MW) in  mountainous area
The key document is the 24 November 2016 Resolution No 482 of the Cabinet of
Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the Establishment of Power Limits for
the Production of Electricity and Commissioning of Electrical Installations 137
RENEWABLE ENERGY in the Khizi region, and the 230 MW of solar power capacity
will be built in the Garadagh and Absheron regions Commercial operations are to
begin in 2022 (MoE, 2020; Masdar, 2020) The Khizi region is already home to the
50-MW Yeni Yashma wind power park, which was commissioned in The MoE is also
preparing to construct roughly  000 MW of additional renewable electricity
capacity through competitive bidding processes It is currently defining and
prioritising zones of high renewable energy potential, and it will then assess
land ownership, existing infrastructure and environmental concerns (IRENA, 2019)
With the help of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the MoE
is developing renewable energy auctions to attract more private investment to
the sector To increase the share of renewable energy in the country' total
electricity capacity to 30% by 2030, the MoE invited the German consulting
company VPC to determine the optimal limit of new capacity to be connected to
the electricity grid According to its report, Azerbaijan needs to install  500
MW to reach the 30% target by VPC suggests doing this in three stages: 440 MW in
, 460 MW in  and 600 MW in 2026-Addressing solar PV development specifically,
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) is financing the design and construction of the
country’ first floating solar PV (FPV) plant The 100-kW pilot plant will be
installed on Lake Boyukshor, close to Baku While FPV installations require
stricter standards than land-based PV because of their exposure to water, the
advantages over land-based PV are that they are quick to install and land use is
not an issue They also allow higher energy yields because of the cooling effect
of the water (ADB, 2018) Azerbaijan’ many reservoirs offer opportunities to
synergise FPV technology with existing hydropower generation and related grid
infrastructure Renewable energy for heat Natural gas is the default heating fuel
in Azerbaijan, but continued reliance on it will not allow the country to
decarbonise its heat use in the decades ahead Furthermore, gas resources may be
better used for exports or as  feedstock for petrochemical production District
heating, heat pumps and gas heat pumps are all alternatives to individual gas
boilers, while renewable heat options include solar thermal heating, low-
emission biomass boilers and geothermal energy with ground-source heat pumps
Solar thermal technologies can provide hot water at low operational cost, while
geothermal ground- source heat pumps offer efficient and reliable solutions for
the whole year, since underground temperatures are relatively stable Geothermal
heat pumps enable seasonal storage and offer high performance during cold spells
(as  heat provider) or heat waves (as  cooling provider) (IEA, 2020a)
Azerbaijan’ main renewable energy projects for heating have been the
installation of solar collectors at the SOS Children’ Village in Baku and solar
panels at some educational and medical facilities Assessment Although
Azerbaijan’ energy supply is strongly dominated by oil and natural gas, the
country also has excellent renewable energy potential that – aside from large
hydro – 138  RENEWABLE ENERGY remains largely untapped Solar power’ estimated
technical potential is 23 GW, wind power’ is  GW, and small hydro, geothermal
and bioenergy add another  GW                           Azerbaijan’ renewable
energy potential promises multiple advantages for the country, the benefits of
which can only become greater as technological innovation makes renewables more
affordable Wind and solar power generating costs have fallen significantly over
the past decade, and in many countries they are now the lowest-cost forms of new
generation (IEA, 2020b) Relying more on renewable energy would help Azerbaijan
save natural gas for exports and for use in the petrochemical industry; reduce
the country’ GHG emissions to meet its 2030 Paris Agreement commitment; and
improve electricity security by diversifying generation As part of its planned
energy market reforms, the government has drafted  renewable electricity law and
aims for renewable energy to provide 30% of electricity generating capacity by
2030 – almost twice the 2018 share of 16% The draft law would provide the legal
basis to develop renewable energy projects in the country and would introduce
competitive bidding processes and support mechanisms such as feed-in tariffs
Templates for PPAs and connection agreements have also been drafted The IEA
applauds the government’ increased ambition to develop renewable energy and
urges it to adopt the pending legislation without delay This needs to be done in
co- ordinated manner, consistent with other pending energy reforms, particularly
the country’ overall energy strategy and the Law on Electricity Short-, medium-
and long-term renewable energy targets are needed, as is an action plan that
includes policies and measures to ensure the targets are met Progress should be
monitored and plans regularly updated International experience shows that
renewable energy targets are most effective when it is clear why they are being
adopted Their level should reflect the economic potential of renewable energy,
as well as the use of other policies and measures to meet energy policy goals
For example, it is often more affordable to meet policy goals by increasing
energy efficiency than by building new generating capacity Cost-effectiveness
should be  key policy choice criterion Attracting investment Increasing the
share of renewable electricity capacity to 30% of the total by 2030 means much
more generating capacity will need to be built, which raises questions about the
most effective way to do this and what kind of  regulatory regime is needed
Government plans include large hydropower, and although solar and wind power
offer excellent potential, attracting investments in these technologies
generally requires adequate remuneration, grid access, system integration, and
the removal of non-economic barriers In general, renewable energy should be
developed as an integral part of the electricity market and should be factored
into electricity market design at the outset (see Chapter ) Azerbaijan does not
have  competitive electricity market to provide price signals for investors At
the same time, it has excess electricity generation capacity, and the price of
the natural gas that fuels 90% of electricity generation is low because it is
subsidised As long as the state-owned monopoly generator (Azerenergy) receives
subsidised gas for  In 2019, the natural gas export price averaged AZN 33 (USD
19) per megawatt hour (MWh), while the price of gas for domestic electricity
generation was set at AZN 12 per MWh The fixed annual wholesale electricity
price was AZN 57 per MWh 139  RENEWABLE ENERGY power generation and the
wholesale power price is set by the government, private companies will find it
difficult to compete and would not want to enter the sector without specific
guarantees from the government Plus, private companies may perceive  longer-
term risk of gas exports decreasing in upcoming decades because of gradually
stricter climate policies in importing countries, and of renewable energy facing
strong cost competition from natural gas domestically as  result While the
purpose of the pending electricity market reform is to introduce more
competition and dynamism to the sector, the government could also make renewable
energy more cost-competitive by phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and
introducing carbon pricing or  revenue-neutral carbon tax Fuel subsidy reform,
which is dealt with more fully in other chapters, would offer numerous benefits
Together with carbon pricing, it would help the country meet its CO2 emissions
reduction targets and save gas for exports and for petrochemical production Fuel
subsidy reform and carbon pricing or  revenue-neutral carbon tax offer  much
better way forward than direct subsidies for renewable energy, which would be
inefficient both for the energy sector and for the national economy Competitive
bidding and long-term purchase agreements Finding the optimal level of
remuneration for renewable electricity will be challenging as long as the
country does not have  competitive electricity market To overcome similar
investment challenges, many countries have used auctions (centralised,
competitive procurement of renewable energy capacity through  government or
public body), and they have been instrumental in driving down prices, especially
for solar PV and wind (IEA, 2018a) They are typically accompanied by long-term
PPAs In fact, Azerbaijan has already begun to use auctions and PPAs to attract
renewable energy investors In December 2020, the MoE and Azerenergy signed
20-year PPA for  240-MW wind farm with Saudi Arabia’ ACWA Power and in March
2021 for  230-MW solar power project with Abu Dhabi’ Masdar These are very
promising developments Although PPAs help facilitate project financing, as they
reduce the perceived project risk, they should be used with care As the World
Bank finds in its study of power market reforms across the world since the
1990s, long-term contracts can distort power dispatch and build contractual
rigidity into the power system, both of which significantly limit the scope for
competition when  wholesale market is eventually introduced On the other hand,
while wholesale markets should provide price signals for dispatch and new
capacity investments, they do not guarantee those investments Two suggestions
can be offered to balance these considerations: first, using supply auctions may
well be worthwhile to ensure that investment takes place, especially as the
auctions can be geared towards specific policy goals or technologies (Foster and
Rana, 2020) Before the electricity market is fully functional, annually adjusted
price caps could be introduced to limit the risk of collusion Second,  mechanism
should be designed to integrate PPAs into the future market It could make sense
to expand renewable capacity in increments to allow time for rising electricity
demand to counterbalance the current power generation capacity surplus, and for
electricity market reforms to be implemented This should in turn reduce the need
for long-term PPAs that could otherwise lock in  large segment of renewable
energy supply outside the competitive market, reducing efficiency and incentives
for innovation in the sector 140  RENEWABLE ENERGY Declining technology costs
continue to improve Azerbaijan’ prospects to exploit its vast solar and wind
energy resources Beyond onshore wind, the government should also study options
to harness the country’ offshore wind potential While the technology remains
more expensive than for onshore wind or solar power, it offers access to high
wind speeds and there are no land use competition or local opposition issues
Synergies could be created with the offshore oil and gas companies already
operating in the country                           Grid integration and the need
for more power system flexibility As VRE shares expand, new approaches to
electricity market design and investments in grid infrastructure will be needed
Establishing  regulatory framework that facilitates the integration of
renewables should be part of the electricity market reform: for example, clear
rules are needed on how to organise power dispatch and how to allocate and
govern grid connection costs Auctions for solar and wind capacity should ideally
incorporate system costs Increasing solar and wind power generation capacity
considerably (to more than 10% of total generation) would require Azerbaijan’
power system to become more flexible to accommodate the natural daily and
seasonal variations of these energy sources (see Figure ) The country’ most
obvious sources of flexibility are its combined-cycle gas turbine, gas engine
and hydropower plants, and it could strengthen its electricity networks
Additional options include stronger cross-border connections, electricity
trading, and storage ranging from minutes to hours and days (for example, pumped
hydro and district heating systems with thermal storage; see Chapter ) Financial
incentives to put these measures in place and to establish demand-response
capabilities should be considered as part of the electricity market reform
Emerging flexibility options include grid-scale batteries and hydrogen
production, but reducing their cost continues to be  major challenge (IEA,
2020a; 2020b) One intriguing option is the installation of FPV capacity on
reservoirs connected to HPPs Azerbaijan has several reservoirs suitable for
this, the largest of which is the 605-km2 Mingachevir HPP reservoir Although FPV
is  nascent technology, coupling it with hydropower would offer several
advantages Transmission costs should be low, as FPV equipment could be linked to
the HPP substation and no extra grids would need to be built Also, solar and
hydro generation could balance each other, as dry seasons offer the highest
solar resources while rainy seasons offer the best hydro potential  hybrid FPV-
hydro plant could also use pumped hydro technology to store excess solar power
Faster permitting Permitting renewable energy projects is often  complex and
sometimes lengthy process Ideally, the whole procedure – from site selection to
gathering basic data for project evaluation and planning, to negotiating terms
and conditions with the government – should involve close co-ordination of all
relevant government agencies Azerbaijan’ government should explore how to
streamline the licensing process, and recognise that project implementation
could be made more efficient through the use of tools such as requests for
prequalification (RFPQs), requests for proposal (RFPs) and government support
agreements (GSAs) Ideally, the entire permitting and licensing process would be
managed through  single point of contact (  one-stop shop) 141  RENEWABLE ENERGY
Local solutions for electricity and heat supply In Azerbaijan’ remote
mountainous areas where it is expensive to build grid infrastructure, off-grid
renewable energy systems could be  cost-effective way to provide electricity,
particularly as their prices have declined in recent years Pilot projects could
be carried out, keeping in mind lessons learned from other countries Renewable
heat could also be provided in these areas, both directly ( through clean
bioenergy, geothermal or solar heat) and indirectly (through heat pumps) The
government should install off-grid renewable energy technologies through pilot
programmes to ensure cost-effective energy access to all parts of the country
These pilots should incorporate the sustainable use of local renewable energy
resources for heat The government could consider providing incentives for small
renewable energy suppliers, to encourage entrepreneurship and the establishment
of small businesses in the energy sector Recommendations The government of
Azerbaijan should:  Evaluate the economic potential of renewable energy and use
the assessment results to design an action plan to take advantage of that
potential  Set renewable energy targets that take account of the cost-
effectiveness of all available policy options and of the need for consistency
with electricity market reform measures  Minimise the costs of additional
renewable energy capacity through competitive bidding processes and by
identifying ways to incorporate long-term PPAs into the competitive electricity
market the government plans to introduce  Take account of the need for
renewable energy integration in plans to develop and and upgrade the grid 
Facilitate renewable energy capacity increases by streamlining authorisation and
licensing processes as well as project implementation procedures, keeping in
mind the case for establishing  single point of contact and for ensuring that
grid connection rules do not discourage renewable electricity  Develop and
implement programmes to install solar collectors, batteries and other
independent renewable energy technologies in remote parts of the country to
ensure cost-effective access to energy in those areas  Consider providing
incentives for small renewable energy suppliers, to encourage entrepreneurship
and the establishment of small businesses in the energy sector 142  RENEWABLE
ENERGY References                          ACWA Power (2020), ACWA power expands
its geographic footprint by entering the Azerbaijan market,  footprint-by-
entering-the-azerbaijan-market/  ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2018), Floating
solar energy development: Technical assistance report,  enpdf ANAS (Azerbaijan’
National Academy of Science) (2004), Alternative energy sources in the Republic
of Azerbaijan,  Aydin,  (2019), Energy insecurity and renewable energy sources:
Prospects and challenges for Azerbaijan, ADBI working paper 992, ADB, Tokyo,
azerbaijan Azernews (2020), Minister: Azerbaijan seeks to boost renewables by 30
pct by 2030,  CIC (Caspian Information Centre) (2013), Azerbaijan: Alternative
and renewable energy –  business perspective,  and-Renewable-Energypdf?sequence=
ECS (Energy Charter Secretariat) (2020), In-Depth Review of the Energy
Efficiency Policy of the Republic of Azerbaijan, ECS, Brussels Eurasianet
(2020), Azerbaijan faces growing water shortage,  Foster,  and  Rana (2020),
Rethinking Power Sector Reform in the Developing World, Sustainable
Infrastructure Series, World Bank, Washington, DC, doi:1596--4648- 1442- IEA
(International Energy Agency) (2021), World Energy Balances 2021 (database),
IEA (2020a), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020,  technology-perspectives-IEA
(2020b), Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020,  costs-of-generating-
electricity-IEA (2018a), 20 Renewable Energy Policy Recommendations,  renewable-
energy-policy-recommendations IEA (2018b), World Energy Outlook 2018,  (2017),
Status of Power System Transformation 2017,  power-system-transformation-IRENA
(International Renewable Energy Agency) (2019), Renewables Readiness Assessment:
Republic of Azerbaijan, IRENA, Abu Dhabi,
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/Dec/IRENA_RRA_Azerbaijan_2019PDF 143
RENEWABLE ENERGY Kerimov, , Ismailova,  and  Rahmanov (2013), Modeling of wind
power producing in Caspian Sea conditions, International Journal on Technical
and Physical Problems of Engineering, Vol , No ,  Jun2013-IJTPE-
Issue15-Vol5-No2-Jun2013-pp136-pdf Masdar (2020), Masdar signs agreement to
develop landmark solar project in Azerbaijan,  landmark-solar-project-in-
azerbaijan MoE (Ministry of Energy) (2020), MoE website,  SSC (State Statistical
Committee of Azerbaijan) (2019), Environment in Azerbaijan 2019, SSC, Baku World
Bank (2020a), Global Solar Atlas: Azerbaijan,  World Bank (2020b), Global Wind
Atlas: Azerbaijan,  144                            Energy research, development
and demonstration Overview The Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences (ANAS)
co‑ ordinates academic research, while the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of
Transport, Communications and High Technologies, the Azerbaijan State Oil and
Industrial University and the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR)
carry out research and development (&) activities in their own institutes or by
funding other organisations Private businesses, international financial
institutions (IFIs) and donors also contribute to & Nevertheless, Azerbaijan has
significant potential to increase its & activities, including in the energy
field, with the support of long-term planning Overall spending on & is low, and
the country does not yet have  specific strategy or action plan for energy &
Funding According to the Science Development Foundation, Azerbaijan’ total &
spending over the past decade equates to around % of its GDP (SDF, 2020) This is
around half what the lowest-spending Organisation for Economic Co‑ operation and
Development (OECD) member country spends, and less than one-tenth of the OECD
average (around % of GDP), but is similar to the & spending of many of
Azerbaijan’ neighbours & is primarily publicly funded, 86% from public research
institutions and % from higher education establishments, while private sector
funding covers only % More than 80% of total funding is allocated to basic
research, and less than 20% to applied & The level of competitive funding
(project-based and grants) remains negligible (WB, 2018) Around 65% of total
funding has been allocated to the natural and technical sciences in recent
years, but detailed information about energy & spending is not available Energy
research institutions Azerbaijan has  number of research and higher education
institutions that carry out energy technology & They have participated in
national and international programmes and projects, enabling Azerbaijani
scientists and researchers to contribute to the development of these projects
while acquiring new skills and knowledge 145  ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND
DEMONSTRATION The main institutions are:  the Azerbaijan Technical University 
the Baku Engineering University  the Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry
University  ANAS’ Institute of Physics and Institute of Petrochemical Processes
 the Azerbaijan Scientific-Research and Design-Prospecting Power Engineering
Institute, Ltd  SOCAR’ Oil and Gas Research and Design Institute  the
Azerbaijan State University of Architecture and Construction  the Baku Higher
Oil School Developing relevant skills and know-how, for example through better
schooling and greater participation in higher education programmes, is necessary
to carry out & activities Such knowledge and capabilities are also critical for
Azerbaijan to develop its economy more generally Although steps are being taken
to make improvements, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has suggested that more
resources and  more effective institutional setup and cohesive policy framework
are needed to further develop the country’ infrastructure and human capital
(ADB, 2019) The 2019‑ 2023 State Programme on Increasing the International
Competitiveness of the Higher Education System promotes dual-degree programmes
with highly rated universities in other countries For example, the Baku Higher
Oil School, in conjunction with the Geneva Business School, is introducing
dual-diploma MBA in Oil and Gas Management Energy technology innovation
According to the Word Bank, Azerbaijan’ public sector & institutions, which
focus primarily on basic research, have relatively weak links with the private
sector and, consequently, there is scope to improve the country’
commercialisation and general innovation performance (patents, etc) (WB, 2018)
The ADB has also argued that private sector participation in & should be
increased To this end, in January 2019 the president issued an order on Ensuring
Co‑ ordination in the Field of Innovative Development in the Republic of
Azerbaijan Efforts to stimulate innovation include the establishment of
technology parks, which are typically offered tax, land acquisition and customs
benefits The High Tech Research Center under the Ministry of Transport,
Communications and High Technologies was established in 2008 to import advanced
technologies to Azerbaijan and develop science- based industries in the country
The Center has developed prototypes of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and  small-
scale LED production line, for example ANAS’ High Technologies Park (HTP) was
created by  presidential decree of  November The HTP aims to establish
application mechanisms for industry-driven projects, provide technological
innovation for mass production, and facilitate practical work in the field of
science and technology Petrochemicals is one of the HTP’ focus areas Baku
Engineering University started  technology park in 2013 to support student
innovation The park organises competitions and provides funding to help students
146  ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION develop innovative ideas,
and BP sponsors high-spec labs in support of this work The university is
launching  programme to prepare specialists in long-term energy planning
SOCAR, the country’ largest company, conducts research, development and
innovation (RDI) activities in its Oil and Gas Research and Design Institute It
provides AZN  million per year for research, together with the National Academy
of Science; it also offers stipends for scientists The Institute’ work covers
wide range of petroleum industry activities: geological and geophysical surveys
of prospects and oil and gas fields; exploration, and the preparation of
prospects for development; oil and gas field development; well drilling,
completion and operation; petrochemical and petroleum processing engineering;
petroleum industry economic and management studies; the preparation of short-
term reservoir engineering strategies; environmental protection; and the
processing, storage and transportation of petroleum products (SOCAR, 2020)
Assessment RDI activities are necessary to help Azerbaijan maintain and improve
the competitiveness of its economy and diversify it away from oil and gas The
country has the means to increase its RDI potential and make better use of it,
but stronger efforts and  long-term commitment are required Several of
Azerbaijan’ research and education institutions have been important in setting
the country on the path to further technological progress They have participated
in various national and international programmes and projects, enabling Azeri
scientists and researchers to contribute to the work being done while acquiring
new skills and knowledge At the same time, RDI governance in Azerbaijan remains
fragmented, as do its systems Policy and funding are not as well co‑ordinated as
they could be and would benefit from streamlining  welcome sign of improvement
and interest is the January 2019 presidential order on Ensuring Co‑ordination in
the Field of Innovative Development in the Republic of Azerbaijan Total &
spending remains at % of GDP, which is low by international standards, so there
is  strong case to be made for increasing spending and changing the country’
approach & is primarily funded from Azerbaijan’ state budget, with the private
sector providing only % of the total, whereas in developed economies the private
sector covers the majority of & expenditures, followed by higher education
institutions Furthermore, the share of funding allocated to applied research in
Azerbaijan is low (less than 20% of the total) and should be raised to develop
the economy’ non-oil sectors; the level of competitive funding (project-based
and grants) should also be increased Active policies to promote co-operation
among public research institutions, universities and the private sector will be
required to enact the necessary revisions Regarding energy RDI specifically, the
government should develop  strategy, policies and programmes It should also
encourage and facilitate wider participation in international RDI programmes and
projects As Azerbaijan’ economy, as well as its energy research and technology
base, is dominated by the oil and gas industry, there is  strong argument for
diversification focused on energy efficiency and renewable energy RDI in the
field of energy efficiency and 147  ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND
DEMONSTRATION renewable energy would benefit from framework legislation to
create better conditions and provide incentives for small and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs) Given their importance, the government should also place
stronger emphasis on energy sector digitalisation and smart technologies,
including smart grids, energy storage, digital technologies for power, district
heating and cooling (DHC) and gas networks as well as new oil and gas sector
technologies, notably carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) For the oil
and gas industry, international experience offers models of resource development
compatible with deep decarbonisation, with especial focus on CCUS, hydrogen
production and strategies to find and develop non-combustion uses for
hydrocarbons Incorporating CCUS into petrochemical production may be
particularly rewarding, given the potential for cost-efficient carbon storage
options (IEA, 2020a) Depleted oil and gas reservoirs also merit careful
consideration because they could be one of the lowest-cost CO2 storage options
in  future in which hundreds of millions of tonnes of CO2 will need to be stored
The availability of inexpensive natural gas and CO2 storage could also provide
comparative advantage in the production of clean hydrogen Furthermore, as
technologies to capture CO2 and to inject it for enhanced oil recovery are
commercially mature and have been applied in industry for decades, they could be
used to boost oil production from existing assets as well as reduce Azerbaijan’
overall emissions intensity and avoid the need for new production infrastructure
Recommendations The government of Azerbaijan should:  Formulate an integrated
energy RDI strategy based on close co-ordination among ANAS, the Ministry of
Energy, the Ministry of Transport, Communications and High Technologies, SOCAR,
private sector businesses, and IFIs and donors in the field; include measures to
ensure their continued co-operation for effective implementation of the strategy
 Establish  framework to develop infrastructure and knowledge related to
sustainable technologies, especially energy efficiency and renewable energy, in
the RDI strategy  Include in the RDI strategy: >  mixture of base financing and
competitive project-based granting > support for innovative SMEs and start-ups >
support for research on climate change and adaptation in the energy sector >
measures to further develop university technology parks > measures to strengthen
the country’ capacity to participate in international RDI and education
programmes, including Horizon Europe , and to develop  national contact point
148  ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION  Place strong emphasis in
the RDI strategy on smart technologies and digitalisation of the energy sector,
including smart grids and energy storage; on digital technologies for power and
gas networks; and on new oil and gas sector technologies, including CCUS
 Facilitate access to available technology transfer options offered by climate
funds, IFIs and donors, build up relevant policy capacity, and promote the
development of relevant projects  Track public energy-related & funding in
detail ( by technology and energy source) to inform energy-related & policy
decisions 149  ENERGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION References ADB
(Asian Development Bank) (2019), Azerbaijan  – Promoting Diversified and
Inclusive Growth, Country Partnership Strategy, ADB, Manila,  IEA (International
Energy Agency) (2020a), The Oil and Gas Industry in Energy Transitions,
OECD/IEA, Paris IEA (2020b), Energy Technology Perspectives 2020, OECD/IEA,
Paris SDF (Science Development Foundation) (2020), Main indicators,  pdf SOCAR
(State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic) (2020), SOCAR website, research and
development,  journal WB (World Bank) (2018), Azerbaijan: The Role of Higher
Education in Innovation, World Bank, Washington, DC,  Role-of-Higher-Education-
in-Innovationpdf 150        ANNEX : Organisation of the review Review criteria
The Shared Goals, which were adopted by the IEA Ministers at their  June 1993
meeting in Paris, provide the evaluation criteria for the in-depth reviews
(IDRs) conducted by the IEA The Shared Goals are presented in Annex  Review team
and preparation of the report The IEA in-depth review team visited Baku
February The team met with government officials, energy suppliers, interest
groups and various other organisations This report was drafted on the basis of
these meetings, the team’ preliminary assessment of the country’ energy policy,
the government’ response to the IEA energy policy questionnaire and other
information The members of the team were: IEA member countries • Edmund HOSKER,
Adviser to the IEA, UNITED KINGDOM (Team leader) • Paule ANDEREGG, Energy
Efficiency Specialist, Swiss Federal Office of Energy, SWITZERLAND • Kavita
JADHAV, Oil & Gas Sector Specialist, Department for Business, Energy &
Industrial Strategy, UNITED KINGDOM EU4Energy countries • Adkham ABDULLAEV, Head
of Sector, Energy Statistics, RES & EE Calculations, State Committee of the
Republic of Uzbekistan on Statistics, UZBEKISTAN • Giorgi CHIKOVANI, CEO,
Georgian Energy Development Fund, GEORGIA • Marine GOGOLADZE, Head of Industry,
Construction and Energy Statistics Division under Business Statistics
Department, GEOSTAT, GEORGIA • Shokhzod ISLAMOV, Deputy Head, Department for
Green Economy Development, Ministry of Economy and Industry, UZBEKISTAN •
Miromil SAIDOV, Chief Specialist, Department for Development of Electric
Networks, Ministry of Energy, UZBEKISTAN IEA secretariat • Joel COUSE, Special
Adviser, Directorate of Energy Markets and Security • Rebecca GAGHEN, Head,
Division for Europe, Middle East, Africa and Latin America, Office of Global
Energy Relations 151 ANNEXES IEA for EU4Energy programme • Mariana BOTEZATU,
Country Expert for Moldova • Jacinta BYRNE-DEQUEANT, Administrative Co-ordinator
• Borys DODONOV, Country Expert for Ukraine • Markus FAGER-PINTILÄ, Statistics
Programme Manager • Andrei MALOCHKA, Country Expert for Belarus • Zaur MAMMADOV,
Country Expert for Azerbaijan • Murman MARGVELASHVILI, Country Expert for
Georgia • Anna PETRUS, Programme Officer • Tolib SULTANOV, Country Expert for
Uzbekistan • Miika TOMMILA, Key author of the IDR report The team is grateful
for the co-operation and assistance of the many people it met throughout the
visit Thanks to their kind hospitality, openness and willingness to share
information, the visit was highly informative, productive and enjoyable The team
expresses its gratitude to Mr Samir Valiyev, Deputy Minister of Energy, and to
Mr Yusif Yusifov, Deputy Chairman of the State Statistical Committee, for co-
ordinating the response to the IEA energy policy questionnaire and for
supporting the team visit The team also expresses sincere thanks to Mr Zaur
Mammadov, Country Expert for Azerbaijan of the IEA for EU4Energy Programme, and
Mr Javid Abdullayev, Adviser to the Minister of Energy, for their great
organisational skills, personal commitment and ability to respond to the team’
many requests in  very professional and effective manner Miika Tommila drafted
chapters - and - of this report and Joel Couse was the lead author of chapter
Markus Fager-Pintilä prepared the graphs and drafted the sections related to
statistics and energy data Edmund Hosker reviewed the full report and provided
useful comments throughout Anna Petrus co-ordinated the review process The
report was prepared under the guidance of Rebecca Gaghen, Head of the Europe,
Middle East, Africa and Latin America Division Helpful comments and updates were
provided by the review team members and IEA staff, including Simon Bennett,
Szilvia Doczi, Jean-Baptiste Dubreuil, Peter Fraser, Cesar Alejandro Hernandez,
Tom Howes, Sara Moarif, Gergely Molnar and Takahiro Oki Therese Walsh managed
the editing process and Kristine Douaud edited the report Astrid Dumond managed
the production process, Isabelle Nonain-Semelin finalised the layout, and Tanya
Dyhin prepared the maps and images 152 ANNEXES        Organisations interviewed
ACE Consultants ADB Azerbaijan Architecture and Construction University
Azerbaijan Energy Engineering and Consulting LLC Azerbaijan Oil and Industry
University Azerbaijan Technical University Azerenergy Azerigaz Azerishiq
Azeristiliktejhizat BP EBRD Ecological Enlightenment and Monitoring Social Union
Ecological Information Public Union Energy Charter expert EU Delegation to Baku
EU4Climate Helind Energy International EcoEnergy Academy ITOCHU Ministry of
Ecology and Natural Resources Ministry of Energy Provitaz Regulatory Authority
of Ministry of Energy (Energy Services Regulation) Science Development
Foundation Scientific-Research and Design-Prospecting Power Engineering
Institute, Ltd SOCAR State Statistical Committee State Tax Service Tariff
Council Total UNDP 153 ANNEXES ANNEX : Energy balances and key statistical data
Azerbaijan Energy balances and key statistical data Unit: Mtoe 2019 1990 2000
2010 2016 2017 2018 SUPPLY 78 81 15 76 83 10 84 TOTAL PRODUCTION Coal - - - - -
- - Peat - - - - - - - Oil 57 09 78 77 31 26 44 Natural gas 57 99 72 27 58 13 04
Biofuels and  aste¹ 02 09 10 10 12 11 02 Nuclear - - - - - - - Hydro 13 30 17 15
13 15 14 Wind - 00 00 00 01 01 - Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² - - 00 00
00 00 - -54 -52 -64 -79 -08 -01 TOTAL NET IMPORTS 42 Coal - - - - - - - Exports
09 - - - - - - Imports 09 - - - - - - Net imports 11 81 85 14 34 33 90 Oil
Exports 43 09 03 32 53 33 29 Imports -35 -10 -48 -23 -21 -16 -35 Int' marine and
aviation bunkers -02 -82 -30 -05 -02 -15 -96 Net imports 40 - 20 76 44 32 94
Natural gas Exports 89 24 - 25 77 51 - Imports 50 24 -20 -51 -67 -81 -94 Net
imports 29 07 04 09 11 12 13 Electricity Exports 15 12 01 01 01 01 01 Imports
-14 04 -03 -08 -10 -11 -12 Net imports TOTAL STOCK CHANGES -53 03 -81 31 -51 -17
-16 TOTAL SUPPLY (TES) 67 09 30 - 82 - 42 - 54 - 59 - 94 - Coal - - - - - - -
Peat 09 28 62 84 25 13 25 Oil 46 83 85 40 13 30 54 Natural gas 02 02 09 10 10 11
12 Biofuels and  aste¹ - - - - - - - Nuclear 14 13 30 17 15 15 13 Hydro - - 00
00 00 01 01 Wind - - - - - - - Geothermal - - - 00 00 00 00 Solar/other²
Electricity trade⁴ Shares in TES (%) -14 04 -03 -08 -10 -11 -12 Coal  - - - - -
- Peat - - - - - - - Oil Natural gas Biofuels and waste¹        Nuclear - - - -
- - - Hydro        Wind - -      Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other²
Electricity trade⁴ - - -     -  - - - - -  is negligible, - is nil,  is not
available Please note: rounding may cause totals to differ from the sum of the
elements 154 ANNEXES        Unit: Mtoe DEMAND FINAL CONSUMPTION 2019 2000 2010
2016 2017 2018 1990 80 - 91 - 99 - 93 - 47 - 53 - 71 09 TFC Coal Peat - - - - -
- - Oil 53 66 39 00 42 93 06 Natural gas 31 06 91 29 21 07 29 Biofuels and
aste¹ 04 09 03 04 04 02 02 Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² - - - - - - -
Electricity 61 05 51 47 53 24 36 Heat 32 06 14 14 27 26 90 Shares in TFC (%)
Coal - - - - - -  Peat - - - - - - - Oil Natural gas Biofuels and waste¹
Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² - - - - - - - Electricity  Heat       82 -
27 - 27 - 09 - 20 - 02 - 58 - TOTAL INDUSTRY⁵ Coal - - - - - - - Peat 40 57 92
13 27 94 39 Oil 86 54 05 65 47 80 26 Natural gas 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 Biofuels
and  aste¹ - - - - - - - Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² 38 15 30 31 32 06
61 Electricity 17 00 - - 13 21 32 Heat Shares in total industry (%) Coal - - - -
- - - Peat - - - - - - - Oil Natural gas Biofuels and waste¹        Geothermal -
- - - - - - Solar/other² - - - - - - - Electricity   Heat   - -  TRANSPORT⁴
OTHER⁶ Coal 82 72 17 59 85 84 21 17 - 93 - 54 - 25 - 43 - 67 - 91 09 - - - - - -
- Peat 35 41 33 32 34 23 71 Oil 44 52 87 64 73 24 85 Natural gas 04 09 03 03 04
02 02 Biofuels and  aste¹ - - - - - - - Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² 19
85 18 12 18 13 68 Electricity 05 58 14 05 14 14 14 Heat Shares in other (%) Coal
- - - - - -  Peat - - - - - - - Oil      Natural gas Biofuels and waste¹
Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² - - - - - - - Electricity Heat       155
ANNEXES Unit: Mtoe DEMAND ENERGY TRANSFORMATION AND LOSSES 1990 2000 2010 2016
2017 2018 2019 ELECTRICITY GENERATION⁷ Input (Mtoe) 08 17 78 76 08 13 13 Output
(Mtoe) 24 99 61 61 15 09 17 Output (TWh) 07 15 70 71 95 32 23 Output Shares (%)
Coal - - - - - - - Peat - - - - - - - Oil     Natural gas Biofuels and waste¹  -
- -    Nuclear - - - - - - - Hydro       Wind  - -     Geothermal - - - - - - -
Solar/other²  - - -    TOTAL LOSSES of  hich: 08 96 77 65 35 54 06 Electricity
and heat generation⁸ 84 15 93 04 96 18 17 Other transformation 37 39 44 56 38 32
23 Ow  use and transmission/distribution losses 88 11 98 95 72 46 36 Statistical
differences -06 -26 -09 -06 -06 - - INDICATORS 2019 2010 2016 2017 2018 1990
2000 46 57 11 99 45 53 30 GDP (billion 2015 USD) 02 16 05 05 76 85 94 Population
(millions) TES/GDP (toe USD) 30 10 93 25 28 28 28 Energy production/TES 77 92 67
68 07 84 90 59 17 40 31 48 48 47 Per capita TES (toe/capita) Oil supply/GDP (toe
USD) 10 39 52 08 09 10 10 TFC/GDP (toe USD) 20 81 54 14 17 17 18 08 33 81 76 92
91 95 Per capita TFC (toe/capita) CO2 emissions from fuel combustion (MtCO2) 10
CO2 emissions from bunkers (MtCO2)10 - -       GROWTH RATES (% per year)
-       TES Coal -- - - - - - Peat - - - - - - - Oil - -   -  - Natural gas -  -
Biofuels and  aste¹      Nuclear - - - - - - - Hydro -  - - - Wind - - - -
Geothermal - - - - - - - Solar/other² - - -   - -   -   TFC Electricity
consumption - -  -    Energy production - - -    Net oil imports  - -  -  GDP -
TES/GDP - -  -  - TFC/GDP - - -  -  is negligible, - is nil,  is not available
Please note: rounding may cause totals to differ from the sum of the elements
156 ANNEXES        Footnotes to energy balances and key statistical data
Biofuels and waste comprise solid biofuels, industrial waste and municipal waste
Data are often based on partial surveys and may not be comparable between
countries  Other includes ambient heat used in heat pumps  Excludes
international marine bunkers and international aviation bunkers  Total supply of
electricity represents net trade  negative number in the share of TES indicates
that exports are greater than imports  Industry includes non-energy use  Other
includes residential, commercial and public services, agriculture/forestry,
fishing and other non-specified  Inputs to electricity generation include inputs
for electricity, co-generation (CHP) and heat plants Output refers to
electricity generation only  Losses arising from electricity and heat production
by main-activity and autoproducers For non- fossil-fuel electricity generation,
theoretical losses are based on plant efficiencies of around 33% for nuclear and
solar thermal, 10% for geothermal and 100% for hydro, wind and solar
photovoltaic  Toe per thousand USD at 2015 prices and exchange rates CO2
emissions from fuel combustion were estimated using the IPCC Tier  Sectoral
Approach methodology from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines Emissions from international
marine and aviation bunkers are not included in national totals 157 ANNEXES
ANNEX : International Energy Agency Shared Goals The member countries* of the
International Energy Agency (IEA) seek to create conditions in which the energy
sectors of their economies can make the fullest possible contribution to
sustainable economic development and to the well-being of their people and the
environment In formulating energy policies, the establishment of free and open
markets is  fundamental point of departure, though energy security and
environmental protection need to be given particular emphasis by governments IEA
countries recognise the significance of increasing global interdependence in
energy They therefore seek to promote the effective operation of international
energy markets and encourage dialogue with all participants To secure their
objectives, member countries therefore aim to create  policy framework
consistent with the following goals:  Diversity, efficiency and flexibility
within the energy sector are basic conditions for longer-term energy security:
the fuels used within and across sectors and the sources of those fuels should
be as diverse as practicable Non-fossil fuels, particularly nuclear and hydro,
make  substantial contribution to the energy supply diversity of IEA countries
as  group  Energy systems should have the ability to respond promptly and
flexibly to energy emergencies In some cases, this requires collective
mechanisms and action: IEA countries co-operate through the Agency in responding
jointly to oil supply emergencies  The environmentally sustainable provision and
use of energy are central to the achievement of these shared goals Decision
makers should seek to minimise the adverse environmental impacts of energy
activities, just as environmental decisions should take account of the energy
consequences Government interventions should respect the Polluter Pays Principle
when practicable  More environmentally acceptable energy sources need to be
encouraged and developed Clean and efficient fossil fuel use is essential The
development of economic non-fossil sources is also  priority  number of IEA
member countries wish to retain and improve the nuclear option for the future,
at the highest available safety standards, because nuclear energy does not emit
carbon dioxide Renewable energy sources will also have an increasingly important
contribution to make  Improved energy efficiency can promote both environmental
protection and energy security in  cost- effective manner There are significant
opportunities for greater energy efficiency at all stages of the energy cycle,
from production to consumption Strong efforts by governments and all energy
users are needed to realise these opportunities  Continued research, development
and market deployment of new and improved energy technologies make  critical
contribution to achieving the objectives outlined above Energy technology
policies should complement broader energy policies International co-operation in
the development and dissemination of energy technologies, including industry
participation and co-operation with non-member countries, should be encouraged
158 ANNEXES         Undistorted energy prices enable markets to work efficiently
Energy prices should not be held artificially below the costs of supply to
promote social or industrial goals To the greatest extent necessary and
practicable, the environmental costs of energy production and use should be
reflected in prices  Free and open trade and  secure framework for investment
contribute to efficient energy markets and energy security Distortions to energy
trade and investment should be avoided  Co-operation among all energy market
participants helps improve information access and understanding, and encourages
the development of efficient, environmentally acceptable and flexible energy
systems and markets worldwide These are needed to help promote the investment,
trade and confidence necessary to achieve global energy security and
environmental objectives (The Shared Goals were adopted by IEA Ministers at the
meeting of  June 1993 at Paris, France) * Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, the United Kingdom, the United States 159 ANNEXES ANNEX : Acronyms,
abbreviations and units of measure Acronyms and abbreviations AC Alternating
current ACG Azeri-Chirag-Gunashli ADB Asian Development Bank AERA Azerbaijan
Energy Regulatory Agency AGT Azerbaijan-Georgia-Turkey ANAS Azerbaijan’ National
Academy of Science BOO Build-own-operate BTC Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan CCGT Combined-
cycle gas turbine CCS Carbon capture and storage CCUS Carbon capture,
utilisation and storage CDD Central Dispatching Department CENEF Center for
Energy Efficiency CEPI Caspian Environmental Protection Initiative CESD Center
for Economic and Social Development CNG Compressed natural gas DH District
heating DHC District heating and cooling DSO Distribution system operator ECS
Energy Charter Secretariat EMS Energy management systems EOP Early Oil Project
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EU European Union FDI
Foreign direct investment FEM Fuel and Energy Ministry GSA Government support
agreements HAR Heydar Aliyev Refinery HTP High Technologies Park IDR In-depth
reviews IEA International Energy Agency IFI International financial institutions
IISPUS Integrated information system of public utility services INDC Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution IOC International oil companies 160 ANNEXES
JODI Joint Organizations Data Initiative JV Joint venture LED Light-emitting
diodes LPG Liquefied petroleum gas MENR Ministry of Ecology and Natural
Resources MEPR Minimum energy performance requirements MEPS Minimum energy
performance standards MoE Ministry of Energy MoU Memorandums of understanding
MRV Measurement, reporting and verification NDC Nationally determined
contribution NEEAP National energy efficiency action plan NGL Natural gas
liquids NREP Northern Route Export Pipeline OECD Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development OGPC Oil, gas and petrochemical complex OPEC
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries PPA Power purchase agreements
PPP Purchasing power parity PSA Production sharing agreement & Research and
development RDI Research, development and innovation RES Renewable energy
sources RFP Requests for proposal RSC Risk service contracts SAARES State Agency
on Alternative and Renewable Energy Sources SAIDI System Average Interruption
Duration Index SAIFI System Average Interruption Frequency Index SCADA
Supervisory control and data acquisition SCP South Caucasus Pipeline SDG
Sustainable Development Goals SGC Southern Gas Corridor SME Small and medium-
sized enterprises SOE State-owned enterprises SSC State Statistical Committee
STEP Sangachal Terminal Expansion Programme TANAP Through the newly launched
Trans-Anatolian Pipeline TAP Trans-Adriatic Pipeline TES Total energy supply TFC
Total final consumption 161 ANNEXES TPP Thermal Power Plant TRV Temperature
regulating valves TSO Transmission system operator UNDP UN Development Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNSD United Nations
Statistics Division USAID United States Agency for International Development VRE
Variable renewable energy WREP Western Route Export Pipeline Units of measure
bcm billion cubic metres gCO2 gramme of carbon dioxide GW gigawatt GWh gigawatt
hour kb thousand barrels kbd thousand barrels per day km kilometres kt kilotonne
ktoe kilotonne of oil equivalent kV kilovolt kW kilowatt kWh kilowatt hour m3
cubic metre mcm million cubic metres Mt million tonnes MtCO million tonnes of
carbon dioxide MtCO  -eq million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent Mtoe
million tonnes of oil equivalent  Mt/ million tonnes per annum (million tonnes
per year) MW megawatt MWh megawatt hour toe tonne of oil equivalent terawatt
hour TWh 162 This publication has been produced with the financial assistance of
the European Union and is part of the EU4Energy programme This publication
reflects the views of the International Energy Agency (IEA) Secretariat but does
not necessarily reflect those of individual IEA member countries or the European
Union The IEA makes no representation or warranty, express or implied, in
respect to the publication’ contents (including its completeness or accuracy)
and shall not be responsible for any use of, or reliance on, the publication
EU4Energy is  collaboration between the IEA, the European Union, Focus Countries
and other implementing parties, designed to support the aspirations of Focus
Countries to implement sustainable energy policies and foster co- operative
energy sector development at the regional level This publication and any map
included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any
territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to
the name of any territory, city or area IEA All rights reserved IEA Publications
International Energy Agency Website:  Contact information:  Typeset in France by
IEA - June 2021 Cover design: IEA Azerbaijan 2021 Energy Policy Review Oil and
gas continue to dominate Azerbaijan’ economy and provide most of its export and
government revenue While these resources have sharply raised the country’ living
standards since the late 1990s and remain plentiful, the long-term outlook for
this economic model is uncertain Oil production is declining and major oil and
gas importing countries have pledged to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net-
zero by mid-century, implying little demand three decades from now for oil or
gas without carbon capture and storage This report assesses the energy sector
and related economic challenges facing Azerbaijan It proposes several ways to
respond by increasing the efficiency and diversity of domestic energy supply and
use The overriding recommendation is  gradual transition to competitive markets
with significant private sector participation and energy prices that reflect the
cost of production The withdrawal of subsidies should be accompanied by support
measures for those most in need Such  transition would attract new market
entrants and new investments, helping to develop Azerbaijan’ significant solar
and wind potential, and limiting greenhouse gas emissions These recommendations
are in line with efforts already underway in Azerbaijan Prompted by the oil
price shock in , the government has recently drafted proposals for electricity
and gas market reforms, as well as laws on energy efficiency and renewable
energy The country’ first specific energy strategy is also nearing completion
The report encourages Azerbaijan to move swiftly to adopt all these proposals
and implement them effectively to ensure secure and sustainable energy in the
future Co-funded by the European Union