Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/AZE/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The Republic of Azerbaijan is an
upper middle-income country in the high human development category The
population exceeded 10 million in  The Government of Azerbaijan is seeking to
transition the country towards more balanced, inclusive and sustainable economic
growth To facilitate the country’ economic transition, the Government aims to
create conditions for development based on  growing non-oil economy  The
Republic of Azerbaijan has also had to address the impact of the decades-long
conflict in and around its Nagorno-Karabakh region, which has resulted in
massive displacement and extensive damage The Government has declared its
intention to rehabilitate and reconstruct conflict-affected areas in and around
the Nagorno-Karabakh region of the Republic of Azerbaijan, in preparation for
the return of over 652,000 internally displaced persons UNDP along with the
United Nations country team (UNCT) will support Azerbaijan to assess recovery
needs and help facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of displaced
persons to their homes  In 2019, the economy of Azerbaijan grew by  per cent and
gross domestic product in the non-oil sector had begun to increase at  faster
rate than in the oil sector Projections for 2020, however, suggest  sharp
contraction in both the oil and non-oil sectors of the economy due to the
combined impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and  fall in
world oil prices The fiscal balance is set to record  deficit of  per cent in
The devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as both  health emergency and
socioeconomic crisis has created development challenges for Azerbaijan which
have been partly addressed by the Government’ multisectoral response to the
pandemic  Absolute poverty declined from per cent in 2005 to  per cent in 20183
but several groups of people remain vulnerable to economic volatility, pandemics
and natural disasters  The performance of the country’ public sector on the
World Bank’ Government Effectiveness index has been steadily improving since
2012 due to ongoing public administration reforms Continued modernization of the
public sector is needed to better formulate and implement policies, and more
effectively deliver public and social services  Having signed and ratified the
Paris Climate Agreement, the Government has targeted  35 per cent reduction in
the country’ greenhouse gas emissions as its intended nationally determined
contribution to the global climate change effort Implementation is linked to the
country’ climate-risk trajectory and climate adaptation strategy  Improvements
in national human development have benefited women and girls The value of the
Gender Development Index, which measures gender gaps in human development,
improved in 2019 in Azerbaijan However, faster progress is still needed in key
areas of gender equality including improving maternal and child health, reducing
the gender wage gap and increasing women’ political representation Azerbaijan
has the potential to make considerable progress towards attaining the
Sustainable Development Goals The Government nationalized and prioritized 17
Goals, 88 targets and 119 indicators The 2019 voluntary national review
identified challenges affecting acceleration of implementing the Goals in
Azerbaijan which need to be addressed  State Statistical Committee of the
Republic of Azerbaijan  World Bank estimate  State Statistical Committee of the
Republic of Azerbaijan    Second Voluntary National Review of the Republic of
Azerbaijan /14  DP/DCP/AZE/ Although the Government’ development strategy,
“Azerbaijan 2020: Vision into the Future”, concludes at the end of 2020, the
Strategic Road Maps on National Economy maintain relevance with their long-term
outlook to The formulation of  new development strategy is under preparation
with UNDP to provide support to the Government in its formulation and
implementation UNDP is committed to accelerating structural and digital
transformations for resilient, sustainable and inclusive development through
innovative solutions that have multiplier effects across the Sustainable
Development Goals The independent country programme evaluation conducted in 2019
found that the country office has promoted and piloted innovations, particularly
in the areas of energy efficiency and environment, aiming to merge tech-savvy
and entrepreneurial solutions with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The UNDP accelerator lab will work with national partners to test new solutions
that can be scaled up, help modernize ongoing programmes and projects, champion
digital transformation and improve quality of life  good example is the UNDP
self-employment programme for people with disabilities, whose approach can be
expanded to support other vulnerable groups UNDP will seek to partner with the
Government, international financial institutions (IFIs), the private sector and
civil society to advocate for the 2030 Agenda and mobilize finance for the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will continue its long-
standing partnership with the Government which is the largest single contributor
to the UNDP programme The country office will work closely with existing donors
such as the European Union and the United States Agency for International
Development, and vertical funds like the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and
the Green Climate Fund (GCF) It will also diversify its funding sources by
partnering with new donors UNDP will engage with civil society organizations
(CSOs) to build the capacity of vulnerable groups and increase community
participation It will also broaden its engagement with the private sector to
support micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) implement the Climate
Promise and finance the Sustainable Development Goals The UNDP partnership with
national institutions – combined with  prompt response to needs, an efficient
procurement system and promotion of the work of CSOs – made it an effective
development partner in support of key national priorities The independent
country programme evaluation concluded that UNDP support to development
continues to be highly relevant in Azerbaijan  key lesson learned from the
evaluation is that in upper middle-income countries like Azerbaijan, the value
added by UNDP increasingly takes the form of innovative thought leadership drawn
from its international experience, its ability to promote integrated approaches
and its capacity to convene different stakeholders The theory of change
underlying the country programme is that inclusive and sustainable growth will
reduce vulnerability and build resilience in the country, particularly for the
most disadvantaged The Government faces increasingly complex and linked
development challenges that defy simple solutions, requiring greater
collaboration across sectors and partners To address this, UNDP offers
coordinated, integrated, whole-of-government and multisectoral approaches that
aim to facilitate systemic reforms With its reputation as  neutral and impartial
partner, and through its integrator role, UNDP can use platforms to support
dialogue between different stakeholders, including the most marginalized, and
/14 DP/DCP/AZE/ strengthen its convening and normative role for nationalizing
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will facilitate systemic
reforms around structural transformations that support the Government’ priority
of economic diversification through the development of the non- oil sector UNDP
will work with the Government, MSMEs and CSOs in partnership with other national
and international stakeholders to support sustainable, inclusive and green
growth, to modernize governance and institutions for better public and social
services delivery, and to respond to the challenges of climate change and
environmental degradation Drawing on gender-disaggregated data to report on
results, UNDP will mainstream gender equality across all areas of its work in
Azerbaijan To assist the Government to meet its climate action goals, UNDP will
facilitate the country’ shift to  greener, circular economy that is resilient to
climate risks, is energy-efficient and sustainably manages natural resources
Benefiting from the spread of digital governance, public institutions will be
strengthened at the national and local levels to develop and implement policies
that deliver better public and social services Greater engagement of civil
society and the private sector in public decision-making processes will also be
fostered UNDP contributed significantly to public awareness of the Sustainable
Development Goals and integrating them in national policies, exemplified by the
first regional forum on the Goals for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent
States, organized with the Government The President’ decision to establish the
National Coordination Council for Sustainable Development was strongly supported
by UNDP The Council was mandated to define the national priorities and monitor
the country’ progress towards the 2030 Agenda UNDP helped the Government to
prepare two voluntary national reviews on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and present them to the high-level political forum on sustainable development in
2017 and UNDP will continue to support the National Coordinating Council, most
notably in the preparation of new voluntary national reviews and by promoting
the Goals Working with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the office
of the Resident Coordinator on the Joint SDG Fund, UNDP will apply the
integrator approach to support the establishment and operationalization of
holistic and participatory integrated national financing framework The
Government will use the framework to enhance its efforts in coordinating
financing of Sustainable Development Goal implementation in the country, in
cooperation with stakeholders and partners UNDP recognizes the importance of
diversifying sources of development finance through new mechanisms and by
attracting potential investors, UNDP will support the United Nations system in
Azerbaijan to play  strategic role to expand the public policy dialogue between
the Government, the IFIs and the private sector UNDP will continue to ensure
that the country programme contributes to regional/global knowledge-sharing
through South-South and triangular cooperation by sharing the country’ expertise
and practices in relevant areas The experience of the Azerbaijan Service and
Assessment Network and the Agency for Sustainable and Operational Social
Security can be relevant to other middle-income countries seeking to modernize
the delivery of government services In addition, UNDP will partner with the
European Union on interventions involving several Eastern Partnership countries
in such areas as climate change, local development and conflict transformation
The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) for
is aimed at reducing social and economic inequalities by contributing to
inclusive and sustainable development in support of the 2030 Agenda UNDP will
contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals in the
country by applying an integrated 7Draft UNSDCF, /14  DP/DCP/AZE/ approach to
the strategic pillars in the UNSDCF UNDP will further contribute to the
collective delivery of results through joint programming and inter-agency
cooperation within the United Nations system in the country UNDP will partner
with the UNCT in strategic areas such as the development of new national
strategies and Sustainable Development Goal nationalization and advocacy Joint
programmes with United Nations agencies will be sought in several areas
including on the integrated national financing framework and on women and
disability with UNFPA, female economic empowerment with the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), basic
services for people with disability with the United Nations Children’ Fund and
employment-related interventions with the International Labour Organization
Working with the Government, UNDP will provide technical leadership in the UNCT
for the implementation of the COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery plan as well as
the development of  dashboard to monitor progress with the recovery II Programme
priorities and partnerships The country programme is grounded in the UNDP
Strategic Plan, , which is anchored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its principles of leaving no one behind Despite substantial
improvements in national living standards in recent years, some women, youth,
children, people with disabilities, elderly persons, refugees, displaced
communities, informal workers, labour migrants and rural populations remain
vulnerable Working in tandem with government and other partners, the UNDP
programme aims to reduce vulnerability by supporting economic diversification,
inclusive growth and sustainable development aligned to the Sustainable
Development Goals Inclusive growth that reduces vulnerability and builds
resilience Inclusive growth is  key driver for reducing vulnerability and
building more resilience, particularly for the poor and most disadvantaged, many
of whom live in rural areas To reduce vulnerability, the Government has
prioritized increased income-generating opportunities combined with human
capital development UNDP will therefore focus on multisectoral, integrated
solutions providing the necessary skills, vocational education and training and
access to decent jobs, sustainable livelihoods and business opportunities in the
non-oil sector Drawing from the UNDP Azerbaijan socioeconomic assessment for
COVID-19, assistance will be provided to the Government to strengthen employment
and social protection for those most affected by the pandemic With young people
comprising one quarter of the population of Azerbaijan, UNDP will continue
promoting the engagement of youth as productive human capital Partnering with
labour-market stakeholders, UNDP will leverage synergies through its integrated
platform approach to boosting youth employment, entrepreneurship and skills
development via youth employment projects UNDP will play an active role in
facilitating inclusive growth by scaling up its flagship Women’ Resource Centres
across the country, building on its partnership with the State Committee for
Family, Women and Children Affairs and the Ministry of Labour and Social
Protection of the Population, and working together with UN-Women and the Swiss
Agency for Development Cooperation Vulnerability will be further reduced by
supporting youth platform labs, social protection, inclusive education and
traditional arts programmes Engaging with both the private sector and financial
institutions as engines of growth, MSMEs and social enterprises will be
developed to become future-oriented businesses using digital and energy-
efficient technologies Gender inequalities will be addressed by strengthening
the national capacity to combat gender-based violence, providing support for
entrepreneurial initiatives and vocational  /14 DP/DCP/AZE/ education of rural
women, empowering women to be more active in public decision-making, and
expanding the digitalization of resources and services for better economic,
educational and public engagement Systemic action will be taken to promote
gender equality at the levels of both policy formulation and implementation
Partnering with civil society, UNDP will advocate for the rights of women and
other disadvantaged groups In addition, vocational rehabilitation for people
with disabilities will be modernized and public awareness of their rights will
be raised Tourism, information technology and agro-industry are priority non-oil
sectors for economic diversification and job creation UNDP will strengthen its
partnership with the State Tourism Agency, including building the capacity of
the Mingachevir Tourism College, to further develop sustainable tourism Local
employment and entrepreneurship in the tourism sector will be increased through
ecotourism, handicraft production, increased involvement of women in tourism
start-ups, strengthened capacity of the tourism industry and the establishment
of  green supply chain for MSMEs specializing in rural tourism Stronger
institutions for delivery of quality public and social services Through
evidence-based policy development and cost-effective policy implementation,
working at both the national and local levels, UNDP will provide thought
leadership on good governance and institutional capacity-building to improve
public sector service delivery The evidence base will be strengthened for
effective decision-making and the horizontal and vertical integration of
national and subnational institutions will be supported to facilitate proper
planning and responsiveness to crises Tapping into the UNDP innovation culture
and its support for -governance, UNDP will collaborate with the Government to
make the delivery of public sector services more accessible, affordable and
inclusive through digitalization, particularly for the vulnerable, as
demonstrated by past collaboration on the automation of the payment of social
protection benefits In this context, UNDP will support the Government’ efforts
to digitally transform the country by helping with the modernization of
information and communication technology infrastructure and the expansion of
-communication and -services UNDP will contribute to the development of digital
skills and an enabling environment for digital innovation through support to the
smart cities road map, the youth Internet governance forum and  national digital
strategy Building on existing relationships with the Ministry of Education and
the State Agency for Vocational Education, and in partnership with the European
Union, UNDP will increase its support for the reform of the vocational education
and training system Innovative measures will be piloted including work-based
learning, new course curricula for future skills and the application of
digitalization and online training In addition, the capacity of vocational
education and training providers will be built and the infrastructure and
equipment of selected providers will be modernized As part of institutional
capacity-building to support health reforms, the capacity of the national
health-care procurement system will be enhanced to improve the cost-effective
procurement of essential medicines for treating tuberculosis and HIV in
Azerbaijan There will also be scope for UNDP to support public health
procurement and digital health solutions in response to COVID-19 and other
pandemics Working with the Government and other relevant stakeholders, UNDP will
seek to strengthen the national capacity for conflict prevention and sustaining
peace Further efforts in this area will focus on strategic advice and dialogue,
integration of United Nations normative frameworks into national action plans,
skills development and advocacy and support for internally displaced persons to
access their rights and sustainable solutions UNDP will help to establish  new
Women’ Resource Centre serving conflict-affected communities UNDP will continue
its longstanding partnership with the Azerbaijan National Agency for Mine Action
/14  DP/DCP/AZE/ The capacities of CSOs to engage in development issues will be
strengthened Building on its integrator role, UNDP will advocate for the
inclusion of civil society, including organizations representing youth, women
and persons with disabilities, to build enabling ecosystems for social
entrepreneurship and innovation Protecting the environment and addressing
climate change UNDP will promote environmental protection and address climate
change to reduce the vulnerability of the population, particularly in rural
areas, and build resilience to natural disasters  vision for green growth is
required to help mitigate environmental risks, increase agricultural
productivity and respond effectively to climate change Working with the
Government, the private sector and civil society, UNDP will seek to integrate
climate change considerations into national policies, strategies and planning
frameworks The Government will be supported to enhance its nationally determined
contribution by incorporating global climate change mitigation through the UNDP
Climate Promise The country’ capacities for monitoring greenhouse gas emissions
will be strengthened and the national measurement, reporting and verification
system will be upgraded UNDP will assist the Government to prepare key climate
change reports and plans including the country’ national communications report
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, its National
Climate Change Adaptation Plan and  new climate change road map aligned with
European Union legislation Support will be provided to the re-established State
Commission on Climate Change chaired by the Deputy Prime Minister UNDP will
engage with the Government on climate change adaptation and mitigation, energy
efficiency and the transition to low-carbon technologies These actions will be
concentrated on rural communities and those who are more affected by the
consequences of climate change and water scarcity Green agriculture will be
supported by promoting water-efficient irrigation methods, increasing the
production of local crops and landraces through improved biodiversity and
supporting sustainable farming practices Rural women, one of the more
disadvantaged groups in the country, will be key beneficiaries of UNDP
engagement on climate change, energy efficiency and renewable energy Working
with the private sector, women will be economically empowered Access to
technologies will be increased and green energy entrepreneurship models and
climate- smart agriculture will be supported Partnerships with the public,
private and not-for-profit sectors as well as capacity- building and advisory
services, will be provided to support energy transitions such as the long-term
low greenhouse gas emission strategy Working with the Government, GEF, GCF, the
International Renewable Energy Agency, United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and other
partners, UNDP will address energy-efficiency issues by unlocking the market for
retrofitting buildings and increasing the production of renewable energy The
energy efficiency of buildings will be monitored and green standards will be
applied in the planning and design of construction, particularly for public
buildings and social housing With scarce freshwater resources and its coastal
Caspian Sea location, Azerbaijan is highly vulnerable to climate change and
water scarcity UNDP will support the Government’ efforts to improve water
management to address this vulnerability Since the country is prone to climate-
induced floods and droughts, UNDP will assist the Government at the regional,
national and local levels to mitigate against climate change and build
resilience to natural disasters in line with the country’ obligations under the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction  /14 DP/DCP/AZE/ III Programme and
risk management The development of the country programme was closely aligned to
the formulation of the UNSDCF, which was prepared through an inclusive and
participatory process informed by the United Nations-led Common Country Analysis
strategic prioritization workshop was convened in January 2020 where national
priorities were determined with the United Nations, government counterparts and
key stakeholders UNDP also consulted with all relevant government bodies in the
preparation of the country programme This country programme document outlines
the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers to
country programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and the internal control framework The country programme
will be nationally executed but may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure Cost definitions and
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to
the concerned projects Together with the Cabinet of Ministers, UNDP will
exercise joint ownership responsibility for the programme As part of the UNSDCF
Steering Group, UNDP will continue to actively lead in joint workplans and
monitoring frameworks to contribute to  coherent approach within the United
Nations system All United Nations activities, programmes and projects in all
districts and areas of the Republic of Azerbaijan will continue to be fully
coordinated, agreed and implemented by the offices of the United Nations system
in Azerbaijan with the respective counterparts within the Government of
Azerbaijan They will be implemented in full respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan within its
internationally recognized borders and in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and all relevant United Nations Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions The role of the private sector and financing institutions in areas
such as economic transformation, MSMEs and financing start-ups will be pursued,
particularly targeting youth, women, smallholder farmers and small entrepreneurs
at the local level Partnerships with the Government will be further strengthened
in view of the Government’ increasing co- financing of the UNDP programme In
order to accommodate  sizeable (64 per cent) increase in programme value
compared to the previous country programme, UNDP will strengthen its programme
and operational capacity including if necessary, through the recruitment of
additional staff in key positions The programme assumes that the Government will
continue to pursue its policy reforms to modernize the country as well as
provide investments that transform the economy and promote inclusion The risks
to the programme originate from the uncertainty of external financing given the
high middle-income context of Azerbaijan, the risk-aversion of the banking
sector to introduce innovative financing mechanisms to support MSMEs and
decreasing energy prices If living standards fall as  result of overlapping
health, economic and/or security crises, UNDP would need to mitigate the risks
through reprogramming and enhanced resource mobilization UNDP will apply
portfolio-based approach to have holistic programmes around development
priorities and broaden the donor and partner base to mobilize resources for
their realization in response to the risk of decreased financing To help manage
these risks, UNDP will integrate social and environmental standards and
accountability mechanisms through establishing early warning arrangements,
strengthened stakeholder response mechanism and compliance review and grievance
mechanisms /14  DP/DCP/AZE/ IV Monitoring and evaluation UNDP will promote
responsibility and accountability throughout the programme management cycle by
aligning the country programme monitoring and evaluation framework with that of
the UNSDCF The programme results and resources framework is fully aligned with
the integrated results and resources framework of the UNDP Strategic Plan UNDP
will work with the Cabinet of Ministers, as the coordinating government
institution, and with partners and beneficiaries to assess progress on
implementation, foster learning and ensure timely decision-making To track the
contribution of the programme to transformative change and strengthen learning
within the organization, UNDP will increase its in-house capacity for gender-
and age-disaggregated data collection, analysis and utilization Evaluation
findings will be incorporated into decision-making to adapt ongoing programmes
as well as design new projects to achieve defined strategic results The
programme will supplement traditional tools with innovative ones such as
multilevel mixed evaluation methods, crowdsourcing, micro- narratives, real-time
reporting and engagement with civil society to strengthen data collection and
analysis To improve the quality of decentralized evaluations as well as increase
use of evaluation findings for learning and adaptation, UNDP will establish
quarterly assurance mechanism UNDP will continue to rely on evaluations to
inform its programming decisions and approaches It will cooperate with United
Nations agencies and government counterparts to strengthen national statistical
and analytical capacities for monitoring and reporting on the Sustainable
Development Goals The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor expenditures
and improve planning and decision-making, with UNDP aiming to invest at least 15
per cent of its budget in interventions to achieve results in gender equality
/14 DP/DCP/AZE/ Annex Results and resources framework for Azerbaijan () The
baselines and targets for the UNSDCF Result Matrix will be agreed by the United
Nations agencies, the Government counterparts and other stakeholders National
Coordination Council for Sustainable Development is  coordinating partner
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: INCLUSIVE GROWTH THAT REDUCES VULNERABILITY AND
BUILDS RESILIENCE UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: People furthest behind
participate in and benefit from  diverse and innovative economy encompassing
future-oriented labour-market transformation and access to decent work RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms
and dimensions DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME ($) MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET()
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) -
Ministry of Labour and - Social Protection of the - Population Indicator (SDG ):
Proportion of small-scale industries in total industry value added Baseline:  %
Target: share of SMEs in GDP is 35%; in Employment is 40 % State Statistical
Committee; annually Regular: $567,000 Output  Vulnerable groups, particularly
the poor, women and people with disabilities (PWD), are empowered to gain
universal access to financial and non-financial assets to build productive
capacities and benefit from sustainable livelihoods and jobs Indicator  Number
of vulnerable populations including PWD receive tailored support for activation,
social and work- oriented rehabilitation for self-employment or employment into
the formal labour market in the regions Baseline:  Target: min 700 (425 women)
Data source; frequency: Ministry of Labour and Social Protection of the
Population, UNDP report; annually (targets are revised as  result of COVID-19)
Other: $21,257,103 - State Committee for Family, - Women and Children’ - Affairs
- - Ministry of Economy - - National Coordination Council for Sustainable
Development - - - Ministry of Labour and Indicator: Number of MSMEs and social
enterprises operating in lower-income communities Baseline:  Target: min 500
Social Protection of the - Population, State Committee for Family, Women and
Children Affairs, UNDP report; annually Indicator: Number of people
(disaggregated) with adequate knowledge and resources to set up MSMEs Baseline:
285 women Target: 425 women - - Ministry of Agriculture - - Ministry of Youth
and Sports - Indicator  Number of young women and men gaining the skills and
access to secure  decent job within 12 months of receiving training in the
regions Baseline:  Target: 202 employed (of which 112 are women) Data source;
frequency: UNDP report; annually Indicator (SDG ): Proportion of people of
working age not in education, employment or training Baseline: 23% (2017)
Target: 15% State Tourism Agency - Ministry of Labour and - Social Protection of
the - Population State Agency on Vocational Education State Agency for Public
Service and Social Innovations Output  Vulnerable groups empowered to benefit
from skills and resources to achieve financial resilience through establishing
MSMEs and social enterprises Indicator  Number of MSMEs and social enterprises
operating in lower-income communities Baseline:  Target: min 500 (150 women-led
businesses) Data source; frequency: Ministry of Labour and Social Protection of
the Population, UNDP report; annually State Statistical Committee European Union
USAID Qatar Fund for Development German Cooperation 10  DP/DCP/AZE/ Output
Green supply chain for MSMEs specializing in rural and ecotourism has been
established Indicator  Number of operators of regional and local MSMEs who
became members of the Regional Tourism Associations/Public-Private Partnerships
structure Baseline:  Target: 120 Data source; frequency: State Tourism Agency,
UNDP report; annually Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office of the United
Kingdom CSOs Private sector Output  Opportunities to acquire capabilities
including future-oriented skills valuable in the labour market as well as
support in finding employment after graduation have been created Indicator
Number of people enrolled in short-term flexible courses at vocational
educational centres and later employed in the regions Baseline:  Target: ,000
enrolled (of which ,000 employed) Data source; frequency: State Agency on
Vocational Education, UNDP report; annually Output  Nature-based solutions and
mechanisms developed and supported for improving rural community resilience
Indicator  Number of households (and number of women) directly involved in the
sustainable farming of native crops in rural areas Baseline:  (of which  woman-
led household) Target: 54 (of which 17 women-led households) Data source;
frequency: Ministry of Agriculture, UNDP report; annually NATIONAL PRIORITY OR
GOAL: STRONGER INSTITUTIONS FOR DELIVERY OF QUALITY PUBLIC AND SOCIAL SERVICES
UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: People furthest behind benefit from enhanced
national capacities and governance structures for social protection and quality
public and social services, in line with Azerbaijan’ international commitments
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Accelerate structural transformation
for sustainable development Indicator: Number of vocational education and
training centres modernized to render  quality education for those who seek to
acquire relevant skills including technical and vocational skills, for
employment, decent jobs and entrepreneurship Baseline:  Target:  State Agency on
Vocational Education; annually Output  Strengthen institutional capacity to
effectively develop and implement governance programmes, public service delivery
and services to bridge digital divide and to promote social cohesion Indicator
Number of innovative digital solutions introduced to enhance demand-driven
public services Baseline:  Target:  Data frequency: Ministry of Transport,
Communication and High Technologies, State Customs Committee, UNDP report;
annually Presidential Administration of Azerbaijan Regular: $250,000 Other:
$49,592,503 State Agency for Mandatory Health Insurance Ministry of Labour and
Social Protection of the Population Indicator: Number of civil society
organizations that receive capacity-building on engagement in source; UNDP
report; annually 11  DP/DCP/AZE/ public policymaking, confidence-building
Baseline:  Target: 25 local development and State Committee for Family, Women
and Children’ Affairs Output  Modernize vocational education centres to meet the
growing labour market and social needs Indicator  Number of established public-
private partnerships to modernize vocational and education centres as well as to
promote capacity-building measures for both vocational education and training
and private sector stakeholders Baseline:  Target: 10 Data source; frequency:
State Agency on Vocational Education, UNDP report; annually Ministry of Economy
National Coordination Council for Sustainable Development Ministry of Youth and
Sports Ministry of Education the national health-care Output  Strengthen
procurement system and improve the treatment of tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS
patients Indicator  Number of types of essential medicines procured Baseline:
Target: 22 types of medicines for tuberculosis; 25 types of medicines for people
living with HIV Data source; frequency: Ministry of Health, State Agency on
Mandatory Health Insurance; Administration of the Regional Medical Divisions
(TABIB), UNDP report; annually Ministry of Health Ministry of Transport,
Communication and High Technologies State Agency for Public Service and Social
Innovations State Statistical Committee State Agency on Vocational Education
Output  Civic participation, particularly women’ activism, through civil society
organizations strengthened to promote inclusion, accountability and innovative
approaches to respond to emerging public needs Indicator  Number of targeted
initiatives to promote inclusive dialogue and support for conflict-affected
communities Baseline:  Target:  Data source; frequency: UNDP report; annually
Azerbaijan National Agency for Mine Action State Customs Committee Scientific-
Research Institute of Lung Diseases Qatar Fund for Development Output
Strengthen community-based mechanisms to address gender-based violence and
domestic violence to build community resilience through women’ economic
empowerment, increased trust in State institutions, and broad attitudinal change
Indicator  Number of regions with the built capacity of community-based
mechanisms to provide essential services to provide essential services to
gender-based violence and domestic violence survivors Baseline:  Target: 10
regions Data source; frequency: UNDP report, annually German Cooperation
European Union CSOs Centre for Analysis of International Relations 12
DP/DCP/AZE/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT & ADDRESSING
CLIMATE CHANGE UNSCDF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: People including those left
behind benefit from climate strategies and environment protection policies that
ensure natural resources are sustainably managed, livelihoods are protected and
resilience strengthened RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Strengthen
resilience to shocks and crises Preparation of (SDG ): Indicator or
establishment the on communication operationalization integrated an of
policy/strategy/plan which increases their ability to adapt to the adverse
impacts of climate change, and foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas
emissions development in  manner that does not threaten food production
(including  national adaptation plan, nationally determined contribution,
national communication, biennial update report or other) Baseline:  Target:
Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources; annually Output  Climate change
measures integrated into national policies, strategies and planning frameworks
Indicator  Number of national and subnational plans and/or strategies that
integrate climate change principles developed Baseline:  Target:  Data source;
frequency: Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources, State Statistical
Committee, UNDP report; annually Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources
Regular: $250,000 Other: $18,104,967 Ministry of Agriculture Ministry of Energy
Ministry of Economy Ministry of Finance Output  Ensure conservation and
sustainable land management important for biodiversity and food security
Indicator  Number of hectares that is compatible with the integrated regional
land-use plans Baseline:  Target: min 300,000 ha Data source; frequency:
Ministry of Agriculture State Statistical Committee, UNDP report; annually of
Emergency Ministry Situations National Coordination Council for Sustainable
Development Indicator: Square metres covered by the energy management
information system Baseline:  Target: ,000,000 square metres Ministry of Energy;
annually Academy of Science State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) the
Indicator: Number of energy-saving solution applications that integrate the
Leaving No One Behind principle Baseline:  Target: 10 Output  Innovative
solutions developed to promote energy efficiency on national and subnational
levels Indicator  Number of municipalities applying enhanced energy management
information system and green social housing Baseline:  Target: 15 Data source;
frequency: Ministry of Energy, UNDP report; annually Ministry of Ecology and
Natural Resources, Ministry of Energy, UNDP report; annually State Commission on
Climate Change National Employer Confederation of Indicator (SDG ): Proportion
of communities vulnerable to land degradation that have been covered by
adaptation policies Baseline:  Target:  Confederation of Trade Unions of
Azerbaijan Ministry of Agriculture, annually Output  Integrated national
financing framework (INFF) coordinated the Government, development partners and
private sector to operationalize future SDG-aligned policies including Green
Strategy Indicator  Number of INFF-coordinated structures established to promote
green growth Baseline:  Target:  Data source; frequency: Ministry of Economy,
UNDP report; annually structure established with Global Environment Facility
Special Climate Change Fund Green Climate Fund Adaptation Fund Local executive
authorities United Nations Youth Advisory Council Baku City Executive Power 13
DP/DCP/AZE/ State Housing Construction Agency State Agency for Alternative and
Renewable Energy Sources European Union Qatar Fund for Development German
Cooperation Private Sector CSOs 14