% % -% -10% -15% -20% -25%                80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10  ENERGY
PROFILE Afghanistan COUNTRY INDICATORS AND SDGS GDP per capita  Real GDP growth
rate  Energy intensity                   ' -%                 /          100%
80% 60% 40% 20% %  Access to electricity (% population)  Access to clean cooking
(% population)  Renewable energy (% TFEC)  98% 35% % 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017  Public flows to renewables  Per capita
renewable capacity  Air particulate matter (PM2) 49       /  10 10         Urban
Average Rural WHO safe  90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10   )   /   (      2015 2016
2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 TOTAL ENERGY SUPPLY (TES) Total Energy Supply (TES) Non-renewable (TJ)
Renewable (TJ) Total (TJ) Renewable share (%) Growth in TES Non-renewable (%)
Renewable (%) Total (%) Primary energy trade Imports (TJ) Exports (TJ) Net trade
(TJ) Imports (% of supply) Exports (% of production) Energy self-sufficiency (%)
2015 136 360 32 112 168 472 19  +++2015 125 795 12 465 - 113 330 75 21 36 2020
159 638 36 777 196 415 19  + - + 2020 134 846  345 - 125 501 69 13 36 Total
energy supply in 2020 19% 23% 56% % Oil Gas Nuclear Coal + others Renewables
Renewable energy supply in 2020 15% % % 84% Hydro/marine Wind Solar Bioenergy
Geothermal )   (           30 25 20 15 10   RENEWABLE ENERGY CONSUMPTION (TFEC)
Renewable TFEC trend Renewable energy consumption in 2020 Electricity Commercial
heat Bioenergy Geothermal Solar direct 24 25 25 26 26 25 13% 2015 2016 2017 2018
2019 2020 Consumption by sector Industry (TJ) Transport (TJ) Households (TJ)
Other (TJ) 2015  029  15 166  285 2020 764  15 490  728 87% % 35%  Industry
Transport Households Other 62% Installed capacity trend Renewable capacity in
2022 ELECTRICITY CAPACITY Non-renewable Fossil fuels Renewable Hydro/marine
Hydro/marine Bioenergy Solar  Wind Bioenergy  Geothermal Total  )     Capacity
change (%)  Non-renewable   ( Renewable    Hydro/marine     Solar    Wind
Bioenergy Geothermal Total    Nuclear Wind Geothermal    277 492 459 33     769
+ 17 + 32 + 32 + 46    + 26 36 Other Non-RE 64 Solar 60 Renewable share     80%
100 100%    ) % 64% (  60%    + + 40% +         + 20%  % 2015 2016 2017 2018
2019 2020 2021 2022 Net capacity change in 2022 (MW) Non-renewable Hydro and
marine Solar Bioenergy  +   Wind Geothermal + 103   % % 93% Hydro/marine Solar
Wind Bioenergy Geothermal Net capacity change (GW) Fossil fuels Renewable
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Capacity utilisation in 2021 (%)        -  Fossil
fuels 11% Nuclear Hydro/Marine Solar Wind % Bioenergy Geothermal 27% 29%  20 40
60 80 100 ELECTRICITY GENERATION Generation in 2021 Non-renewable Renewable
Hydro and marine Solar Wind Bioenergy Geothermal Total GWh 258 927 849 78
184 % 22 78 72     100 Per capita electricity generation (kWh) Total Renewable
50 40 30 20 10  Electricity generation trend Fossil fuels Hydro/marine Bioenergy
Nuclear Wind Other Non-RE Solar Geothermal Renewable share )    (      -
100%      78% 80% ) % (               60% 40% 20% % 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 LATEST POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND LEGISLATION
Energy-related CO2 emissions by sector Elec & heat generation CO2 emissions in
Elec & heat Other Industrial Transport Other Buildings ENERGY AND EMISSIONS
10      25 20 15 10                 23% Coal + others % Gas Oil 77% 2016 2017
2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided emissions from renewable elec & heat CO2 emission
factor for elec & heat generation Emitted CO2 RE Avoided CO2 AFG Asia World  000
500  000 ENERGY AND EMISSIONS ,965  500    /   000     500  000 500  ,151 2016
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided emissions based
on fossil fuel mix used for power Calculated by dividing power sector emissions
by elec + heat gen +% 3Mt CO2 RENEWABLE RESOURCE POTENTIAL Distribution of solar
potential Distribution of wind potential World Afghanistan World Afghanistan
100% 80% 60% 40% 20% %                                         100% 80% 60% 40%
20% % <  -   -   -   -   -  > <260      >1060 Annual generation per unit of
installed PV capacity (MWh/kWp) Wind power density at 100m height (/m2) Biomass
potential: net primary production Indicators of renewable resource potential
200   tC/ha/yr  11   10 = Global average of - tC/ha/yr Solar PV: Solar resource
potential has been divided into seven classes, each representing  range of
annual PV output per unit of capacity (kWh/kWp/yr) The bar chart shows the
proportion of  country' land area in each of these classes and the global
distribution of land area across the classes (for comparison) Onshore wind:
Potential wind power density (/m2) is shown in the seven classes used by NREL,
measured at  height of 100m The bar chart shows the distribution of the country'
land area in each of these classes compared to the global distribution of wind
resources Areas in the third class or above are considered to be  good wind
resource Biomass: Net primary production (NPP) is the amount of carbon fixed by
plants and accumulated as biomass each year It is  basic measure of biomass
productivity The chart shows the average NPP in the country (tC/ha/yr), compared
to the global average NPP of - tonnes of carbon Sources: IRENA statistics, plus
data from the following sources: UN SDG Database (original sources: WHO; World
Bank; IEA; IRENA; and UNSD); UN World Population Prospects; UNSD Energy
Balances; UN COMTRADE; World Bank World Development Indicators; EDGAR; REN21
Global Status Report; IEA -IRENA Joint Policies and Measures Database; IRENA
Global Atlas; and World Bank Global Solar Atlas and Global Wind Atlas Additional
notes: Capacity per capita and public investments SDGs only apply to developing
areas Energy self-sufficiency has been defined as total primary energy
production divided by total primary energy supply Energy trade includes all
commodities in Chapter 27 of the Harmonised System (HS) Capacity utilisation is
calculated as annual generation divided by year-end capacity  ,760h/year Avoided
emissions from renewable power is calculated as renewable generation divided by
fossil fuel generation multiplied by reported emissions from the power sector
This assumes that, if renewable power did not exist, fossil fuels would be used
in its place to generate the same amount of power and using the same mix of
fossil fuels In countries and years where no fossil fuel generation occurs, an
average fossil fuel emission factor has been used to calculate the avoided
emissions These profiles have been produced to provide an overview of
developments in renewable energy in different countries and areas The IRENA
statistics team would welcome comments and feedback on its structure and
content, which can be sent to statistics@irenaorg Last updated on: 8th August,
2023 IRENA Headquarters Masdar City  Box 236, Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates