RENEWABLE ENERGY ROADMAP FOR AFGHANISTAN RER2032 This work is supported by the
Asian Development Bank (ADB), under the project “TA-8808 AFG: Renewable Energy
Development in Afghanistan” (September 2015- June 2017) REPORT PREPARED BY ITP
INDIA IT Power Consulting Private Limited 410, Ansal Tower 38, Nehru Place New
Delhi – 110019, INDIA Tel: +91 (11) / 92 Fax: +91 (11) 46001193 Web:  RER2032
FOREWORD Energy access and energy security are two key requisites for the socio-
economic growth of Afghan societies Renewable energy resource with their
enormous potential in Afghanistan, can successfully be harnessed to meet these
two requirements The development of renewable energy sector is thus  priority
area for the Government of Afghanistan and all its supporting partners An
important pillar for the RE sector development is the engagement of the private
sector and financing institutions The Asian Development Bank through  Technical
Assistance (TA) has addressed these challenges by way of developing the Roadmap
for Renewable Energy in Afghanistan which is  strategic document aiming at
meeting the objectives of the Afghanistan Renewable Energy Policy and the
National Energy Supply Programme The Roadmap is designed to increase the supply
of energy from domestic resources; improve energy supply to load centers,
provincial capitals, and rural population; and increase the capacity within the
Government to plan and implement renewable energy projects It includes
prioritization of RE technologies and projects, designing appropriate business
models for their implementation and identifying enablers for market development
One of the important outcomes of this TA is the design and development of
strategic and relevant projects which are trendsetters in their respective
domains and their implementation will help in opening markets for different
renewable energy technologies and applications in Afghanistan These projects are
- Daikundi mini-grid, Kabul roof-top solar, Hisar--Shahi industrial park solar
project and Farah PV-wind-diesel hybrid project  hope that this Roadmap will
provide  confidence to the private sector in preparing to invest its resources
in supporting the RE sector in Afghanistan Engineer Ali Ahmad Osmani Minister of
Energy and Water June 2017  RER2032 TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS   THE ROADMAP    INTRODUCTION  14      Rationale 14
Contextual analysis  14 Business environment and industrial landscape  16
Renewable and rural energy programs and key outcomes  17 Relevance of mapping
the road to RE development  19  TECHNOLOGIES AND MARKETS  21    From vision to
targets  21 Renewable energy outlook for Afghanistan  21 RE resource potential
21 Technologies and markets  22 Description of RE technologies and systems  23
Solar photovoltaics (PV)  23 Solar thermal  28 Hydro  34 Wind  35 Biomass  36
Geothermal  39 Other related technologies  39 Recommended RE technologies and
systems  43            DEVELOPMENT OF PROJECT PIPELINE USING DECISION TOOL  45
Developing the project pipeline  45 Decision process and levels 45 Decision Tool
47 Description of parameters  48 Application of Decision Tool for creating the
project pipeline  49 Prioritizing RE projects  52  BUSINESS MODELS FOR RE
PROJECTS IN AFGHANISTAN  57       From markets to business models  57 Solar
Power Parks (SPP)  59 Distribution Franchisee (DF)  61 Roof-top solar PV through
net metering  65 Renewable (Rural) Energy Service Company (RESCO)  67 Pay-as-
you-go or Micro-finance based standalone systems  70  ENABLERS AND ACTIONS FOR
MARKET DEVELOPMENT-  STAGE GATE APPROACH  75   Stage-Gate model for market
development – look back to move ahead  75 Market seeding & Stage- Gate  (SG1)
75 Market creation & Stage- Gate  (SG2)  76 Market expansion & Stage- Gate
(SG3)  76 Key enablers and actions  78 Policy readiness and programmatic support
78 Technological and technical support  79 Institutions and Institutional
framework  79       June 2017  RER2032          Access to finance  80 Local
manufacturing and enterprise development  81 Risk management  82 Enablers for
implementation of specific business models  84 Enablers for Solar Power Parks
84 Enablers for Distribution Franchisee  84 Enablers for Roof-top solar  85
Enablers for mini-grids and RESCO business model  85 Enablers for microfinance
supported stand-alone PV market  86  COSTING AND FINANCING OF ROADMAP  87
RE benchmark costs and global cost trends  87 RE costs in Afghanistan  90 Cost
of achieving Stage- Gate  targets  92 Financing of Roadmap  93 Framework for
financing  93 Funding instruments and mechanisms  94 Financing approaches for
different stages of development  96 Financing framework applied to the Utility
Scale market segment  98 Financing framework applied to the Mini-grid market
segment  99 Financing framework applied to the Stand-Alone market segment  101
Conclusion- from dependent to self-reliance  102  IMPLEMENTATION OF ROADMAP  104
Principles  104 Proponents  104 Projects  106 People  107  IMPACTS OF THE
ROADMAP  108 Employment generation and livelihood creation  108  Infrastructure
development and enterprise development  109  Local manufacturing and supply
chain creation  110  Co-ordinated planning and budgeting across various
government departments  110  Co-benefits of climate change mitigation and
resilience/ adaptation  110  Sustainable development through leap-frogging  110
Cross-border trade and energy security  110  Knowledge creation and sharing
through regional platforms  111   Potential to explore climate and sustainable
development funds  111 10 Membership of IRENA, ISA and other organisations  111
11 Advancement of SE4All and SDGs agenda  111 June 2017  RER2032 LIST OF FIGURES
AND TABLES Figure  - Framework for RE Roadmap  10 Figure  – Process of Roadmap
development  12 Figure  - Stage-Gate model for Afghanistan  13 Figure  -
Relevance of Roadmap  20 Figure  - Market share of PV technologies in 2015  23
Figure  - Grid connected Solar PV Systems  25 Figure  - Solar PV Mini-grid
System  25 Figure  -  floating PV system of 15 MW capacity installed in Okegawa,
Japan  26 Figure  -  MWp Canal-top PV system installed over Narmada canal in
Gujarat, India  27 Figure 10 -  MWp CPV project in Golmud, China  27 Figure 11 –
Parabolic Trough Collector (left) & Linear Fresnel Reflector system (right)  29
Figure 12 - Parabolic Dish System (left) & Central Receiver Tower (right)  30
Figure 13 - Market share of different CSP technologies  31 Figure 14 - Solar
Thermal-LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking at  Power Plant Staff kitchen at NTPC- Dadri,
India  33 Figure 15 - Solar–Biomass Hybrid Cold Storage-cum-Power Generation
system for Rural Applications installed at NISE, India  33 Figure 16 - 10 kW
micro hydro turbine at Bhira 35 Figure 17 - Improved cook-stove & Biogas system
setup  37 Figure 18 - Schematic of Air Source Heat Pump  40 Figure 19 - Maturity
of energy storage technologies  42 Figure 20 – Decision Tool for creating
project pipeline  47 Figure 21 - Process flows and roles / responsibilities of
various stakeholders for SPPs in Afghanistan  61 Figure 22 - Charanka Solar Park
62 Figure 23 - Process flows and roles/ responsibilities of various stakeholders
for DF model in Afghanistan  64 Figure 24 - Process flows and roles/
responsibilities of various actors for roof-top solar PV- net metering model in
Afghanistan  66 Figure 25 - Process flows and roles / responsibilities of
various stakeholders for RESCO model in Afghanistan  69 Figure 26 - Impact of
the SPEED program  70 Figure 27 - Process flows and roles / responsibilities of
various actors for standalone system (SS) model in Afghanistan  73 Figure 28 –
Indigo Duo solar home system  74 Figure 29 - Stage-Gate framework  75 Figure 30
Trends in Solar PV Utility scale auction prices  88 June 2017  RER2032 Figure 31
Market expansion and price declines in the Utility Scale Solar PV sector in
India  89 Figure 32 Projected trends in global LCOE of utility scale solar PV
89 Figure 33 Expected global LCOE ranges for RE in 2025 as against the 2014
values  90 Figure 34 PV price comparison  91 Figure 35 Cost elements for
utility-scale systems, Afghanistan and India  92 Figure 36 – RE Roadmap
Financing Approach  94 Figure 37 - Financial Mechanisms and Market Stage -
Utility Scale Market  99 Figure 38 - Financial Mechanisms and Market Stage -
Mini-grid Market  101 Figure 39 - Financial Mechanisms and Market Stage – Stand-
alone Market  102 Figure 40 Overall Financing Framework - All Stages  103 Figure
41 Financing the Roadmap - All Stages  103 Table  - Status of RE projects in
Afghanistan  15 Table  - Renewable energy policy landscape and other initiatives
in Afghanistan  16 Table  - Region-wise RE technical potential in Afghanistan
21 Table  - Conversion efficiencies of commercial PV modules  24 Table  - Top
Five Floating PV projects globally based on installed capacity  26 Table  - Top
ten CSP Installations in the world  31 Table  - RE technologies and their
applications in Afghanistan  43 Table  - Description of parameters  48 Table  -
Suitable provinces for utility-scale RE projects  50 Table 10 - Prioritizing the
selection of RETs for Afghanistan  53 Table 11 - Current unfunded hydro projects
55 Table 12 - Technology-wise contribution for meeting RENP targets  56 Table 13
- RE business model classification  58 Table 14 - Suggested targets for three
stages 77 Table 15 - Enablers and their applicability in various stages  83
Table 16 Total cost of stage gate   93 Table 17 – Overview of financing options
95 Table 18 - Setting up key institutions  105 Table 19 - High priority,
strategically important and trendsetting projects  106 June 2017  RER2032
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS AC ADB AFG AISA ANDS AREU ASERD ASHP ATC BMC BOOM
CAPEX CBO CCSAP CdTE COAM COP CPSU CPV CSH -Si CSO CSO CSP Alternating Current
Asian Development Bank Afghanistan Afghanistan Investment Support Agency
Afghanistan National Development Strategy Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union
Afghanistan Sustainable Energy for Rural Development Air Source Heat Pump
Aggregate Technical & Commercial Billing, Metering and Collection Build-Own-
Operate-Maintain Capital Expenditure Community Based Organization Climate Change
Strategy and Action Plan Cadmium-telluride Conservation Organisation for Afghan
Mountain Areas Coefficient of Performance Central Public-Sector Undertaking
Concentrating PV Concentrating Solar Heat crystalline Silicon Central Statistics
Office Civil Society Organizations Concentrating Solar Power CTCN DABS Climate
Technology Centre and Network Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat DC DF DNI DPR DRE
ECO ERDA ESCO ESIA ETC FAO FiT FPC Direct Current Distribution Franchisee Direct
Normal Irradiance Detailed Project Report Decentralised Renewable Energy
Economic Cooperation Organization Energy for Rural Development in Afghanistan
Energy Service Companies Environmental-Social Impacts Assessment Evacuated tube
collectors Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Feed-in-
Tariffs Flat-plate collectors June 2017  RER2032 FPV GCF GEF GHG GIZ GoI
Floating PV Green Climate Fund Global Environment Facility Greenhouse Gas
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit Government of India
GoIRA GW Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan Gigawatt HPP Hydro Power
Plant ICT IDCOL INDC IPP IREDA IRENA ISA kW kWh LFR MAIL MEW MFC MFI MHPs MJ
MNRE MRRD MW MWh NAMA NESP NGO NISE NRVA NSP NZAID & OPEX PCU PPA PPP
Information and Communications Technology Infrastructure Development Company
Limited Intended Nationally Determined Contributions Independent Power Producer
Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited International Renewable
Energy Agency International Solar Alliance Kilowatt Kilowatt-hour Linear Fresnel
Reflector Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock Ministry of Energy
and Water Microbial Fuel Cells Microfinance Institutions Micro Hydropower Plants
Multi-Junction Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (India) Ministry of Rural
Rehabilitation and Development Megawatt Megawatt-hour Nationally Appropriate
Mitigation Actions National Energy Supply Programme Non-Governmental
Organizations National Institute of Solar Energy National Risk and Vulnerability
Assessment National Solidary Program New Zealand Aid Programme Operation and
maintenance Operational Expenditure Power Control Unit Power Purchase Agreement
Public-Private-Partnership June 2017  RER2032 PSMP PTC & RAGA RE RENP RESCO RETs
SAARC SDGs Power Sector Master Plan Parabolic trough collector Research and
Development Rapid Assessment Gap Analysis Renewable Energy Afghanistan Renewable
Energy Policy Renewable Energy Service Company Renewable Energy Technologies
South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation Sustainable Development Goals
SE4ALL Sustainable Energy for All SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India Solar
Home Systems SHS SHWs SPEED SPPD SPPs SPV SREP SS & TES TPL TWh VAM Solar Hot
Water System Smart Power for Environmentally-sound Economic Development Solar
Power Park Developer Solar Power Park Solar Photovoltaics Scaling Up Renewable
Energy Program Standalone Systems Transmission and Distribution Thermal Energy
Storage Torrent Power Limited Terawatt-hours Vapor Absorption Machine June 2017
RER2032 THE ROADMAP The Renewable Energy Roadmap for Afghanistan is developed to
realize the vision and intent of the Renewable Energy Policy (RENP) for
Afghanistan that sets  target of deploying 4500 – 5000 MW of renewable energy
(RE) capacity by 2032 and envisions  transition from donor grant-funded RE
projects to  fully-private sector led industry by Objectives and scope The
objectives of the Roadmap are three-fold:  To increase the supply of energy by
domestic resources  To augment energy services to population and load centres
that are either not served or are poorly served  To enhance energy access to
remote rural population for their livelihood needs The scope of the Roadmap
includes an estimation of technology specific achievable targets based on RE
potential that has already been mapped and segregated region-wise Technologies
utilizing solar, wind, biomass, hydro and geothermal resources are considered
for this purpose The Roadmap comprises of prioritization of technologies and
projects, designing appropriate business models for their implementation and
identifying enablers for market development using  Stage-Gate analysis approach
The Roadmap also estimates costs for achieving the RE generation targets based
on the international/ regional costs and experiences from implementing RE
projects in Afghanistan Further, it proposes applicable sources of funds for
development of RE sector An essential component of the Roadmap is the
institutional arrangement for its implementation and enhancing the capacities of
various stakeholders through training on knowledge products particularly the
project selection and decision-making tool and system optimization models
Methodological framework and presentation of Roadmap The framework and approach
for RE Roadmap rests on four pillars- an assessment of RE resource potential and
its deployment through various technologies and projects; appropriate markets
and business models for using these technologies; enablers (both policy and
market related) that are required to implement the appropriate business models;
and estimation of system costs in Afghanistan for financing of the Roadmap
(Figure ) June 2017  RER2032 Technologies and systems Figure  - Framework for RE
Roadmap  The available RE resources in Afghanistan and their technical potential
include solar, wind, hydro (small, mini and micro), biomass (including waste-to-
energy) and geothermal These resources can be harnessed through  variety of
technologies and systems addressing electrical and thermal energy needs The
systems are categorized as utility scale, mini-grids and off-grid/ stand- alone
which also represent the RE market segments in Afghanistan Some of these
technologies and systems include MW scale solar PV (both flat plate and
concentrating); roof-top and stand-alone PV systems; concentrating solar thermal
for power generation and for low grade process heat applications; wind farms and
stand-alone wind-electric generators; small hydro power projects; mini-grids and
biogas digesters  The process for developing project pipeline follows  –level
decision process:  Level  assesses the possibility of utility scale RE projects
on the basis of good quality RE resource, availability of national grid for
power evacuation, road connectivity and overall security situation If not
satisfied, it points at options of mini-grids and off-grid stand-alone systems
Level  assesses the viability of setting up either RE/ hybrid mini-grids or
stand-alone systems on the basis of population concentration, nature of loads (
domestic, institutional, enterprises, anchor loads such as telecom towers), and
operational diesel mini-grids that can be hybridised or replaced with RE  Level
assesses the feasibility of specific projects on the basis of primary energy
surveys, topographical studies, environmental and social impact assessment (if
required), community engagement activities, stakeholder consultations etc June
2017 10 RER2032 The decision process evolves into  flow-chart and is presented
as the decision tool to develop RE project pipeline for Afghanistan Markets and
business models  Further, for each of the market segments ( utility scale, mini-
grids, off-grid/ stand-alone), the Roadmap recommends business models that
identify the roles of the government, DABS, private sector (already present and
likely to be present), MFIs, NGOs and communities Regional and international
best practices have been studied and customized for designing the businesses
models for Afghanistan Solar Power Parks, solar roof-top with net-metering,
RESCO (Renewable Energy Service Company) and microfinance aided sale of stand-
alone devices ( Pay-As-You-Go) are some of the business models selected for RE
projects in Afghanistan Ecosystem enablers  The Roadmap uses  Stage-Gate model
to discuss the enablers that are required for development of RE markets across
several technologies and business models Market development is expected to
commence with the introduction of policies and guidelines for specific
technologies and business models, such as the feed-in tariffs, and net-metering
policy Implementation of model projects across technologies as public – private
– partnership (PPP) projects, will further develop this sector This initial
stage is termed as Market Seeding  With favourable policies and an enabling
business environment, commercial-scale projects may be implemented, moving the
market from seeding to Market Creation stage The first few commercial projects,
led by the private sector, will comprise low-risk options where risks and gains
are shared across the government, private sector and beneficiary communities The
subsequent stage is that of Market Transformation where technologies and markets
are mainstreamed within the overall energy sector Costing and financing  The
costs for applicable RE technologies and projects in Afghanistan have been
collected through primary research by directly consulting with project
developers, mainly members of Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union (AREU) and  few
NGOs and donors These costs are compared with regional and international costs
to understand and then benchmark RE costs for Afghanistan  The above exercise
helps in estimating the financing requirements for the Roadmap and suggesting
enablers that can help in reducing the costs in future An analysis of various
available mechanisms- globally, regionally and locally- is undertaken to
recommend possible ways to finance the Roadmap Implementation arrangement  It is
important to recognize the hierarchy of this document (the Roadmap) within the
renewable energy development planning process The RENP sets the vision and goals
for RE development in Afghanistan and the Roadmap develops  strategy for
achieving these goals The next logical step is to implement the strategy laid
out in the Roadmap by carrying out activities and initiatives and monitoring
their progress with the help of  tracking system  brief discussion on the
implementation arrangement June 2017 11 RER2032 with focus on institutional
structure, skill enhancements and training is also included in this document
Figure  elaborates the process of Roadmap development Presentation of Roadmap
Figure  – Process of Roadmap development The Roadmap is presented in eight
chapters It maps the RE resource potential across different regions; selects
appropriate and viable RE technologies; identifies applications and categorises
markets for selected RE technologies; develops project pipeline for identified
markets and designs suitable business models for each market category This
analysis is based on the Decision Tool, specifically developed for this purpose
and applied across Afghanistan Subsequently, the Roadmap focuses on enablers and
actions required for achieving the targets and milestones using the Stage-Gate
model customised for market categories and business models The enablers are
analysed across technical, financial, regulatory and institutional landscape, as
applicable to Afghanistan Further, the analysis also includes estimation of
costs for various technologies in Afghanistan The outcome of this analysis are
the financial requirements and financing modalities; regulatory & institutional
framework for setting up business models; assessment and planning for
institutional capacities and evaluation of overall impacts of implementing the
Roadmap Figure  presents the Roadmap, summarising its outputs, outcomes and
ecosystem elements required to achieve the outcomes June 2017 12 RER2032 Legend:
Grant: Grants from Government and Partners VGF: Viability Gap Funding LCD: Low
Cost Debt MkD: Market Debt PE: Promoter Equity / Community Contributions Figure
- Stage-Gate model for Afghanistan June 2017 13 RER2032  INTRODUCTION  Rationale
Renewable energy sector development is one of the priority areas for the
Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) for immediate purpose of
providing access to modern energy to remote and rural population and for medium
to long term purpose of providing energy security to the country Afghanistan is
rich in energy resources, both fossil fuel based and renewables However, it
still depends heavily on imported electricity and fuels and has one of the
lowest per capita consumption of electricity in the world Lack of domestic
generation remains the key challenge for energy security and energy access in
Afghanistan Its 30% electrification rate ranks it in the lowest % in per capita
energy consumption globally Out of the total 519 MW installed capacity, 51% is
thermal (diesel and furnace oil) with  generation cost of $ per kWh, which is
four times that of imported electricity The remaining 49% (254 MW) is from
hydropower, which is seasonal and has  capacity factor of less than 40% Over 80%
of total electricity supply is imported1 The Roadmap for renewable energy for
Afghanistan identifies pathways for reaching about ,000 MW of renewable energy
based generation capacity by 2032, in line with the Afghanistan Renewable Energy
Policy targets and vision It provides an inclusive, medium to long-term vision
of the renewable energy sector, taking into cognizance inter-dependencies
between energy, environment and overall socio-economic development It also
provides  ‘portfolio approach’, integrating technologies and market structures
that are based on viable business models and finance options  Contextual
analysis The foundation of the RE development is based on the Afghanistan
National Development Strategy (ANDS, 2008) which provides the overall vision and
goals of the energy sector; Power Sector Master Plan, (PSMP, 2013) that provides
the overall status and priorities of power sector network planning and
expansion, including identification of regions where network expansion in not
economically viable; and the National Energy Supply Program, (NESP, 2013) The
NESP has set the short-term (by 2015) and long-term (up to 2022) targets for
electricity supply, energy efficiency and renewable energy sector, energy
institutions and private sector participation, as well as capacity and
regulatory framework development Recently approved Renewable Energy Policy
(RENP, 2015), as an overarching policy instrument, has set ambitious targets for
RE development in the country The Afghanistan Integrated Energy Policy is
proposing to put the RE sector development as one of its strategic intents The
above is broadly in sync with the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) target for
energy access for all by 2030, which is developed as  country level plan of
action to ensure access to energy for all Development of renewable energy is
also one of the priority areas for low emission development for Afghanistan
(NAMA, 2015) particularly in the context of energy access to rural communities
to think and act beyond lighting energy  Inter-Ministerial Commission for Energy
(ICE) Report (2016)- Ministry of Economy, Afghanistan 14 June 2017 RER2032 The
Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan for Afghanistan (CCSAP, 2015) targets
100 percent electricity coverage by 2100 as mandated within the National
Priority Programs It further targets at least 40 percent share of renewable
energy in the Afghanistan national grid by 2100, with an increased presence of
decentralised renewable energy based systems to cater to off-grid areas
Subsequently, the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) have
identified access to renewable energy for 25% of rural population as the goal
Many donors and international organisations are supporting the development of
renewable energy sector in Afghanistan The Asian Development Bank, GIZ, DFID,
Islamic Development Bank are among  few According to the Ministry of Energy and
Water (MEW), about 5100 RE Projects have been jointly implemented/ under
implementation by MEW/MRRD/DABS and other developers, the installed capacity of
the mentioned projects is 55 MW (Table ) MEW has recently invited private sector
to invest in 30 RE projects totalling upto 100 MW and comprising biogas, solar,
wind, hydro and hybrid technology options3 Table  - Status of RE projects in
Afghanistan Projects Total No of Renewable Energy Projects Completed Total No of
Renewable Energy Projects Planned Total No of Renewable Energy Projects Under
Construction Total ,602 99 493 Total Capacity of Renewable Energy Projects (no)
,911 Total Capacity of Renewable Energy Projects Completed and (kW) 55,011 RE
type Biomass MHP Solar Wind Total Total number Capacity (kW) 44 ,678 ,450 22
,194  52,913 ,868 230 55,011   Last visited in May 2017  Consultants estimate
the RE projects installed capacity to be around 100 MW 15 June 2017 RER2032
Business environment and industrial landscape The renewable energy industry in
Afghanistan is in infancy The AREU is  newly formed body with about 45 members
and consist of equipment manufacturers and system integrators The status of
financial sector remains  constraint for private sector development and limited
access to credit is limiting the growth and involvement of local RE industry in
rural and renewable energy sector The business environment is characterised by
grant based delivery models Private sector engagement in the RE market is still
weak and unsystematic The tariff regime is largely dominated by Da Afghanistan
Breshna Sherkat (DABS), the national utility DABS operates on  cost-plus pricing
basis As  result, tariff rates can be high, and they often are The weighted
average tariff in 2014 was Afs  (11 $) per kWh Commercial customers of DABS
almost everywhere pay around -10 Afs (15 $) per kWh Further, DABS finances are
affected by foreign exchange movements; since imported power is purchased in USD
while local revenues are in AFN Increasing the proportion of supply from
domestic sources is one lever to manage this risk Table  - Renewable energy
policy landscape and other initiatives in Afghanistan Name of the Document Dated
and Version Key highlights Power Sector Master Plan 2013, Final Afghanistan
Renewable Energy Policy 2015, Approved Rapid Assessment Gap Analysis 2015, Draft
Strategy and Guidelines for Implementation of RENP 2015, Draft Power Services
Regulation Law 2015, Approved Feed-in-Tariff Policy 2015, Final Dari Version
Precursor to all policies: provided  national perspective on medium to long term
energy planning for Afghanistan Comprehensive and overarching policy document
that promises to give  stimulus to the RE sector in the country Targets
sustainable energy access for all by 2030, syncs well with PSMP’ 2032 target
profile, also demands higher intensity of renewable energy and energy efficiency
projects Supports and supplements RENP in many directions, including but not
limited to financial planning De-licenses and deregulates small scale power
production through renewables of upto 100 kW generation plants Provides critical
comfort levels to the private sector in terms of revenue assurances Major
enabling factor in fast-tracking projects in the RET sector June 2017 16 RER2032
Investment Policy 2015, Final Dari Version EOI for 100 MW 2016, Final Version
Public Private Partnership Law Approved, 2016 Approved, 2016 Afghanistan energy
sector -year self- sufficiency plan Power Purchase agreement for Kandahar 10 MW
solar project Significant in terms of facilitating and attracting investment in
the Afghan economy – strong links for private participation in the RET sector
First batch of projects launched, considered as  curtain raiser to increased
activity in the RET sector Provides the policy guidelines for setting up public-
private partnerships, with the objectives of regulating PPPs keeping in mind
transparency, competition and cost- effectiveness; key provisions include
formation of  Central Public Private Partnership Authority (CPPPA) The plan
describes recommended outcomes, outputs, and required tasks for the energy
sector Signed, 2016 Up-front capital subsidy, PPA tariff decided through reverse
auction  Renewable and rural energy programs and key outcomes The renewable
energy landscape in Afghanistan is dominated by hydropower and solar PV
technologies National Solidarity Program (NSP)/ NABDP and Energy for Rural
Development in Afghanistan (ERDA) within NABDP, have been the flagship programs
of MRRD for rural energization In addition to MRRD, DABS also carries out grid
extensions to rural areas under the NESP of MEW Apart from the MRRD and MEW
programmes, there are efforts by FAO, NZAID and GiZ at  smaller scale which are
also supporting village electrification There are also small- scale efforts by
NGOs such as COAM and Geres targeting thermal energy issues However, the thermal
energy needs are not being addressed in any significant scale by existing
programmes and there has not been much penetration of energy efficient devices
Dependence on fuel wood and other non-renewable biomass is very high and indoor
air pollution and resultant lower respiratory illnesses is the biggest cause of
pre-mature deaths in Afghanistan Along with hydropower, solar home systems have
also proliferated across the country The main reasons behind solar PV’
popularity are its affordability and portability, due to its highly scalable and
modular structure However, as on date the renewable energy landscape is
dominated by smaller systems, catering mostly to lighting and household level
demand Some experience has been generated recently on the use of solar PV pumps
both for drinking water and for irrigation by the MRRD’ National Rural Water
Supply, Sanitation and Irrigation 17 June 2017 RER2032 Programme (Ru-WatSIP),
and also on large scale (between 500 kWp to  MWp) of solar PV based mini-grids
The rural electrification efforts supported by the international community has
led to key learning including4: • There is  need to go beyond household
electrification for lighting by addressing household thermal energy needs and
engaging anchor customers for productive use in the commercial sector and public
service opportunities in rural government institutions Monthly expenditure on
solid fuels during winter months is considered to be 10 times higher than the
spend on kerosene for lighting5 • There is  need for integrated planning for
energy projects along with infrastructure projects that will get direct benefits
from reliable energy and vice-versa For instance, planning for agriculture based
livelihoods projects ( cold-storages) should include  component of energy
provision and likewise planning for energy projects ( MHP) should identify and
support enterprises and public institutions that will use the electricity thus
generated • The mini-grid systems are infrastructure projects and hence require
standard approaches of engineering services, project planning and operational
management All the projects should be planned and implemented in  coherent
manner using standard guidelines and practices In this regard, internationally
accepted forms of contract, contract management and engineering supervision
should be used • New technologies and technology innovation must be tracked by
the planning and engineering teams and integrated within the overall framework
of electricity service provision Further, system planning and optimisation tools
for maximising the benefits of hybrid configurations for generation from
renewable energy and distributed generation topologies must be used •  common
and accepted understanding of the roles and responsibilities in the ownership,
operation and management, maintenance, payment for services, regulation, funding
and financing, etc are critical and should be achieved • Financing model of
almost all the cost of the installation and maintenance with donor funding is
not sustainable, collecting fee-for-services from the consumers is important for
& of the plant It will be important to create rural energy service delivery
models that engage the private sector and financial institutions and leverage
donor and government sources to create scalable and replicable models • • There
is  need to include gender perspective in the planning and implementation of
rural energy projects and gender mainstreaming should be an integral component
of any policy and planning framework  compilation by consultants on the basis of
several stakeholder consultations, including GiZ IDEA team  COAM, 2012, Shan
Foladi village survey 18 June 2017 RER2032  Relevance of mapping the road to RE
development Mapping the road to RE development (The Roadmap), is important not
only for meeting the internal objectives of energy access and energy security,
but also to keep Afghanistan aligned with international initiatives on climate
change adaptation and mitigation; sustainable development goals, and regional
energy trade At the macro level, the Roadmap shall contribute to achievement of
sustainable development goals (SDGs), especially towards reduction of poverty
(SDG ), affordable and clean energy (SDG ) and industry, innovation and
infrastructure (SDG ) It also addresses concerns in good health and wellbeing
(SDG ) and quality education (SDG ) through provision of energy security for
better service delivery in social sectors Consistency with climate action (SDG
13) is maintained by linking the Roadmap’ broad vision and outputs with key
national climate policy documents such as the Afghanistan CCSAP and INDC
Following figure highlights the relevance of the Roadmap June 2017 19 RER2032
Prospects • Only 30% energy access in rural areas and 65% in urban • Estimates
suggest 222 GW of solar, 66 GW of wind and 23GW of hydro potential • Role of RE
recognized for energy access, security, SDGs and climate energy resilient
development Situation • Forward looking and conducive policy regime • RED (MEW),
dedicated department to develop RE sector • Donors support to further the sector
• Private sector taking interest Roadmap Requirements • Efficient and effective
regulatory and policy landscape to attract private sector • Regulatory and
policy landscape to be efficient and effective for private sector to participate
in RE development for • Strong pipeline economically sustainable and financially
viable projects • Local industry to be strengthened to implementation of RE the
support projects • Synergistic approach by donors and other developmental
partners • Institutions absorptive to the capacity building and strengthening
initiatives Obstacles • Internal security, particularly for international
companies and experts • Safety and connectivity related issues for travels to
remote areas • Availability of trained personnel • Lack of funds and financing
Figure  - Relevance of Roadmap June 2017 20 RER2032  TECHNOLOGIES AND MARKETS
From vision to targets The vision of this Roadmap is to guide policy makers, the
private sector, developers and other key stakeholders in shaping the renewable
energy sector in Afghanistan As discussed, the target for 2032 is to achieve
around ,000 MW of RE capacity to be realised as the RE market traverses three
stages- Seeding, Creation and Transformation The process for achieving these
targets starts with an assessment of applicable and appropriate RE technologies
for Afghanistan on the basis of ) RE resource potential, ) techno-commercial
status at global level and ) appropriate system designs and configuration for
various applications and markets  Renewable energy outlook for Afghanistan
Afghanistan’ renewable energy potential is estimated to be over 300,000 MW6,
consisting of solar (222,849 MW), wind (66,726 MW), hydro (23,310 MW) and
biomass (,000 MW) Geothermal needs more detailed assessments to ascertain
realizable potential Table  provides  summary of the total potential for RE
resources in different provinces in Afghanistan RE technical resource maps for
Afghanistan are provided in Annexure  Table  - Region-wise RE technical
potential in Afghanistan RE resource technical potential  No Province/ Capital
Solar (MW) Wind (MW) Hydro (MW) (River basin) Biomass- Electrical Energy
Production potential (MWhr/ year) MSW Animal Manure Crop Residue          10 11
12 13 14 Kabul (Kabul) Kapisa (Mahmud--Raqi) Parwan (Charikar) 432 183 548
Wardak (Meydan Shahr) ,043 Lowgar (Pol- Alam) Ghazni (Ghazni) Paktia (Gardez)
Khost (Khost) Nangarhar (Jalalabad) Konar (Asadabad) Laghman (Mehtar Lam)
Nuristan (Nuristan) Badakhshan (Faizabad) Bamian (Bamian) 451 ,802 ,042 364 ,687
447 842 888 ,736 ,863 41 81 127 18 - 48 99 146 81 255 - 331 24 ,941 (Kabul)
126,884 69,089 465,372 13,848 171,438 442,103 20,287 160,281 565,369 18,231
84,917 529,715 11,984 72,713 842,423 37,542 227,860 ,343,574 13,291 144,569
475,755 17,563 367,769 376,509 46,124 626,687 ,749,774 13,773 313,913 449,026
13,622 269,201 654,148 ,526 156,503 93,491 29,029 452,658 598,604 13,667 143,149
286,562  Source: Renewable Energy Department, Ministry of Energy and Water ( 21
June 2017 RER2032 RE resource technical potential  No Province/ Capital Solar
(MW) Wind (MW) Takhar (Taloqan) Baghlan (Pol- Khomri) Kunduz (Kunduz) Samangan
(Aybak) Balkh (Mazar--Shariff) Jowzjan (Sheberghan) Sar- Pol (Sar- Pol) Faryab
(Maymana) Badghis (Qaleh-ye Now) Herat (Herat) Farah (Farah) ,543 ,536 ,279 ,912
,900 ,230 ,131 ,679 ,328 ,199 208  266 786 43 182 252 191 28,539 18,473 27,137
30,677 202 (Harirod- Murghab) Ghowr (Chaghcharan) Helmand (Lashkar Gah) 10,539
33,282 84 936 Hydro (MW) (River basin) 20,137 (Panj- Amu) 760 (Northern)
Biomass- Electrical Energy Production potential (MWhr/ year) MSW Animal Manure
Crop Residue 29,990 269,732 ,524,344 27,742 296,943 ,442,236 30,636 388,437
,863,114 11,846 53,134 416,541 39,993 196,478 ,731,926 16,449 75,809 906,725
17,086 124,985 616,743 30,450 182,703 ,350,830 15,157 148,016 577,837 28,250
382,275 ,013,776 15,495 162,717 375,425 21,109 232,387 406,450 57,174 424,513
,732,510 Nimruz (Zaranj) 22,618 10,725 ,030 47,449 299,114 Kandahar (Kandahar)
31,079 Zabol (Qalat) Uruzgan (Tarin Kowt) Daikondi (Nili) Panjshir (Bazarak)
Paktika (Sharan) ,464 ,530 ,911 510 374 117 816 495 - - 18 270 (Helmand) -
36,973 406,866 ,111,055 ,292 70,405 261,469 10,712 159,410 584,592 14,085
209,599 194,405 16,863 237,601 616,076 ,693 37,076 185,815 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 Total 222,849 66,726 23,310 819,396
,367,282 27,083,408 Appropriate technologies for harnessing the above RE
resources are briefly discussed below The RE resource potential available in
Afghanistan can be harnessed using various technologies, some of them are
already available and used in Afghanistan, while some others are yet to be
introduced These RE technologies can be configured into different types of
systems suitable for specific applications and markets The RENP has identified
three main categories of applications and markets that require the use of RE
technologies and systems These are: • Utility scale (MW and above) essentially
grid-connected to increase the domestic supply into the energy generation mix of
the country • Mini-grids for serving the load centers and population clusters
for enhancing the livelihoods • Stand-alone for servicing the basic and
productive needs to off-grid communities 22 June 2017 RER2032  Description of RE
technologies and systems Afghanistan has  good solar resource that can be
harnessed for electricity generation and for thermal applications The country
enjoys particularly long sunny days with high irradiation, ranging from  -
kWh/m²/day Technologies that convert solar energy into electric energy and
usable heat are classified into two types: Solar Photovoltaic (PV) and Solar
Thermal technologies respectively Solar PV is one of the most advanced and
universally applicable RE technologies that also boasts of  fastest growth curve
in the recent years Global installed capacity for Solar PV stands at 303 GWp, of
which, the largest capacity exists in China, followed by Japan and Germany7
Basis description of solar PV technology Solar cells, the building block of PV
system, convert sunlight directly into DC electricity These are categorized
based on materials they are made of, such as wafer-based crystalline silicon
(-Si) (either mono-crystalline or multi-crystalline silicon) and thin-films
using amorphous Si (-Si/ -Si), cadmium-telluride (CdTe) and copper-indium-
gallium-selenide (CIGS) Figure  gives the current market share of PV
technologies as per year Total installed capacity: 227 GWp Multi -Si 69% Thin
Film % Mono -Si 24% -Si % CI() % Cd-Te % Figure  - Market share of PV
technologies in 2015 Solar cells are assembled and electrically interconnected
to form solar PV modules In  - Si PV module, slices (wafers) of solar-grade
(high purity) silicon are made into cells that are assembled into modules and
electrically connected Thin film PV modules consist of thin layers of
semiconductor material deposited onto inexpensive, large-size substrates such as
glass, polymer or metal Several solar PV modules are connected in series and/ or
in parallel to increase voltage and/or current, respectively An inverter is
needed to convert direct current (DC) into alternating current (AC) for grid
integration and use with most electrical appliances Solar PV Modules and balance
of system ( inverter, mounting structures,  REN21 Renewables 2017 Global Status
Report  Photovoltaics Report November 2016, Fraunhofer ISE June 2017 23 RER2032
power control unit (PCU), cabling and batteries, if any) form  modular PV system
with  capacity ranging from picowatts to gigawatts System configurations Solar
PV systems are used to generate electricity for both grid-connected and off
-grid applications, such as residential and commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, remote and rural areas and large power plants Based on the system
configurations, grid connectivity and system portability, solar PV systems are
generally categorized mainly into  types: • Utility scale • Roof-top (which can
be both grid connected and stand-alone) • Mini-grids • Stand-alone The choice of
solar PV technology for installation is often based on  trade-off between
investment cost, module efficiency and electricity tariff Thin film solar PV
technology is generally cheaper, though significantly less efficient and
requires substantially more surface area for the same power output than -Si-
based systems Conversion efficiencies of commercially available PV modules are
given in Table 49: Table  - Conversion efficiencies of commercial PV modules PV
Module Technology Crystalline silicon (-Si) Thin Film (TF) Mono -Si Multi -Si
-Si Cd-Te CI() Efficiency Range % % -% -11% % Utility scale PV systems  Utility
scale solar PV systems are typically in MW range and are generally ground-
mounted These are deployed either as Independent Power Projects (IPPs) or in
Solar Power Parks (SPPs) Electricity generated from these projects is evacuated
through the national (or private, as the case may be) transmission network II
Roof-top solar PV systems Roof-top solar PV is  modular, grid-connected or
standalone system that has electricity generating solar panels mounted on the
roof of any building By virtue of being mounted on  roof, these systems are
small compared to ground mounted solar PV stations that could be in the MW range
Typically, solar PV roof-top systems range from  kW and upto 100 kW in terms of
installed capacity Figure  below shows  roof-top mounted and  ground mounted
solar PV system respectively  IEA Photo Voltaic Solar Technology Roadmap Paris:
IEA Publications, 24 June 2017 RER2032 Roof-top Solar PV, Madhya Pradesh, India
Charanka Solar Park in Gujarat, India Figure  - Grid connected Solar PV Systems
III Solar PV mini-grids Solar PV mini-grids have their own generation source
(solar) and  local distribution grid These are an ideal alternative to grid
electricity in areas (such as remote villages) that do not have grid
connectivity Mini-grids also provide more reliable electricity, as any power
cuts or interruptions to electricity supply can be quickly identified and
corrected Additionally, having the site of power generation closer to the load
also reduces transmission and distribution (&) losses associated with
centralised generation In most cases, solar PV mini-grids are either hybridized
with other RE sources ( wind) or with diesel and are backed up with batteries to
increase the reliability and supply of electricity, particularly in case where
electricity is required for after sun-shine hours Typical sizes of mini-grids
are from 10 kW to  MW Figure  shows  typical solar mini-grid system Figure  -
Solar PV Mini-grid System June 2017 25 RER2032 IV Stand-alone solar PV systems
Stand-alone solar PV systems have many different applications across different
sectors such as lighting, pumping and battery charging The most popular stand-
alone solar PV systems are:  Solar lanterns  Solar home systems (SHS)  Solar
streetlights  Solar battery charging systems  Solar power packs (defence,
telecommunication, etc)  Solar pumps In addition to the above proven system
configurations, there are some new and emerging concepts which are worth
mentioning here These are the floating PV installations on static water bodies
(such as lakes and reservoirs), canal-top PV systems, and concentrating PV
Floating solar systems Floating PV systems are installed over the surface of
stationary water bodies such as reservoirs, lakes and ponds to generate
electricity It allows efficient use of the water body by reducing evaporation of
water and improved yield from solar PV panels due to lowered ambient
temperatures These installations are particularly useful when availability of
land is  constraint However, there are some challenges which need to be overcome
before this concept can become  techno-commercial viable application These are
related to design and materials of float, including the anchoring, impact on
aquatic flora and fauna and social impacts on fishermen, local communities etc
Figure  -  floating PV system of 15 MW capacity installed in Okegawa, Japan
Table  - Top Five Floating PV projects globally based on installed capacity Rank
Size (kW) Name of reservoir (lake) / Name of Plant Country City/Province
Operating from      20,000 Coal mining subsidence area of Huainan City ,500
Kawashima Taiyou to shizen no megumi Solarpark China Anhui Province April, 2016
Japan Saitama October, 2015 ,338 Queen Elizabeth II reservoir UK London March,
2016 ,000 Otae Province ,000 Jipyeong Province South Korea South Korea Sangju
City Gyeongsang Bukdo Sangju City Gyeongsang Bukdo October, 2015 October, 2015
(Source: Saori Minamino (Solarplaza) & Camille Marliere (Ciel & Terre), Floating
Solar Plants - Niche Rising to the Surface?) June 2017 26 RER2032 VI Canal-top
PV systems Canal-top PV systems are installed across the canals and water
channels It allows efficient use of the canals by reducing evaporation of water
The capacity of canal-top PV systems may vary from small-scale (kW-sized) to
larger-scale (MW- sized) installations Although similar in capacity to ground
mounted systems, this system varies significantly because of the need of
longer, wider and stronger mounting structure to support its installation over
the width of the canal Figure  -  MWp Canal-top PV system installed over Narmada
canal in Gujarat, India VII Concentrating photovoltaic (CPV) systems CPV uses
lenses and curved mirrors to focus sunlight onto small, but highly efficient,
multi- junction (MJ) solar cells In addition, CPV systems often use solar
trackers and sometimes  cooling system to further increase their efficiency
Ongoing research and development (&) is rapidly improving their competitiveness
in the utility-scale segment and in areas of high insolation Figure 10 -  MWp
CPV project in Golmud, China Global status and outlook Global Solar PV
installations at the end of 2016 stand at 303 GWp, contributed both by
industrialized and developing countries10 The size and number of large-scale
power plants continue to grow globally During early 2016, at least 120 (70 in
the previous year) solar PV plants of sizes 50 MW and larger were operating in
23 countries Increase in market for solar PV is due to its increasing
competitiveness, new government programmes, rising demand for 10 Renewables 2017
Global Status Report, REN21  report/ June 2017 27 RER2032 electricity and
increased awareness of solar PV’ potential as countries seek to reduce pollution
and CO2 emissions Until 2014, developed countries (namely Germany, Italy and
Japan) dominated investment in solar In 2015, developing countries such as
China, India, Chile, South Africa and  few others increased the level of
deployment of both utility and small-scale investment in solar PV Solar power
(both solar PV and thermal) investment in 2016 in developed countries was USD
billion, compared to USD billion in developing and emerging economies10 Status
and relevance in Afghanistan As per IRENA,  cumulative capacity of 1MW11 has
been installed in Afghanistan by The largest one is 1MW solar PV off grid
system, which is installed in Bamyan province, supported by New Zealand
Government Some other important installations are:  250KW solar PV off- gird
system installed near the Kabul airport by the Japan Embassy,  100kW solar PV
off- grid system installed in Gardiz province, many roof-top solar PV systems
through NSP in remote areas & villages and  number of standalone systems
Majority of these are installed through donor driven programmes Solar PV systems
have  significant role to play in overall development of electricity sector in
Afghanistan on account of the following: • Majority of the population in remote
areas doesn’ have access to electricity and off- grid solar PV systems are
viable option where population is dispersed and scattered over  wide area •
Demand for electricity for irrigation is currently met through DG systems, which
can be replaced by solar water pumping systems • Utility scale solar PV projects
can contribute to generation at the national level • Solar PV systems are useful
and applicable for nomads12 (Kuchi people) Solar thermal systems convert solar
radiation into heat These systems are used to raise the temperature of  heat
transfer fluid which can be air, water or  specially designed fluid The heated
fluid can then be used directly for hot water needs or space heating/cooling
needs, or  heat exchanger can be used to transfer the thermal energy to the
final application The heat generated can also be stored in  storage tank for use
in the hours when the sun is not available Solar thermal systems find various
applications such as electricity generation, water heating, space heating/
cooling, industrial process heating, electricity generation etc Solar thermal
technologies can be divided into two broad categories: non-concentrating and
concentrating Non-concentrating solar thermal technologies Solar thermal
technologies in which sunlight is directly absorbed and is not concentrated, are
called non-concentrating solar thermal technologies They work on the principle
of exposing  dark surface to solar radiation so that the radiation is absorbed
Non- concentrating collectors absorb both direct and diffuse radiation The
absorbed radiation is 11  ; viewed on 27 12 Nomads are  community of people who
live in different locations, moving from one place to another 28 June 2017
RER2032 then transferred to  fluid, like air or water There are two main types
of non-concentrating solar thermal collectors: flat-plate collectors and
evacuated tube collectors  Flat-plate collectors (FPC) FPC system consists of
tubes carrying  fluid running through an insulated, weather-proof box with  dark
absorber material and thermal insulation material on the backside that also
prevents heat loss FPC systems are typically used for heating swimming pools and
other low-temperature applications II Evacuated tube collectors(ETC) ETC system
use parallel rows of glass tubes, each of which contains either  heat pipe or
another type of absorber, surrounded by  vacuum This greatly reduces heat loss,
particularly in cold climates ETC systems are typically used in solar water
heating systems (SWHs) Concentrating solar thermal technologies Concentrating
solar thermal technologies use mirrors to concentrate sunlight and produce heat
and steam to generate electricity via  conventional thermodynamic cycle Unlike
solar PV, concentrating solar thermal uses only the Direct Normal Irradiance
(DNI) and provides heat and power only in regions with high DNI Concentrating
solar thermal systems can be equipped with  heat storage system to use heat
energy even under cloudy skies or after sunset Concentrating solar thermal
systems used to generate electricity as an outcome are known as Concentrating
Solar Power (CSP) systems and those used to generate heat as an outcome are
known as Concentrating Solar Heat (CSH) systems There are four main
concentrating solar thermal system configurations, that are commercially
available:  Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR) system Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR)
systems use  series of ground-based, flat or slightly curved mirrors placed at
different angles to concentrate the sunlight onto  fixed receiver located
several meters above the mirror field Figure 11 – Parabolic Trough Collector
(left) & Linear Fresnel Reflector system (right) 13 13  June 2017 29 RER2032 II
Parabolic trough collector (PTC) Parabolic trough systems consist of parabolic
mirrors that concentrate the sun’ rays on heat receivers ( steel tubes) placed
on the focal line Receivers have  special coating to maximize energy absorption
and minimize infrared re-irradiation and work in an evacuated glass envelope to
avoid convection heat losses The solar heat is removed by  heat transfer fluid (
synthetic oil, molten salt) flowing in the receiver tube and transferred to
steam generator to produce the super-heated steam that runs the turbine Mirrors
and receivers ( the solar collectors) track the sun’ path along  single axis
(usually East to West) Parabolic troughs are desirable for certain industrial
and commercial needs to provide large amounts of hot water and/or for producing
electricity by running steam turbines III Parabolic dish system Parabolic dish
systems consist of  parabolic dish shaped concentrator (like  satellite dish)
that reflects sunlight into  receiver placed at the focal point of the dish The
receiver may be  Stirling engine ( kinematic and free-piston variants) or
micro-turbine Parabolic dish systems require two-axis sun tracking systems and
offer very high concentration factors and operating temperatures The main
advantages of parabolic dish systems include high efficiency ( up to 30%) and
modularity, which is suitable for distributed generation IV Central receiver
tower system  central receiver tower system consists of  large number of mirrors
(heliostats) that track the sun individually over two axes and focuses on the
central tower where the solar heat drives  thermodynamic cycle and generates
electricity The heat transfer medium used for most modern type solar towers
includes water/steam, molten salts, liquid sodium, oil and even air The sunlight
from many mirror-like dish reflectors spread over  large area is focused to one
central point achieving an extremely high temperature which is used to produce
high pressure steam which is then used to generate electricity Figure 12 -
Parabolic Dish System (left) & Central Receiver Tower (right) In addition to
renewable heat and power generation, concentrating solar technologies have other
economically viable and sustainable applications, such as co-generation for
domestic and industrial heat use, water desalination and enhanced oil recovery
in mature and heavy oil fields 30 June 2017 RER2032 Market share of different
CSP technologies, both operating and under construction as per year 2015 is
presented in Figure Figure 13 - Market share of different CSP technologies
Global status and outlook Solar thermal market is less established as compared
to solar PV though its applications are vast and varied, particularly in
developing countries’ context Total concentrating solar power installed capacity
has reached  GW at the end of 201615 with  further 11 GW in pipeline16 Globally,
costs for solar thermal technologies are declining, several new technologies are
under development, and thermal energy storage (TES) is becoming increasingly
important and remains the focus of extensive research and development CSP is
gathering increased policy support in nations with limited oil/gas reserves,
constrained power networks or strong agenda for industrialization and job
creation Top ten CSP installations in the world is provided in Table Table  -
Top ten CSP Installations in the world Project Name Technology Country City
Operating from Rank Size (MW)  392 Ivanpah Solar Electric Generating System
(ISEGS)     280 Mojave Solar Project 280 250 Solana Generating Station (Solana)
Genesis Solar Energy Project 170 NOOR   125 Dhursar Power Tower Parabolic Trough
Parabolic Trough Parabolic Trough Parabolic Trough Linear Fresnel Reflector USA
California 2014 USA California 2014 USA Arizona 2013 USA California 2014 Morocco
Ouarzazate 2015 India Dhursar, Rajasthan 2014 14 Graph created based on NREL
SolarPACES data on CSP Projects accessed in November 2016 15 Renewables 2017
Global Status Report, REN21 16  17 Table created based on NREL SolarPACES data
on CSP Projects accessed in November 2016 31 June 2017 RER2032  110 Crescent
Dunes Solar Energy Project (Tonopah)   100 KaXu Solar One 100 Shams  89 Solar
Electric Generating Station VIII (SEGS VIII) Power Tower Parabolic Trough
Parabolic Trough Parabolic Trough USA South Africa UAE Tonopah, Nevada 2015
Poffader 2015 Madinat Zayed 2013 USA California 1989 Status and relevance in
Afghanistan The largest solar thermal system (20m3/day) has been installed in
Kabul University’ women’ dormitory funded by the World Bank Some other small
solar thermal systems (domestic and large scale) are installed in the schools,
dormitories, children garden and military bases since Different types of solar
thermal systems are manufactured in the country, like solar concentrated system
for cooking, flat plate hot water system among others Currently, advance solar
hot water system (SHWS) are imported from China and India and are being used in
the houses and for commercial purposes Small and large scale of solar driers are
made and used in agriculture sector There is  huge potential of solar thermal
systems such as SHWS, which can be utilized in domestic sector, schools and
mosques Solar dryers can increase the quality of the local products in the
agriculture sector Local fabrication of the components can help create jobs and
utilize locally manufactured materials Solar cookers can be useful and
applicable for rural communities and nomads June 2017 32 RER2032 Solar Thermal-
LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking Solar Thermal- LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking system has been
commissioned at NTPC- Dadri, India which has been hybridized with Concentrating
Solar Thermal M90 Dishes and efficient LPG Fired Burner During day time (sunny
hours) the system uses concentrating solar heat from M90 dishes for cooking, and
during non-sunny periods, the LPG Fired burner automatically fires up, to
provide completely automated-uninterrupted heat to the kitchen for cooking Solar
Thermal M90 Dishes at NTPC bear low running cost, the payback period is less
than four years Configuration of Concentrating Solar M90 Dishes at NTPC- Dadri,
India: Figure 14 - Solar Thermal-LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking at  Power Plant Staff
kitchen at NTPC- Dadri, India Peak Capacity at STC Application System
Configuration Integration Peak Capacity at STC Total Concentrator Area 80,000
kcal/hr Cooking (Baking, Boiling and Frying) Hot Thermic Oil at 220° Hybridized
with LPG Thermic Oil Heater 80,000 kcal/hr  Nos of M90 Dishes totaling 180 m2
Solar–Biomass Hybrid Cold Storage-cum-Power Generation system for Rural
Applications  new concept whereby available biomass and solar resource could be
used to operate  small, decentralized cold storage right at the village level is
implemented in National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE), India and is now
operational In addition to providing the cold storage facility to the farmers,
such  system could also supply grid- quality power to the village; thereby
offering  holistic solution to some of the key problems facing agrarian
population Figure 15 - Solar–Biomass Hybrid Cold Storage- cum-Power Generation
system for Rural Applications installed at NISE, India The system, comprises  15
kW (~ TR) vapor absorption machine (VAM) coupled with  50 kWe biomass gasifier
system and  field of solar concentrating collectors The biomass gasifier
produces synthesis gas using locally available woody biomass, which is then used
to run an engine-generator to produce electricity The waste heat from the
biomass gasifier along with the heat energy from the solar concentrating
collectors is utilized by the VAM to cool the cold storage chamber Since, the
cold storage can be cooled to temperature as low as 0oC,  wide variety of fruit,
vegetables, and horticulture produce can be stored there The electricity
generated by the system is enough to power domestic, community, as well as
productive loads in  typical village June 2017 33 RER2032 Technology Hydropower
is  mature technology that is currently used to produce cost-effective,
renewable electricity In hydropower technology, water’ potential energy is
converted to kinetic energy and spins the blade of  turbine, which activates
generator to produce electricity Hydropower plants have two basic
configurations: dams with reservoirs and run-of-river plants, with no reservoirs
The dam scheme can be sub-divided into small dams with night- and-day
regulation, large dams with seasonal storage and pumped storage reversible
plants (for pumping and generation) for energy storage and night-and-day
regulation Pumped storage plants consist of two or more natural or artificial
(dams) reservoirs at different elevations When electricity generation exceeds
grid demand, the energy is stored by pumping water from the lower to the higher
reservoir During peak electricity demand periods, water flows back to the lower
reservoir through the turbine, thus generating electricity In these kinds of
plants, reversible Francis devices are used both for pumping water and for
generating electricity Small-scale hydropower is normally designed to run in-
river This is an environmentally friendlier option because it does not
significantly interfere with the river’ natural flow Small-scale hydro is often
used for distributed generation applications to provide electricity to rural
populations In Afghanistan, hydropower plants are classified as pico-hydro ( to
kW), micro-hydro ( to 100 kW), mini-hydro (101kW to 1000 kW), small-hydro
(1001Kw to 10,000 kW) and large- hydro (above 10,001 kW) Hydropower also
provides other key services, such as flood control, irrigation and potable water
reservoirs Hydropower is an extremely flexible electricity generation technology
Hydro reservoirs provide built-in energy storage that enables  quick response to
electricity demand fluctuations across the grid, optimization of electricity
production and compensation for power losses from other sources Global status
and outlook Globally,  total capacity of ,096 GW hydropower has been installed
by the end of Countries such as China, Brazil, USA, Canada, Norway, India, and
Russian federation accounted for 62% of installed capacities at the end of Other
than increasing new capacities, there is always  demand for refurbishment of
existing plants to improve the efficiency of output, as well as environmental
performance in the face of new regulatory requirements Innovations in hydropower
technology include variable speed technology for new and refurbished pumped
storage plants, which assist in further integration of variable renewable
resources Status and relevance for Afghanistan In Afghanistan, micro hydropower
plants (MHPs) are commissioned and working in different provinces In 2014,  MHP
systems ranging from (200 kW to 500 kW) were commissioned in Badakhshan province
These MHPs were later handed over to DABS and are currently run by 18 RENP 19
Renewables 2017 Global Status Report, REN21 June 2017 34 RER2032 DABS
Afghanistan, has many feasible sites for MHP plants Local expertise is available
for operation and maintenance of these systems in Afghanistan MHP systems can
play  crucial role in economic and social development in the remote areas in
Afghanistan As per ICE Energy Sector Report (Q2 2016), 42 MW Salma Hydro Power
Plant (HPP) is in the final stage of completion by Indian government support and
MW hydropower plant at Faizabad in KfW funding is under construction Kajaki  HPP
is expanding to  capacity of MW with funding support from USAID and construction
contract for Kajaki II HPP with 100 MW capacity has been signed with  private
company Construction of Surobi II HPP at Kabul with capacity of 180 MW and
Baghdara HPP with capacity of 240 MW is under progress with support from private
sector Micro Hydro Kinetic Turbine Tata Power in India has successfully
commissioned and tested  10-kW low-head micro-hydro turbine, installed in the
tailrace of the 150 MW Bhira hydro power plant in Maharashtra The micro turbine
generator was indigenously manufactured in Mumbai by Casmir Group based on the
patented technology licensed from the University of Southampton The turbine
utilizes the existing flow rate available to generate clean energy The AC power
generated by the turbine generator is  function of the following three factors
combined: • Average water velocity in the range of 25 / to  / (Increased power
generation in faster flow) Figure 16 - 10 kW micro hydro turbine at Bhira •
Minimum machine diameter of 1m requires 5m of water depth (Increased power
generation in sites with deeper waters using the longer blade variants
available) • Continuous flows: total power generated depends on number of hours
of water flow available at  site Other than applications in tailraces of
existing hydropower plants, rivers and canals, the micro hydro turbine has  bi-
directionality option to facilitate operations in tidal currents as well Source:
hydro-power-station-in-Maharashtra Technology The kinetic energy of the moving
air (or wind) is transformed into electrical energy by wind turbines or wind
energy conversion systems The wind forces the turbine’ rotor to spin, changing
the kinetic energy to rotational energy by moving  shaft which is connected to
generator, thereby producing electrical energy through electromagnetism Wind
power systems are categorized primarily by the grid connection (connected/
stand- alone) and wind turbine type (vertical/horizontal-axis) The specific
system configuration is determined mainly by the wind condition (especially wind
speed), land availability (or where the plant is sited), grid availability,
turbine size and height, and blade size Most large wind turbines are up-wind
horizontal-axis turbines with three blades Most small wind turbines are also
horizontal-axis June 2017 35 RER2032 Horizontal-axis turbines are being used
commercially all over the world The rotating shaft is mounted parallel to the
wind flow/ground, and the turbines can have two types of rotors: up-wind and
down-wind The advantage of up-wind turbines is that they are minimally
influenced by the turbulence caused by the tower However,  yaw mechanism is
needed to align the turbine with the prevailing wind  group of wind turbines in
the same location used for production of electricity constitutes  wind farm
large wind farm may consist of several hundred individual wind turbines
distributed over an extended area, but the land between the turbines may be used
for agricultural or other purposes Wind energy is very consistent from year to
year but has significant variation over shorter time scales It is therefore
connected to the national electricity grid or can even be used as  hybrid option
with other electricity generating/ storage sources to give  reliable electricity
supply such as wind-solar hybrid, wind-diesel hybrid etc Such hybrid options can
be used as mini-grids for supplying electricity to areas with no electricity
grid Wind energy projects are common for off-grid applications such as water
pumping and electricity supply through wind power systems, wind-solar/ wind-
diesel hybrid systems Global status and outlook Globally, 487 GW of wind power
technology has been installed by the end of 2015 of which, the largest capacity
exists in China, followed by United States, Germany and India The wind power
capacity at the end of 2016 was enough to meet almost % of total world
electricity production20 Wind power is now considered as the most cost-effective
option in  large number of countries for new power generating capacity Status
and relevance for Afghanistan Afghanistan has  good wind resource potential
especially in South East part of the country Sixteen wind monitoring stations
have been installed in different parts of the country  few small wind turbine
systems (<50kW) are installed in different locations of the country The first
ever wind turbine system of capacity 100 kW with battery backup system has been
installed in Panjsher province  couple of local wind turbine manufacturers are
available in Kabul city who can fabricate up to 20kW wind turbines with
accessories Wind power systems can be used in various configurations such as the
following: • Wind farms can contribute significantly to national grid
electricity • Wind mechanical pumps, which can be very useful for irrigation
purposes especially in Farah, Nimroz and Herat provinces, because of high wind
speeds • Small mechanical wind turbine can be hybridized with DG sets for remote
areas, institutional and agricultural loads Technology and systems Bio-energy is
generated from organic matter derived from plants or animals available on
renewable basis also known as “Biomass” It is used for energy applications
covering  variety of practices and technologies, ranging from traditional heat
production for cooking and/ or space heating to modern combined heat and power
generation or biofuels 20 Renewables 2017 Global Status Report, REN21 June 2017
36 RER2032 production Majority of the biomass energy is consumed in developing
countries for traditional uses with very low efficiency (10%-20%) such as
cooking, while modern uses of biomass for heat and power generation include
mainly high-efficiency, direct biomass combustion, co-firing with coal and
biomass gasification Direct, traditional uses of biomass for heating and cooking
applications rely on  wide range of feedstock and simple devices, but the energy
efficiency of these applications is very low because of biomass moisture
content, low energy density and the type of the basic input Pre-treatment is
done in order to improve biomass characteristics and make handling, transport,
and conversion processes more efficient and cost-effective such as: • Drying to
reduce moisture content and transport costs of biomass feedstock and improve
combustion efficiency; • Palletisation and Briquetting to mechanically compact
bulky biomass, such as sawdust or agricultural residues; • Torrefaction (for
woody biomass) in which biomass is heated in the absence of oxygen to between °
and turned into char, with  process that is similar to traditional charcoal
production • Pyrolysis is  further thermo-chemical pre-treatment process during
which biomass is heated to temperatures of ° in the absence of oxygen to produce
pyrolysis oil (also referred to as bio-oil), along with solid charcoal and  by-
product gas Biomass is distributed worldwide and is extensively used for energy,
however, securing good quality feedstock at affordable prices over  plant’
lifetime is crucial for biomass power projects Bio-energy is also being used in
other forms and applications such as:  Improved cook-stoves Improved cook-stoves
is basically  combustion device which burns biomass fuel more efficiently with
reduced emissions and offers cleaner cooking energy solutions These are
basically of two types; fixed type and portable type The portable cook-stoves
are also of two types; natural draft and forced draft Forced draft cook-stoves
are more efficient cook- stoves compared to natural draft ones Each type of
cook-stove can be used for domestic as well as community cooking applications
The improved cook-stoves may be made with metal, ceramic and terracotta/ pottery
(durable type) and combination thereof Figure 17 - Improved cook-stove & Biogas
system setup 37 June 2017 RER2032 II Biogas systems Biogas refers to  mixture of
different gases produced by the breakdown of organic matter in the absence of
oxygen Biogas can be produced from raw materials such as agricultural waste,
manure, municipal waste, industrial waste, plant material, sewage, green waste
or food waste Biogas systems provide: • Clean gaseous fuel for cooking and
lighting • Digested slurry from biogas plants to be used as enriched bio-manure
to supplement • chemical fertilizers Improved sanitation in villages and semi
-urban areas by linking sanitary toilets with biogas plants III Waste to energy
systems Waste to Energy systems allow treatment and processing of waste from
urban & rural areas and industries, resulting in energy generation Energy is
generated from the organic fraction of waste (biodegradable as well as non-
biodegradable) through thermal, thermo-chemical, biochemical and electrochemical
methods • Thermal conversion: The process involves thermal degradation of waste
under high temperature In this complete oxidation of the waste occurs under high
temperature The major technological option under this category is Incineration •
Thermo-chemical conversion: This process entails high temperature driven
decomposition of organic matter to produce either heat energy or fuel oil or gas
They are useful for wastes containing high percentage of organic non-
biodegradable matter and low moisture content The main technological options
under this category include Pyrolysis and Gasification The products of these
processes (producer gas, exhaust gases etc) can be used purely as heat energy or
further processed chemically, to produce  range of end products • Bio-chemical
conversion: This process is based on enzymatic decomposition of organic matter
by microbial action to produce methane gas, and alcohol etc This process, on the
other hand, is preferred for wastes having high percentage of organic, bio-
degradable (putrescible) matter and high level of moisture/ water content, which
aids microbial activity The major technological options under this category are
anaerobic digestion (bio-methanation) and fermentation Of the two, anaerobic
digestion is the most frequently used method for waste to energy, and
fermentation is emerging • Electrochemical conversion: Electrochemical
conversion in the context of waste to energy refers typically to microbial fuel
cells (MFC) These systems are developed to trap the energy from wastes, where
the reduction-oxidation machinery of immobilized microbial cells is
catalytically exploited, for the accelerated transfer of electrons from organic
wastes, to generate electricity and bio-hydrogen gas However, this methodology
needs extensive evaluation studies on bulk scale liquid waste treatments and
stands at  nascent level, worldwide Global status and outlook Globally bio-power
capacity reached 112 GW by the end of The share of bio-energy in total global
primary energy consumption has remained steady since 2005, at around % June 2017
38 RER2032 By country, the United States is the largest producer of electricity
from biomass sources and by region, European Union leads both the bio-power
generation and capacity21 Status and relevance in Afghanistan Most of the rural
population in Afghanistan is active in agriculture and livestock sector, however
bio-energy technologies are still in  nascent stage Only  limited number of
family type biogas plants have been installed in eastern provinces and central
parts of the country through MRRD, BORDA Afghanistan and  couple of NGOs
Recently, some studies are under process for biomass energy projects in Kabul
city and Balkh province under supervision of Kabul Municipality, Ministry of
Urban development Applications of bio-energy such as waste to energy and biogas
units are relevant to Afghanistan Raw material (municipality waste) is available
in the cities which can be utilized in the waste to energy projects for
electricity generation In remote areas, agricultural wastes are available that
can act as  raw material for biogas plants Improved cook-stoves can also help to
improve indoor air quality and offers cleaner cooking energy solutions These can
improve health protection of women and society in villages and keep the
environment clean Technology Geothermal electricity generation is  mature,
baseload generation technology that utilizes steam or hot water from
geothermally active areas to provide very competitive electricity where high-
quality resources exist Geothermal energy originates from the geological
processes during formation of the planet, radioactive decay of minerals, and
from solar energy absorbed at the surface Geothermal energy is available around
the clock, independent of the surface climatic conditions Geothermal resources
include dry steam, hot water, hot dry rock, magma, and ambient ground heat
Global status and outlook Globally, GW of geothermal power has been installed at
the end of Top five leading countries in the geothermal power generation are
USA, Philippines, Indonesia, Mexico and New Zealand Geothermal direct use
capacity has increased by  yearly average rate of % in recent years, while
direct heat consumption has grown by %The geothermal industry continues to face
significant project development risk; various efforts are under way to
ameliorate such risks Status and relevance in Afghanistan Geothermal energy is
highly valuable, clean and reliable heat and power source in Afghanistan, which
is still untapped Historically, geothermal energy in Afghanistan has been only
used for medical bathing22 Further geological, geochemical, and geophysical
studies are required to characterize the reservoirs of numerous geothermal
prospects in Afghanistan for electricity generation and other applications In
addition to the above RE technologies, there are other related technologies
which are significant for RE development in Afghanistan 21 Renewables 2017
Global Status Report, REN21 22  39 June 2017 RER2032 Air source heat pump An air
source heat pump (ASHP) is  system which uses energy to draw heat from outside
to inside  building, or vice versa This heat can then be used to heat radiators,
underfloor heating systems and hot water circuit Air source heat pump can absorb
heat from the air even when the temperature is as low as -15°  The energy that
is produced by the air source heat pump is considered as  renewable because the
air is heated by sun which then heats the house, even though the pump itself is
powered by electricity Air source heat pumps are an attractive alternative to
conventional domestic heating systems such as LPG boilers The air source heat
pump is promising solution for building segments with limited roof area
availability  heat pump system consists of  compressor and two coils made of
copper tubing In heating mode, the refrigerant in the outside coils extracts
heat from the air and evaporates into vapor form The indoor coils release heat
from the refrigerant while it condenses into  liquid  reversing valve changes
the direction of the refrigerant flow for cooling in summer There are two main
types of air source heat pump systems: Air to Water and Air to Air Air- to-Air
systems typically use fans to circulate warm air around the home and cannot be
used to heat water The performance of air source heat pumps is measured by the
coefficient of performance (COP)  COP of  means the heat pump generates  units
of heat energy for every  unit of electricity it consumes Globally the market
for heat pumps is assessed at million units (2013) and predicted to increase at
CAGR of % for 2014-Air source heat pumps have become widely available
commercially only in the past few years24 The efficiency of heat pumps is
expected to improve by 2030 by % for heating and % for cooling Cost reductions
are also expected due to technology improvements, market penetration and synergy
with thermal storage systems25 The figure illustrates the working of an Air
Source Heat Pump Figure 18 - Schematic of Air Source Heat Pump26 Energy storage
Renewable energy sources are intermittent in nature, producing energy when the
sun is shining and the wind is blowing, and therefore energy storage becomes
important for supplying uninterrupted energy Energy storage technologies absorb
energy when production is more than the demand and store it for  period before
releasing it to supply energy By storing the energy produced and delivering it
on demand, it can level out peaks in output to create  continuous, reliable
stream of power throughout the day Energy storage technologies are divided into
following six main categories 23 Heat Pumps (Heating, Cooling and Hot Water) -
Global Market Overview 24 Radisson Blu Hotel in Pune, India has installed 40 TR
Air source heat pump to generate hot water for bathing and kitchen with  capital
cost of INR  million and having  payback of  years 25 ETSAP - IRENA Heat Pumps
Technology Brief 26 Roundtable discussion on “Renewable Energy onsite generation
and use in Buildings”: Prayas and Greentech Knowledge Solutions; New Delhi, 20th
Oct 2016 40 June 2017 RER2032 • Electric batteries store electricity in the form
of chemical energy and are mainly of two types – rechargeable and non-
rechargeable • Flywheels are mechanical devices that stores electricity as
rotational energy which is harnessed to deliver instantaneous electricity •
Compressed air energy storage stores off-peak electricity to compress air which
is later discharged to the gas turbine to generate electricity during peak
periods • Thermal storage systems store thermal energy by heating or cooling
storage medium which can be used at  later stage for heating and cooling
applications and power generation • Pumped hydropower storage facilities store
energy in the form of water in an upper reservoir, pumped from another reservoir
at  lower elevation During periods of high electricity demand, power is
generated by releasing the stored water through turbines in the same manner as
conventional hydropower station Today, energy (electricity and thermal) storage
technologies exist at different levels of development, from the & to
demonstration and commercialization Figure 19 shows the development stages of
various energy storage technologies The energy storage market is estimated to
grow to an annual installation size of  GW in 2017 and over 40 GW by 2022 from
34 GW installed in 2012 and June 2017 41 Figure 19 - Maturity of energy storage
technologies27 27 Technology Roadmap Energy Storage IEA 2014  Recommended RE
technologies and systems This chapter has discussed and provided  long list of
technologies that are to be harnessed in AfghanistanThe following table gives
summary of all RETs that are being studied as possibilities for implementation,
along with their applications Table  - RE technologies and their applications in
Afghanistan Technology Market System Configuration Solar Power Parks Utility
Floating PV Concentrating PV Solar IPPs Mini-grid Hybrid: Diesel + Solar Solar
Photovoltaic Application Utility Scale Generation Utility Scale Generation
Utility Scale Generation Utility Scale Generation Localised loads Roof-top with
Net-metering Captive consumption/export to grid Stand alone PV home systems
Solar pumping Utility Concentrating solar power Solar Thermal Stand alone
Evacuated tubes/Flat plate Off-grid/rural markets Off-grid irrigation/drinking
water supply Utility Scale heat and electricity Generation Thermal energy
generation for heating purposes Utility Large Hydro Power plants Utility Scale
Generation Hydro Wind SHP + MHP Mini-grid Hybrid: Diesel + MHP Utility Wind IPPs
Mini grid Hybrid: Diesel + Wind Power generation from agri residues Utility
Methanation of organic manure/agri waste Localised loads Localised loads Utility
Scale Generation Localised loads Utility Scale Generation Utility Scale
Generation Biomass/ Biogas Bio-methanation of Municipal solid waste Utility
Scale Generation Mini-grid Hybrid: Diesel + Biomass Localised loads Stand alone
Utility Biogas for thermal energy Space heating/captive consumption Improved
cook stoves Heat pump applications and electricity generation Cooking (domestic
and community) Utility Scale Generation Geo- thermal RER2032 Key highlights of
Renewable energy sector • By the end of 2016, the renewable energy installed
capacity was enough to supply an estimated % of global electricity, with
hydropower providing about % The world now adds more renewable power capacity
annually than it adds (net) capacity from all fossil fuels combined [Renewables
2017 Global Status Report, REN21] • The record lab solar PV cell efficiency has
reached % for mono-crystalline and % for multi-crystalline silicon wafer-based
technology [Photovoltaics Report 2016, Fraunhofer ISE] • Even in conservative
scenarios and assuming no major technological breakthroughs, solar power will be
the cheapest form of electricity in many regions of the world Depending on
annual sunshine, power cost of – cents/kWh are expected by 2025, reaching –
cents/kWh by 205028 • By end of 2015, global concentrating PV (CPV) capacity
reached 360 MW, most of which are high-concentration systems (CR: ) [Renewables
2016 Global Status Report, REN21] With concentrator technology, module
efficiencies of up to % (lab record) & 33 % (commercially) have been reached
[Photovoltaics Report 2016, Fraunhofer ISE] • Since first floating plant
installation in 2007, the total installed capacity globally has now reached 93
MWp with 70 floating PV plant worldwide The biggest floating plant has  capacity
of 20 MWp29 •  new form of CSP, called STEM (Solar Thermo Electric Magaldi),
which uses fluidized silica sand as  thermal storage and heat transfer medium to
produce 24-hour industrial scale power for off-grid applications is receiving
international interest By using fluidized solids as alternative to other storage
media, the use of corrosive or environmentally unfriendly fluids can be cut down
and the receiver can be operated at much higher temperature30 On 30th June 2016,
the first STEM industrial model plant started operations in San Filippo del Mela
(Sicily)31 • Repowering,  replacing old wind turbines with modern higher
capacity turbines, is on the rise It has led to increase in wind power while
reducing the footprint   MW wind turbine with an 80- diameter rotor now
generates four to six times more electricity than  500 kW, 40  diameter rotor
built in [IEA Website] • Bioenergy accounts for around % of all industrial heat
consumption, and has not increased in recent years [Renewables 2017 Global
Status Report, REN21] • Asia has the highest number of small-scale biogas
digesters, with more than 100 million people in rural China and 83 million
people in India have access to digesters to produce gas for cooking and space
heating [Renewables 2016 Global Status Report, REN21] • Two lithium ion battery
storage projects totalling MW & 150 MWh is under construction phase in Southern
California When completed, the larger, 120 MWh (30 MW for  hours) project will
be the single biggest lithium ion battery in service on  utility grid in the
world In March 2016,  project with 50 MW, 300 MWh sodium-sulfur battery facility
went into service32 In October 2016, the Powerwall  (an upgrade to its previous
version),  home battery unit, was unveiled by Tesla Company It is considered
game changer for the residential energy storage market The improved version has
capacity of kWh and has an inbuilt Inverter of  kW The cost per kWh of the
battery with inverter is around 407 USD but after deducting the cost of
inverter, it is only 259 USD33 • 28 Current and Future Cost of Photovoltaics:
Agora Energiewende & Fraunhofer ISE 29 Saori Minamino (Solarplaza) & Camille
Marliere (Ciel & Terre), Floating Solar Plants - Niche Rising to the Surface?)
30  technology/ 31  starts-operations-in-sicilyhtml 32  faci/ 33  44 June 2017
RER2032  DEVELOPMENT OF PROJECT PIPELINE USING DECISION TOOL The type of
projects that could be taken up for each RE technology, are identified through
process that is developed specifically for this Roadmap and is presented here in
the form of  Decision Tool  Developing the project pipeline  -level process is
developed for creating  pipeline of RE projects in Afghanistan ensuring RE
resource are exploited by suitable system configurations Level  takes into
account the techno-economical RE resource potential, grid availability, land
availability and logistics which are very region-specific in Afghanistan This
process gives an idea about suitable RE resource and the implementing technology
and also point at suitability of utility scale vs off-grid systems The next
Level , evaluates various factors such as existing load profiles, energy
consumption pattern, terrain characteristics, population densities, available
energy resources, and other social factors to indicate mini-grids vs stand-alone
system choices Level  discusses about requirements of actual implementation of
RE projects by conducting surveys, devising suitable business models, and
involving existing institutions such as NGOs, MFIs, and CDCs The -level process
evolves into  Decision Tool that is presented in this chapter This decision tool
is aligned with the needs of the government, the project developers and the
users, and acts as  guiding principle to assist them in decision making It is
presented in the form of  flow chart, supported by qualitative and quantitative
parameters The Decision Tool can be linked with the GIS system for strategic
planning of projects  Decision process and levels Level : At level , Decision
Tool aids the policy makers who are at the first level of the decision-making
hierarchy in deciding whether to plan for utility scale grid- connected or off-
grid projects The decision is aided by ensuring the feasible RE resource at the
first step and grid availability or any grid extension plan in the near future
for electricity evacuation Next immediate factor to consider is availability of
land and proper road connectivity to the proposed site for installation of
grid-connected/ utility-scale RE project Finally, an important point for
consideration is security of the proposed site as grid-scale project developers
would prefer safe and secured operating environment Thus, this level serves as
quick and practical indicator to decide between grid-connected/ utility scale or
off-grid markets Level : The outcome at level  is further evaluated to determine
the most appropriate RE system configuration  complete solution depends not only
on the technical and financial parameters, which are quantitative in nature, but
also on qualitative socio-economic parameters The first indicator at this stage
is the concentration of population to be served by the RE system This gives an
idea about the presence of load demand in the area For instance, stand-alone
systems work well in locations with scattered population and dispersed demand
The second indicator is the existing load type that defines the prevalent
electricity consumer category- industrial, residential or rural, and government;
and any application-specific demand Presence of other energy supplying sources
such as diesel plants allows opting for RE-diesel hybrid mini-grid market June
2017 45 RER2032 Level : The final level aids in realizing ease of implementation
of the identified system configuration at levels  and  These are used to micro-
site the project and evaluate the social acceptability and financial viability
of the utility-scale, mini-grid or stand-alone RE project Ultimately, these
parameters enable the project developers and the users in developing  mutually
agreed upon business model, thus suggesting project design for the project
pipeline June 2017 46 RER2032  Decision Tool Figure 20 illustrates the flow of
the -level process as the Decision Tool Feasible RE Resource Grid existence or
extension Land Availability Road connectivity Security Yes Utility-scale project
No Off-grid Population Load type concentrated //  scattered Mini-grid project
Operating Diesel Plants Stand-alone project Demand for irrigational pumps Pure
RE based Mini-grid project Diesel-based Hybrid mini-grid project Solar SHS,
Lights; Others RE-based pumps Utility-scale project Mini-grid project Stand-
alone project Utility- Scale Project • • • • Micro siting Grid stability Actual
land availability ESIA Mini-grid • • • RE measurements Topography Load
distribution pattern Stand-alone project • • Presence of CDCs, MFIs, NGOs
Willingness-to- pay Legend: “”-Residential, “” -Industrial, “” -Government
Figure 20 – Decision Tool for creating project pipeline June 2017 47 RER2032
Description of parameters Parameters used in the Decision Tool are described in
the following table: Table  - Description of parameters Description Technical
potential of various RE resources across the country helps to know about the
deployable RE technology() among solar, wind, hydro, biomass, and geothermal
energy Presence of grid for power evacuation makes utility scale RE project
viable choice for that area Future plans for grid extension can help determine
the choice between grid compatible mini-grid configurations and future utility
scale options Land availability is critical for setting up utility-scale RE
power projects Likewise, the availability of large water bodies/roof areas can
help determine the choices of land neutral/roof-top solutions respectively Road
connectivity helps utility scale project development by easing the
transportation of labour and heavy equipment during the construction phase
Likewise, the operation and maintenance phases are also improved by good road
access  secured project site is essential when going for utility-scale projects,
for developers and other consumers, as it ensures  safe operating environment
for the project as well as better revenue inflow Source NREL, RE Resource maps
from MEW (Annexure ) Power system planning maps from DABS (Annexure ) Land
authority, Central Statistic Organisation (CSO) Road maps of Afghanistan UN
security map and internal security maps Population concentration helps decide
between mini-grid or stand-alone system configuration An area with high
population concentration, without grid connection, is suitable for mini-grid
type projects However,  scattered population, covering  large area is more
suited to standalone systems Presence of existing consumers (or load),
industrial, commercial or residential, in  region helps to understand the
prevalent energy usage pattern and local supply options at the proposed site
Potential for enterprise development further helps in selecting mini-grids or
stand- alone options CSO CSO Parameter Level  RE resource availability Grid
availability or grid extension plan Land availability Road connectivity Security
Level  Population concentration Presence of industrial, commercial, residential,
and institutional Loads Level  Presence of CDCs, MFIs and NGOs Topography
Presence of NGOs, MFIs and CDCs enable sustainable project deployment by
providing finance and preparing communities to accept stand-alone and mini-grid
facilities It increases the ease of project implementation for the government,
donor organizations, or the project developers and implementers Topographical
studies will help determine the ideal sites for RE projects based on various
geographical factors and also for distribution network design Load centers and
distribution pattern Availability of load centers helps determine the proximity
of the project as well as the design of the distribution network Micro-siting
Grid-stability Land demarcation Micro-siting helps in the optimal setup of
utility scale power projects to maximize the power output from the given site
Grid-stability should be ensured so that the coupling of new utility scale power
plants with the grid does not cause any issues Once land availability is
certain, then land demarcation must be followed to ascertain the exact land that
is needed from the available land area so as to not trespass over public or
private property June 2017 Project feasibility study including primary survey
and desk analysis AGS and USGS topographic maps DABS, Primary surveys and desk
analysis RE Resource atlas Grid network analysis Primary survey and desk
analysis 48 RER2032 Applying -level process for developing project pipeline
Level   Check for RE resource potential from the RE resource maps  Check for
grid availability and grid extension plan If “Yes” then utility scale projects
can come up If “No”, then mini-grid or stand-alone projects can come up  Then
check for land availability, road connectivity, and security if “utility-scale”
is the outcome above If all are “Yes”, then conclude at utility-scale projects
and move to Stage   Level   Check for population concentration and load type If
the answer for population is “concentrated” and the load type is “residential,
industrial, and government”, then RE mini-grid projects are possible Also, check
for other operational electricity sources available in  particular region If
“Yes”, then RE- hybrid mini- grid projects are possible  If population is
“scattered” and load type is “residential” then stand-alone systems are possible
Check for application specific demand such as for irrigation pumps, and others,
then stand-alone RE pumps are suggested  Level   For “Utility-scale”, enabling
steps such micro-siting, grid-stability, actual land availability, etc are taken
up  For “Mini-grid”, load distribution pattern, site topography etc are to be
studied  For “stand-alone projects” check for presence of NGO’, MFI’ and CDC’
that enable implementation through community preparedness, financing, creating
awareness, etc  Application of Decision Tool for creating the project pipeline
The Decision Tool and its -level process is  dynamic process which can be
modified to suite the changing RE market environment The process is applied by
considering the identified RE potential, technology application, and suitable
markets As per chapter , the recommended technologies for utility scale projects
are solar, wind, biomass, hydro and geothermal Table  identifies provinces
suitable for this market by applying the five criteria as in level- of the
Decision Tool Afghanistan National Grid Plan map has been referred to at this
level (Annexure ) June 2017 49 RER2032 Table  - Suitable provinces for utility-
scale RE projects  No Provinces Solar Radiation >  KWh/m2/day Wind Power > 600
/m2 Waste generation > 150 tonne/day Biogas from animal manure > 500 thousand m3
/year Crop residues > 400 thousand tonnes/year Grid connectivity (> 110 kV) Land
availability Road connectivity Security          10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Badakhshan Badghis Baghlan Balkh Bamian Daikondi Farah Faryab Ghazni Ghowr
Hilmand Herat Jowzjan Kabul ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ Kandahar ✔ Kapisa Khost Kunduz June
2017 ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
50 ✔ RER2032 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 Kunar Laghman
Lowgar Nangarhar Nimruz Nuristan Paktika Paktiya Panjshir Parwan Samangan Sar-
Pol Takhar Uruzgan Wardak Zabol ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ Legend
Colour    Grid Connectivity – present and planned (funded only) Grid exists or
planned in capital and some districts Grid exists or planned only in capital
Land availability Road connectivity Security Land available Road is metalled
Highly secure Limited/scattered availability Road exists by not all weather
Major parts are secured No grid plan Land not easily available Road is poor or
does not exist Exposed to heavy security risks June 2017 51 Further, the
provinces with no or limited grid availability but high solar radiation are
considered ideal for mini-grid or stand-alone projects in level  of the Decision
Tool Subsequently, population concentration and load characteristics are used
for identifying potential mini-grid projects Highly populated provinces are
assumed to contain load mix of “residential, industrial, commercial, and
government” The presence of operating diesel gensets are prioritised for
developing diesel-RE hybrid mini-grids with an understanding that it will
immediately reduce the dependence on diesel, while simultaneously providing
reliable back-up or supplement power supply system to RE based mini-grid
Accordingly, all the provincial capitals and trade clusters are suitable to
implement stand- alone or DG-based hybrid SPV mini-grid projects The exact
sizing and technical design is to be done on the basis of detailed feasibility
for each project considering topography, demand pattern, among others which
takes the user to the third-level of the Decision Tool Finally, stand-alone
projects are designed and customised for specific sites and for specific loads,
power packs for universities, solar pumps for irrigation or drinking water
supply, power supply units for telecom towers, biomass gasifiers for community
cooking or electricity needs etc The third level of the Decision Tool helps in
conducting site specific studies and analysis for all types of stand- alone
projects, including user survey, stakeholder consultations, enterprise
development studies etc  Prioritizing RE projects The Decision Tool provides
method to create  project pipeline However, deployment of RE projects may vary
from each other on the basis of several considerations and hence, need to be
prioritised Some of these considerations would be: • Simplicity: How easy they
are to construct, operate and maintain • Scalability: Whether they can be
implemented across  variety of sizes and locations • Familiarity: What is their
familiarity in Afghanistan on the basis of past experience • Viability: Whether
they are  financially sound option The above considerations are used in
customised knock-out criteria method34 to qualify them as hot (high priority)
and cold (low priority) and is applied below to prioritise the deployment of
some RETs and downgrade some others in the context of Afghanistan 34  RER2032
Table 10 - Prioritizing the selection of RETs for Afghanistan Technology
Simplicity Scalability Familiarity Viability Overall Applicability * Solar PV
Grid- connected utility scale Solar PV Mini-grids Solar PV Roof-top Systems
Solar PV Standalone systems Concentrating Solar Thermal Grid- connected utility
scale systems Non-concentrating Solar Technologies – Flat Plate and ETC
Concentrating Solar Heating Systems for Industrial Applications Micro / Mini
-hydro powered mini grids Utility Scale Wind Power Wind powered thermal energy
Hybrid Systems (wind – biomass - solar – diesel) Biomass based standalone Waste
to Energy Biogas systems – thermal Biogas systems – electrical Improved
cookstoves Geothermal
*: Overall Applicability is indicated as ‘hot’ if the technology scores ‘’ (red)
in two or more fields ‘Cold’ is represented in ‘’ (blue) June 2017 53 RER2032
The High priority and strategically important projects and their achievable
targets are described here: ) Solar PV utility scale The Decision Tool points at
setting up  total of 800 MW of solar utility scale PV through Solar Power Parks
(SPPs) and Independent Power Producers (IPPs), with an optimum capacity of 100
MW for SPPs and 10 MW for IPPs Land requirement will roughly be of the order to
hectares for 800 MW The proposed 100 MW SPP at Naghlu and 10 MW IPP at Kandahar
will be trailblazers in this segment SPP model is discussed in details in next
chapter ) Utility scale wind farms Utility scale wind power projects, commonly
known as wind farms, both in power parks mode and IPP mode, are high priority
projects and upto 600 MW capacity addition is recommended using this technology
) Roof-top solar PV This market segment is of strategic importance to
Afghanistan’ major cities and provincial capitals on account of unmet captive
demand and dependence on diesel genset in most of government, public and private
buildings, and available roof space Assuming an average  kWp system on
residential households and multiples of 10 kWp in public and private
institutional buildings, an aggregate capacity of 420 MWp can be installed using
this technology The proposed 10 MWp roof-top PV project in Kabul would be the
first-of-its kind, which will be followed by similar projects in other major
towns and provincial capitals that are/ will be connected to the national/
provincial grids ) Bio-methanation of municipal solid waste The conversion of
municipal solid waste into energy is of strategic importance to Afghanistan
considering the amount of solid waste generated in major municipalities For
instance, Kabul generates approximately 1600 tonnes of MSW daily The first
proposed pilot project for  MW in Kabul municipality is an encouraging
initiative The Roadmap recommends more such projects, totalling to about 56 MW
aggregated installed capacity ) Mini-grids - Solar PV, MHP and hybrids Mini-
grids have emerged as viable alternative to grid extension for rural/ semi-urban
communities’ world over Diesel based mini-grids are commonly used in
Afghanistan, which need to be either replaced or hybridized with solar, wind and
MHP technologies In addition, new mini-grids need to be installed in load
centers and provincial towns Roadmap recommends  total of 720 MW of installed
capacities About 25 mini-grids on average 500 kW capacities are being proposed
under the ASERD programme of MRRD, which will kick- start this segment ) Solar
PV stand-alone systems, include solar pumping Solar PV stand-alone systems
consisting of street lights, home lighting and domestic systems, power packs for
telecom towers, solar pumps, portable lights and battery chargers are some of
the systems that can play  critical role in improving energy access of rural
communities Upto 126 MWp worth of aggregate capacity can be installed in this
segment as per this Roadmap Private enterprises are already marketing these
systems in Afghanistan 54 June 2017 RER2032 Initiatives such as ‘Citizens’
Charter Afghanistan Programme’ will provide  further boost to this segment )
Non-concentrating solar thermal systems Given the requirement of hot-water (and
low-grade heat) for domestic, community and commercial purposes throughout the
year in Afghanistan, non-concentrating solar thermal systems (flat-plate or ETC)
can play  critical role in providing thermal energy to these applications
Accordingly, Roadmap suggests  total target of 60 MW under this category35 )
Biogas and improved cookstoves for cooking energy In addition to solar thermal
systems, biogas and improved cookstoves will make  significant contribution in
thermal energy sector by providing clean energy for cooking This Roadmap
suggests  deployment of such systems with an aggregate capacity of around  MW )
Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) Although CSP has not yet been introduced in
Afghanistan, it is  proven technology and there are operational power plants
globally as well as in the region Since the solar radiation levels, particularly
DNI levels are high in Afghanistan, at least  few pilot CSP plants are
recommended to be set up in any one the provinces high with solar radiations
levels Most commonly sized capacity amongst operational CSP plants globally is
50 MW ) Floating PV (Floatovoltaics) Though  relatively new concept world-wide,
there are already 70 FPV projects currently operational, most of these in Japan
The sizes range from as small as  kWp to the largest one being 20 MWp Most of
these FPV plants are installed on reservoirs Considering the fact that
Afghanistan has significant numbers of reservoirs and dams for irrigational and
electricity generation purposes, this Roadmap recommends setting up of MWp of
floating PV plants of varying capacities on the basis of detailed feasibility
studies, including Environmental-Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) studies )
Large hydro projects Large hydro projects are now being considered as renewable
energy projects36 Their contribution to Afghanistan’ total energy mix is
significant While the plan for installing large hydro projects under NSSP is
already underway, this Roadmap recommends focussing on nearly 1750 MW worth of
projects that are stalled due to several reasons Table 11 - Current unfunded
hydro projects Project Location Capacity /MW Estimated Design Cost / USD Mil
Estimated Construction Cost / USD Mil Baghdara HPP Sarobi  HPP Shal HPP Kapisa
Kabul Kunar Kajaki  HPP Helmand 240 180 798 100   10 25 526 300 1636 200 35
approximate estimation based on calculations from the IEA report: Solar Heat
Worldwide, 2016 edition 36  55 June 2017 RER2032 Qala  Mumaee HPP Badakhshan 420
Ghor MHPP Ghor  Completed 1459 16 With these and other projects being
commissioned, 2000 MW of additional renewable energy capacity can be added The
table below provides  summary of above discussion and presents technology-wise
contribution to meet the targets of RENP Institutional and market mechanisms or
business models and ecosystems enablers required to deploy these technologies
and implement RE projects are discussed in subsequent chapters Table 12 -
Technology-wise contribution for meeting RENP targets Market Technology Type
Target Capacity (MW) Solar PV Solar PV Solar Power Parks (SPP) Solar IPPs Solar
Thermal Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) Solar PV Solar PV Wind Floating PV
Concentrating PV Wind IPPs Utility scale Large Hydro Large Hydro Biomass Biogas
- Electricity Waste to Energy Geothermal Hybrid Power generation from agri-
residues Methanation of organic manure & agri waste Bio-methanation of municipal
solid waste Heat Pump Applications & Geothermal Energy Diesel + wind / solar /
mini hydro MHP & SHP MHP + SHP Mini-grid Solar PV Solar PV Solar PV Stand alone
Solar Thermal Biogas Improved Cookstoves Total Roof-top with net-metering / FiT
PV Home Systems, telecom towers & others Solar Pumping Evacuative Tube & Flat
Plate - Thermal energy Thermal Energy Thermal Energy Note: The existing capacity
of 100 MW is not included in the above table June 2017  ,   ,56 RER2032
BUSINESS MODELS FOR RE PROJECTS IN AFGHANISTAN The renewable energy market in
Afghanistan is still in its nascent stages As  result, structured business
models, which characterize mature markets, are not yet in place The market
landscape is dominated by government programmes, supported by bilateral or
multilateral development partners The private sector acts as turnkey or
installation contractors, with little or no financial liabilities in the project
However, the introduction of RENP and feed-in tariffs for connecting such
projects to the grid has given  fillip to the sector As  result, there is  push
for structured and standardized business models, aimed at engaging key
stakeholders (private sector, government and communities) to exploit win-win
possibilities in the market This chapter seeks to present business models
relevant to Afghanistan, which are in sync with the national context These could
be introduced so as to guide and steer renewable energy development in
structured manner Importantly, implementation of the business models shall serve
to engage the private sector, thereby infusing private capital in the market As
discussed in the subsequent chapters, development of the RE sector shall take
place in stages Each stage is the outcome of policy directions issued by
government, and the resultant response from the private sector and other
stakeholders As the Stage-Gate model later explains in next chapter, the
expansion of the RE sector and its components follows the  stages of market
seeding, market creation and market transformation This chapter also attempts to
demonstrate how, and to what extent, the implementation of business models helps
in transformation of the markets in each stage  From markets to business models
The renewable energy market in Afghanistan is segregated into three categories (
utility scale, mini-grids, and stand-alone) each addressing  specific objective
of the Roadmap as presented below: Large, utility scale The large-scale project
landscape is dominated by state run power generation units and independent power
producers The business model for large power producers is based on
considerations of assured and long-term power off-take Financing is also  key
requirement given the capital-intensive nature of power plants In addition,
producers need proper infrastructure to set up their MW scale power plants Thus,
the power purchase agreement (PPA) assumes primary importance for large scale,
MW scale power plants Small and medium, micro-utility or mini-grid application
In this segment, the operator manages  self-contained grid (resembling  micro
utility), it has to manage loads and ensure that outages are minimized to
improve the viability of the project Load development and management is  key
feature of business models in this segment The business model requires the
entrepreneur to make investments in power generation and/or distribution systems
that would optimally serve its command area This segment is also marked by use
of new technologies and the application of ICT enabled features to ensure
optimality in production and distribution June 2017 57 RER2032 Micro, standalone
systems The standalone segment has seen some market movement via outright
purchases of solar powered home systems However, this market is largely non-
formal and lacks quality assurances The segment has significant potential in
Afghanistan with the centralized grid not being  cost-effective option in
several pockets of the country dominated by mountainous terrain and spatially
dispersed communities With this generic categorization of markets, the approach
adopted in developing business models for Afghanistan is to bring the
understanding of what has worked globally, and customize it to the local Afghan
context For each market segment, the following section identifies business
models customized in the Afghan context Table 13 - RE business model
classification Roadmap objectives Market type and project scale Proposed
Business Model Increase domestic RE supply Utility scale, large projects ( MW or
more) Solar Power Parks Enhance energy supply to population centers without grid
connection + captive power plants Mini-grids, small & mid- scale (10 kW to  MW)
Provide basic energy services to Isolated and remote populations Stand-alone,
micro- and mini (pico to kW) Renewable (rural) Energy Service Companies (RESCO)
Distribution franchisees Roof-top solar PV systems through net-metering and FiT
Standalone solar home systems supported by Microfinance Pay-as-you-go business
models June 2017 58 RER2032  Solar Power Parks (SPP) Description SPP is
dedicated and demarcated zone for development of solar PV power projects Several
power producers operate within  SPP The park provides project developers with
proper infrastructure and access to facilities for power generation and export
to the grid against  firm Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) In doing so, project
development risks are minimized for the individual developer SPPs facilitate
developers by reducing the number of required approvals The solar park is
typically developed and operated by  Special Purpose Vehicle or  service
provider, usually called the Solar Power Park Developer or SPPD While this
section discusses the SPPs, similar approach may also be considered for setting
up of wind power parks/farms Salient features As defined above,  single SPP can
accommodate several projects promoted by  number of private sector entities, all
facing roughly similar conditions for power generation and sale, which are
governed in their individual power purchase agreements signed with the off-
taker, such as DABS in this case The activity of setting up the infrastructure
for  SPP is generally anchored by  government entity This entity, in the role of
the SPPD, executes the following: • Acquisition of land and developing it for
SPP • Getting land related clearances and approvals that are required to convert
it to land suitable for SPP development • Developing approach roads, water
supply and distribution, drainage and other related infrastructure to each
project within the SPP • Creating the power transmission network within the park
and maintaining it; also setting up power evacuation infrastructure to connect
to the grid • Providing security for SPP After execution of these tasks, the
project developers are invited to invest in setting up solar PV projects through
bidding process Projects are set up through Build-Own-Operate- Maintain (BOOM)
process Project developers are expected to undertake investments related to
setting up and maintaining the projects over the tenure of their PPAs Projects
may be transferred to the government upon expiry of PPA In addition, the
following features may be relevant in the specific context of Afghanistan: •
Specific policies for SPPs are required, to provide regulatory support to
private sector/other stakeholders These could be generic, or tailored to suit
the needs of  specific SPP •  corporate body is needed to act as the SPPD This
could be  subsidiary of  utility or any other PPP arrangement This corporate
body shall need to develop its own business plan, outlining revenues, costs and
plan to break even over the long run • Larger scale solar projects need to be
encouraged in view of their higher potential to bring down the cost of power
generation This is because capital costs per MW of developing solar PV projects
reduce with an increase in project scale • The land in SPP shall be leased to
project developers The tenure of such leases shall be equal to the duration of
the PPA June 2017 59 RER2032 • Power purchase is governed by the PPA between
each project developer and the utility  DABS Feed-in tariffs may be used to pre-
determine tariffs for SPPs In addition, tariffs could be announced by the
government in advance or determined as part of  bidding process • Power is
evacuated as must-take, purchased by the national transmission utility, DABS
Standards for metering and connectivity to grid shall follow the guidelines set
out in Electricity Law and other relevant guidance documents • PPA tenures may
extend to 20 to 25 years, with suitable clauses governing tariff movements over
time • Projects shall have well-defined pathways after the expiry of the PPA
These pathways could include sale of asset to government, extension of PPA and
others In terms of the institutional engagement in SPPs, major responsibilities
of different institutions are expected to pan out as follows: • Power sector
regulatory body: The regulator shall define conditions for power evacuation
(must-run and must-take), long term access, PPA and others • Ministry of Energy
and Water: Policy direction for setting up of the SPPs These shall be classified
under separate notification for  “SPP Scheme” • Special Purpose Vehicle: Govt
may set up  Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in the PPP mode (similar to AISA) for
setting up and managing SPPs, like  Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD) This
agency shall be entrusted with the task of setting up and managing the SPPs, and
shall execute the following activities:  Preparation of Detailed Project Report
(DPR) for each SPP  Site development for SPPs as indicated above  Facilitate
single-window clearance for SPPs  Maintenance of the SPPs  Providing security
for SPPs Investments made by this agency can be realized from lease rentals and
other fees against services that are paid by project developers • Da Afghanistan
Breshna Sherkat (DABS): DABS shall, as the transmission and distribution
utility, shall finalize tariff rates for procurement of power from SPPs and
procure the power Wherever necessary, escrow mechanisms may also be set up to
provide revenue assurance to project developers • Project Developer: The project
developer shall set up its solar PV project and operate and maintain the same
throughout the life of the PPA Depending upon the terms of agreement, after
expiry of the PPA the developer may hand over the project to the government The
significant advantage of the SPP in Afghanistan is that it can unlock private
capital through the engagement of the private sector in the generation of MW
scale power in the country Thus, it would largely eliminate the need for
national and/or provincial governments to invest their resources in power
generation, whether centrally or in decentralised fashion Furthermore, with the
right incentive structures, the SPP model may be able to generate revenues for
government agencies such as the SPPD Finally, the SPP model is designed for
locations where land is plentifully available This shall build infrastructure
such as roads, power and water lines to the site and around, thus developing the
local micro-economy and resulting in decentralised development and reversing the
course of migration 60 June 2017 RER2032 Global experience demonstrates that
SPPs or solar farms are typically around 100–200 MW in size, although SPPs of
around 750 MW have recently been commissioned in Rewa, Madhya Pradesh37 There
are over twenty (20) countries, which have set up SPPs However, in USA, China
and India SPPs have tended to be larger in size, especially those installed in
the past few years (2012 onwards) Importantly these countries started off with
100 MW size parks, and gradually moved up in scale with time The following
schematic shows the SPP in terms of process flows and roles/ responsibilities of
various actors Figure 21 - Process flows and roles / responsibilities of various
stakeholders for SPPs in Afghanistan  Distribution Franchisee (DF) Description
Distribution Franchisee (DF) is an entity authorised by  distribution utility to
distribute electricity on its behalf, in  particular area within the utility’
area of supply The DF may invest in improvements in the existing distribution
network to improve technical and commercial losses, better power quality and
improved overall service delivery The DF business model works around  cluster of
consumers such as industrial parks and municipalities, with DABS as generator
and an independent qualified entity as the DF Examples of DF could be the
industrial park union, association of residents of  housing society, or any
private agency interested in purchasing power from DABS (generator) and
distributing it within the mandated zone (park, housing society etc) 37  61 June
2017 RER2032 Charanka Solar Park in Gujarat, India The experience of
neighbouring India on solar power parks has been noteworthy Under the aegis of
the Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), as many as 33 SPPs, with
cumulative capacity of 19,900 MW are either operational or under implementation
SECI has identified nodal agencies in prominent Indian states where solar power
parks are planned These nodal agencies form joint ventures with SECI and act as
the SPPD The Charanka Solar Park with an installed capacity of 590 MW was set up
in the Indian state of Gujarat, by the Gujarat Power Corporation Limited The
park, located in Patan district, is spread over ,384 acres of unused land By the
end of 2016, Charanka solar park has installed capacity of nearly 350 MW (March
2016) Among the first solar PV parks to be installed in India, Charanka has been
developed as part of Gujarat solar parks Policy support for solar power parks in
India was derived from the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM),
which laid down the broad objectives and guidelines Subsequently, the Solar
Energy Corporation of India (SECI) was set up by the Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy), Government of India
States interested in developing solar parks has to set up  Special Purpose
Vehicle, generically called  Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD), who could form
joint venture with SECI, or choose to remain an independent agency As  third
option, the individual state could give responsibility to SECI to become the
agency within the state The choice of technology and identification of
entrepreneurs within  solar park may be kept open and subjected to  bidding
process The SPPD is responsible for setting up the solar park with the required
infrastructure For Charanka, the Gujarat Power Corporation Limited acted as the
SPPD With its overall mandate for power development, and considering favorable
wind speeds in Charanka, few wind turbines were also commissioned to generate
additional power Figure 22 - Charanka Solar Park The distribution franchisee can
operate in several ways It can use  basic model for operation and maintenance
services against  commission or  fee, where the DF is responsible for billing,
maintenance and collection activities It can also have an advanced model where
the DF invests in the local grid, improves technical performance and reduces
Aggregate Technical & Commercial (ATC) losses, thereby providing 24x7 quality
power at  premium For energy-deficit industrial areas and parks in Afghanistan,
the DF approach could be  cost-effective solution to meeting the industries’
needs of quality, low to high voltage power demand Salient features The DF
business model necessarily includes  generator that is owned by an entity
different from the DF The generator such as DABS (national utility) is then
responsible for selling bulk power to DF for  pre-demarcated territory The
salient features are as follows: June 2017 62 RER2032 • The utility sells
electricity to the DF at  single point (such as  transformer) at  pre- agreed,
bulk tariff that is governed by  power purchase agreement DF distributes
electricity to individual consumers at pre-agreed consumer tariff This step
assures the utility of payments from the DF, and thus de-risks it from engaging
with  multitude of consumers Usually, the DF is appointed in  zone where utility
faces challenges in servicing the customer profitably • The utility and DF enter
into  long-term time bound contractual agreement wherein utility commits to
supplying electricity to the DF DF commits to undertaking Billing, Metering and
Collection (BMC) activities, or making required investments / improvements in
the distribution network, as the case may be • The DF represents the utility on
the ground and is provided with security and other administrative support This
is especially relevant in the context of Afghanistan, where local security
issues could be present in certain provinces The DF could be  local entity
familiar with site-specific dynamics, which would assist in de-risking revenue
collection and establishment of business ties with community members • The DF
may invest in setting up / upgrading / strengthening the distribution network,
which may belong to the utility Its investments include:  Installing
transformers, feeders and conducting continuous maintenance of the network
Enhancing safety and security of the network by installing protective measures
Reducing theft and other commercial losses  Installing smart meters at
consumers’ ends and maintaining  helpline to enhance customer care • The DF may
invest in additional back-up power generation options to provide 24x7 power to
the consumers This is more relevant for industrial and urban consumers • DF
realizes its returns on above investments by charging pre-agreed consumer
tariffs, that are usually at  premium (in return for better service delivery) •
Benefits to consumers served by the DF include improved power supply (both
qualitatively and quantitatively) and improved complaint redressal • Benefits to
utility include assured revenue collection (from  single-bulk-consumer) and
reduced manpower deployment costs in the zone where DF operates • DF benefits
from financial returns from  performance turnaround in its zone, and may look to
expand operations to similar zones It also enjoys  customer base for  years,
which will offer opportunities for further business expansion Roles and
responsibilities of various agencies in the DF model are explained below: •
Regulator: Lays down guidelines within the Electricity Law for defining and
setting up distribution franchisees in Afghanistan • Ministry of Energy and
Water (MEW): Designs the DF Scheme in Pan-Afghanistan context along the above
guidelines and provides policy support for its roll- out • Da Afghanistan
Breshna Sherkat (DABS): Identify areas where power distribution can be licensed
to DF Enters into contract for sale of power and for the maintenance of DABS’
distribution infrastructure in the area now under the franchisee’ operations 63
June 2017 RER2032 DABS shall provide necessary support to DF on the ground in
the form of security and any other administrative / legal support as and when
required • Distribution Franchisee (DF): Invests in, operates and maintains the
distribution infrastructure over the tenure of its terms of agreement with DABS
Provides services to the consumers in the manner outlined in its terms of
agreement • Consumers: Enter into agreement with the DF and pay tariffs as
agreed upon The roles are further explained through the following flowchart:
Figure 23 - Process flows and roles/ responsibilities of various stakeholders
for DF model in Afghanistan DF models have been successful across several
countries, as  de-risking mechanism that enables both the generator and the
franchisee to build on their individual competencies in  strategic, mutually
beneficial scenario In the neighbouring country, India for example, Torrent
Power Limited (TPL) launched one of the first input based distribution
franchisee operations in Bhiwandi circle of Maharashtra in western India
Reviewed by an independent agency, the model has successfully shown that
aggregate technical and commercial (ATC) losses coming down from  high of 58% in
2007 to % in 2011, and around 20% as of 201538, providing profitable solutions
for all stakeholders Importantly, TPL has  ten-year mandate in Bhiwandi Circle,
which is needed for it to recover its investments and make returns 38  case-
study-by-torrent-power-limited/ 64 June 2017 RER2032  Roof-top solar PV through
net metering Description In Afghanistan, there is significant potential of roof-
top solar PV systems on account of levels of solar radiation consistently above
kWh/m2 as well as available roof-top space, especially in urban locations With
largely low-rise architecture prevalent in the cities and towns, there is ample
opportunity for development of roof-top solar PV projects due to abundance of
sunshine On the demand side, lack of reliable energy access coupled with high
demand for electrical energy for lighting and other applications provide  ready
market for roof-top based solar PV systems With the advantage of net metering,
households can also sell unused electricity back to the grid and provide more
power for distribution Net metering facility allows the user to export power
from the solar PV unit as and when such power is unutilized Similarly, if power
supplied from the solar PV unit falls short of current demand at the user’ end,
then the user draws electricity from the grid At the end of  billing cycle
(typically  month), the net power consumed / exported by the user is calculated
(using the net meter), and the user either paid or charged accordingly Net
metering allows the user to partially recover its investment by selling surplus
electricity generated Salient features There are two main business models used
in roof-top solar: CAPEX and OPEX models • CAPEX model:  The Capital Expenditure
(CAPEX) model involves the owner of the roof and electricity distributor (DABS,
in this case) The owner purchases all the necessary equipment for the generation
of roof-top solar and sells the electricity generated to the distributor via
net-metering mechanism  The operation and maintenance (&) of the system is
generally done by an external contractor hired by the owner  The roof-top owner
can enjoy government tax benefits and incentives for generating clean power •
OPEX model:  The Operational Expenditure (OPEX) model involves the owner of the
roof,  third-party implementation company and the electricity distributor The
roof owner rents out their roof to  third party in order for them to generate
electricity from solar PV panels The third party sells the electricity generated
to the distribution company In turn, the owner collects rent from the third
party, after taking into account any other arrangements, like electricity
purchase, profit-sharing, etc Alternatively, the roof owner can get into  power
purchase agreement (PPA) with the third party, in order to get electricity for
their building at  lower rate  The maintenance of the system is handled by
either the third-party developer or by the roof-top owner, depending on the
agreement between them  The third-party developer enjoys government tax benefits
and incentives as  generator of clean power In the case of Afghanistan, DABS
could also become the third-party so as to generate more grid-connected energy
at  relatively low cost June 2017 65 RER2032 To ensure long-term sustainability
of roof-top solar PV systems, distribution companies purchasing power through
net metering, instance, shall need to ensure complementarities in power
interface with the utility (DABS) grid, so that there is seamless integration
with national power systems and management of local interconnection issues
Moreover, the financial health of the utility such as DABS is vital to secure
revenues for the seller for The institutional framework for roof-top solar is
mix between standalone captive systems and  grid-tied solar PV system Like grid-
tied systems, feed-in tariffs play an important role At the same time, the model
is based on  single consumer, similar to standalone systems Afghanistan in
currently establishing its net metering policy, which will catalyse the roof-top
market Figure below presents the model Figure 24 - Process flows and roles/
responsibilities of various actors for roof-top solar PV- net metering model in
Afghanistan Globally, the European Union and especially Germany has been  proven
leader in roof-top solar power development In terms of regional success stories,
roof-top solar PV schemes are popular in India and Sri Lanka within the South
Asian region In Sri Lanka, the net metering policy is open to all generators of
renewable energy (hydropower, solar etc) with  cap of ,000 kW per user The
excess power sold to the grid is valued at the PPA and credited to the user in
terms of energy credits, with the user to have flexibility on when user chooses
to monetise them In addition, countries where roof-top solar PV are present have
introduced prior regulation to facilitate setting up of these systems June 2017
66 RER2032 The German Roof-top success story With  total generation of terawatt-
hours (TWh; equivalent to 36,600 GWh) from solar PV in 2015, and  total
installed capacity of GW (29,600 MW) exclusively through solar PV roof-tops,
Germany has over % of its total electricity demand being fed by solar systems
Germany’ solar roof-top installations are characterized by less than 10 kW
units, mounted on the roof of  house Beginning from  stage of negligible solar
PV capacity in the 1990s, the country has targeted 45,000 GWh by Importantly,
the approach puts importance on roof-top as  key enabler Today, the roof-top
segment contributes almost 75% of Germany’ PV capacity Germany’ EnergieWiende
claims that investments in solar PV have helped the economy phase out nuclear
power plants Behind this significant success lies the Renewable Energy Guarantee
Act that guarantees priority grid access to all electricity generated by
renewables In addition, policies significantly incentivize owners to mount solar
roof-top systems, through Feed-in-Tariffs (FiT) While in the initial years the
FiT was high so as to encourage homeowners to mount solar PV in their roof-tops,
more recently (2014) the policy is tweaked to ensure auctioning of tariffs,
which presents  more competitive picture As per German EnergieWiende, the
opening up of the solar PV market also had significant co-benefits These were in
terms of employment generation, greening of the energy sector, combating climate
change impacts in Germany and Europe Being roof-top installed, the aesthetic
appeal of the houses was also not hampered, since roof-top units are usually not
visible from the ground  Renewable (Rural) Energy Service Company (RESCO)
Description RESCO is an entity that provides energy services to consumers in
particular area by setting up  mini-utility, usually in an off-grid location As
mini-utility, RESCO combines both generation and distribution functions The
RESCO business model is built on enhancing community level incomes through
reliable and affordable energy access These incomes pay for energy consumed,
sustaining the micro-utility function In the Afghanistan context, there are
several areas where the national utility (DABS) may encounter difficulty in
providing reliable electricity access These are pockets best served by
decentralised, renewable energy based systems RESCO projects, acting as
complete micro-or mini-utility by combining generation and distribution services
under  single roof, can meet power demand and contribute to local growth by
facilitating enterprise development Thus, RESCO models are more relevant in
areas characterized by high levels of unmet demand for energy, usually for
agriculture (irrigation), farm-based enterprises (cold storage and drying) and
anchor loads (24x7 demand such as telecom, market centers and hospitals) along
with high population densities Salient features The broad features of the RESCO
business model are as follows: 67 June 2017 RER2032 • The RESCO mirrors  utility
on the ground Typically, RESCO sets up  cluster of projects in  district to
reduce management overheads and ensure viability RESCO businesses undertake
several pre-project activities such as site selection, load and enterprise
development, feasibility study preparation and engineering design For power
generation, RESCO utilizes locally available RE resources such as solar, biomass
and wind • Power is sold to consumers across all load categories, viz household,
commercial (shops) and enterprises • RESCOs are assisted by local entities such
as Civil Society Organizations (CSO) and other community based organizations
These entities play important roles in project identification, community
mobilization, load development and tariff fixation CSOs, largely being local,
build trust bridges between RESCO and communities Security and other
administrative support relevant in the local context are managed by the RESCO
with the support of CSO / local partner • To ensure long-term sustainability of
operations, RESCOs can ensure complementarities in interface between the mini-
grids constructed by them and the utility (DABS) grid, so that there is seamless
integration with the national grid as and when it reaches in future • From
financing perspective, RESCOs are often implemented as public-private
partnerships with government agencies (MRRD, MEW etc) providing support to
RESCOs to reduce their risk exposure levels • One of the key aspects leading to
the success of  RESCO is the presence of an anchor load An anchor load is
defined as  load type that can provide sustained demand for power generated from
the RESCO project Other intermittent or seasonal loads can then be built around
the anchor load to provide stability and higher levels of capacity utilization
For instance, telecom towers have 24x7 demand and can act as anchor loads
Another good example is that of cold storages that need power round the clock •
Significant benefits to the community (as consumers) accrue through  RESCO
project through sustainable energy access, especially for enterprise development
This also leads to economic growth in the nearby region With  “clustering”
approach, district level impacts are also possible • RESCO benefits from
revenues earned by powering various loads in the area under its command It also
forges  long-term relationship with communities in the region, which will help
to scale up the business to other locations The RESCO also gains knowledge of
various aspects of an energy-based business • Benefits to government accrue
through provision of environmentally sustainable energy in un-electrified areas,
thereby complementing government efforts The RESCO business model has strong
potential in Afghanistan, mostly because decentralised energy is expected to
contribute significantly in the country’ overall energy sector In the process of
setting up the RESCO, the following institutional roles are envisaged: •
Regulator: The regulator shall demarcate regions within Afghanistan where grid
may not reach in  certain foreseeable future These shall ring-fence zones where
RESCO can operate It would also open up the market for private sector players to
act as potential RESCOs • Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) & Ministry of Rural
Rehabilitation & Development (MRRD): As RESCOs are widely expected to be set up
in rural June 2017 68 RER2032 ecosystems, MRRD would play an important role in
institutionalizing this business model in all its energy programmes MEW will set
up guidelines for technical design, safety and quality of power delivered for
RESCO projects MEW shall also carry out capacity building activities for RESCOs
MRRD can empanel potential RESCO organizations and work in tandem with relevant
Community Development Councils and other grassroots organizations to identify
RESCO project opportunities Capacity development of RESCOs can also be jointly
taken up by the two ministries along with DABS • Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat
(DABS): DABS shall, as the transmission utility, lay down guidelines for
interconnection of distribution networks for mini-utilities projects with the
grid, so as to facilitate seamless transition in the event of grid interface
DABS shall build capacities of RESCOs on technical and commercial aspects of the
distribution business including billing, metering and collection activities •
RESCO: The role of the RESCO encompasses building, operating and maintaining the
micro-utility ecosystem throughout the life of the PPAs signed with various
consumers • Consumers: Enter into agreement with RESCO and pay tariffs as agreed
upon With this above background, the following diagram shows  flow diagram of
how the RESCO is expected to operate Figure 25 - Process flows and roles /
responsibilities of various stakeholders for RESCO model in Afghanistan In
Afghanistan, RESCO projects are assumed to be in the 100 kW – ,000 kW range, in
terms of installed capacity  typical RESCO project is expected to cover  –
villages, thereby connecting between ,000 - ,000 households or roughly ,000 –
15,000 individuals This scale is higher than normal RESCO projects in the South
Asian region (which vary between June 2017 69 RER2032 10 kW – 500kW) One major
reason behind this is that  number of districts and rural areas are expected to
remain disconnected from the national grid, thereby allowing larger scale RESCO
projects Global success on RESCO projects is based upon private enterprise in
off-grid locations, where entrepreneurship sets up its own micro-utility to
provide electricity solutions More prevalent is the diesel generator operator,
who functions as an energy service provider using diesel generator sets,
essentially providing lighting energy to markets in Asia and Africa In India,
the Rockefeller Foundation has been at the center of empowering rural
communities with environmentally sustainable energy supply options through the
well- known SPEED programme The SPEED Story Smart Power for Environmentally-
sound Economic Development (SPEED), an initiative by the Rockefeller Foundation
to connect remote, rural households in India with renewable energy based systems
The SPEED model is structured around empowering enterprises, and is built around
the concept of anchor loads Anchor loads allow  generating station to perform at
higher levels of capacity utilization The programme sought to support Energy
Service Companies (ESCO) to enter the rural energy market,  segment marked with
high transaction costs relative to volume Over the past  years since 2010, the
SPEED programme (and now its successor the Smart Power for Rural Development)
has worked with over 50 ESCO organisations, contributing to its goal to energize
,000 Indian villages with ‘smart power’ The rural mini-grids are equipped with
efficient LED lights, prepaid meters and tamper proof distribution networks that
ensure safety and security Several micro- enterprises have been energized, viz
telecom towers, drying and processing units, small garment making businesses,
cold storages, training centres and numerous shops Agricultural pumping has also
been  major beneficiary Figure 26 - Impact of the SPEED program  Pay-as-you-go
or Micro-finance based standalone systems  stand-alone solar PV system is
modular, photovoltaic-based electrification system that provides amenity power
for  captive consumer, typically  household Being modular in nature, the stand-
alone system is often designed to suit the needs of the customer The business
model sustains on providing reliable, easy-to-afford energy access at the
household level Using pay-as-you-go or microfinance based financing models,
these systems provide June 2017 70 RER2032 basic electricity supply at
negligible upfront costs For affluent users, larger and more sophisticated
systems can be introduced There are several versions and variants that may be
adapted for stand-alone models This section shall attempt to highlight some of
the best practices followed globally, seeking to capture the various nuances
involved in these systems Salient features Overall, the following salient
features broadly describe the stand-alone, home based solar PV systems business
model: • Stand-alone systems are provided as either one-time outright purchase
or  hire-to- purchase or  pay-as-you-go model Hire-to-purchase as well as pay-
as-you-go models have sequenced ownership rights • The model may typically
comprise  technical entity (who could be the manufacturer itself) entrusted with
the design of systems, and  implementation partner who identifies and engages
with end users Optionally,  financial intermediary may be involved • Stand-alone
models are typically characterized by the presence of ICT enabled, ‘smart’
features These may include systems that are integrated with central servers
through Radio Frequency tags, prepaid usage, “black box” designs etc • • The
models exhibit optimal and efficient energy use devices such as LED lights,
energy efficient fans, multi-function devices (chargeable
lantern–cum–torch–cum–FM radio; or  hand-cranked or bicycle powered battery to
provide supplementary charge) These features also make the stand-alone device
lifestyle tool In order to cater to  large number of customers, the routes to
market adoption for stand-alone systems often involve innovative channels While
most manufacturers use the NGO – community based organization (CBO) route, there
are other models that have utilized existing distribution channels for petroleum
products (Reliance Solar), or linking with education programmes (Kotak Urja) in
India, or selling energy coupled to other infrastructure services such as water
(as done by Grundfos in Africa39) Yet, others have developed their own dealer-
distributor networks • To ensure scale up of stand-alone home-based systems
financing partner is needed The partner partly resolves cash flow issues for the
end user and the technical partner or the implementing agency Typically, the
financing partner extends micro- credit to the user Financing of the systems by
the technical partner and/or implementing agency is also common As these systems
replace fossil fuels such as kerosene, the financing terms are tuned to ensure
that financial savings from avoided fuel expenses are utilized to pay monthly
lease rentals for the stand-alone systems In addition, there are significant
advantages in terms of avoided indoor emissions from kerosene use, in addition
to GHG emission reductions • Stand-alone models are often implemented as public-
private partnerships, with the government providing investment support to
implementing partners These forms  win-win solution for government who are
unable to extend the main grid to remote areas 39  71 June 2017 RER2032 • •
Communities (as consumers) accrue significant benefits through  stand-alone
system from household energy access, especially for education and improving the
quality of life for the family Implementing agencies and technical partners
benefit from accessing  larger user base In deferred payment models, user
charges typically run for 60–84 months, within which the user has invariably
increased its demand so as to ask for  second– or  larger–system In presence of
microfinance agencies in the SS model, such trends are significantly more
pronounced Unlike other business models, the stand-alone system market does not
require much regulatory provisions: broadly this market is characterized by
transaction between  service provider (commonly the implementing agency) and
customer However, there are strategic roles played by institutional players that
determine the success of this market These are outlined below: • Ministry of
Energy and Water (MEW): MEW can set up guidelines for household scale systems,
specifying technical design, safety and power delivered from  given system MEW
can also carry out capacity building activities for implementing agencies and
provide support to technical partners • Microfinance (MF) or financing entity:
The financing entity often holds the key to any large-scale programme The role
of the MF entity is typically to ensure that cash flows are positive for the
implementing entity (typically the intermediary who as the implementing agency
is the interface between the manufacturer and user) At the same time, by
providing upfront cash for the systems on behalf of the seller, the MF enters
into  financing agreement with the end user, allowing him to make small
repayments every month In pay-as-you-go systems, the financing entity may
finance the implementing agency with  debt-equity combination, which de-risks
the implementer from delayed payments The user, who is not financed, pays off
for the system every month through user charges These charges typically run for
60 – 84 months, following which the user owns the asset • The Implementing
Agency: This agency plays  central role in putting together the entire programme
At the sourcing end, it interacts with financial institutions to ensure
microfinance and other financial tie-ups At the same time, it works closely with
manufacturers to ensure that devices being sold cater to the needs of the
consumers Finally, it controls the operational aspects of the programme to
ensure smooth performance, absence of leakages (systems being sold to wrong end-
users, stolen, or traded internally for arbitrage etc) Crucially, the
implementing agency is responsible for overall after-sales service and
maintenance performance of the programme as well In many cases, the implementing
agency is multi-tiered: involving two or three levels Large programmes (at
national level) require an apex entity, supported by entities at the provincial
level such as NGOs or CSOs • Consumers: Consumers can be simple end-users, who
can undertake outright purchase of  system They can also participate in the
programme under  deferred payment or  pay-as-you-go model June 2017 72 RER2032
Figure 27 - Process flows and roles / responsibilities of various actors for
standalone system (SS) model in Afghanistan The schematic flowchart above
outlines the overall process and identifies roles and responsibilities of
various stakeholders in  simplified version of the standalone system In the
Afghanistan context, stand-alone solar PV has been widely in use across rural
areas, driven largely by lack of options for electricity supply Most of these
systems are assembled out of imported components or systems from neighbouring
countries As  result, these units usually are not certified, and could be of
questionable quality Stand-alone devices are expected to have significant impact
in Afghanistan in the years to come, especially with participation from
microfinance agencies As  result, the implementation of the business models for
stand-alone systems could also have far-reaching impacts Perceived as  low-risk
intervention and already present in the local markets, various agencies are in
the process of introducing state-of-the-art stand-alone systems for the Afghan
market, through  financial intermediary40 The implementation of business models
requires generic as well as specific support in terms of policy readiness,
financing, technical-cum-managerial capacities among others These ecosystem
enablers are critical for initiation and sustainability of business models The
next chapter of the Roadmap presents these enablers and their role in stage-wise
development and maturity of RE markets 40 Mercy Corps, for instance has  plan to
introduce ,800 solar home systems aggregating  MWp of installed capacity, across
four districts of Afghanistan 73 June 2017 RER2032 The Azuri Pay-as-you-go Model
in Sub-Saharan Africa The Azuri model, called the Indigo Duo solar home system
is  simple kit with   Wp PV module and  ,300 mAh battery, connected to two LED
lights (60 lumens each), and the Indigo controller (the black box) The battery
and the controller are housed in the black box with  keypad (see picture) The
black box allows power in the sockets only when the system has been recharged
using  valid code provided to the user This code is obtained when the user makes
payment, typically for  one-week or four-week duration The business model works
through distribution channels as Azuri does not have any direct sales strategy
Hardware and services are sold to distribution partners, say in Sub Saharan
Africa Distributors are trained in the Azuri system, and they are demarcated
areas of coverage The cloud based Azuri database stores details of all
distributors and consumers, providing each and every consumer with  unique ID
(like  serial number) For the user, there are eighty instalment payments after
purchase of his system the payments contributes Each of something towards the
cost of the system After expiry of the installments, the system becomes free at
the hands of the user Figure 28 – Indigo Duo solar home system June 2017 74
RER2032  ENABLERS AND ACTIONS FOR MARKET DEVELOPMENT-  STAGE GATE APPROACH
Development of RE markets is often  stage - wise process wherein each stage is
the outcome of policy directions and actions facilitated by government, and the
resultant responses from the private sector and other engaged stakeholders Each
stage thus requires broad-based as well as targeted enablers for various
technologies and business models to develop and mature The Stage-gate model as
explained below, facilitates an understanding of these enablers  Stage-Gate
model for market development – look back to move ahead The stage-gate model is
technically understood as  management technique in which an initiative or
project is divided into stages, separated by gates At each gate, the approach is
‘look back to move ahead’ In other words, the continuation of the initiative is
contingent upon certain conditions to be met, review to be done, risks to be
assessed at each gate, and then an informed decision to be taken to move ahead
to the next stage In the current context, the RE market in Afghanistan would
follow three () stages: market seeding to market creation and then to market
transformation, with each stage being built on certain enablers (technical,
regulatory/ policy, financial/ economical and institutional or related to
capacities) that are put in place As mentioned earlier, there are some
overarching enablers that are required for the entire RE sector per se, but
there are also specific and targeted actions that need to be undertaken for
specific technologies and business models to grow This chapter discusses the
Stage- Gate model as applicable to Afghanistan, followed by  discussion on
overarching as well as targeted enablers and actions for each stage of the
market development of the Stage-Gate Figure 29 presents framework above-
discussed the approach As shown in the graph, the Stage- Gate figure juxtaposes
capacity additions in renewable energy over time, so as to demonstrate the
trajectory of growth of the energy sector circa Figure 29 - Stage-Gate framework
The Stage- Gate  is the successful completion of the first stage representing
seeding of the RE market This stage is characterized by the following: • This
stage builds upon existing experience in the country on renewable energy and
proof of concept for some RE technologies that have not been tried at all or at
the scale that the Roadmap suggests • The thematic focus remains on identifying
tried-and-tested technologies, together with the processes, in terms of policies
and guidelines and initiating  few pilots to seed the markets 75 June 2017
RER2032 • • Increase in installed capacities for technologies identified as
highly applicable in Afghanistan in the current context (as shown in Table 10 in
chapter ) This includes solar PV, mini and micro hydro technologies, and wind
power In terms of specific technology applications, the highest focus remains on
utility scale power projects, whether installed as  power park or as IPPs Other
important contributions are from mini-grids (solar as well as hydro) and stand-
alone solar PV • New technologies to be piloted include waste to energy, roof-
top solar, stand-alone solar for strategic applications such as telecom tower
and pumping, solar thermal applications and domestic cooking using improved
cookstoves and biogas • This stage is supported by government and partner
(donor) funds as the market is still premature and needs structural support
Details are discussed in chapter  on ‘Costing and Financing of Roadmap’ • The
market creation stage represents demonstration of ‘techno-commercial viability’
and confidence building of private sector • The focus shifts to setting up more
projects in order to create the markets In this stage, various business models
are implemented and customized to achieve success in the Afghan context In
addition to technologies that are initiated in SG1 and are now (expectedly)
being implemented at  commercial scale, SG2 introduces new technologies such as
CSP, Floatovoltaics, CPV, Biomass power generation, and geothermal energy
particularly for heating applications • • SG2 is still supported by grants and
government support, but their share is expected to reduce, from almost 80%
finance (as in SG1) to around 40% This share is taken up by promoter’ equity,
while the grant component could be redistributed as viability gap funding and
other sources of low cost debt • This stage represents market maturity and
expansion, led by private initiative • Stakeholders (mainly private sector,
represented both by local and global) are fully familiar with the ground rules
vis--vis RE markets in Afghanistan, and  number of enterprise models are
operating to transform the sector to higher levels of growth • Government inputs
and support are strategic in nature, focusing on newer technologies, • newer
policies and newer initiatives In this stage, grants may still exist for  few
sunrise applications, but overall forms  small share of the pool of funds (15%)
Promoter contributions exceed 50% with own equity, market debt and low-cost debt
June 2017 76 RER2032 The suggested targets for each of the three stages is
presented below: Market Type Table 14 - Suggested targets for three stages Stage
Gate  Stage Gate II Stage Gate III Target Capacity (MW) Solar Power Parks (SPP)
Solar IPPs Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) Floating PV Concentrating PV Wind
IPPs Large Hydro Power generation from agri-residues Methanation of organic
manure & agri waste Bio-methanation of municipal solid waste Heat Pump
Applications & Geothermal Energy Diesel + wind / solar / mini hydro MHP + SHP
Roof-top with net-metering / FiT PV Home Systems, telecom towers & others Solar
Pumping Evacuative Tube & Flat Plate - Thermal energy Thermal Energy (Biogas)
Thermal Energy (Improved Cookstoves) Utility scale Mini-grid Stand alone Total
,,      ,,,As discussed at the beginning of the chapter, the essence of the
Stage-Gate developmental model is the effective presence of enablers and actions
Sections below discuss the key enablers and actions required for meeting the
targets through each of the three stages The stages contain certain provisos,
which if realized could translate into additional power generation and eventual
contribution to the RENP policy target of ,000 MW by June 2017 77 RER2032  Key
enablers and actions One of the recurrent prerequisites discussed in the context
of RE sector development is the need for policies and regulatory direction from
the government Among the landmarks achieved, Renewable Energy Policy for the
country has been finalized Another vital regulatory instrument is the Feed in
Tariff Policy In addition, Energy Investment Policy and others are also in the
process of being approved While these policies provide  legal and regulatory
framework for managing the overall energy and renewable energy domains, there is
also  need for other specific enablers which include the following:
Programmatic guidelines (or Schemes) for promoting specific business models:
National level programmatic guidelines for development of Solar (or Wind) Power
Parks and for Distribution Franchisees shall unlock the markets for SPPs and
pave way for distribution franchisee or mini-utilities in the country The
guidelines should include as  minimum - the definition; framework and processes;
institutional roles and responsibilities; permissions, clearances and statutory
requirements; power evacuation and financing mechanisms  Policy on mini-grids:
dedicated policy on mini-grids is required to kick-start this segment in
Afghanistan The policy should expectedly include the definition and description;
technical standards and guidelines for designing, operating and maintaining the
mini-grids; tariff methodologies; structure and roles for the energy service
company (RESCO); regulations and incentives; and involvement of local
enterprises, communities in sustaining the mini-grids  Regulatory guidance on
power distribution and grid integration for off-grid systems: There is  need to
provide guidelines for setting up of roof-top and off- grid power projects in
manner that would allow safe and seamless integration with the national grid
when it reached these locations  Demarcation of areas for electrification
through decentralised (localized) generation: Taking DABS’ proposed network as
the starting point, districts or zones may be identified where power may be
generated and consumed locally These shall not only open the market for
decentralised renewable energy projects, but also allow DABS to identify its own
priority areas It would also provide clear guidance for electrification efforts
in Afghanistan  Greening of strategic sectors: Telecommunication, agricultural
pumping, transportation, food processing, buildings and construction, internal
and border security, etc are some of the strategic sectors that require reliable
electricity  scheme for promoting the use of RE in these sectors would create
demand and provide the ‘pull’ for RETs in the country  Incentives for use of
solar hot water systems: As  part of Afghanistan building energy codes and
regulations, use of solar hot water systems should be incentivized so that the
dependence on electric or thermal heating systems for water is reduced Some of
the incentives would be discounts in monthly or yearly electricity bills, rebate
on home loans, reduced property tax etc June 2017 78 RER2032  Developing the RE
resource atlas: While available RE resource maps that are developed by MEW are
useful to conduct pre-feasibilities of projects, improvements such as
demarcation of RE resources using time series data of key variables such as GHI,
DNI (for solar), wind speeds, flow rates for MHP and SHPs shall enhance the
quality of the maps The preparation of RE atlas is thus an important action that
need to start as early as possible to facilitate project developers in designing
the projects in market creation stage  Testing and certification of systems and
components: In order to ensure the quality and safety of RE systems and
components, and to ensure the designed and expected performance, it is important
to create  state-of-the-art national level testing and certification facility
that could later be expanded at provincial levels Existing efforts in this
direction taken by the Afghanistan National Standards Authority (ANSA) may be
complemented  Technical training and education: In order to provide  constant
stream of educated and skilled workforce to sustain this sector, it is important
to mainstream the RE education and skill development as  part of national level
educational and vocational training infrastructure  specialist organisation may
also be set up, or existing institutions such as the Vocational Training Centre
(VTC) strengthened, so as to meet this challenge in  systematic manner
Independent regulatory agency: Role of the regulatory agency would be to
introduce and guide regulations on various subjects such as tariffs, power
access and transmission, determination of  national ‘grid code’, issuance of
licenses for power generation and distribution operations It can issue guidance
on demarcated zones for decentralised and off-grid power generation, facilitate
development of solar power parks, open access and power purchase / sales and so
on Thus, the regulatory agency shall be  key enabler in structuring the
electricity sector and complement the efforts of the Ministry of Energy and
Water  Specialized institutions or Special Purpose Vehicles: These shall be
formed to carry out activities specific to  sub-sector or project type For
instance, the Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD) may be entrusted with the task
of setting up and managing solar PV parks Similarly, there could be  dedicated
entity managing the roof-top sector These specialized bodies, set up under the
aegis of the MEW can be given executive power, thereby according them ownership
and responsibility  Rural electricity utility: The rural electricity utility may
be given responsibilities for generation, transmission and distribution
exclusively in rural areas In terms of ownership, the utility could be  public
corporation or  government owned company Given that most of rural Afghanistan is
not connected to the national grid,  dedicated rural utility shall provide
greater focus on meeting the rural power shortage scenario  Dedicated financial
institution: As the sector grows and enters the market creation stage, it would
require  dedicated institution to generate and manage 79 June 2017 RER2032 funds
for the implementation of RE projects The institution will be developed to
manage local as well as international grants and lines of credit This shall
create  basket-fund approach, in which development partners and other agencies
can pool in resources and enable the entity to offer  string of financial
solutions to suit various project types The financial entity may empanel
prospective project developers (private sector players, micro-finance companies,
NGOs) who can avail of financial support through it  Coordination mechanism and
an oversight: coordination between institutions responsible for electricity
generation, distribution and application is important for realizing the
potential of RE in Afghanistan Therefore, an effective coordination mechanism
amongst these institutions is an important step to ensure synchronized
development of the sector  Institutional capacities on project planning,
managing, monitoring and reporting: RE sector will grow on the shoulders of
strong and capable national level institutions Building and strengthening of
institutions is therefore  pre- requisite for developing RE sector in
Afghanistan Specifically, capacities need to be strengthened across MEW, MRRD
and other key ministries and provincial governments on technical, managerial,
administrative and financing aspects of RE projects This would be  continuous
process, as there would be  need to keep abreast with the latest developments in
RE sector internationally and also to incorporate learnings from local as well
as international experiences  National level awareness generation: since the
success of RE sector depends on its effective uptake by various sections of the
society and communities, it is critical to make them aware of and educate them
about the use and benefits of RE systems An all-encompassing and multi-
stakeholder targeted national level campaign on RE is expected to help catalyze
the growth of the sector One of the key enablers for RE sector in Afghanistan is
access to finance, which spans across all finance needs, viz large, medium,
small and micro In this direction, the relative weakness in the Afghan domestic
financial system implies that private resources are not readily available for
investment in the renewable energy sector As  result, the main sources of
finance lie in the public domain The RENP has rightly identified the unlocking
of private capital as  means to finance investments in the renewable energy
sector Engagement of banking sector & investment finance can take place at the
following levels:  Bank (Debt) Finance: Bank finance for large and medium scale
projects in the renewable energy sector shall in-turn mobilize both private and
public capital Currently, most projects in this domain get supported by
concessional donor funds and government contributions Currently Afghan banks are
more focused on retail operations, however donor or government guaranteed debt
instruments leverage additional capital These can be utilized to expedite can
implementation of renewable energy projects, especially for solar power parks,
larger RE technology projects and setting up of power distribution franchisees
Microfinance: Primarily for micro scale projects at the user level, microfinance
supported renewable energy projects has had significant success in ecosystems 80
June 2017 RER2032 similar to Afghanistan, across Asia and Africa Similar
potential exists here, with high levels of household energy demand for
consumption as well as micro- enterprise development  Working capital finance:
In addition, working capital finance, which is currently available from Afghan
banks for large businesses and industrial groups, is  potential enabler for
easing the capital constraints of the RE market  Enterprise development: In
rural economy, enterprises form the backbone, supporting the economy with
employment, trade and commerce Enterprises also enable communities to adapt to
climate-induced exigencies that lead to lower farm incomes and consequently
higher climate vulnerability From an energy security perspective, enterprises
are  key enabler as they are able to utilise energy for productive applications,
thereby generating incomes to sustain both the enterprise as well as the energy
generation unit There is  role for social enterprise incubators, who provide
various value-add services such as sales and marketing tie-ups, advice on
operating businesses and start-up capital In the Afghan context, the incubator
landscape is dominated by donors and CSOs, which provide inputs to enterprise
development However, there is  need for strengthening enterprises as well as
enterprise incubation services Several government agencies, especially MRRD and
MAIL (Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock), in collaboration with
development partners, have set up incubators to facilitate rural enterprise
development  Support programme for local RE industry: since local industry is
expected to provide the back-bone of RE sector in Afghanistan, it is important
to design and implement  support programme for local manufacturers, system
assemblers and others by way of enhancing their capacities, providing networking
opportunities with international industry, access to technology and technical
know-how, financial incentives, mentoring and incubation, involvement through
regular consultations for policies and overall RE sector’ improvement etc
Private – Public – Partnerships or PPP: The PPP model works on the premise of
getting the best out of public and private sectors to work together for  common
goal While the public sector brings socially responsive pro-poor approach to
project design, the private sector focuses on financial viability of the project
The PPP model also helps in developing the confidence of the private sector
through risk sharing mechanism With spatially distributed communities, PPP
projects are especially an enabler in unlocking private capital for financing
renewable energy projects in rural sector This model is particularly pertinent
in mini-grid sector where DABS along with  local RESCO can work together to
build, operate and maintain (or transfer) mini- grids, and in the process,
builds the capacities of local enterprises to undertake such projects in future
Fiscal and financial incentives for RE sector: while the sector will continue to
benefit from already available support and incentives for the private sector led
infrastructure projects, the RE sector would require customized fiscal and
financial incentives particularly in terms of customs duty and import tax
waivers 81 June 2017 RER2032 Management of risks is  key enabler in providing
the right environment for stakeholders engaged in the sustainable energy sector
Although risks and their mitigants could be varied, broad risk classes are
outlined below:  Mitigating business risks: Business risks include delays in
import and transportation, absence of insurance or high insurance premium, lack
or absence of skilled labor, risks of theft of plant and machinery (during
transit, or during implementation / operation) etc These risks, most of which
are present in Afghanistan, can be mitigated by policy interventions and / or
improvement in overall business environment  Managing project risks: As distinct
from business risks, project risks are intrinsic to the project location These
could include revenue risks arising from non- payment of dues from consumers,
cost overrun risks from delayed implementation, safety risks from possible
accidents etc Some of these risks overlap with business risks as well Better
project design and management will help in mitigating these risks  Addressing
security risks: Finally, the delicate security situation in the country poses
risk as well While the success of telecommunication in Afghanistan has indicated
that rural infrastructure may not always be threatened by the security
situation, the potential for disruption remains active Direct mitigating
measures include use of security, while more passive options could be to build
trust capital with local communities as  means to counter subversive forces
Management of these risks reduces chances of project failure and are crucial for
the success of the renewable energy sector in general The following table maps
enablers along with the stage of implementation in terms of the applicable
stage-gate when the enabler is expected to be introduced Enablers as applied to
relevant RE applications and business models are discussed in next section June
2017 82 RER2032 # Enabler Table 15 - Enablers and their applicability in various
stages  Programmatic guidelines (or Schemes) for promoting specific business
models  Policy on mini-grids   Regulatory guidance on power distribution and
grid integration for off-grid systems Demarcation of areas for electrification
through decentralised (localized) generation  Greening of strategic sectors
Incentives for use of solar hot water systems  Developing the RE resource atlas
SG  SG  SG  ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔  Testing and certification of systems and
components ✔ ✔  Technical training and education  Independent regulatory agency
Specialized institutions or Special Purpose Vehicles  Rural electricity utility
Dedicated financial institution  Coordination mechanism and an oversight
Institutional capacities on project planning, managing, monitoring and reporting
National level awareness generation  Bank (Debt) Finance  Microfinance  Working
capital finance  Enterprise development  Support programme for local RE industry
Private – Public – Partnerships or PPP  Fiscal and financial incentives for RE
sector  Mitigating business risks  Managing project risks  Addressing security
risks ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ 83 June 2017
RER2032  Enablers for implementation of specific business models This section
breaks down some of the enablers outlined in the sections above, into enabling
activities specific to the context of business models and technologies discussed
in this Roadmap For implementation of SPPs in Afghanistan, some of the key
enablers and actions, their impacts in  stage-wise manner in realizing the SPP
business model are presented below: Enablers and actions Stage Impact
Guidelines for SPP   Special Purpose Vehicle as SPPD in place Guidelines for
power evacuation and long-term access   ,  RE resource atlas , Stakeholders,
particularly project developers, have clarity and direction, and are empowered
to take decisions Learning curve for all stakeholders and expedites market
growth Long-term access to central transmission utility allows private producers
to sell to buyers, thereby opening up the market for private – private sale of
power Will encourage private sector to set up large scale SPPs, and IPPs with
confidence and will help in designing robust PPAs  Manging business and security
risks ,  Private sector shall come forward with investments in SPPs It is
expected that Distribution Franchisee projects shall be implemented in urban and
industrial areas of Afghanistan, although  modified version could be equally
applicable for RESCO projects Success factors and visibility of DF projects
shall lead to greater proliferation of DF projects Key enablers for effective
implementation of Distribution Franchisee business model and their impacts are
given below: Enablers Stage Impact  Policies and guidelines for DF   Demarcation
of areas to be franchised and first DF set up as proof of concept  Stakeholders
have clarity and direction, and are empowered to take decisions Learning curve
for all stakeholders and expedites market adoption of DF model June 2017 84
RER2032   Modified DF model introduced to RESCO business model , Incentives and
support for DF agencies  RESCO model could out-source billing, metering and
revenue collection (BMC) to local agencies DFs play an increasingly active role
in areas where national utilities fail to realize targeted revenues The key
enablers and their impacts in the implementation of this business model are:
Enablers Stage Impact     Policy on solar PV roof-tops with incentives for
stakeholders Kabul Solar Roof-top PV project as first project Accreditation of
EPC contractors as qualified third- parties to Build-Own-Operate (or variants of
the above), and also as aggregators Escrow accounts with utilities to enable
utility payments to net sellers Also, retail financing of solar roof-tops   , ,
Policies will provide direction to stakeholders, while incentives will encourage
private sector players to enter the market Pilot project shall launch
implementation of solar PV roof-tops Qualified EPC contractors can deliver long
term and lasting roof-top systems that shall yield revenues and reduce risks
Aggregators shall also de-risk the user from & responsibilities Inability of
utility to pay consumers for net power purchased is  bottleneck Techno-
commercial solutions like escrow shall unlock the market further Key enablers
and their impacts on mini-grid market are presented below: Enablers Stage Impact
Policy for rural mini-grid projects, demarcation of areas to be electrified only
by decentralised projects  Will provide clear direction and focus to
stakeholders on prospective zones for RESCO development June 2017 85 RER2032
Financial support or other mechanisms to support RESCOs in pre-project
activities ,  Empanelment of RESCOs   Access to financial instruments , In
Afghanistan, terrain and weak infrastructure pose higher costs for RESCO
projects; as such project identification and design costs are expected to be
higher in the initial stages Pre-project support will strengthen the business
case for RESCOs As RESCO market expands, eligibility norms for applicant RESCOs
shall ensure participation of credible entities This shall improve sector
viability and encourage financial sector lending Key to unlocking RESCO
potential in long run lies in RESCO projects accessing finance One of the
required interventions is for  dedicated rural energy funds to support RESCO
projects with  combination of debt, grant and last stage equity Key enablers for
successful, microfinance based solar PV standalone systems model are identified
as follows: Enablers Stage Impact  Strengthening and capacity building of MFI to
lend to solar stand-alone systems   Diversification into larger systems and
variety of products , Will assist in providing upfront capital for procuring
state-of-the-art system for rural Afghan households Enable the household to move
away from expensive fossil fuels and use the solar system to generate streams of
avoided cash flows Will provide more options to the end user As  result, markets
can also merge – larger solar home systems could be financed by MFIs, set up in
roof-tops and coupled to  net metering system for power consumption and export
As discussed, the Stage-Gate framework of development is contingent upon the
introduction and implementation of enablers, both overarching and specific to
business models An important enabler for the overall RE future development is
related to availability of funds and financing instruments which are discussed
in the next chapter in details June 2017 86 RER2032  COSTING AND FINANCING OF
ROADMAP The purpose of this chapter is to outline the framework that can be used
to estimate initial costs for achieving Roadmap targets, and to outline
mechanisms that can be used to reduce the cost to the government and
international development partners by incentivizing investment by the private
sector The RE market in Afghanistan is in infancy and hence there is no clear
‘market price’ for RE in Afghanistan Wide variations in costs exist even amongst
similar RE system configurations This is  consequence of projects being grant
funded by  wide variety of donors (with corresponding variations in standards,
overheads, and costs),  small and fragmented market, the lack of focus on
commercial sustainability, and an emphasis on system commissioning rather than
on ongoing operations and maintenance  framework is designed for evaluating
potential costs required to reach the targets of Stage- Gate  of this Roadmap
Costs for these RE technologies are estimated based on broad international
benchmarks obtained from credible sources The framework allows costs to be
calculated by technology ( Solar PV) and market ( utility scale) It then
outlines  mechanism to put in place financial instruments appropriate to the
market type ( utility scale, mini-grids, etc) This framework is not technology
specific, but does make note of the degree of maturity of these technologies in
Afghanistan This degree of maturity can be used to evaluate useful instruments
for the current stage of the market and make efforts to put in place mechanisms
that will be useful at future stages The framework is geared towards maximizing
the role and investment of the private sector, and targeting donor / government
subsidies to that end Private-sector led growth is both in line with the RENP
(and economic development efforts more generally), and is cost-effective, as
international experience suggests that  robust competitive private sector
dominated market with effective regulation promotes the greatest market growth
and lowest prices In keeping with the overall structure of this Roadmap
document, the goal is to move towards  liberalized energy market To date, there
has been very limited investment by private sector RE developers or commercial
financial institutions, although surveys conducted suggest an interest and
willingness provided risks are adequately addressed The financing strategy is to
gradually reduce the proportion of public investment in favour of higher share
of investment by the private sector in the forms of viability gap funding, debt,
equity, and various hybrid financing and risk mitigation products The framework
is built upon deploying the right financial mechanisms based upon business model
or market type ( utility scale projects), and the stage of market development (
market creation) The financial mechanisms are selected based upon the likely
barriers being faced to private sector led market growth at that stage and are
organized into three broad areas; subsidies and grants, risk reduction/
mitigation instruments, and climate change related funds / mechanisms  RE
benchmark costs and global cost trends Globally, RE prices have dropped
consistently over the past few years,  trend that is expected to continue for at
least the next decade Future costs for renewable energy will depend on  variety
of inter-related factors including technological advancement, market expansion
and regulatory action However, the core premise is that costs will reduce as the
June 2017 87 RER2032 market expands, which is supported by international
experience The following figure shows the trends in utility scale solar PV
auctions throughout the world It is clearly visible that the prices are going
down at  rapid rate Figure 30 Trends in Solar PV Utility scale auction prices41
In fact, utility scale solar PV is even achieving parity with fossil fuel (coal)
based systems in some countries As an illustrative example, the figure below
shows how the tariffs bid by developers (the price) has changed as the installed
capacity for utility scale PV has increased (market expansion) in India42 : 41
IRENA Rethinking Energy 2017 42As per the recently opened bid for solar park,
the lowest bid was INR 97/kWh (04 USD/kWh)  -unit-at-rewa-bidding 88 June 2017
RER2032 Figure 31 Market expansion and price declines in the Utility Scale Solar
PV sector in India The following figures, obtained from IRENA show the expected
trends in LCOEs of utility scale solar PV up to 2025 (Error! Reference source
not found) and the overall LCOE ranges expected for various RE technologies in
2025 (Error! Reference source not found) Figure 32 Projected trends in global
LCOE of utility scale solar PV43 43 IRENA Rethinking Energy 2017 June 2017 89
RER2032 Figure 33 Expected global LCOE ranges for RE in 2025 as against the 2014
values44 Global PV utility scale costs and wind power costs are expected to
halve over the next decade Biomass and hydropower, as mature technologies, are
not expected to fall too much in prices However, based upon current
technological trends and research, prices for the core mini-grid system are
predicted to drop by over 50% in the next twenty years New tenders (particularly
in the Middle East) also reveal such low prices While it remains to be seen if
projects bid at these rates will be financially viable (and it should be noted
that complex financing and PPA structures can make this published cost difficult
to compare), these projects do point to the potential for cost savings given
mature market  RE costs in Afghanistan To establish the cost baseline in the
absence of an established market in Afghanistan, costs for reference systems
were procured from local RE organizations In the case of solar PV, the AREU was
asked to provide quotations for systems in each of the proposed markets ( MW
with no storage (utility scale market), 100 kW with some storage (mini-grid
market), and 10 kW stand alone with battery backup (large household system
market) The graph below shows unit costs (USD/ Watt) for solar PV systems of
different configurations, as provided by the AREU 44 IRENA Renewable Power
Generation Costs in 2014 June 2017 90 Comparison of per Watt costs for different
system configurations in Afghanistan - AREU Data RER2032     /        AFG - Home
System AFG - Mini Grid system AFG - Utility Scale Panels Other Equipt Other
costs Govt costs Figure 34 PV price comparison Solar panel costs were broken out
separately, while other costs were grouped within the categories of other
equipment, other costs, and government costs for sake of comparison as shown
below It should also be noted that land costs and security costs are not
included as these are highly variable and site specific Other equipment
Inverters, batteries, PV panel stands, battery racks, grounding, cabling, safety
ropes, nuts, and bolts and other miscellaneous minor equipment required for
plant construction Other costs Equipment transport to site, management and
administration charges, site labour charges, site design and civil works and
other miscellaneous design and site preparation costs Government costs Taxes and
permitting fees It appears that economies of scale are present in panel costs
(as evidenced by lower panel unit costs as system sizes increase) However,
quotations received indicate that the greater system complexity including
additional charge controllers required for  mini-grid as compared to  home
system negate these economies of scale when overall costs are considered In
contrast, the lack of storage (battery costs are approximately 40% of the
equipment cost for home systems and 30% for mini-grids) and simpler
configurations required for  utility scale system result in overall unit costs
below 50% as compared to home systems and mini-grids When compared to global and
regional benchmarks, it was found that costs are higher in Afghanistan Higher
equipment costs are likely  reflection both of higher transportation and
logistics costs as well as of  smaller market and the lack of intense
competition for large utility-scale projects The higher labour costs reflect the
lack of skilled technical labour available for large-scale installations, which
can be partially addressed by training programs The proportion of costs (as
shown below) for utility-scale systems in India and Afghanistan is similar, even
though the logistics, market, and tax regime in India are different to 91 June
2017 RER2032 Afghanistan It suggests that  reduction in taxes, other supportive
policies and an expanded market has the potential to drive costs down across
both equipment and labour costs Figure 35 Cost elements for utility-scale
systems, Afghanistan and India Following scenario/developments will lead to
rapid cost reductions in future: • Rapid progress towards integration into
international RE market enabling country to benefit from regional economies of
scale • Rapid improvement in logistics costs due to improved infrastructure
particularly towards sites for large utility-scale projects • Positive
regulatory environment, established track record and significantly reduced
Afghanistan risk premium  Cost of achieving Stage-Gate  target The global costs
mentioned in previous section have provided  basis for estimating the costs per
MW of generation capacity for the various proposed technologies in Afghanistan
The assessment is limited to the cost of constructing and commissioning RE
equipment and does not include costs for transmission/distribution grid
infrastructure, materials/equipment replacement and & costs The assessment also
does not consider the land and security costs required These costs vary markedly
across the country, and in many deployments land and security will either be
provided by the government, the community or owners’ associations (as in the
case of industrial parks) Stage- Gate  represent the phase when technology
deployment is at  nascent stage and projects are generally intended to confirm
the sufficient availability of natural resource ( wind availability at the site)
or to demonstrate technical viability and refine standard designs through pilot
projects Private-sector led capital investment at this stage is often
challenging, and faces the barriers of  lack of confidence in the natural
resource and (once the resource potential is established) confidence in the
techno-economic viability of the project The table below provides an indication
of what costs might be based upon international benchmarks provided above to
give an indication of the scale of investments required to reach the roadmap
targets in Stage- Gate  However, as it should be noted again that these costs
represent broad global averages rather than Afghanistan specific costs Further,
these costs represent  wide range of sites, financing, and market conditions,
and often consist of only ‘core’ costs (not including distribution, &, capacity
building, etc) Nevertheless, 92 June 2017 RER2032 applying these broad
benchmarks suggests that the overall capital costs to achieve the roadmap
targets in Stage- Gate  will be around 500 million USD Table 16 Total cost of
stage gate  Technology Solar PV (Utility Scale) Solar PV (Mini-grid) Wind
(Utility Scale) Large hydro MHP+SHP Mini-grids Bio-methanation of municipal
solid waste Solar PV Roof-top Various Stand alone Total Cost Estimate45 (USD/MW)
SG  Target (MW) Total Cost Estimate (USD million) 57 90 28 45 50 40 90 50   313
488  Financing of Roadmap The sections above on costing outlined  framework to
estimate the range of costs for deploying RE technology/market combinations as
per the Roadmap targets This section outlines  framework to judge and put in
place financing instruments appropriate to the market type ( utility scale,
mini-grid) and stage of expansion, but is not technology- specific It should
also be noted that these financing mechanisms are only one aspect of  robust
private sector This chapter does not discuss financing modalities for the
broader infrastructure for the energy sector that must be built (such as
transmission infrastructure), nor does it discuss financing of improved
logistics, security, etc  Framework for financing The framework for suitable
financing actions is aligned with the broader Roadmap framework that approaches
RE development in terms of technologies, markets and stages At each of these
stages (market seeding, market creation, market expansion), the market tends to
be dominated by particular project types ( resource assessments and pilot
projects tend to occur during the market seeding stage) These activities,
particularly when attempted by the private sector, face risks and barriers Each
of these barriers is targeted by financial mechanisms, which are organized into
grants / subsidies and risk mitigation mechanisms Funding for these mechanisms
is the form of instruments ( grants through the newly-announced Citizens’
Charter Program) This approach is outlined below: 45 IRENA, Renewable Power
Generation costs in 2014 June 2017 93 RER2032 Assessed for each technology /
market combination ( Solar PV / Utility Scale) Stage of development Types of
projects  resource assessments, pilot projects, etc Risks / barriers  lack of
natural resource information Mechanisms  grants/subsidies or risk mitigation
funding from citizens' charter, risk guarantees from ADB Instruments Figure 36 –
RE Roadmap Financing Approach  Funding instruments and mechanisms In this
analysis, climate fund instruments are called out separately due to their
particular applicability to renewable energy Risks and barriers to RE
development have been previously discussed in the policy framework for RE
development (the RENP) and are unique to  particular market and stage of
development, and  brief definition of the types of financial mechanisms46 is
provided below: Subsidy/Grant: These are monetary benefits given to private
sector participants and consumers so as to reduce the financial impact of
commissioning and maintaining RE projects The purpose of these mechanisms is to
recognize and address commercial issues that can make  RE project unviable if
the only funding available was from the private sector These can include
generation-based capital subsidies (where grants are provided to project
developers for commissioning plants), ongoing Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) or
Feed-in-Tariff subsidies (where monies are provided based upon ongoing
generation) or concessional finance (where monies are used to provide  cheaper
source of capital such as equity or debt to RE developers) The payment of the
grant or subsidy is linked wherever possible to outputs;  certain capacity
installed or energy generated over time To date, the financing ecosystem for 46
At this stage,  distinction needs to be made between funding and financing
Funding implies that the government or any public agency provides the capital,
often consequent to an agreement and is usually free of charge Financing, on the
other hand, is the sum of money provided with an expectation that the receiver
repays the amount in due time June 2017 94 RER2032 renewable energy in
Afghanistan has been almost completely dominated by grants Instruments under
this mechanism include design-build or design-build-operate contracts financed
by international development agencies, grants for infrastructure such as under
the NSP (and by the newly-launched Citizens’ Charter Programs) and funding by
NGOs An overview of some of these types of grant/subsidy funding mechanisms is
provided below: Table 17 – Overview of financing options Financing Option
Advantages Limitations Experience in RE sector in Afghanistan Donor/GoA Grants
Direct support; Lacks sustainability, can “crowd-out” private investment
Dominates current Afghanistan funding landscape Viability Gap Funding /
Guarantee Funding Low-cost Debt Equity Complements finance already facilitates
scale up is in place, that Leverages equity and other forms of financing; ties
up the borrower in  formal and legal framework form of Purest financing where
stakeholders share equally risks Supports up-scaling and leveraging of debt to
be Difficult multiplied across several projects and ecosystems; programme driven
Needs government support for main- streaming; not all variants may be with
compliant Islamic Finance principles Possible at scale in mature markets; not
all variants may be compliant with Islamic Finance principles Co-financing is
tried out in limited form through UNDP Small Grants Programme Not present Not
present Risk mitigating instruments: These are insurance and risk mitigation
mechanisms that are guaranteed by public ( donor or government) monies but which
are paid out not in the normal course of commercial business, but during
specified non-business event The purpose of these mechanisms is to recognize and
address non-commercial risks that prevent private sector participants from
investing These mechanisms and events include resource risk guarantees (paid out
when exploratory or resource assessment investigations by the private sector
fail to uncover sufficient natural resource potential such as geothermal basin
heat capability); political / sovereign risks ( political insurrection) and to
serve as re- insurance for commercial insurers While risk mitigation financial
mechanisms have not yet been used in the renewable energy industry in
Afghanistan, they are being attempted in areas such as natural-gas fired power
generation Risk mitigation instruments are usually provided by development banks
such as the World Bank Group and the Asian Development Bank June 2017 95 RER2032
Climate funds: These are financial mechanisms / monetary incentives specifically
designed to increase the penetration of climate friendly technologies Although
in practice they can take the form of  subsidy or risk mitigation mechanism,
they are called out here separately as they are specific to RE development There
are  variety of climate funding opportunities that serve different purposes and
which are designed to be deployed at particular stages of market evolution Pilot
projects and programs have previously accessed climate funding, and larger
integrated programs have applied for funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF)
Financing approaches for different stages of development Stage : market seeding
This is when technology deployment is at  nascent stage and projects are
generally intended to confirm the sufficient availability of natural resource (
wind availability at the site) or to demonstrate technical viability and refine
standard designs through pilot projects Private-sector led capital investment at
this stage is often challenging, and faces the barriers of  lack of confidence
in the natural resource and (once the resource potential is established)
confidence in the techno-economic viability of the project The type of direct
grant funding that has been traditionally employed by development partners in
Afghanistan is useful at this stage Public grant money also has  role to play in
helping ensure that any results or lessons learned from resource assessments are
shared as well as helping to provide legitimacy (by assisting with certification
and monitoring) for resource assessments Certification and legitimacy of
resource assessments and pilot project results also help provide proof points
that give confidence for the private sector to begin investing in projects, and
for commercial banks to provide financing Rather than  direct grant,  resource
risk guarantee can be useful in instances where there is the possibility of
pursuing an integrated strategy with  project developer for resource assessment
and an initial commercial project ( the private developer agrees to perform the
geothermal resource assessment at  site, and if successful, then develop the
site into  commercial project)  resource risk guarantee is structured such that
if the initial resource investigation proves to be unviable, the resource risk
guarantee compensates the developer for all or part of the cost of the resource
investigation With regard to climate funds appropriate mechanisms at this stage
are those that focus on technology transfer and can be mobilized quickly The
Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN) and Poznan Technology Transfer
mechanisms are designed for this purpose Stage : market creation At this point,
natural resource availability and technical viability have been established, and
technology application is no longer new to the country as  result of multiple
pilot projects The focus at this stage is demonstrating that the designs and
business models developed during pilot projects of the Market Seeding stage can
be scaled and replicated Private sector entities at this stage start exhibiting
interest in mechanisms apart from pure grant- funded contracting (as is normally
the case in the pilot projects of the previous phase) The barriers faced to
private-sector led growth revolve around longer-term viability such as continued
& and cost recovery (initial technical and financial viability having been
established) and the perception of risk regarding political climate and security
June 2017 96 RER2032 Grant / subsidy mechanisms chosen at this stage are
selected to let the market decide the level of risk that private sector entrants
are willing to bear It is possible that subsidies will still need to be offered
to elicit private sector interest (especially in markets where electricity
tariffs are regulated) and will involve some combination of subsidies for
capital investment and for ongoing operation It is recommended that
subsidies/grants be explicitly linked to effective output; such as payment upon
some defined capacity commissioned and certified, or linked to per unit of
continued energy production The government has the opportunity to incentivize
developers through mechanisms that forego revenue but increase the market; tax
holidays for profits and import duty exemptions for equipment It is also
recommended that market mechanisms be used to determine the level of subsidy
required through strategies such as auctions for the level of capital subsidy
and PPA tariff In the recent 10 MW Kandahar solar project, an element of this
model has already proved successful; the PPA tariff that DABS would pay to the
developer was decided based upon  reverse auction, while the capital subsidy was
decided up-front The next stage could be the use of  reverse auction mechanism
for both the capital subsidy and the PPA tariff The subsidy demanded by the
market can be further reduced (and more private sector entrants enticed) through
the use of risk mitigation products Development organizations such as the World
Bank, ADB, and OPIC provide these instruments, with variations for required
eligibility (OPIC’ mechanisms are in place to aid US businesses) These
instruments provide  guarantee for specified recompense in the event of  defined
political event or in the event that the government utility cannot make good on
its commitments To ensure that the government also has protection, the contract
terms of the IPP can specify that the asset will pass to DABS in the event of
independently-assessed non-performance Climate funds at this stage of market
evolution should be targeted towards programs rather than individual projects
Larger funding packages such as those available from the GCF can build upon the
proof points and lessons from the pilot programs commissioned during the market
seeding stage to propose programmatic interventions Conceivably, the results
from one climate-funded initiative can be used to apply for funding from another
source; using  CTCN intervention for initial technology transfer and assistance,
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or Climate Investment Funds (CIF) funds to
build upon CTCN, and using these results to form the basis for  GCF proposal
Stage : market expansion At this stage, the market has been proven and viable
combinations of technical designs and business models are in place The focus at
this stage is to select financial structures to reduce the cost deploying
systems in the commercial market Grant / subsidy mechanisms are selected to
assure demand, either through standardized FITs (again auctioned where possible)
and access to concessional finance In mature markets, government mechanisms are
formed (such as IREDA in India) that allow concessional finance funds (from
government funds and institutions such as the ADB, World Bank and KfW) to be
pooled and accessed by project developers In the case of Afghanistan, it will
also be necessary to align these instruments with Islamic Finance principles
where required With regard to risk mitigation, it is anticipated that in  mature
market,  project developer will be able to access conventional sources of
project insurance; and should an Afghanistan risk premium persist, re-insurance
sponsored by multilateral agencies can reduce this premium Climate funding (if
available) is past the pilot, scale-up and market creation mechanisms and takes
the form of active trading of carbon credits 97 June 2017 RER2032 The framework
as applied to the three roadmap market types (utility scale, mini-grid and
stand-alone) is presented below, along with an assessment of the current
maturity of technologies in each of these markets “Utility Scale” systems are
typically characterized by larger projects that feed to the grid and sell bulk
power, typically on  per unit (KWh) basis During the market seeding stage,
private sector developers face the risk of unknown natural resource potential at
the site (which in turn can affect generation and revenue) as well as technical
risks including the ability to connect and inject power into the grid At this
stage, grant funding is useful to help locate suitable sites with natural
resource potential and required infrastructure, and fund resource assessments,
as well as for studies that demonstrate that generated power can be evacuated by
the grid To establish  track record of successful operation in areas of
perceived increased risk, initial projects in the country are likely to be grant
funded Since the electricity sale is usually to the utility, capacity building
and technical assistance to train utility personnel in effectively managing the
introduction of private sector power into the grid may also be useful As
mentioned, in some cases (such as geothermal development), private sector
participants may be willing to fund resource assessments as part of an
integrated strategy that leads to development if they are compensated in the
event of the resource not being sufficient for commercial development During the
market creation stage, initial technical viability has been established and the
focus is on sustaining operations and revenue In many instances, the cost of
generating power is higher than that of other sources of grid supply (such as
imported power from Central Asia) and the regulated prevailing user tariff
Public monies will then be required to fill this ‘viability gap’ between the
unit cost of generating renewable energy for the developer and  per-unit revenue
(tariff) realized by the utility To reduce the overhead costs of development and
limit the developers’ risk to the extent possible to technical generation of
power, public monies are also useful to develop ‘Renewable Energy Parks’ wherein
suitable site selection, ancillary infrastructure and security are arranged for
by the government Technical assistance to the government to effectively manage
private sector participants (such as the structuring of contracts and tariff
mechanisms) is also useful to safeguard the interests of the government and
consumers Since the electricity is sold to one customer (the utility), the risks
private sector investor faces include default or non-payment on the part of the
utility/government As mentioned previously, instruments exist to insure the
developer against non-payment by the government or defined political risks
During the market expansion stage, the focus is on expanding the variety and
scope of finance available to private sector developers as well as to ensure
continued demand for renewable energy  model that has proved successful in the
region is for the government to set up  pooled finance mechanism for renewable
energy development that is structured to accept concessional finance from
development agencies and in turn lend (after appropriate due diligence) to
project developers at favourable rates In some cases, this finance can take the
form of an equity stake rather than debt The risk of insufficient demand can be
reduced by transparent policies by the government to commit to renewable energy
targets through mechanisms such as renewable purchase 98 June 2017 RER2032
obligations, which compel government agencies (and in some cases large
industrial and commercial consumers) to source  certain percentage of their
power from renewable sources With regard to risk mitigation, the risk guarantee
instruments that insure against political risk or non-performance by the utility
can continue to be useful, as can international development agencies
facilitating access to commercial insurance Figure 37 - Financial Mechanisms and
Market Stage - Utility Scale Market The mini-grid market shares some
similarities with the utility scale market (such as the project type) but also
has several important differences For one, the barriers to successful commercial
operation rely on effective revenue collection and buy-in from  group of (often
rural) consumers, rather than bulk sales to the grid Systems are smaller and
unless methods of aggregating assets into  portfolio are implemented and
partnerships with local banks formed, the small scale of financing requirements
often makes the cost of due diligence and oversight problematic for multilateral
development agencies and larger commercial banks The distributed / rural nature
of many operations also presents challenges in terms of directing financing
appropriately towards system sustainability Finally, site selection must be
coordinated with grid expansion plans so that systems do not become unviable due
to competition from cheaper grid power During the market seeding stage, grant
funding is useful for site-specific resource assessments, technology transfer
and technical assistance, and capacity building both amongst the mini-grid
operators and the local community The emphasis at this point is to use public
monies to refine the business model, select appropriate technology and to
develop the knowledge and training tools for both producers and consumers of
energy During the market creation stage, lessons from these individual pilot
projects are expanded into programs Grant / subsidy funds are directed towards
funding the non-core aspects of June 2017 99 RER2032 successful mini-grid
operation such as knowledge platforms (for both consumers and providers),
equipment standards certification, and providing technical assistance and
technology transfer support It may be likely that subsidization of minigrids
will be required to ensure financial viability for the operators, especially if
tariffs are regulated and set to compete with grid power Evidence from previous
systems suggest that longer-term maintenance and sustainability of systems is an
issue For this reason, it is also prudent to ensure that backstop operation and
finance capability exists (supported by public monies) so that if  mini-grid
operator cannot carry out their functions, alternatives can be put in place to
prevent the loss of the asset and faith of the user base The market creation
stage is also when  tighter integration between the larger government and
development banks and rural banks becomes useful to help with the issue of
aggregation mentioned previously and to ensure financing is available for local
mini-grid operators in  manner that is aligned with acceptable business
practices ( Islamic Finance) During the market expansion stage, after the
technical and financial viability and sustainability of mini-grid systems has
been prove, the focus is on ensuring adequate finance for scale-up and demand
for services International experience suggests that this finance is best
conducted by local banks, who are in turn able to access concessional finance
provided by public monies Finance for technology transfer and technical
assistance will still be required, but directed towards assistance in managing
portfolio of projects rather than individual sites As the market expands,
private sector developers will wish to secure insurance to guard against
expropriation of assets by the government, loss of demand should the grid be
expanded to the area and political and security risks As in the case of utility
scale systems, existing risk mitigation mechanisms such as guarantees and
insurance can be deployed to allay private sector concerns While the diagram and
discussion below focus on financing mechanisms, these considerations are
intrinsically linked to site and business model selection, discussed in greater
detail in chapters  and  Viability depends also on  supportive and transparent
regulatory environment and protection of the rights of producers and consumers
June 2017 100 RER2032 Figure 38 - Financial Mechanisms and Market Stage - Mini-
grid Market The challenges to private sector participation in the stand-alone
market are similar to those faced in the mini-grid ( sustainability of rural
service delivery) but are nuanced by the need for operations and maintenance
over  wider group of consumers, the need for individual consumers to mobilize
the up-front capital for such systems, user confidence in initial technical
quality of systems, and ensuring that private sector participation is not
‘crowded out’ by purely grant funded external systems that are deployed in the
same service area of coverage International experience suggests that  viable
stand-alone ecosystem can be enhanced by  tight integration between technology
providers, microfinance / commercial finance institutions, and government /
multilateral development agencies During the market seeding stage, the focus is
on developing standardized designs and business models that can be deployed
commercially Many of the uses of grant funding in the mini-grid market have
applicability here; technology transfer, community engagement and demand
assessment; feasibility studies; certification and measurements of benefits, and
capacity building both for the suppliers and consumers of systems During the
market creation stage, integration between government / international
development partners, commercial banks and technology providers has proved
useful in other regions This requires public funds to fund an organization to
certify equipment and vendors; extend concessional finance for microfinance /
banking institutions that in turn perform due diligence and extend credit
(compliant with Islamic Finance) towards the purchase of certified equipment to
users, and, where required, subsidize systems such that they are affordable
Although stand-alone PV systems have been deployed in Afghanistan, evidence
suggests that this lack of integration between technology and finance has
prevented sustainable operation of many systems 101 June 2017 RER2032 During the
market expansion stage, the involvement of the local banks is expanded to
extending credit to systems providers so that they can expand operations, while
continuing credit facilities to consumers to purchase and maintain their systems
As in the case of mini-grids, this requires capacity building and concessional
funding to commercial banks so they have the tools to perform commercial due
diligence on these systems providers and extend credit in  manner compliant with
Islamic Finance principles (where required) Public and grant funding also has
part to play in building awareness of the benefits and on proper use of the
systems, and funding subsidies to ensure used equipment such as batteries are
disposed of in an environmentally friendly manner Risk mitigation mechanisms
typically do not come into play in the stand alone market due to the lower
capital investment and distributed assets However, should sufficiently large
private sector players be evidenced in the market who seek international
commercial funding or insurance but require political risk / expropriation
guarantees, risk mitigation mechanisms might be useful at that later stage of
market development Figure 39 - Financial Mechanisms and Market Stage – Stand-
alone Market  Conclusion- from dependent to self-reliance The focus of the above
discussed financing strategy is to incentivize private sector participation and
investment It is geared towards using government /donor monies to assist the
transition from  purely donor grant-driven reality to  vibrant competitive
sector dominated by private sector led growth International experience suggests
that as the market expands and greater penetration of RE development is
apparent, the relative contribution of direct subsidies will decrease in place
of risk mitigation mechanisms and concessional finance Following figures
summarize the overall financial framework and  possible financial landscape
covering all stages of RE sector development towards self- reliance June 2017
102 RER2032 Figure 40 Overall Financing Framework - All Stages Figure 41
Financing the Roadmap - All Stages June 2017 103 RER2032  IMPLEMENTATION OF
ROADMAP The strategic rationale, methodology, project prioritization, technical
considerations and financial strategies for achieving  step change in renewable
energy deployment have been the focus of this work The above is proposed to be
achieved through the roadmapping exercise by which  roadmap is created,
implemented, monitored and updated as necessary47 The Renewable Energy Roadmap
-RER2032- an output of this work, is  high level strategic plan that sets the
pathways to achieve the intended objectives of RE sector development in
Afghanistan The RER2032 has set milestones, outlined tasks and prioritised
actions The next logical step is to implement the Roadmap by carrying out
activities and initiatives that address Roadmap tasks and priorities and
monitoring their progress with the help of  tracking system Accordingly, the 4Ps
- Proponents, Projects and People- are considered at the core of the Roadmap
implementation plan These are briefly discussed here  Principles The
implementation of the Roadmap is based on four guiding principles: ) Empowered
and dedicated institution() - to oversee the implementation of the Roadmap in
time bound and coordinated manner ) Participatory and collaborative approach-
among various ministries, departments, donors, public institutions, private
sector and communities to work towards the common goals of achieving energy
security and energy access by deploying renewable energy resources in
Afghanistan ) Optimisation of existing and raising new financial resources-
through  mix of donor funds, national funds and private finances with  focus on
private- sector led growth, and corresponding use of public monies to
incentivize private sector participation ) State-of-the-art global practices and
techniques- customised to the local conditions and adopted effectively across
all departmental functions and projects  Proponents Proponents are  set of
state-led institutions spanning across financing and implementation space that
are needed to realize the intents of the Roadmap It is critical that these
institutions work in close collaboration with legislative and regulatory
authorities to ensure that renewable energy development is within  transparent
legal framework At the project level these institutions shall work closely with
private sector players, thereby effectively bridging the gap between policy and
practice Finally, these public institutions shall also be able to work with
development partners, donors and civil society organisations and thus be 47
According to the IEA,  roadmap is  strategic plan that describes the steps an
organisation needs to take to achieve stated outcomes and goals It clearly
outlines links among tasks and priorities for action in the near, medium and
long term An effective roadmap also includes metrics and milestones to allow
regular tracking of progress towards the roadmap’ ultimate goals
mplementationpdf June 2017 104 RER2032 able to grow independently in future
Following three institutions are relevant for the growth of RE sector in
Afghanistan: Table 18 - Setting up key institutions Description Purpose and key
features (in brief) Renewables energy project development organisation •  for-
profit public-private partnership organization • • focused on utility-scale
generation set up along the lines of AISA with overlapping functions to DABS to
catalyse and foster growth of RET (solar and wind) based power parks, and IPPs
in collaboration with private sector Rural electrification agency Financing
institution for clean energy sector • • would act as  single-window clearance
for future IPPs • Promote rural electrification projects, specifically mini-
grids through site selection, land acquisition, access to finance, and
regulatory approvals set up along the lines of DABS, but would set up generation
and distribution of electricity in rural areas only shall support local
enterprises as RESCO as distribution franchisees of DABS serve to minimize risk
to private sector’ engagement in rural electrification shall work in close
collaboration with ministries and departments serving rural population and
requiring energy services • • • •  dedicated and empowered institution to
finance renewable energy and energy efficiency projects facilitating  basket-
fund approach • • ensuring ring-fencing of funds for clean energy sector • shall
provide debt and equity to project promoters and developers • can also extend
financial support by way of conditional grants and last-stage equity that can
provide viability- gap financing • be able to raise funds through internal as
well as external markets June 2017 105 RER2032 The above institutions are
governed and guided by the government Ministries which are primarily policy and
law-making authorities There are good examples from the region that have served
the purposes as described above Some of these are Infrastructure Development
Company Limited (IDCOL), Bangladesh; Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency
(IREDA), India; Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), India; and Alternate
Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC), Nepal  Projects To meet the targets of the RENP,
it is imperative to find success on the ground with projects that are
implemented in the ‘first stage’ of the Roadmap The second focus area shall
therefore be the development of strategically important and trendsetting
projects in addition to priority sectors outlined in Roadmap  list of the such
projects along with their description is provided in the table below: Table 19 -
High priority, strategically important and trendsetting projects Project Title
Brief description  Solar power park   Mini-grids with RESCO model Solar hot
water systems for institutions  Kabul roof-top solar  RE atlas  Pilot scale
Geothermal  Pilot scale REEEP project De-risking deployment of utility-scale
wind and solar projects by Identifying suitable sites, providing infrastructure
for evacuation and security, and streamlining regulatory clearance SPPs may be
set up by DABS as the SPPD, and eventually owned by private sector partners
cluster of mini-grid projects to be developed and bid out either individually or
collectively following the RESCO business model As an effective demand-side-
management strategy to reduce electricity generation requirements, while
offering potential for economic development through local manufacture, SHWS to
be promoted in  programmatic mode Following the maturity and proven viability of
this market globally, Kabul roof-top solar pilot project will seed this market
for Afghanistan  national-level initiative that could build upon the RE database
and provide both  national strategic overview of RE deployment and link to
project-level monitoring; thus, providing insights on new development
opportunities and overall RE roadmap progress In line with the 55 MW Roadmap
target, and recognizing the need for impetus in this sector, geothermal resource
assessment linked where viable to pilot geothermal projects (either direct heat
or electricity) to catalyze activity Although not directly identified in
Roadmap, this pilot scale project to integrate RE with energy efficiency
measures in the commercial and industrial sector shall improve the viability and
acceptance of RETs June 2017 106 RER2032  Daikundi Mini-grid 10 Hisar--Shahi
industrial park solar project  People Mini-grids being strategically important
for Afghanistan, this project will help in standardizing mini-grid designs and
business models Strategically important project for industrial development that
forms the backbone of Afghan economy The intent of the RE sector development in
Afghanistan is its people who need energy for their well-being, livelihoods and
development The implementation of the Roadmap will also be shouldered by people
who will perform technical, managerial, financial, administrative and other
functions The Roadmap therefore needs to be inclusive of people’ expectations
and involvement for whom it will be implemented; while at the same time be owned
by people who will implement it Awareness and skilling are two important people
centric attributes that the Roadmap will focus on for it implementation
effectively  national level initiative to raise the awareness levels of multi-
stakeholders at multiple-levels will support the development of the RE sector,
while short-term and long-term skill enhancement initiatives will make it
impactful Vocational training programs focusing on RE system design,
installation and maintenance along with university level programmes targeting
energy sector planners and managers will be required to both ensure sufficient
local capacity exists to develop and maintain RE infrastructure while
capitalizing on RE as an opportunity for employment generation As illustrated
below, detailing of the implementation plan along with its monitoring and
verification plan, are the next logical steps to move towards realizing the set
objectives of the RE development in Afghanistan The expected impacts, upon the
successful implementation of the Roadmap are elaborated in the next and the
final chapter Renewable Energy Policy The goals for RE development (Vision)
Roadmap  plan for achieving the vision (Strategy) Implementa- tion Plan How the
plan will be executed (Tasks) June 2017 107 RER2032  IMPACTS OF THE ROADMAP The
Roadmap facilitates the transformation of RE sector in Afghanistan from
‘current project’ centric thinking and approach to  programmatic or an ecosystem
approach that encompasses technologies, markets, institutions, finances and
other enablers These ecosystem elements synergise to achieve the objectives of
the Roadmap which are energy security, energy access and socio-economic growth
as listed in chapter  of this document Moreover, the Roadmap has Broader Impacts
that go beyond the said objectives These broader impacts span across local,
regional and international issues and boundaries as presented as discussed here:
Local impacts  Employment generation and livelihood creation  Infrastructure
development and enterprise development  Local manufacturing and supply chain
creation  Co-ordinated planning and budgeting across various government
departments  Co-benefits of climate change mitigation and resilience/adaptation
Sustainable development through leap-frogging Regional impacts  Cross border
trade and energy security  Knowledge creation and sharing through regional
platforms such as SAARC and ECO Global impacts  Potential to explore climate and
sustainable development funds Membership of IRENA, ISA and other organisations
Advancement of SE4All and SDGs agenda  Employment generation and livelihood
creation Employment in the renewable energy sector has been growing rapidly at
the global level In 2015, the number of direct and indirect employees in the
sector increased by %, to  million supporting  total of 1095 GW48 Many of these
jobs are in the solar PV sector, and their share in the total is increasing
every year Accounting for large scale hydropower projects adds  further  million
to the  million According to Wei et al49, upstream RE sector creates 10 jobs per
MW related to construction, operation and maintenance of projects; with solar
creating nearly 15 jobs/MW, and wind/hydro producing  job/MW capacity Thus, the
addition of 5000 MW RE capacity is likely to support 50,000 jobs in
Afghanistan50 Further, RE projects will also create livelihood opportunities in
the downstream sector About 70% of Afghan population is not served by the grid51
The bulk of the population resides in rural areas The deployment of RE mini-
grids and other stand-alone projects in rural areas with unmet demands for
electricity and thermal energy can significantly improve the rural economy,
contributing to sustainable livelihoods through affordable agriculture, farm
based 48 REN21: Renewables 2016 - Global Status Report 49  50 Energy Matters
sees  potential for  million jobs being created in India due to the rise of
solar and wind energy with the proposed targets of 100 GW in solar and 60 GW in
wind by  51Afghanistan Power Sector Master Plan, 2012 108 June 2017 RER2032 and
off-farm enterprises These would in turn imply more employment, induced by the
setting up of the electricity infrastructure For instance,  rural mini-grid of
MW could positively impact around ,000 households and create or sustain 50 – 60
livelihoods, including direct jobs generated52 (such as new opportunities as
maintenance engineers for the electricity setup) This does not include indirect
benefits accrued from better access, such as better healthcare and education
facilities, which shall attract new jobs as well Thus, there are far-reaching
and tangible induced impacts that can be derived through provision of reliable
and competitively priced energy services  Infrastructure development and
enterprise development Apart from benefits related to livelihood creation and
employment, RE projects provide  boost to local economy by setting up new
infrastructure and strengthening the existing ones Specifically, solar and wind
power parks and other utility scale projects necessitate building of roads and
facilitate setting up of water supply and other facilities Enhanced energy
access through RE projects facilitates movement of industries to the otherwise
virgin locations as well as in the creation of new cottage industries, that are
well served by electricity Improved energy infrastructure would also have
positive effect on larger industries in terms of their competitiveness and their
exports Afghanistan Chambers of Commerce in their Business Monitor indicated
energy shortage as the major bottleneck (88%)53 in the development of industries
Industrial parks such as the ones in Hisar--Shahi would also benefit greatly
from reliable electricity supply, as having such  source would help them lower
their overhead costs and hence create goods at  lower price Finally, energy
access would catalyse setting up Rural Economic Zones – or rural business hubs
including  market for agri produce and inputs, repair and maintenance services
and farm based enterprises such as processing plants and units On the social
side, creation and operation of hospitals and schools are strongly dependent
upon provision of electricity and thermal energy Not surprisingly, best
facilities for health and education in Afghanistan are to be found in the cities
Improvements in the energy supply would help the urban as well as rural
hospitals, schools and other community institutions invest in state-of-the-art
equipment, and hence improve their overall services In terms of local economies,
some of the impacts are as follows: • Agriculture: Though the most important
employment sector is agriculture and livestock where 39% Afghan population is
employed, the productivity in the agriculture sector is low, with agriculture
contributing just over 25% of GDP Improved electricity access would impact the
farming structure, cropping patterns and behaviour, due to better irrigation
This would lead to better farm incomes, and better agricultural services54 •
Financial services, especially microfinances, could be developed more easily
They would be both  giver and  recipient of the benefits provided by energy
access Over time, this could also stretch to core banking services such as local
co-operatives 52 Concept Note prepared for and on behalf of ASERD Programme to
Green Climate Fund 53 Business Monitor, 2013 edition; published in 2014 54
According to Afghanistan Export Promotion Agency, fresh and dried fruits make
the biggest contribution to country’ exports However,  major obstacle for an
increase in fruit exports is the lack of facilities to process and package these
products to international standards Energy supply will alleviate this problem
109 June 2017 RER2032 • Labour markets: The employment by sector and gender
would also improve with expansion in the farming and services sectors  Local
manufacturing and supply chain creation Setting up RE projects would require
local manufacturing of auxiliary as well as main components and equipment in
Afghanistan Focusing on local manufacturing would help improve the upstream and
downstream supply chains develop in capacities and capabilities as well The
elements of local manufacturing and supply chain would not only limit to
fabrication, assembly and system integration, but would also extend to
transportation, warehousing, engineering, procurement and construction
activities RE supply chain, once created, will benefit other sectors as well
Co-ordinated planning and budgeting across various government departments One of
the re-requisites for implementing the Roadmap, is to inculcate  practice of
coordinated planning and budgeting of resources across various departments
within the MEW and also with other Ministries The mechanism of ‘basket fund’
would trigger this practice which will have far-reaching impacts in terms of
optimum utilisation and effective deployment of resources, for efficient gains
to the overall economy of Afghanistan  Co-benefits of climate change mitigation
and resilience/ adaptation Afghanistan is  high-risk profile country according
to the National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA 2012) The Global
Adaptation Index 2012, ranks it as the most vulnerable in country in the world,
taking into account the country’ exposure, sensitivity and ability to cope with
climate related hazards, worsened by the socio-political conflicts and security
Coping with the impacts of climate change is  major challenge for development in
Afghanistan given that its negative effects are likely to be most severely felt
by the poor and marginalized due to their high dependence on subsistence
agriculture and limited capacity to cope with the impacts of climate variability
and extremes The access to reliable and cost-effective energy will strengthen
community-level coping strategies and improve income, thereby increasing their
resilience to climate change impacts  adaptation related benefits Besides, the
deployment of RE as per the Roadmap, will reduce the dependence of communities
on conventional fuels such as kerosene, diesel and biomass, contributing to
mitigation elated benefits as well  Sustainable development through leap-
frogging Afghanistan currently has one of the lowest per-capita carbon emissions
in the world However, in order to develop itself into  successful economy, its
energy use would have to increase greatly This will in-turn increase its
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions By developing its RE potential, Afghanistan is in
unique position where it can leapfrog over carbon intensive energy sources like
coal and oil, while at the same time following sustainable development pathways
Cross-border trade and energy security Afghanistan gets more than 60% of its
power requirements via imports It also faces issues from grid snaps in its
neighbouring countries, causing blackouts in cities like Kabul As per 110 June
2017 RER2032 the Roadmap, Afghanistan’ power generation capacity from domestic
RE resources would reach 850 MW by the end of Stage , which would potentially
replace around 40% of imports at the current levels, avoiding drain of foreign
exchange that is required to finance energy imports Focussing on renewables for
domestic power generation, would ensure power generation and grid stability for
its current and future energy needs, and would thus help Afghanistan achieve
energy security The decreasing prices of renewables and their increased
generation could be an opportunity for Afghanistan to be  net energy supplier in
the long term In the short term, it could also act as  conduit transporting
energy from Central Asian and West Asian economies (Tajikistan and Turkmenistan)
starved South Asian countries (India/Pakistan/Nepal), while using its own
generated energy within the country the energy to  Knowledge creation and
sharing through regional platforms Roadmap has introduced knowledge tools for
developing projects, customising business models, benchmarking for RE costs,
stage-gate framework for sector development etc These knowledge tools, geared
towards planning for RE sector will be useful for other countries in the region
and Afghanistan can use regional platforms such as ECO and SAARC to share this
knowledge Besides, the valuable experience to be generated through implementing
different types of RE projects for various applications would create  body of
knowledge that can also be shared with other countries in the region  Potential
to explore climate and sustainable development funds The development of RE
sector as envisaged in the Roadmap, will be aligned to the global agenda of
climate change and sustainable development Afghanistan will thus be able to
explore global resources and funds that are available for these sectors  Green
Climate Funds (GCF), Global Environment Facility (GEF), Scaling up Renewable
Energy Programme (SREP) among others Some of these funds are already made
available to Afghanistan However, their portfolio can be expanded to support the
RE and related sectors 10 Membership of IRENA, ISA and other organisations
Renewable Energy Roadmap is  strong endorsement of the GoIRA for supporting this
sector The introduction/ presence of an enabling ecosystem will further showcase
the commitment at all levels to promote this sector These actions will
facilitate Afghanistan to become member of international organisation such as
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and International Solar Alliance
(ISA) These memberships will further support the development of RE sector
through tangible well as non-tangible instruments such as demonstration
projects, feasibilities studies, mapping of resources, monitoring and evaluation
studies, knowledge exchange etc 11 Advancement of SE4All and SDGs agenda
Afghanistan, despite its internal challenges related to poverty, security etc,
will adopt the global agenda towards sustainable energy for all and sustainable
development goals through the implementation of the Roadmap This will catalyse
progressive thinking and approach to development, impacting not only the
internal well-being but also propagating an enterprising image of Afghans June
2017 111