 ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND WATER AFGHANISTAN ENERGY
EFFICIENCY POLICY FINAL DRAFT: OCTOBER 2016 Ministry of Energy and Water
Approved By Sector Responsible Authorities Ministry / Agency Name of
Minister/Director Signature FOREWORD Afghanistan is building its energy sector
to provide the back bone for its socio-economic development Integrating energy
efficiency practices to reduce losses across entire range of energy value chain
starting from mining and extraction, transformation, transmission and
distribution and end use sectors must become  priority for Afghanistan for long
term sustainability of resources and providing access to clean energy for
everyone Energy efficiency in Afghanistan is regarded as an embryonic subject
matter presently for policy makers as well as wider population, resulting in
various levels of challenges in bringing about necessary changes in social and
institutional landscape to carry out policy reforms related to energy efficiency
This energy efficiency policy is  timely initiative that provides  direction to
energy efficiency activities in the country by utilizing the collective strength
and interdependencies of several stakeholders and government departments It
endeavours to achieve this by creating an enabling environment for the
development of the energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan in short term, and
facilitate private investment led energy efficiency market in long term The
salient features of the Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy are:  It specifies
clear goals, objective, strategies and targets to initiate and implement
programs and projects applicable to the energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan
Within the strategic intent of improving energy efficiency across all sectors,
the policy takes  note of importance of public sector demonstrating leadership
in adopting energy efficiency practices      It highlights the important role
government has in making energy efficiency practices  mainstream choice for
businesses & households through awareness raising, making knowledge accessible,
creating regulatory drivers and design of proper financial signals The Policy
mentions the institutional arrangement for its implementation, mechanisms to
finance energy efficiency policy and resulting activities as well as the
promotion activities which can be used to create awareness and engage
stakeholders It provides guiding principles for executing and managing the
energy efficiency activities as  whole, as well as within individual ministries,
departments and representatives from private industry The strategic intents and
related policy actions have been prioritized for their implementation at short
term (TERM ) and long term (TERM ) basis, on the basis of its effectiveness and
ease to implement  monitoring and evaluation framework has been provided to
evaluate effectiveness of institutions engaged in delivering woks resulting from
this policy, both at program level, as well at policy level iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work on the Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy was commissioned by the
Ministry of Energy and Water through the Energy Policy Department and was
supported and financed by the German Development Cooperation The AEEP has been
drafted in  collaborative manner Various ministries, organizations and their
representatives have been consulted and are duly acknowledged here for their
support, guidance and valuable inputs throughout the process of development of
this national policy      Deputy Minister of Energy, Ministry of Energy and
Water Energy Programming Directorate, Ministry of Energy and Water Inter-
Ministerial Commission for Energy (ICE) Secretariat Team Da Afghanistan Breshna
Sherkat (DABS) GIZ Institutional Development for Energy in Afghanistan (IDEA) iv
CONTENTS FOREWORD  iii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  iv ABBREVIATIONS  vii EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
viii  CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND   Context    Background    Background Paper on
Energy Efficiency (2012)    Energy Audits    Readiness Survey    Stakeholder
Consultation    Review of six EE Policies    ENERGY SAVING POTENTIAL    End
use/Demand side energy consumption    Electricity transformation/generation side
12  Electricity transmission/distribution side  14  SCOPE, VISION AND GOALS  15
Scope  15  Vision  15  Overarching Goals  16  STRATEGIES AND POLICY ACTIONS  18
Greening of building sector  18  Public lighting  19  Appliances & equipment  19
Transport sector  20  Generation, transmission and distribution of electricity
20  Mining, oil & gas extraction  20  Supporting Businesses, Enterprises &
Commercial Establishments  21  Consumer awareness  22  Laws and Regulations  22
10 Energy service companies - ESCO  23 11 Knowledge base and standards  24 12
Efficient energy for rural communities  24  13 Renewable energy  25 14
International Co-operation  25  IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY  26  Overview 26
Institutional Systems  26  Financing Mechanism  29  MONITORING & EVALUATION
FRAMEWORK  31 GLOSSARY  38 vi ABBREVIATIONS High Intensity Discharge Inter-
Ministerial Commission for Energy Information Technology Light Emitting Diodes
Afghanistan Investment Support Agency Afghanistan National Energy Policy Afghan
National Standards Authority Best Available Technology Clean Development
Mechanism Central Statistics Organization Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat
Department for International Development Department of Education Energy
Efficiency Energy Service Companies Afghanistan Chamber of Commerce and
Industries ACCI Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Codes for Building AEEC AEEP
Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy AGBDS Afghanistan Green Building Design
Standards AISA ANEP ANSA BAT CDM CSO DABS DfID DoE EE ESCO GoIRA Government of
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan HIDs ICE IT LEDs MAIL Ministry of Agriculture,
Irrigation and Livestock MEPS Minimum Energy Performance Standards MER MEW
Ministry of Energy and Water MoF Ministry of Finance MoIC Ministry of
Information & Culture MoRA Ministry of Hajj and Religious Affairs MRRD Ministry
of Rural Rehabilitation and Development MoUD Ministry of Urban Development NEPA
NLA OEE QS RED REN RET SMEs & TCO USAID United States Agency for International
Development National Environmental Policy Act Net Lettable Area Office of Energy
Efficiency Quality Standards Renewable Energy Department Renewable Energy
Renewable Energy Technologies Small and Medium Enterprises Transmission &
Distribution Total cost of Ownership Monitoring, Evaluating and Reporting vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Over the last decade, Afghanistan has made significant
reconstruction efforts at all levels of the energy supply chain, in particular,
the electricity sector However, energy access continues to be an imposing
challenge for the government While Afghanistan is building up its domestic
generation capacity, it becomes imperative to integrate energy efficiency
principles within Afghanistan’ energy policy landscape in order to best utilize
the scarce energy resources, and reduce costs in the long term The Ministry of
Energy and Water (MEW), as one of the key ministries to plan and direct the
development of energy sector in Afghanistan, has now prepared the Afghanistan
Energy Efficiency Policy (AEEP) which aims to provide direction to the energy
efficiency activities in the country The scope of AEEP covers all sectors on the
energy value chain being extraction, transformation, transmission and
distribution and end use The AEEP will be implemented in two terms, TERM1 and
TERM , to achieve its strategic and policy goals TERM  (2017 – 2020) will work
to create enabling environment for the establishment of an energy efficiency
industry in Afghanistan TERM  () will be working to enable transition of the
energy efficiency industry from  government led activity to  private investment
led marketplace The Office of Energy Efficiency (OEE), proposed to be created
within the Ministry of Environment and Water (MEW), will have primary
responsibility for strategizing, planning, budgeting and coordinating the
implementation of AEEP  committee headed by deputy minister of MEW and
comprising of relevant stakeholders will be responsible of creating OEE The OEE
will work with  range of public and private sector representative institutions
to achieve its objectives and will develop into an independent decision making
authority on EE in the long term Salient features of the Policy are:       The
objective of the policy is to adopt an integrated approach to harness all
resources on the supply side while applying good demand side management
practices in all energy consuming sectors The policy sets targets for reducing
losses in extraction, generation, transmission & distribution and end use and
promotes identification and adoption of energy efficiency opportunities across
all sectors of the economy through awareness creation and capacity building It
seeks leadership from the public sector to adopt energy efficiency practices by
setting measurable targets across  range of activities and operations It
advocates for the government to provide resources for business leadership to
enable them embrace and lead energy efficiency objectives The policy encourages
households and small to medium enterprises businesses to reduce costs by
improving access to energy efficiency projects through technology and financing
It seeks to strengthen consumer awareness in order to empower them make informed
choices for energy efficient purchasing viii    It supports setting up minimum
and acceptable standards across  range of options – minimum energy performance
scheme for appliances, energy efficiency rating schemes for buildings, minimum
renewable energy integration targets for new developments - with the help of
legislations Policy acknowledges the need to create knowledge base and standards
to support development of high quality of energy technologies and modern energy
efficiency industry It encourages use of renewable energy as generation and
demand side management as well as fuel diversification option It uses existing
partnership platforms with other countries to exchange energy efficiency ideas,
projects, finance and innovation It lays the foundation for setting up “basket-
funds” for EE projects which would evolve into  dedicated EE financing
institution in TERM  of the policy implementation It recognizes the importance
of institutional strengthening and possible reorganization, including setting up
of new institution for strategizing, planning, budgeting and coordinating the
implementation ix  CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND  Context       Afghanistan is
currently experiencing an economic growth rate of sub % per annum, and expected
to continue moving north1 The country also continues to experience  consistently
healthy population growth of approximately % per annum over the last few years
The combined effect of its population and economic growth is putting an upward
pressure on annual energy demand, and is expected to continue in the coming
years Even as Afghanistan is rich in energy resources, years of political
instability has led to under investment in creation of infrastructure required
for extraction, refinement, generation, transmission and distribution of energy
services These assets are critical in delivering  nation’ objective of creating
an equal opportunity, stable and prosperous society As an outcome of this
historic instability, the nation has been facing chronic challenges in providing
energy access to all of its citizens, as well as developing its own energy
security Over the last decade, Afghanistan has made significant reconstruction
efforts at all levels of the energy supply chain, in particular, the electricity
sector As  consequence, electricity now reaches 30% population in 2016, compared
to only % population in 2007, an increase of 23% in almost  decade3 This change
has been  direct result of the reforms carried out by the federal government,
which has prioritized providing energy supply to every user as one of its
national objectives Even with such impressive results, energy access continues
to be an imposing challenge for the government Afghanistan has one of the lowest
per capita electricity consumption in the world and it is mostly attributed to
unavailability of both electricity and reliable electricity to  large number of
Afghan populations Moreover, only around  third of the Afghan population has
access to electricity of which  majority stays in the urban areas Kabul alone
accounting for 80% of the connected load Also to note is Afghanistan’ energy end
use distribution, which is quite unique in global context While industries
account for  majority share in world’ energy end use statistics in 2014, this
spot is occupied by residential sector (73%) in Afghanistan It is indicative of
an economy, where with favorable global and internal conditions, high rate of
growth can be achieved thus  corresponding increase in demand for energy Energy
efficiency, thus becomes  priority focus area for policy makers to reduce
pressure on scarce energy resources The rural communities, which account for
about 73% of the total population4, are still in the process of getting
connected to the grid This energy access wedge between urban and rural
communities is further exacerbated by unavailability of clean fuel in the rural
areas According to the available statistics, more than 97% of the rural
population use solid fuels ( firewood, dung cakes, crop residues) for combustion
to meet their cooking and space heating needs, usually in inefficient devices5
This practice creates adverse outcomes for health of rural communes, in
particular, women and children           Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy
The energy access challenge also emanates from the situation that Afghanistan is
still building up its domestic generation capacity Currently, it is heavily
reliant on electricity imports, which is as high as 60% of the total installed
capacity6This brings home another issue of concern for Afghanistan in the form
of energy security, which also stretches to other primary energy sources
including oil and gas In 2014, nearly 97% of the country’ oil needs were
imported7 Lack of investments in gas production and transmission infrastructure
has restricted development of identified gas reserves On other hand, large scale
construction activity and increasing number of transport vehicles in Afghanistan
is resulting in an increase in demand of petroleum products As an example, motor
vehicles per 1000 people were added to Afghanistan roads in the years between
2006 and 2011 creating additional demand for barrels of oil in that period8
Given the above set of circumstances, investment in increasing the number of
power stations, oil and gas extraction, transmission and distribution networks
certainly becomes  high priority activity for Afghanistan However, energy
acquisition and distribution being  scarce and costly resource, it becomes
equally important to minimize losses at each step of the energy supply chain,
starting from production, distribution to end use at consumer level It therefore
becomes imperative to integrate energy efficiency principles within Afghanistan’
energy policy landscape Energy value chain Losses occur during energy
transformation, transmission distribution and at end consumer use level The
strategic intent of an energy policy is to reduce these losses across entire
energy value chain, using technical, procedural and behavioral interventions
Energy efficiency is about doing more for less Each unit of energy which is
saved by efficient use translates into  unit of energy not required to be
produced The flow on effects are reduction in carbon emissions, outdoor and
indoor pollution and at  larger scale, avoidance of building new power
assessed August 2016 & Energy Sector Status Summary Report Q2 2016- MoEC/ICE
Motor vehicles include cars, buses, and freight vehicles but do not include two-
wheelers Population refers to midyear population in the year Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy  stations or fuel extraction and refining to cater to
additional demand created by inefficient use Therefore, energy efficiency
becomes an important piece in addressing energy access and energy security
challenges Energy efficiency signifies around 40 percent of the GHG reduction
potential globally that can be realized9 Many nations have put emphasis on
energy efficiency measures to stimulate their faltering economies One of the
objectives of Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) - to double the global rate of
improvement of energy efficiency – also reflects the global agenda of tapping
energy efficiency market Enhancing energy efficiency was one of the major focal
point of the Paris climate agreement made in December Adoption of energy
efficiency measures and practices such as enforcement of building energy codes,
mandatory minimum energy performance standards for appliances, taxes incentive
and penalties to encourage use of energy efficient appliances, motor vehicles,
energy efficient lighting in domestic, commercial, industrial and transport
sectors have shown to reduce the intensity of energy demand without compromising
on socio-economic growth For instance,  economic output expanded more than three
times since 1970 while demand for energy grew only 50% According to IEA, total
worldwide outlay in EE was USD 221 billion in 2015, an increase of % from The
efficiency gains have been greatly led by policy and there are huge potential
lying in regions where policy is absent or inadequate The National Energy Policy
of Afghanistan and Afghanistan Renewable Energy Policy advocates energy
efficiency to be integrated at all level of project cycle to maximize its
benefits Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), which focuses on
reducing emissions and contributing to sustainable development, has also listed
EE as one of the main priorities It recommended establishment of institutional
framework, drafting of policy and guidelines, identification of low cost and
high return options for implementation of energy efficiency and target of
meeting 100 GWh saving  Background Energy efficiency as an area of focus has
been  relatively new concept in Afghanistan Currently, Energy Efficiency (EE)
Unit within the Ministry of Energy and Water coordinates and implements energy
efficiency works  few of the significant milestones marking important
developments in progression of energy efficiency as  mainstream activity in the
country has been discussed below  Background Paper on Energy Efficiency (2012):
The energy efficiency background paper (2012) was perhaps the first such study
done to identify energy saving potential in Afghanistan Scope of this paper was
limited to demand side electrical energy efficiency The overall approach towards
integrating energy efficiency within Afghanistan’ energy landscape was proposed
in three distinct terms, including, short term (- years), long term (- years)
and continued reforms (+ years) In the short term, the priority was to undertake
energy saving projects which reliable and already available, while in the longer
term, institutional reforms would be undertaken to develop an investor friendly
marketplace The paper examined  number of potential technical and policy
solutions for improving demand side efficiency in the country, further
shortlisted into seven programs to be  Energy efficiency:  compelling global
resource - McKinsey & Company 10 The History of Energy Efficiency, Alliance
Commission on National Energy Efficiency Policy, January 2013 11 Afghanistan
Energy Efficiency Policy  implemented as priority, and included the following:
Awareness campaign, Urban re-lamping program to replace incandescent based
lighting with CFL, dissemination of solar water heater, Load management, large
electric motor efficiency programs, improving building envelop performance and
development of Afghan energy services industry Suggestions for longer term
reforms included setting electricity pricing and tariffs to encourage actions to
save energy, capacity building of institutions and industry, nationwide
improvement in power quality, norms and standards for household appliances, data
collection processes for monitoring and evaluation of projects, and financing
mechanisms, incentives, legislations and regulations, Energy Audits: Energy
audit surveys were conducted at 12 of the government run facilities across Kabul
(), Nangarhar (), and Herat () in the year of These audits included collection
of energy consumption data from the buildings, recommend measures to reduce
energy consumption and provide financial analysis of the measures based on
energy savings These projects have been conducted as “demonstration” projects in
the country The main objective of the demonstration projects was to set up
system through which people and utilities can see tangible results from
efficient use of electricity and define the degree of possible potentials
savings for future intervention Some of the typical recommendations which were
cross cutting for the 11 facilities included:  Replacement of Incandescent
bulbs with CFLs  Replacement of CFLs with LEDs  Replacement of Fluorescent
lights with lower power rated fluorescent lights  Halogen/Mercury Vapor lamp
with LEDs  Use of energy efficient Variable Refrigerant Flow Air-conditioning
units  Replacement of Higher Capacity Air-conditioners with lower capacity Air-
conditioners  Replacement of electric water heaters/boilers with solar water
heaters/boilers  Electromagnetic chokes with electronic chokes  Training and
capacity building of building maintenance staff Readiness Survey: In 2016,
review of the existing energy efficiency policy landscape was done in
Afghanistan, with  view to identify potential gaps in effective promotion of
energy efficiency and present next steps to create an energy efficiency policy
for focused development of this area The exercise involved one to one survey and
consultations with respondents from government, household, commercial and
industry The output of this work identified lack of awareness and high cost of
energy efficient products as main barriers in adoption of energy efficiency
practices Motivating factors as cited by the respondent to be considered in
future policy included personal responsibility and financial saving as the key
drivers for change Support was sought from the government in education and
awareness, tighter regulations, access to qualified advice and availability of
grants to support projects Stakeholder Consultation: It was also observed that
despite recent efforts, development of energy efficiency sector in the country
is yet to commence on  noticeable scale Outcomes from stakeholder consultations
identified energy efficiency an embryonic subject matter for policy makers as
well as wider population, resulting in various levels of challenges in bringing
about necessary changes in social and institutional landscape to push through
the energy efficiency reforms Some of the challenges that have constrained this
change include lack of institutional capacity to implement energy efficiency
activities, inadequate systems and processes to capture data which Afghanistan
Energy Efficiency Policy     prohibits measuring and evaluation of energy
efficiency interventions, development of energy management tools such as
intensity indicators or accounting of country’ energy balance Other important
gaps were identified in form of lack of budgetary support; well-defined roles
and responsibilities for ministries and departments and poor awareness level
among general public & institutions  Review of six EE Policies: Through  desktop
research of energy efficiency policies from six countries (Australia, China,
Germany, India, Pakistan, Kazakhstan), it was observed that some of the features
of  well working framework include promotion and adoption of energy efficiency
across sectors through various institutions and measures Establishment of energy
efficiency agency was acknowledged in almost all the policies as  necessary
instrument to foster the implementation of EE policies Regulations like energy
labeling and standards have proven effective in lowering energy consumption of
specific appliances and equipment and to speed up the diffusion of energy-
efficient equipment in the market Economic incentives aimed at encouraging
investments in energy efficient equipment, buildings and processes by reducing
the upfront cost, either directly (financial incentives like subsidies, low
interest loans) or indirectly (fiscal incentives like tax reduction) have been
introduced in almost all EE policies Due to constraints on government budgets,
policies recommended involvement of the private sector in supporting investments
in energy efficiency, through energy service companies (ESCOs) and energy
utilities Energy-savings obligations are an innovative measure in which energy
companies have  legal obligation to undertake energy-efficiency activities with
their customers However,  strong institutional setup was required to achieve the
participation of private investors in energy efficiency market   Taking the
above into account,  concept paper on Afghanistan energy efficiency sector was
prepared This paper recommended development of  national energy efficiency
policy which would include political and regulatory measures; financial support
mechanism; awareness creation and technical education for capacity building;
creation of market conditions and low-risk business environment to overcome the
barriers and create favorable regulatory and institutional environment for
uptake of EE in Afghanistan The Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy (AEEP) 2016
is an outcome of  consultative process which includes government and private
sector The policy is aimed at providing direction to the energy efficiency
activities in the country It envisions achieving this through utilizing the
collective strength and interdependencies of several stakeholders and government
departments by creating an enabling environment for the development of the
energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan The drafting of the AEEP is authorized
by the Presidential Decree Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy   ENERGY SAVING
POTENTIAL     list of possible energy efficiency activities applicable to
Afghanistan’ context and their respective energy saving potential is provided in
this section This list is based on desktop research of publications from several
countries including India, France, Thailand, Tajikistan and  2014 report on
World Energy Investment Outlook from the International Energy Association (IEA)
Listing of energy efficiency opportunities is primarily concentrated on areas of
the economy using electricity as the energy source; however, observations have
also been made for energy efficiency opportunities in other sectors which may
not use electricity, for example, agriculture, on high level estimates The list
is intended to be used as  guide to further investigate and prioritize
implementation of energy saving activities specific to Afghanistan for each of
the involved sectors As the energy saving opportunities and associated savings
are indicative and based on desktop research, the actual values may vary once
the activities have been implemented  End use/Demand side energy consumption
In reference to the electricity end use in Afghanistan, it is important to
recognize that after years of instability, the country is currently undergoing
significant reconstruction exercise Among other important programs, efforts to
provide access to electricity to every section of population in Afghanistan are
currently underway Currently, electricity access is mostly available to urban
consumers For example, the Kabul metropolitan area alone accounts for about 80%
of the connected load in the country This also highlights the urban versus rural
divide the country faces in addressing the energy access challenge  Most of the
residential energy goes towards heating and cooling  house, followed by
appliances, and lighting Even as the above data may not be exactly applicable to
Afghanistan, it does give  rough indication of the areas where energy is usually
consumed  The energy efficiency opportunities which are typically present in
household sector are listed in the table below These opportunities have been
categorized as per the energy end use of the household sector The energy
efficiency potential improvement has been suggested relative to the baseline
technology, whereby, the baseline technology represents the existing inefficient
measure Energy Efficiency Opportunities in household sector Category
Technology/Measure Efficiency Improvement Potential Lighting Baseline Technology
Incandescent, Halogen based, T8 Fluorescent Baseline Upgrade to CFL Technology
Lighting Alternatives Upgrade to T5 Fluorescent tubes Upgrade to LED technology
Up to 25% Up to 20% up to 40% Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy  Category
Technology/Measure Sky lighting Sensor and timer controls Space Cooling Baseline
Technology Air conditioner Space cooling Alternatives Air source heat pump
Advanced air heat pump Space Cooling Baseline Technology Space cooling
Alternatives Space Heating Baseline Technology Ceiling Fans High efficiency
ceiling fans Electric radiators Space Heating Alternative Technology Electric
heat pump Biomass fired heater Insulation Baseline Technology Insulation
Alternative Technology No insulation Loft Insulation Floor insulation Double
glazing windows Solid wall insulation Least efficient appliance Whitegood
Appliances Efficient appliance BAT appliance Efficiency Improvement Potential up
to 100% Add % - 20% Baseline up to 50% up to 70% Baseline up to 20% Baseline up
to 50% Fuel Switch Baseline up to 25% up to 15% up to 15% up to 20% Baseline up
to 50% up to 70%  Public building is the next largest sector with 11% of total
demand side electricity consumption Many of its end uses of electricity are
likely to be very similar to the household energy consumption, although on
larger scale Therefore, the energy efficiency opportunities available for this
sector is likely to be very similar to the ones identified for residential
sector in the above table Energy measures which are specific to the public
building sector are provided below and are in addition to the measures suggested
in Table Energy Efficiency Opportunities in Public building sector (in addition
to the household sector) Category Technology/Measure Street Lighting Baseline
Technology Street Lighting Alternatives Mercury Vapor, T8 Fluorescent Upgrade to
CFL Technology Upgrade to LED technology Stand-alone solar and battery based
street light systems Efficiency Improvement Potential Baseline Up to 25% up to
40% Fuel Switch Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy  Category
Technology/Measure Sensor and timer controls Efficiency Improvement Potential
Add % - 20% Metal Halide, High Pressure Sodium (HID lamps) Baseline Street
Lighting Baseline Technology Street Lighting Alternatives New generation HID
lamps Sensor and timer controls New design Lowering pole height to  meters will
enable using LED lights Space Conditioning Baseline Technology Fixed air volume
HVAC Space Conditioning Alternative Technology Space Heating Baseline Technology
Variable air volume HVAC Building Management System Variable refrigerant volume
space conditioning Variable frequency drives on air handling units Old Boilers –
Coal, oil or inefficient models Condensing Boilers up to 20% Add % - 20% Up to
50% Baseline up to 50% up to 25% up to 30% up to 30% Baseline up to 20%
Commercial sector is the third largest end electricity consumer with about 11%
of the total The opportunities identified for the residential and public
building sector would cover  majority of potential energy efficiency
opportunities Industries are  fast growing sector in Afghanistan Industries
being diverse and complicated systems tend to have energy efficiency
opportunities which are very specific to each industry type However, there are
several energy efficiency opportunities which cut across  range of industry
facilities, within several processes of an industry  selection of these
opportunities commonly found in each of the processes with energy saving
opportunities closer to % is provided in the table below Energy Efficiency
Opportunities in Industry (Cross sectoral) Industry Process Process Step
Efficiency Improvement measures Improve steam traps and maintain steam traps
Boilers / Steam systems Steam Piping Repair leaks Insulation measures Boiler
maintenance Vapor recompression Boilers Efficiency Improvement Potential % % %
10% 10% ‘Furnaces / Process Heater Furnace Flash and Return condensate heat
recovery Efficient design burners ( low NOx) % - 10% 12% Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy  Industry Process Process Step Cooling and refrigeration
Refrigeration Pumps Motor-driven equipment Fan Compressed Air Systems Efficiency
Improvement measures Efficiency Improvement Potential Flue gas heat recovery 13%
Reducing wall heat and radiation losses Improved process controls ( air-to-fuel
ratio) Systems optimization Improved process measuring and control Improved
insulation Isolate flow paths to no- essential equipment Use of pressure
switches Predictive maintenance Trim or change impeller to match output Remove
sediment/scale buildup % - 10% % % % % % % % % % Install variable speed drive %
More efficient pump % Isolate flow paths non- essential or non-operating
equipment Correct poor airflow conditions at fan inlets and outlets % % Install
variable speed drive % Replace oversized fans with more efficient type Fix
leaks, adjust compressor controls, establish ongoing plan Shut-off idle
equipment, engineered nozzles Eliminate inappropriate compressed air uses
Eliminate artificial demand with pressure optimization/control Install sequencer
Variable speed drive Size replacement compressor to meet demand % % % % % % % %
Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy  Industry Process Process Step Efficiency
Improvement measures Efficiency Improvement Potential Overall system Overall
system Preventative maintenance % - 15% Other energy end use sectors which have
not been accounted in the electricity end use profile include transportation and
agriculture Suggested energy efficiency opportunities for the transportation
sectors have been discussed below Energy efficiency in transportation sector can
be achieved broadly through three ways These include improvement in energy
efficiency of motor vehicles, improvement by shifting the modes of travel or
goods transport and improvement by travel demand management The later two are
largely achieved through strategic level interventions, such as deployment of
mass transit systems, use of  mix of transport modes to move people and freight,
transport planning integrated with land use planning and measures like
congestion tax to alter user behavior to name  few These are typically result of
long term planning process and can be carried out at the stages of developing
blueprints for land use and transport planning for  city or province In
Afghanistan’ context, improving energy efficiency of motor vehicle may be an
opportunity which can be achieved in the short term  list of such opportunities
is provided in the following table This list is focused on achieving energy
efficiency through technical improvements which may be possible within new
vehicles Some opportunities, such as low resistance tire and automatic start and
stop function can be  retrofit to older vehicles As data for type of fuels and
end use of energy within the transportation sector is not available, an
assumption was made that petrol and diesel are the most used forms of transport
fuel, and  majority of this fuel is consumed within the road transport sector,
including freight and passenger vehicle Railways, flight, defense vehicle and
water based transport has been excluded from the list of suggestion for the
energy efficiency activities These can be added at  later stage as the knowledge
and understanding of the aforementioned sector increases with improved data
collection Energy Efficiency Opportunities in Transport sector (Passenger
vehicle) Process category Efficiency Measure Direct injection Variable valve
actuation and lift Petrol and diesel IC engines Tyres: low rolling resistance
Light weighting (Aluminium) Start and stop Petrol Hybrid Engines full hybrid -
electric drive (Measures additional to the petrol IC engines) Direct injection
Efficiency Improvement Potential % % % % % % % Afghanistan Energy Efficiency
Policy 10 Process category Efficiency Measure Efficiency Improvement Potential
Diesel Hybrid Engines full hybrid - electric drive 31% (Measures additional to
the diesel IC engines) Advanced combustion technologies % Energy Efficiency
Opportunities in Transport sector (Freight Trucks) Transport Means Process
category Efficiency Measure Efficiency Improvement Potential Intelligent
transport systems (ITS) and Information/communication technologies (ITC) Heavy
Freight Trucks (HFT) Medium Freight Trucks (MFT) Vehicle Drive train ITS / ICT
Engine Vehicle Engine Vehicle Engine ITS / ICT Engine Drive train Vehicle Driver
Support Systems % Single wide tyres Automated manual transmission Vehicle
platooning % % % Pneumatic booster – air hybrid % Light-weight materials
Bottoming cycles/waste heat recovery ( organic Rankine) % % Low rolling
resistance tyres % Start/stop automatic Driver support systems Smart alternator,
battery sensor, electric accessory drive Automated manual transmission Light-
weight materials % % % % % Note: some of the recommendations from HFTs are
applicable to LFTs as well and hence not been included to avoid repetition
Within the agriculture sector, diesel and electricity use is assumed as major
sources of energy consumption Observing the nature of agriculture in similarly
placed economies, it is likely that the energy end use in this sector is
dominated by pumping equipment, motor driven farm machinery, and utility
vehicles such as the farm tractors Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 11 As
like the transport sector,  list of suggestions for energy efficiency activities
for agricultural sector is provided below These suggestions will expand and
improve at  later iteration of the policy as knowledge and understanding of the
agriculture sector increases with improved data collection Energy Efficiency
Opportunities in Agriculture sector Category Technology/Measure Pumping Baseline
Technology Old inefficient pumps Efficiency Improvement Potential Reference
Upgrade to energy efficient pumps Up to 35% Pumping Alternatives Change motors
to energy efficient versions up to % Stand-alone solar PV based pumping systems
Fuel Switch Indirect methods of reducing upstream energy use by reducing
consumption of resources on farm have not been included An example of this would
be reducing use of chemical fertilizer in the fields to collectively reduce the
demand on imports/manufacturing, thereby reducing upstream energy consumption
within the economy  Electricity transformation/generation side Opportunities for
energy efficiency in the electricity generation/transformation segment are
typically challenging for the existing power plants as they are technically
limited due  complex inter-related design, operation and maintenance issues,
including technology choice, loading constraints and fuel availability Moreover,
about 60% of Afghanistan’ electricity demand is catered by imports, thus
limiting the opportunities to make changes in the power generator fleet However,
as the energy generation sector matures overtime, and at some stage into the
future, data on current efficiency levels are available, legislative or market
based incentives can be provided to generation asset operators to bring the
power generation fleet closer towards best practice efficiency levels Studies
have demonstrated that even small increments in energy conversion efficiency of
the generation technology can yield large number of savings over its life As an
example, the following table illustrates savings in fuel and pollution
reductions by only  % improvement in generation efficiency12 Effect of marginal
efficiency improvement in generation assets Specifics Unit Hard Coal Lignite Oil
Gas CC Fuel type 12 Eurelectric, 2003, “Efficiency in Electricity Generation”,
Source:  Accessed /09 Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 12 Rated Capacity
MWelec 800 42% 900 40% 500 44% 300 57% % % % % % % Tonnes/annum ,382 19,400
Tonnes/annum ,938 16,800 200 800 331 790 Existing efficiency Improved efficiency
Savings in fuel consumption Reduction in CO2 emissions Note: Saving were also
achieved in emissions for other hazardous pollutants, including NOx, sulfur,
ashes and dust In the above scenario and at current stage of developments,
improving energy efficiency in generation side is usually more effective as
strategic asset acquisition and management paradigm In this case, strategic
planning is done around end of life replacement of existing generation assets At
the time of designing and procurement of new energy generation assets, an
informed choice of best available technology (BAT) at the time becomes  critical
decision issue Even as the upfront cost of procuring the BAT may appear to be on
higher side as compared to the vintage models,  life cycle cost analysis should
be done before making  decision An approximation of potential improvement in
energy efficiency of electricity generation assets from using BAT at the time of
replacing an end of life asset is provided as follows13 Potential efficiency
opportunity by replacing assets with BAT at end of life Category Technology
Vintage Efficiency 2007 BAT Efficiency 2030 Efficiency Improvement Potential
Coal Gas Pulverized Coal Combustion Combined Cycle Gas Turbine 47% 58% 54% 65% %
% As climate change agreements come into force around the world, and transition
to  clean energy generation continues to become  priority, renewable energy and
storage system are increasingly becoming core considerations in creation of new
power generation assets As an example, In the year 2015, renewable sources (,
biomass, geothermal, hydropower, solar, wind) accounted for almost two-thirds
(85 percent) of the 16,485 MW of new electrical generation placed in service in
the United States14 In this case, energy efficiency in renewable based
generation becomes an important topic of consideration However, energy
efficiency in renewable energy technologies tend to have  range of drivers for
efficiency, and for dominant technologies such as wind farms or solar PV, fuel
costs or CO2 13 Joint Research Centre of the European Commission, 2012,
“Analysis of energy saving potentials in energy generation: Final results:
Source:  , Accessed /09 14  times-more-than-coalhtml Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy 13 pollution is not an item of concern, this area is excluded
from the scope of further investigation on energy efficiency  Electricity
transmission/distribution side As per the available data, the transmission and
distribution line losses in Afghanistan’ electricity sector are in the order of
~ 23%The world average is in the order of % and generally recognized efficiency
standards are usually between  % - % Therefore, the potentials for reducing
electricity transmissions and distribution losses could be estimated to 15% The
following activities are usually undertaken to reduce losses in the & system
Potential efficiency opportunity in  &  Category Technology/Measure Re-
conductoring Transmission Transition to High Voltage Direct Current Transmission
for long distance lines Controlling Power Flow through Flexible Alternating
Current Transmission System (FACTS) Distribution Load Management Efficiency
Improvement Potential16 % % 50% -20% 15 Tahirzada,  2005, Status of Energy
Efficiency in Afghanistan, Presentation for Energy Efficiency Conference,
Kathmandu, Nepal Source:
energyefficiencygovnp/uploads/1_11_zabiullah__1449805762pdf 16 Opportunities for
Energy Efficiency Improvements in the  Electricity Transmission and Distribution
System (April 2015) prepared by OAK RIDGE NATIONAL LABORATORY Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy 14  SCOPE, VISION AND GOALS  Scope        The scope of AEEP
covers all sectors on the energy value chain being extraction, transformation,
transmission and distribution and end use It covers all sectors of the economy
to promote energy efficiency being households, commercial, government,
industrial, transportation, agriculture and mining sectors of Afghanistan It
provides overarching goals, strategic responses and policy tools to incentivize
reducing energy consumption across multiple sectors in Afghanistan It also
specifies  list of potential actions for generation and supply side
(transmission and distribution) energy efficiency which can be investigated by
relevant agencies It covers all forms of fuels used in Afghanistan’ economy
including electricity, coal, wood, petroleum products and gives recommendation
on making  shift to cleaner fuel/clean technologies It offers  framework for
balancing the interests of consumer, while at the same time, gives  rational
basis for deciding government interventions and priorities It guides the
planning of key ministries and departments in the context of energy efficiency
These are - MEW, ICE, DABS, ANSA, CSO, MRRD, MoUD, MAIL, NEPA & others  Vision
The Vision of AEEP is enshrined in the Vision of Afghanistan -  society of hope
and prosperity based on strong, private sector led economy, social equity and
environmental sustainability The vision statements of AEEP has been listed below
Energy Security: Reduce Afghanistan’ dependence on imported energy, Energy
Productivity: Optimal utilization of available energy resources by minimizing
wastage, Energy Access: Converting wasted energy to usable energy to bring more
populations within reach of energy services, Sustainable Growth Pathway: Foster
development pathway with  mix of low energy intensity (or high energy
efficiency) and renewable energy Improving energy efficiency of economy is
fundamental to addressing the challenges of energy access, security of energy
supplies, improving economic productivity and creating economic transformation,
innovation and growth aligned with sustainability principles The objectives of
AEEP, in the above context, are to ensure efficient utilization of the energy
resources in all possible manners and to adopt an integrated approach to harness
all resources on the supply side while applying good demand side management
practices in all energy consuming sectors in order to realize the vision AEEP
will provide tools and guidance for development, implementation, monitoring and
continuous improvement of energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan Afghanistan
Energy Efficiency Policy 15  Overarching Goals       Improve energy efficiency
across all sectors of economy, government, businesses and households, by setting
targets for reducing losses in extraction, generation, transmission &
distribution and end use Promote identification and adoption of energy
efficiency opportunities across all sectors of the economy through awareness
creation and capacity building Enable implementation and financing of energy
efficiency measures across all end use sectors using both regulatory and market
principles Ensure energy products and services offered in Afghanistan meet
desired quality standards as it transitions towards an energy efficiency based
economy Use energy efficiency to address cross cutting issues including climate
change, clean energy, energy access and energy security and health and
productivity outcomes, in particular to rural areas Foster international
cooperation, particularly with countries in the region having similar socio-
cultural milieu for cross learning, promotion of energy efficiency as  product
and service industry and driving innovation for jobs and growth The framework
for Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy is presented below Specific overarching
goals, strategies and resulting policy tools of AEEP to meet the said objectives
are presented in detail in the next section Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy
16 Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 17 VISIONOBJECTIVESGOALS3 Enable
implementation and financingSTRATEGIES & ACTIONSEnergy Security: Reduce
Afghanistan’ dependence on imported energyEnergy Productivity: Optimal
utilization of available energy resources by minimizing wastageEnergy Access:
Converting wasted energy to usable energy Sustainable Growth Pathway: Foster
development pathway with  mix of low energy intensity and renewable energy To
ensure efficient utilization of the energy resources in all possible mannersTo
adopt an integrated approach to harness all resources on the supply side while
applying good demand side management practicesTo provide tools and guidance for
development, implementation, monitoring and continuous improvement of energy
efficiency sector10 Energy service companies• Government backed guarantees for
ESCOs to improve access to finance • Creation of dedicated government backed
financing body • Standardisation of contract procedures and & procedures •
Accreditation of ESCOS to ensure quality assurance Knowledge base and standards•
Create standards for product specifications• Create standards for energy audit •
Create standards for testing & measurement• Introduce EE as subject in school &
university curriculum• Develop manuals & guidelines• Build capacities through
workshops, demonstration etcClean energy in rural areas• Subsidize distribution
of improved cook stoves• Incentivize use of RE devices• Support  &  of rural
specific technologies13 Renewable energy• Promote RE in
centralized/decentralized/distributed mode• Incentivize use of RE devices for
end use applications• Promote use of bio fuels as transport fuel• Develop
capacities to understand interlinkages of RE & EE14 International Cooperation•
Facilitate seminars, conclaves, conferences• Utilize existing network events to
promote trade & investment• Create mechanisms for international partnerships7
Businesses, Enterprises & Commercial Establishments• Subsidize distribution of
technologies • Provide smart meters and trusted information • Design energy
tariff schemes• Work with public sector and private sector financial
institutions to provide loans • Subsidize access to energy auditors and green
building practitioners• Provide low interest loans, subsidies• Start voluntary
energy and carbon disclosure schemes • Provide financial and fiscal incentives
for organisations • Create knowledge sharing platforms• Build management
capability• Initiate green awards8 Consumer Awareness• Information campaigns •
Regional information centre • Guidance documents • Public campaign through
television programs and newspaper advertisements• Energy Efficiency Information
Website • Publicize the results of implemented EE projects• Introduce total cost
of ownership (TCO) as evaluation criteria9 Laws and Regulations• Regulation for
creating EE industry in Afghanistan• Set up minimum and acceptable standards•
Create financial & fiscal measures• Introduce EE certificate, cap and trade
scheme1 Greening of building sector• Enforce AEEC in all new buildings•
Introduce green building rating systems• Energy efficient lighting in public &
private buildings• Retrofitting of old buildings2 Public lighting• Use LEDs or
low energy HIDs in public lighting• Solar powered lights in areas of good solar
access3 Appliances & equipment• Energy performance standards • Energy efficiency
labelling  Transport sector• Vehicle labelling • Alternative fuel vehicles5
Generation, & of Electricity• Monitoring and reporting of power plant operating
efficiency performance• Power plants to meet the efficiency standards • Aim to
reduce & losses to 10% by introducing global best practices6 Mining, Oil & Gas•
Retrofitting with efficient motors, pumps, compressor, turbines and heat
recovery systems• New vehicle fleet to meet fuel efficiency standards •
Automated driverless systems in new fleet of vehicles1 Improve energy efficiency
across all sectors2 Promote identification and adoption  Ensure quality
standards  Use EE to address cross cutting issues6 Foster international
cooperationFRAMEWORK FOR AFGHANISTAN ENERGY EFFICIENCY POLICY  STRATEGIES AND
POLICY ACTIONS The overarching goals are supported with the way of strategies
which provide  high level pathway to achieve these goals The strategies have
been designed to improve EE across sectors and address the barriers to the
uptake of energy efficiency measures and technologies The strategies are further
supported with policy tools which provide action level details required for
realization of strategy The strategies and actions have been listed below:
Greening of building sector Buildings account for about 93% of all electrical
energy in Afghanistan and  significant share of greenhouse gas emissions The
building sector covers  varied set of end use activities, which have different
energy use effects As the country develops, energy demand from the building
sector will continue to increase Thus, energy efficiency in building sector is
especially significant owing to rapid new construction with opportunities to
utilize efficient materials and best practices The policy proposes to set
performance targets on new and old public & private buildings The goals are set
on  TERM  timeframe, and will require creation of legal and institutional
framework to deliver on these changes The specific actions are as follows: 
Enforce Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Codes for Building (AEEC) in all new
buildings: Building Code sets requirements for the energy performance of
buildings New buildings designed and constructed on recommended measures of AEEC
will save significant amounts of money over  building' life Afghanistan energy
efficiency codes for buildings (AEEC) must be aggressively enforced for the new
constructions to follow best practices The policy sets  target of ; 100% of all
new construction above 2000m2 of NLA, both for private and public sector, will
be required to be rated under AEEC  Introduce green building rating systems:
Green rating system provides  scale to measure the sustainability standard of
building' design, construction and operation Through each criteria and sub
criteria, rating system evaluates the performances of the building and award
rating Buyers favor energy efficient buildings which guarantee reduced life
cycle costs ; Introduce an operational building rating system suitable for all
classes of buildings within Afghanistan ; 100% of all buildings in use above
1000m2 of NLA, both for private and public sector, will be required to be rated
under green building rating system  Energy efficient lighting in public and
private buildings: All public buildings can realize significant cost savings and
reduced energy use by choosing energy efficient lighting Making the switch to
energy efficient lighting is  good way to get started on becoming more energy-
efficient, since it typically has such  short payback period The policy has put
target of ; 100% of incandescent, halogen and old generation fluorescent based
lighting to be phased out and replaced with LEDs or other best available
technology in homes and other buildings  Retrofitting of old buildings: Since
many households, private offices, factories and public building have been
constructed in earlier times and typically contain inefficient appliances,
building envelop as well Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 18 as
technologies, it is beneficial for the owners of these buildings to retrofit
them with newer and more efficient appliances and technologies, and where
feasible, building envelop and insulation While government owned buildings tend
to be easier and more practical to enforce to undertake  retrofit project, it is
suggested that commercial, residential and industrial building owners shall also
be encouraged to undertake energy efficiency improvements in their buildings by
way of financial incentives Policy proposes  target for retrofit buildings as
follows: ; 30% of NLA of government buildings, including factories built on or
before 2016 must have had energy efficiency upgrades ; 30% of NLA of private
buildings, including factories built on or before 2016 must have voluntarily
undergone energy efficiency upgrades  Public lighting The potential for energy
savings from making public lighting more energy efficient can be substantial and
relatively simpler to achieve Public lighting may account for as high as 30% -
50% of the overall energy expenditure of  municipality, depending on asset base
Adoption & promotion of best available technologies like LEDs/HIDs or solar
powered lights for public lighting could also help, apart from reduction in
electricity, break down barriers for adoption of energy efficient lighting in
other sectors The policy suggests following targets: ; Energy efficiency of
public lighting assets further improved from 2016 levels with use of best
available technologies such as the LEDs or low energy HIDs ; 50% of the public
lighting assets in areas with good solar access to be powered with solar energy
Appliances & equipment Energy consumed by residential appliances and industrial
and commercial equipment is  major source of greenhouse gas emissions globally
The Strategy includes  range of measures aimed at increasing the energy
efficiency of appliances used in the residential, commercial and industrial
sectors Following action items have been proposed under this strategy:  Energy
performance standards are the most widely used measures globally to reduce
energy use and greenhouse gas emissions from appliances and equipment Minimum
Energy Performance Standards (MEPS) provide consumer protection in  higher
energy price context by ensuring that inefficient appliances are not available
in the market The policy sets the following target: ; 100% of all new appliances
and equipment manufactured or imported in Afghanistan to meet minimum energy
performance and quality standards  Energy efficiency labelling assists
consumers by providing information, allowing them to make coherent choices
having regard to likely life cycle costs It acts as an incentive for
manufacturers to set apart from their competitors and promote introduction of
new and efficient versions The following target has been set: ; 100% of all new
appliances and equipment manufactured or imported in Afghanistan to meet energy
efficiency labelling Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 19  Transport sector
Most of the oil in Afghanistan is imported, which exposes the country to
unstable international oil prices Deployment of advanced technologies and
alternative fuel vehicles can reduce use of imported oil resources in transport
sector Measures to improve energy efficiency in transport contribute not only to
decrease in fuel consumption, but also to the reduction in CO2 emissions The
policy intends to introduce following action items for this strategy:  Vehicle
labelling helps customers to understand and compare vehicle choices on the basis
of fuel economy and CO2 emission level displayed on vehicles This enables
consumers to view the features of other vehicles that they might not have
otherwise considered The policy puts the following target: ; 100% of all new
vehicles manufactured or imported in Afghanistan to meet green labeling
requirement based on kgCO2/km performance ; The efficiency of light and heavy
vehicles entering the fleet has further improved from 2016 levels  Alternative
fuel vehicles: Options for alternative fuel vehicles - from electric cars to
natural gas-powered buses and trucks that run on biodiesel - are increasingly
becoming available Increasing the fleet of alternative fuel vehicles in the
Afghanistan economy will help reduce oil imports and also reduce pollution The
following target have been set under this action ; 10% of all new light and
heavy vehicles entering the fleet must be based on EV and alternative fuel
technology  Generation, transmission and distribution of electricity Electricity
and gas networks play  key role in the achievement of sustainable development It
is therefore equally important, like the demand side sectors, to incorporate
energy efficiency in network design and operations of the existing and new power
generation fleet in Afghanistan The policy recommends following targets to drive
the operations of generator feet and & network towards more energy efficient
outcomes, based on the existing scenario  100% of power plants to monitor and
report on their operating efficiency performance  100% of power plants to meet
the efficiency standards observed in average high efficiency performing power
generation assets  The transmission and distribution losses in government run
energy & assets to get in step with global best practices from 2016 levels
Currently it is around 28% with an aim to reduce to 10% in  Mining, oil & gas
extraction Mining and extraction industries tend to be the most energy use
intensive sectors within an economy They also tend to be the most complex to
manage as they come with  range of technologies which are applied based on
specific needs of  mining or extraction process, geology and technique However,
number of technologies used within the processing stages can be made more
efficient with help of low-cost measures, optimization of production processes,
and reliability of electric power supply Taking the above into account, the
policy suggests the following: Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 20  100% of
all process operations and equipment built before 2016 retrofitted with
efficient motors, pumps, compressor, turbines and heat recovery systems  100%
of new purchased or leased vehicle fleet to meet fuel efficiency standards  10%
of new purchased or leased fleet vehicles to have automated driverless systems
for optimized fuel efficiency  Supporting Businesses, Enterprises & Commercial
Establishments Participation of private sector is critical in ensuring success
of new markets and programs such as the energy efficiency, and in cases like
those similar to current status of Afghanistan, government leadership is deemed
critical in starting and catalyzing  new market  mix of incentives, knowledge
and price signals are often used to guide development of the energy efficiency
industry As the market mature with help of consistent and good quality
information, reliable projects and verifiable savings, the government’ role as
regulator and enforcer takes centre stage The following policy measures are
suggested to be used in Afghanistan to initiate and promote energy efficiency
choices in private industry  Subsidize distribution of technologies with high
energy savings, energy security outcomes, for example – LED lights, insulation
products, solar hot water systems, star rated air-conditioners, space heaters
and solar PV systems  Provide smart meters and trusted information to reduce
energy use at consumer level  Design energy tariff schemes which influence
consumer behaviors to switch to more energy efficient practices  Work with
public sector and private sector financial institutions to provide loans for
energy upgrades or solar PV system installation as part of home and business
loans  Subsidize access to energy auditors and green building practitioners at
zero or low cost to uncover opportunities  Provide low interest loans,
subsidies to implement energy efficiency, alternative fuels and renewable
generation opportunities  Start voluntary energy and carbon disclosure schemes
for organizations which are in top 50 energy consuming organizations in
Afghanistan  Provide financial and fiscal incentives for organisations to
encourage retrofitting of old buildings to improve energy efficiency and
construction of new buildings to be rated under Afghanistan Green Building
Design Standards  Create knowledge sharing platforms for SMEs, transport,
agriculture and other sectors to raise awareness and vision  Build management
capability, including in SMEs, through training and certification courses to
identify and exploit opportunities to ensure energy efficiency good practice is
reflected in mainstream business planning  Initiate green awards to recognize
and celebrate efforts, and encourage industry engagement Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy 21  Consumer awareness Empowering consumers with information
and knowledge on various aspects of energy efficiency practices including tools,
procedures, and benefits is likely to have  long term impact on them accepting
and supporting an energy efficiency campaign Resulting changes in behavior of
end user of energy in form of energy conservation, lifestyle, awareness, low-
cost actions, and small investments can lead to % to 10% in energy savings at
household or workplace level Following measures will be used to educate public
on the subject and choices of energy efficiency:  Information campaigns at
places of national and international importance including religious institutions
can be implemented with an objective of demonstrating integration of energy
efficiency and its related benefits to create awareness of energy efficiency
practices & technologies and also to implement energy efficiency at such
locations  Regional information centre located at non-government organizations
and consumer/ industry associations can serve as focal points for disseminating
information on energy efficiency as well as renewable energy to various target
groups - from the general public to small and medium-sized enterprises and
policy makers  Guidance documents providing information and guidance to help
consumers identify energy efficiency opportunities in their processes &
equipment and also provide relevant details to implement basic energy efficiency
measures can be disseminated among general public, SMEs, Government & commercial
institutions  Public campaign through television programs and newspaper
advertisements to reach out to home owners, the public sector and commercial
enterprises propagating energy efficiency benefits and encouraging energy saving
behavior The objectives are to induce  change in the users’ behavior by creating
awareness of energy use and interest in its reduction  Energy Efficiency
Information Website can be established and maintained through office of energy
efficiency (OEE) which will have comprehensive information on incentives and
policies that support energy efficiency in Afghanistan, case studies of
successful implementation, information on manufacturer of energy efficient
equipment and guidance documents on energy efficient technologies & practices 
Publicize the results of implemented EE projects through mass media like
television, newspaper to create awareness among general public This can be
achieved by integrating communication plan within the project planning stage,
where the project proponent will be lead for creating awareness about their own
project  Introduce total cost of ownership (TCO) as evaluation criteria in
government procurement processes, and encourage private sector to adopt it as
well The TCO factors in operational costs as well as capital costs when
investing in assets – the longer term energy savings may be worth  slightly
higher upfront cost  Laws and Regulations Success of an energy efficiency
program is highly dependent on the legal and regulatory drivers which are
present in the country They provide the first incentives for individuals and
organizations to act as well as respond to energy efficiency expectations in
terms of penalties, fines and other regulatory or reporting requirements It is
typically followed by creation of  market for products and services which help
individuals Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 22 or organizations meet their
compliance needs, as well as save costs on energy use The following steps are
suggested to take Afghanistan to the next step on the energy efficiency program
 Draft and finalize  regulation which provides  legal framework to initiate and
support creation of an energy efficiency industry in Afghanistan  Set up
minimum and acceptable standards across  range of options – minimum energy
performance scheme for appliances, energy efficiency rating schemes for
buildings, minimum renewable energy integration targets for new developments -
with the help of legislations  Create fiscal and financial measures in form of
tax breaks, penalties, low interest loans, lease to provide access to finance
for households, government and commercial sectors  Prepare ground for
introducing market based energy efficiency certificate cap and trade scheme into
TERM  by setting up institutional framework for data acquisition, monitoring and
reporting, user friendly format for energy bills, system to ease financial
transactions or incentives and penalties 10 Energy service companies - ESCO ESCO
or Energy Service Company is  term used to describe  commercial company
providing  wide range of energy related services including design and
implementation of energy efficiency projects, sourcing of best tariff plans for
customers in  privatized energy market It acts as  project developer for
implementing energy conservation measures and shoulder the technical and
performance risks associated with  project The company' return is directly
linked to the actual energy cost savings While ESCOs are not  policy instrument
per se, but they are similar to policy tools and an important medium to capture
energy efficiency potentials and overcome  number of market barriers Various
factors such as enforcement of building codes, consumer awareness, mandatory
energy audits and reporting has enabled the development of  successful ESCO
industry The following action items, based on literature review of enabling
factors in other similarly placed economies, have been proposed for development
of ESCOs:  Government backed guarantees for ESCOs to improve access to finance
for the energy efficiency projects The guarantees can help ESCO secure funds
from domestic financial institutions, or multilateral financing agencies Other
financial support mechanisms may include partial risk guarantees, loan loss
reserve funds, special purpose funds or interest credits  Creation of dedicated
government backed financing body for creating basket funds pooling resources
from various channels and used to finance projects dedicated to energy
efficiency As the ESCO industry matures and the commercial banks are able and
willing to engage ESCOs, public loans or funds should be phased out to avoid
wastage of government subsidies on projects which can be financed by private
sector  Standardisation of contract procedures and measurement and verification
procedures to alleviate the concerns of end-users and the financing community
regarding reliability of ESCOs Standardisation also improves time and cost
effectiveness, and promotes competition and transparency (such as in Germany)
Standard contracts can increase the trust of customers, especially in the public
sector, and thereby their willingness to engage with ESCO  Accreditation of
ESCOS to ensure quality assurance and building trust in the minds of the
consumer regarding their reliability and competence This system is currently in
place in the countries with  large Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 23
number of ESCOs ( accreditation system by the US ESCO association, NAESCO or the
Chinese ESCO association) 11 Knowledge base and standards Lack of good quality
trusted information; standardized source of advice and availability of quality
products in the market is one of the key barriers to energy efficiency take up
To overcome this barrier, it is recommended that the following steps are
undertaken as starting point to create and establish  trusted body of knowledge
which will help in initiating and energy efficiency industry These knowledge
bases can be periodically reviewed and improved upon as the understanding of
energy efficiency grows with experience  Create standards for product
specifications based on IEC standards but localized to Afghanistan needs 
Create standards for energy audit and renewable energy based on ISO standards
but localized to Afghanistan needs  Create test standards and measurement
protocols for appliances and equipment aligned with international standards, to
assist performance comparisons and benchmarking for products  Create knowledge
base and skills for the new energy efficiency industry by introduce school and
university level curriculum and apprenticeships and exchange programs  Develop
manuals, guidelines for adopting advanced technologies and proven energy
efficiency practices across various sectors  Build capacity of manufacturers,
importers and customs to interpret, understand and make decisions on the basis
of available standards through the means of workshops, publications and best
practice demonstration 12 Efficient energy for rural communities In the rural
economy, domestic household sector is the most prominent energy consumer,
followed by the agricultural sector Lack of access to cleaner fuels in rural
areas has led to  process of combusting solid fuels in inefficient devices to
meet space heating and cooking needs Improved cook stoves instead of traditional
biomass cook stoves can ensure efficiency in the use of traditional fuels and
also reduce smoke emission and health hazards Following actions are being
proposed:  Subsidize distribution of energy efficient biomass cooking stoves
and heaters in rural communities where distributing modern clean fuels like LPG
is unfeasible  Incentivize use of renewable energy devices through means of low
interest loans and subsidies for various end use productive loads such solar PV
agricultural pumping and drying systems, Solar PV refrigeration, lighting and
fan systems for shops in rural areas  Source international funds to invest in
research and development of rural specific technologies such as renewable energy
based minigrid systems for electricity and fuel, including, solar PV, micro
hydro, biogas based technologies Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 24 13
Renewable energy Energy efficiency and renewable energy are inextricably linked
in pursuit of  future with sustainable growth with clean energy Lower energy
demand from measures to accelerate energy efficiency contributes to increasing
the share of renewable energy in generation mix, assuming that renewable energy
use will continue to grow The combination of energy efficiency and renewable
energy deployment creates  synergy for increasing both the renewable energy
share and annual improvements in energy intensity, which collectively reduces
the growth in total primary energy supply (TPES),  great outcome for any country
which is highly dependent of imports of energy For the above reasons, the policy
recommends the following  Recognize and promote use of renewable energy such as
Solar PV, Solar thermal, Wind turbines, Hydro, Bio energy (RE) technologies in
centralized, distributed and decentralized generation mode as per the Renewable
Energy Policy  Incentivize use of renewable energy devices for various end use
applications such as lighting and fan systems, agricultural pumping systems,
refrigeration systems  Promote use of biofuels as alternative to reduce
consumption of traditional fossil based transport fuels, thereby reducing their
demand  Develop capacity of households, government and industry to make
decisions by creating knowledge products on demonstrating interlinkages of RE
and EE 14 International Co-operation International cooperation refers to  group
of actions and/or resources exchanged between different countries according to
their own interests and strategies Engaging existing partnership for cooperation
through trade & investment, technology cooperation and capacity building would
ensure development of energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan Specific actions
under this strategy are:  Lead or facilitate seminars, conclaves, conferences
and trade exhibitions of energy efficiency knowledge, products and services 
Utilize existing networking events to promote trade and investment opportunity
in Afghanistan energy efficiency sector Examples include services, training and
capacity building and manufacturing  Create mechanisms for international
partnerships and collaborative opportunities among domestic stakeholder groups
for collective learning and development and transfer of knowledge and technology
through the means of international chairs, colloquiums and workshops Afghanistan
Energy Efficiency Policy 25  IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY  Overview    The AEEP will
be implemented in two terms, TERM1 and TERM , to achieve its strategic and
policy goals TERM  (2017 – 2020) will work to create enabling environment for
the establishment of an energy efficiency industry in Afghanistan This will be
achieved by creating institutions, systems and processes, and establishing
partnerships and collaborations across  range of government and private industry
stakeholders to effectively implement the AEEP The energy efficiency industry in
TERM  will be government led TERM  () will be working to enable transition of
the energy efficiency industry from  government led activity to  private
investment led marketplace This will be achieved by gradually removing barriers
by creating strong legislative framework, skill base, standards, information and
fungible marketplace for private investors  Institutional Systems    An apex
regulatory body, the Office of Energy Efficiency (OEE), is proposed to be
created within the Ministry of Environment and Water (MEW) The OEE will have
primary responsibility for strategizing, planning, budgeting and coordinating
the implementation of AEEP  committee headed by deputy minister of MEW and
comprising of relevant stakeholders will have the responsibility of creating OEE
It will comprise of individuals having appropriate background and training
suited for the job and should demonstrate leadership and professionalism in
their day to day activities The objectives of the proposed OEE include, but are
not limited to the following, and are expected to develop further as the
knowledge and understanding of energy efficiency sector builds up in Afghanistan
) Formulating and facilitating national programs and action plans that are well
suited to the targeted economic sectors for implementation of energy efficiency
policy guidelines ) Establishing terms of reference for coordination between
relevant government and private stakeholders and ministries and serve as the
information house on energy efficiency ) Work with stakeholders to developing
system and processes for monitoring effective implementation of energy
efficiency policies ) Engaging, supporting, working and influencing  wide range
of stakeholders, including public and private organizations with energy
efficiency responsibilities with means of information, financing, and capacity
building ) Conceiving training modules and national level certification scheme
for energy managers and energy auditors Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 26
) Facilitating technical training, awareness generation and capacity building of
stakeholders across both government and non-government organizations ) Promotion
of energy efficiency among general public about national programs and action
plans, energy efficiency measures and their effects ) Source funding
opportunities working with international aid agencies and development financing
institutions     Presently, there are  range of institutions working in
different capacities in the energy efficiency sector, and in most cases,
pursuing the aforementioned objectives Their efforts are largely fragmented and
OEE will consolidate these efforts by providing leadership, resources and
direction to the efforts The OEE will work with  range of public and private
sector representative institutions to achieve its objectives It will allocate
responsibilities to the partner institutions based on their established
strengths in area of energy efficiency, informed by consultative planning and
decision making process These institutions will report to the OEE on an annual
basis on policy targets and progress as agreed between the stakeholders It is
also recommended that these institutions congregate annually in some form of
organizational leadership team meetings, to facilitate building of
understanding, confidence, transparency and hence  team culture between them
This is important for overall development of an effective organizational
culture, conducive to large scale change  list of potential government and
private industry institutions which are envisaged to work with the OEE is
provided in the following table The institutions have been listed per their
existing core deliverables, and their value addition capacity to assist OEE in
delivering critical pieces of works for successful implementation of energy
efficiency policy Institutional Coordination no Institution Required leadership
in delivering EE policy      OEE (proposed)  Coordinate activities of relevant
government departments to deliver on the agenda of energy efficiency policy ACCI
 Promoting energy efficiency objectives in private AISA ANSA sector 
Organising demonstration projects in private sector  Promoting and attracting
investments in EE sector  Development of minimum energy performance standards
for appliances and equipment Banking Institutions  Work with OEE to introduce
financing tools and options for  range of EE activities  The OEE will be
supported by way of grants from central government and multilateral funding
agencies in short term to cover administrative expenses and initiate programs
and activities In the Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 27    CSO DABS 
Establishment of an effective system for acquisition, tracking and reporting of
energy based data from various economic sectors  Support implementation of EE
measures in distribution and supply side of electricity Department of Education
 Establishment of Energy Efficiency Skill Development Scheme and updating of
university level curriculum to include courses on energy efficiency  Donor
community  Support implementation different action items in ICE the EE Policy 
Data analysis of energy use data for energy efficiency benchmarking, tracking
and reporting MAIL  Support OEE in implementing energy efficiency MEW measures
in agriculture pump sets  Support the establishment of independent entity for
energy efficiency sector in Afghanistan and promote EE in energy projects
Ministry of Finance  Organise and manage funds for EE sector Ministry of
Information and Culture Ministry of Religious Affairs MRRD  Promote energy
efficiency campaigns and awareness programmes through public media and other
means  Introduce Mosques as pioneers for EE by participating in projects and
programs related to energy reduction  Support incorporation of energy
efficiency measures in their rural energy projects and energy efficiency
awareness through CDCs MoUD  Enforcement of Afghanistan building codes;
Municipalities promoting energy efficiency in government and household buildings
 Introduce EE in all services, planning and decision making NEPA  Enforce air
quality standards in order to promote cleaner fuels/clean technologies for all
end- use sectors including transport long term, it is recommended that the
energy efficiency office is allowed to raise revenue through  range of options
including tariffs, taxes, penalties or other financial tools Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy 28  Financing Mechanism     The OEE is proposed to be
empowered with  financial wing, which will have the function of sourcing and
consolidating funds from both internally from government resources and
externally from donor or development institution financing For these purposes,
the funds will be managed through mechanism of basket funds which will provide
the foundation block for setting up  dedicated energy efficiency financing
institution in longer term, which could even be merged with the renewable energy
financing body Donor funds could be tied to specific program within the “basket
funds” to give some flexibility and accommodate the preferences of donors
International funds can be sourced in essentially in three forms: Low interest
debt (Soft loans), Equity or Grant money In Afghanistan’ context, soft loan and
grant money are most suitable form of international funding to raise revenue
Funding can be sourced from  variety of international financial institutions
such as the Asian Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, World Bank, Global
Environmental Facility or Bilateral agencies such as USAID, DFID, GTZ or the BMZ
Internally, the OEE will need to use existing government machinery to raise
funds through fiscal mechanisms such as pollution/green taxes, custom duties,
tariffs on inefficient equipment This activity will be important in setting up
the incentive and disincentive networks within the economy to influence consumer
behaviour towards energy efficiency practices The funds raised by the OEE will
be used by the means of various financial instruments, which will assist in
creation of  government led energy efficiency industry in TERM , while
transitioning into  market led industry in TERM  The government led initiative
in TERM  will be created with the help of the following financial instruments:
Direct Subsidies, either completely or partly funded to introduce new
technologies to the users such as the LED lights, energy efficient cooking
stoves, and heating/cooling technologies As the markets become more mature and
self-sustaining, the subsidy levels decrease over time or they are replaced with
market-based instruments Grants or co-financing can be provided to both
government and non-government bodies, private organizations and entrepreneurs to
perform activities related to:  Promotional campaigns for more efficient uses
of energy,  Education and training programs for professionals performing tasks
related to energy efficiency improvement,  Financial aid for the preparation of
energy audits and related project documentation including investment studies, 
Financial aid for energy efficiency improvement projects Low interest loans
(Soft loans), where grants or co-financing is not available, especially for SMEs
or large industries to undertake investment studies and energy efficiency
improvement projects Competitive co-financing can be provided for technology
demonstration and deployment of new and innovative technology which are not yet
commercially attractive investment compared to available and proven alternatives
The goal is to demonstrate the project’ features and scalability to make it an
attractive investment choice for private financers Afghanistan Energy Efficiency
Policy 29  Green lease can be provided to resolve challenge faced by tenant and
owner of  property in terms of investing in improving energy efficiency of
property Energy efficiency loans can be issued to the ‘building’ instead of
tenant or the owner The loan is guaranteed by the local or state government and
loan repayments are collected by the government in form scheduled property taxes
and paid to the investment body, in this case OEE  Tax breaks can be provided
through reducing import duties/VAT on energy efficient equipment which will
encourage inflow of efficient equipment in the market Additionally, as energy
efficiency projects facilitate the adaptation and mitigation measures of climate
change, they are eligible for benefitting from several funds dedicated for such
purposes One such example is the Green Climate Fund (GCF) Even as income from
GCF approved project is not likely to be  key investment driver, it is capable
of acting as  catalyst in increasing return on investment, thus providing
projects more credibility and facilitating the securing of funds from financial
institutions There are other climate related funds also available For this
purpose, all implementing agencies of energy efficiency projects, both in public
and private sector, will explore receiving of climate funds to increase the
viability of their projects during design and development stage itself In TERM ,
the OEE can emphasize of developing electricity or gas markets backed by
regulations, as seen in developed countries like Australia or Germany The key to
success of this market is strong regulations, data collection, reporting and
advanced IT based information exchange networks, which is the area of focus of
TERM  of this policy In  market based scheme, an energy efficiency regulation
body imposes targets on electricity distribution companies, large energy
consumers, or electricity retailers to buy certain amount of energy efficiency
certificates from marketplace Failing to do so attracts penalty charges from
government, which is high enough to discourage such action These energy
efficiency certificates are created by designated consumer groups such as
households, commercial or industrial users saving energy by undertaking energy
efficiency projects Each of the certificates typically represents  savings of
1kwh, or  unit of energy The energy efficiency opportunity is typically
identified and implemented by an energy services company (ESCO), who also
handles the certificate creation and sale process on behalf of consumers
Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 30  MONITORING & EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
Monitoring and evaluation framework for energy efficiency policy is proposed to
be developed on the both program and policy levels It is intended that the
framework at policy level would measure statistical changes resulting from
energy efficiency improvements applied through the policy  program level
framework is intended to measure the effectiveness of institutions which will be
working with the OEE to deliver high level program and strategies to implement
policies  Collection, maintenance and improvement of energy statistics is
complex and reiterative task, but it needs to be started immediately It is
recommended that steps are taken to initiate data collection for the following
list of energy efficiency indicators as  minimum to monitor statistical changes
resulting from energy efficiency improvements applied through the policy The
list will be reviewed at the end of TERM  with  view to further improve and
focus the process as knowledge, understanding and experience of stakeholders
grow with implementation of policy List of indicators for policy level
measurement and evaluation framework Measurable Indicators Definition Formula
Change in Primary energy intensity (ktoe/USD)  Total reduction in energy
intensity at the national level Change in Final Energy Intensity (ktoe/USD)
Energy performance of Public buildings Non-electricity energy use intensity of
public buildings adjusted for climatic conditions TPE GDP TFE GDP NEC() EM  MDD
ADD Total primary energy intensity is the ratio between the gross inland
consumption of energy resources and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) calculated for
calendar year Total final energy intensity is the ratio between the gross inland
consumption of final energy and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) calculated for
calendar year Total non-electricity energy consumed by public buildings in  year
divided by total number of employees in full time equivalent in that year
multiplied by ratio of Type of data required to be collected  TPE: Total
Primary Energy Supply before & after  GDP: Gross Domestic Product before &
after  TFE: Total Final Energy Supply before & after  GDP: Gross Domestic
Product before & after  NEC(): Non- electricity energy consumption of
Institutions in analyzed year Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 31 Measurable
Indicators Definition Formula mean and actual heating degree days 𝐸𝐶() 𝐸𝑀 Total
electric energy consumed by public buildings in  year divided by total number of
employees in full time equivalent in that year (toe/ employee in full time
equivalent) OR (toe/Net Lettable Area in m2) Electricity consumption intensity
of institutional sector (kWh/ employee in full time equivalent) AND (kWh/Net
Lettable Area in m2) NEC ()   MDD ADD  Energy performance of Residential
buildings Non-electricity energy use intensity of household buildings adjusted
for climatic conditions (toe/dwelling) Total non-electricity energy consumed by
household buildings in  year divided by total number of permanently occupied
dwellings in that year multiplied by ratio of mean and actual heating degree
days Type of data required to be collected  MDD & ADD: Mean and actual heating
degree days    EM: Number of FTE employees in analyzed year or Net lettable
area EC (): Electricity energy consumption of institutions in analyzed year EM:
Number of operating institutions in analyzed year or Net lettable area  NEC ():
Non- electricity energy consumption of households in analyzed year  MDD & ADD:
Mean and actual heating degree days  : Number of permanently occupied dwellings
in analyzed year Electricity consumption Total electric energy consumed by
household buildings in  year divided by total number 𝐸𝐶 ()   Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy EC (): Electricity energy consumption 32 Measurable Indicators
Definition Formula intensity of households of permanently occupied dwellings in
that year (kWh/ dwelling)  Energy performance of Industrial units Energy
consumption of industrial subsectors per unit of production (toe/unit of
production) Total energy consumed by industrial sub-sector in analyzed year
divided by industrial production index of same industry sub-sector (selected) in
the same year 𝐸𝐶 (𝑖𝑛𝑑) 𝐼𝑃𝐼  Energy savings in transport sector Energy
consumption intensity of road vehicles (toe/car equivalent) 𝐸𝑅𝑉 𝑆𝑅𝑉 Ratio of
energy consumption of road vehicles (cars, trucks and light vehicles,
motorcycles, buses) in an analyzed year and stock of road vehicles in car
equivalent in that same year Type of data required to be collected of households
in analyzed year  : Number of permanently occupied dwellings in analyzed year 
   EC (ind): Energy consumption of industrial sub-sector in analysed year
IPI: Industrial production index of industry sub- sector (selected) in analysed
year ERV: Energy consumption of road vehicles (cars, trucks and light vehicles,
motorcycles, buses) in analysed year SRV: Stock of road vehicles in car
equivalent in analysed year  truck or light vehicle =  cars equivalent  bus = 15
car equivalent  motorcycle = 15 car equivalent Afghanistan Energy Efficiency
Policy 33  As regards program level indicators, the following list has been
compiled based on the anticipated programs which various institutions may
undertake to implement energy efficiency policy It is recommended that these
indicators are embedded in the annual planning and reporting framework of
relevant institutions The indicators will assist OEE evaluate progress and
effectiveness of its programs and allocate resources accordingly The list will
be reviewed at the end of TERM  with  view to further improve and focus the
process as knowledge, understanding and experience of stakeholders grow with
implementation of AEEP List of indicators for program level measurement and
evaluation framework Policy Goals Indicators Lead Data Collecting Institution
Improve energy efficiency across all sectors of economy, government, businesses
and households, by setting targets for reducing losses in extraction,
generation, transmission & distribution and end use  % of pre-2016 government,
private and MoUD industries buildings undergone energy audit  % of pre-2016
government, private and MoUD industries buildings undergone energy efficiency
upgrade  % of new buildings > 2000m2 rated under AEEC MoUD  % of buildings
with halogen and incandescent bulbs phased out MoUD, Municipalities  %
municipalities with 100% LED or high Municipalities efficiency HID streetlight 
% of public lighting assets powered with solar Municipalities lights  % of
industry and consumer stakeholders aware of Energy labels including energy star,
minimum energy performance standard (MEPS) and quality standard (QS) CSO, ICE 
Number of appliance classes ( Whitegoods, Lighting, HVAC) included under energy
star MEPS and QS ANSA  % of manufactured and imported appliances ANSA under
approved classes rated under energy star, MEPS and QS  % of new vehicles
manufactured and imported MoTCA vehicles rated for green vehicle labelling
standard across all industry sectors  % of new light and heavy (separately)
vehicles based EV, regenerative braking and other MoTCA Afghanistan Energy
Efficiency Policy 34 Policy Goals Indicators Lead Data Collecting Institution 
alternative technologies entering fleet under all tbd17 industry sectors  % of
average efficiency improvement in all tbd classes of vehicles from 2016 baseline
under all industry sectors  % gap in & losses as compared to world best DABS
practice  % of power plants operating within % of world MEW best practice
operating efficiency  % of mining and extraction process operations and
equipment built before 2016 retrofitted with energy saving upgrades Ministry of
Mines & petroleum  Number of subsidized energy audits tbd commissioned  Number
of financial and fiscal incentive schemes MoF active for undertaking energy
efficiency retrofits, AGBDS ratings, solar PV installations and other schemes
for business and households  Number of top 50 energy consumers CSO undertaking
voluntary carbon and energy disclosure  Number of industry seminars, capacity
building trainings, informative media, publication and green awards funded or
organized  % of households and commercial enterprises penetrated through
subsidized distribution of energy saving technologies tbd DABS  % of population
which are aware and which are tbd using energy labelling, educational and
empowerment campaigns, information through websites and different media to make
energy saving choices  % of total procurement departments using total cost of
ownership in evaluation process for purchasing energy related products/service
tbd Promote identification and adoption of energy efficiency opportunities
across all sectors of the economy through awareness creation and capacity
building Enable implementation and financing of energy efficiency  Drafting and
finalization of legal framework for tbd energy efficiency 17 To be decided
Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 35 Policy Goals Indicators Lead Data
Collecting Institution measures across all end use sectors using both regulatory
and market principles  Amount of funding sourced from internal and external
resources to fund energy efficiency policy MoF  Number of consultations done
with various tbd stakeholder groups to form  position on taxing Ensure energy
products and services offered in Afghanistan meet desired quality standards as
it transitions towards an energy efficiency based economy Use energy efficiency
to address cross cutting issues including climate change, clean energy, energy
access, energy security and health and productivity outcomes, in particular to
rural areas Foster international cooperation, particularly with countries in the
region having similar socio-cultural milieu for cross learning, promotion of
energy efficiency as  product and service industry and driving         
 Number of standards created for energy audits, solar PV design and other
technologies in line with international standards Number of test standards and
measurement protocols for appliances aligned with international standards Number
of capacity building technical training manuals, workshops, courses,
international exchange programs developed for  range of stakeholders and
audiences across all sectors (Including but not limited to schools,
manufacturers, importers, technical staff, management) % of rural households
provided with subsidized energy efficient biomass stoves and heating system % of
rural cottage industries and farmers provided with subsidized solar PV based
productive loads % of rural cottage industries and farmers provided with low
interest loans for EE Number of & or operational projects set in village for
renewable energy based minigrid Number of seminars, conclaves, conferences and
trade exhibitions organized Number of research, market and regulatory
presentations from Afghanistan in international and regional events ANSA ANSA
ICE MRRD MRRD MRRD MRRD tbd tbd Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 36 Policy
Goals Indicators Lead Data Collecting Institution innovation for jobs and growth
 Number of innovative and new technologies introduced in Afghanistan as  result
of its exposure to international chairs, colloquiums and workshops tbd
Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 37 Primary Energy Secondary Energy Final
Energy Useful Energy Energy Value Chain Per capita electricity consumption GDP
Net Lettable Area Energy Service Company (ESCOs) GLOSSARY An energy form found
in nature that has not been subjected to any conversion or transformation
process It can be non-renewable or renewable such as crude oil, coal, natural
gas, solar energy, wind energy, biomass etc It describes all sources of energy
that result from the conversion of primary energy sources and generally termed
energy carriers It accounts for secondary energy distributed to end use
consumers from the generating plant and comprises products such as charcoal,
coke, natural gas, gasoline, and electricity, among others It corresponds to the
energy realistically made available to the user in terms of the services
delivered through end-user equipment and expressed in terms of mechanical power,
lighting, heat generation, and travel mileage The energy value chain is
sequence of production activities which begins with exploration and production
of the primary energy for the subsequent processing, transportation,
distribution and use The more developed the value chain, the greater the
benefits can be achieved through the improvements in energy efficiency It refers
to average electricity consumption per person within  population and estimated
by dividing total electricity consumption by country’ total population It is the
monetary value of all the finished goods and services produced within  country'
borders in  specific time period Put simply, GDP is  broad measurement of
nation’ overall economic activity The total area of all floors within the
internal finished surfaces of permanent walls excluding areas such as stairs,
toilets, lift shafts and motor rooms, escalators, lobbies, public space and
areas set aside for the provision of facilities or services It is  commercial
company providing  broad range of energy solutions including designs and
implementation of energy savings projects It acts as  project developer for
implementing energy conservation measures and shoulder the technical and
performance risks associated with  project The company' return is directly
linked to the actual energy cost savings Afghanistan Energy Efficiency Policy 38