A/77/443/Add.9  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  1
December 2022        Original: English    Seventy-seventh session  Agenda item
18 (i)          Sustainable development: ensuring access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all        Report of the Second
Committee*          Rapporteur: Ms. Francesca Cassar (Malta)        I.
Introduction         The  Second  Committee  held  a  substantive  debate  on
agenda  item  18  (see  1.  A/77/443,  para.  2).  Action  on  sub-item  (i)
was  taken  at  the  24th  meeting,  on  22 November 2022. An account of the
Committee’s consideration of the sub-item is  contained in the relevant summary
record. 1      II.  Consideration of draft resolutions A/C.2/77/L.41 and
A/C.2/77/L.70      2.  At the 21st meeting, on 10 November 2022, the
representative of Pakistan, on  behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of  77 and China, introduced a draft
resolution entitled  “Ensuring access to affordable,  reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all” (A/C.2/77/L.41).  3.  At  its  24th  meeting,  on  22
November,  the  Committee  had  before  it  a  draft  resolution  entitled
“Ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy
for  all”  (A/C.2/77/L.70),  submitted  by  the  Vice-Chair  of  the  Committee,
Ahmed Magdy (Egypt), on the basis of informal consultations held on draft
resolution  A/C.2/77/L.41.  4.  At  the  same  meeting,  the  Committee  was
informed  that  draft  resolution  A/C.2/77/L.70 had no programme budget
implications.  __________________  *  The report of the Committee on this item
is being issued in 12 parts, under the symbols    A/77/443, A/77/443/Add.1,
A/77/443/Add.2, A/77/443/Add.3, A/77/443/Add.4, A/77/443/Add.5,  A/77/443/Add.6,
A/77/443/Add.7, A/77/443/Add.8, A/77/443/Add.9, A/77/443/Add.10 and
A/77/443/Add.11.  1  See A/C.2/77/SR.24.    22-27315 (E)    091222
*2227315*      A/77/443/Add.9      5.  Also  at  A/C.2/77/L.70 (see para. 8).
the  same  meeting,  the  Committee  adopted  draft  resolution  6.  Also at the
24th meeting, after the adoption of the draft resolution, statements  were  made
by  the  representatives  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Gre at  Britain  and
Northern  Ireland,  the  United  States  of  America  and  the  European  Union
(also  on  behalf  of Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Georgia,  Montenegro,
the  Republic  of  Moldova, Serbia and Ukraine).  In  the  light of the
adoption of draft  resolution A/C.2/77/L.70, draft resolution  7.  A/C.2/77/L.41
was withdrawn by its sponsors. 22-27315  2/12    A/77/443/Add.9      III.
Recommendation of the Second Committee        The Second Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of  8.  the following draft resolution:
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern    energy for
all      The General Assembly,    Recalling its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October
1998, 54/215 of 22 December 1999,  55/205 of 20 December 2000, 56/200 of 21
December 2001, 58/210 of 23 December  2003,  60/199  of  22  December  2005,
62/197  of  19  December  2007,  64/206  of  21 December  2009,  66/206  of  22
December  2011,  69/225  of  19  December  2014,  70/201 of 22 December 2015,
71/233 of 21 December 2016, 72/224 of 20 December  2017,  73/236  of  20
December  2018,  74/225  of  19  December  2019,  75/221  of  21 December 2020
and 76/210 of 17 December 2021, as well as its resolutions 65/151  of  20
December  2010  on  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for All
and  67/215 of 21 December 2012, in which it decided to declare 2014 –2024 the
United  Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,     Reaffirming  its
resolution  70/1  of  25  September  2015,  entitled  “Transforming  our  world:
the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development”,  in  which  it  adopted  a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred  set of universal and
transformative  Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to
working tirelessly for  the  full  implementation  of  the  Agenda  by  2030,
its  recognition  that  eradicating  poverty  in  all  its  forms  and
dimensions,  including  extre me  poverty,  is  the  greatest  global  challenge
and  an indispensable requirement for  sustainable  development,  its
commitment  to  achieving  sustainable  development  in  its  three  dimensions
–  economic,  social  and  environmental  –  in  a  balanced  and  integrated
manner,  and  to  building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development
Goals and seeking  to address their unfinished business,    Reaffirming  also
its  resolution  69/313  of  27  July  2015  on  the  Addis  Ababa  Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development,
which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
supports  and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation
targets with  concrete  policies  and  actions,  and  reaffirms  the  strong
political  commitment  to  address the challenge of financing and creating an
enabling environment at all levels  for sustainable development in the spirit of
global partnership and solidarity,     Reaffirming  further  the  Paris
Agreement1  and  its  early  entry  into  force,  and  encouraging all its
parties to fully implement the Agreement and parties to the United  Nations
Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change 2  that  have  not  yet  done  so  to
deposit  their  instruments  of  ratification,  acceptance,  approval  or
accession,  where  appropriate, as soon as possible,     Recalling  the  Climate
Action  Summit  convened  by  the  Secretary-General  on  23 September  2019
and  the  multi-partner  initiatives  and  commitments  presented  during the
Summit,    Noting  the  establishment  by  the  Secretary-General  of  the
Global  Crisis    Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
__________________  1  Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1,
decision 1/CP.21.  2  United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.
22-27315  3/12    A/77/443/Add.9      Highlighting  the  synergies  between  the
2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable    Development and the Paris Agreement,
Recalling  the  ministerial  declaration  of  the  high-level  political  forum
on  sustainable  development3  held  in  2022  which  took  note  of  the
Secretary-General’s  proposed global road map for accelerated Sustainable
Development Goal 7 action and  reaffirmed the need to continuously engage on the
implementation of Goal 7,    Expressing concern that, at current rates of
progress, none of the global energy    targets of the Sustainable Development
Goals will be achieved by 2030,    Reaffirming  the  United  Nations  Millennium
Declaration, 4  the  Rio  Declaration  on Environment and Development 5 and
Agenda 216 and the principles set out therein,  and  recalling  the
recommendations  and  conclusions  contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation
of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  (Johannesburg  Plan  of
Implementation)7  and  the  outcome  documents  of  the  United  Nations
Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The  future  we  want”, 8
the  third  International  Conference  on  Small  Island  Developing  States,
entitled  “SIDS  Accelerated  Modalities  of Action (SAMOA)  Pathway”,9 the
second  United  Nations  Conference  on  Landlocked  Developing  Countries,
entitled  “Vienna  Programme  of  Action  for  Landlocked  Developing  Countries
for  the  Decade  2014 –2024”,10  the  Fourth  United  Nations  Conference  on
the  Least  Developed  Countries,  entitled  “Istanbul  Programme  of Action
for  the  Least  Developed  Countries  for  the  Decade  2011–2020”,11 and the
Fifth United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing  Countries, entitled
“Doha Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries” 12  for the Decade
2022–2031, as well as the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United  Nations
Conference  on  Housing  and  Sustainable  Urban  Development  (Habitat  III),
held  in  Quito  from  17  to  20  October  2016, 13  which  underlines,  inter
alia,  the  importance of energy for cities,     Reaffirming also that each
country must take primary responsibility for its own  development and that the
role of national policies and development strategies cannot  be overemphasized
in the achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing  the need for the
creation of an enabling environment at all levels and across all sectors  for
the achievement of sustainable development,     Reaffirming further the
sovereign rights of countries over their energy resources  and  their  right  to
define  appropriate  policies  for  the  production  and  use  of  energy,
recognizing that the 2030 Agenda shall be implemented for the full benefit of
all, for  today’s generation and for future generations,     __________________
3  See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 3    (A/77/3), chap. VI, sect. D.  4  Resolution 55/2.  5  Report
of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de
Janeiro, 3– 14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United
Nations publication, Sales  No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex
I.       6  Ibid., annex II.  7  Report of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, Johannesburg, So uth Africa,  26 August–4 September 2002 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and  corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.      8  Resolution 66/288, annex.  9  Resolution 69/15,
annex.  10  Resolution 69/137, annex II.  11  Report of the Fourth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul,          Turkey,
9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.  12  Resolution 76/258, annex.  13
Resolution 71/256, annex.      22-27315  4/12    A/77/443/Add.9      Emphasizing
that  universal  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern
energy for all is an integral part of poverty eradication and the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda,  and that  the  increased  use and  promotion of new
technologies  and  renewable  energy,  including  in  off-grid  and
decentralized  systems,  and  energy  efficiency could make a significant
contribution in that regard,      Deeply concerned that, while progress towards
the achievement of Goal 7 has  been made in some regions of the world, efforts
remain well below the scale required  to meet the Goal by 2030, 14     Deeply
concerned  also  that  2.4  billion  people  in  developing  countries,
especially in rural areas, rely on traditional biomass, coal and kerosene for
cooking  and heating, with disproportionate health and workload impacts on
women, children  and people in vulnerable situations, including an estimated 4
million premature deaths  annually,  that,  while  the  global  population
without  access  to  electricity  has  fallen  below 1 billion, close to 733
million people are still without access to electricity, that  reliability and
affordability remain challenges in many countries, even as the number  of
household connections increases, that Africa accounts for more than half of both
access  figures  and  that,  even  when  energy  services  are  available,
millions  of  poor  people are unable to pay for them,    Noting with concern
that energy represents less than 1 per cent of overall United  Nations
expenditure  on  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals,  despite  its  critical
importance also in achieving other goals,     Noting with great concern the
severe negative impact on human health, safety  and well-being caused by the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as  the severe disruption to
societies and economies and the devastating impact on lives  and livelihoods,
and that the poorest and most vulnerable are the hardest hit by the  pandemic,
reaffirming  the ambition  to get  back  on track  to achieve the  Sustainable
Development  Goals  by  designing  and  implementing  sustainable  and
inclusive  recovery strategies to accelerate progress towards the full
implementation of the 2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development  and  to  help
to  reduce  the  risk  of  and  build  resilience to future shocks, crises and
pandemics, including by strengthening health  systems and achieving universal
health coverage, and recognizing that equitable and  timely  access  for  all
to  safe,  quality,  effective  and  affordable  COVID -19  vaccines,
therapeutics and diagnostics are an essential part of a global response based on
unity,  solidarity,  renewed  multilateral  cooperation  and  the  princip le
of  leaving  no  one  behind,     Emphasizing  the  critical  socioeconomic
benefits  of  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable and modern energy and the need
to reframe the understanding of energy  from a technical unit to a requirement
for basic social services, incl uding health care,  economic development and
poverty eradication,     Recognizing  that  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable
and  modern  energy  services  are  essential  for  effectively  responding  to
and  achieving  sustainable,  inclusive  and  resilient recovery from the
COVID-19 pandemic and socioeconomic crises, including  for powering health-care
and educational facilities, supplying safe drinking water and  water for
sanitation, including hand-washing, as well as water for agriculture and food
production, supporting sustainable food systems and providing communications and
digital  services  to  connect  people,  share  information  and  facilitate
education,  and  further  recognizing  that  ensuring  access  to  affordable,
reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all  contributes  to  the
achievement  of  the  2030 Agenda  and  the  implementation  of  other  relevant
intergovernmentally  agreed  frameworks  in  the  reaching  Sustainable
economic,  social  and  environmental    fields  and  that  __________________
14  See A/77/211.    22-27315  5/12    A/77/443/Add.9      Development  Goal  7
by  the  end  of  the  decade  requires  an  urge nt  and  steep  rise  in
investment  in  and  financing  of  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and
modern  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  while  noting  that  the
unprecedented  crisis  caused  by  the  COVID-19  pandemic  will  have  serious
impacts  on  progress  towards  fulfilling  the  commitment  on  ensuring
access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy for all by
2030, and economic disruptions related to the COVID -19 crisis have  made  it
even  harder  for  developing  countries  to  reach  Goal  7,  noting  the
announcement of Governments aiming to achieve net-zero emissions, and taking
note  of the findings, in the report of the Secretary-General,15 to put the
world on track for  reaching this objective,   Highlighting  the  importance  of
the  empowerment  of  developing  countries  to  achieve  universal  access
through  the  rapid  expansion  of  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable and
modern energy worldwide,     Highlighting  also  the  significant  efforts  made
in  developing  countries  that  contributed to an increase in the global
electrification  rate to 91 per cent in 2020, and  stressing  the  need  to
further  close  the  electrification  gap  in  many  difficult -to-reach
populations, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa,     Recognizing that each
country has primary responsibility for its own economic  and  social
development  and  that  this  will  include  the  mobilization  of  financial
resources,  as  well  as  capacity-building  and  the  transfer  of
environmentally  sound  technologies  including  concessional and preferential
terms,     to  developing  countries  on  mutually  agreed  terms,  Noting  with
concern  that  lack  of  energy  access  has  remained  a  challenge  for
developing  countries  and  that  sustainable  and  resilient  and  inclusive
development  would  be  unachievable  without  ensuring  access  to  affordable,
reliable,  sustainable  and modern energy for all,     Welcoming the increase in
the share of renewable energy as a part of total final  energy consumption over
the past decade and the significant reductions in the cost of  renewable energy,
the sector’s net positive job contributions  and the rapid expansion  of
renewable  energy  capacity  additions,  which  are  now  greater  than  those
of  other  resources in the electricity sector, and noting that the levelized
cost of solar and wind  energy in many regions of the world is fully competitive
with or undercuts traditional  energy resources,     Noting  with  appreciation
the  work  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency, which facilitates
the widespread and increased adoption and sustainable use  of all forms of
renewable energy,     Noting  the  work  of  multi-stakeholder  partnerships,
including  Sustainable  Energy  for All,  which  has  given  strong  momentum
to  the  promotion  of  renewable  energy and energy efficiency, the initiatives
of the Global Climate Action Agenda, the  Small  Island  Developing  States
Lighthouses  Initiative,  SIDS  DOCK,  the  Energy  Efficiency  Hub and others
that can contribute to reaching the objective of ensuring  access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all,      Noting with appreciation
that the transformation of the world’s energy systems  is being accelerated by
advances in technology, rapid declines in the cost of renewable  energy,  the
deployment  of  least-cost  decentralized  solutions,  policy  support,  new
business models and the sharing of best practices, and noting th e continuing
work of  the International Renewable Energy Agency and the International Solar
Alliance,      __________________  15  A/77/211.    22-27315  6/12
A/77/443/Add.9      Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to
energy issues and the  promotion of synergies across the global energy agenda,
with a focus on e radicating  poverty and achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals,      Reiterating  the  pledge  that  no  one  will  be  left  behind,
reaffirming  the  recognition that the dignity of the human person is
fundamental, and the wish to see  the Goals and targets met for all nations and
peoples and for all segments of society,  and recommitting to endeavour to reach
the furthest behind first,      Noting that the transitions to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy  for  all  should  be  just,  inclusive,
equitable  and  secure,  in  line  with  national  circumstances, in order to
achieve universal access by 2030, while recognizing the need  to increase the
share of renewable and clean energy, including as a cooking source in  urban
areas, to significantly reduce negative health impacts and contribute to
decreased  greenhouse gas emissions and to achieving the goals of the Paris
Agreement,      Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;16   1.    2.
Also  takes  note  of  the  role  and  activities  of  the  International
Renewable  Energy Agency,  encouraging  the Agency  to  continue  to  support
its  members  in  the  achievement of their renewable energy objectives, as well
as the contributions of the  International  Solar Alliance, including in its
capacity as an observer  of the  General  Assembly  in  accordance  with
resolution  76/123  of  9  December  2021,  and  encouraging its  work  to
collectively address key  common  challenges  to the  scalin g  up  of  solar
energy,  as  well  as  the  contributions  of  other  international  and
regional  organizations and forums to the global energy agenda;    3.  Notes
with concern the two-year17 decline in international financial flows  to
developing countries in support of clean, sustainable, affordable, reliable,
just and  inclusive  energy  transitions,  recognizes  that  the  achievement
of  Sustainable  Development  Goal  7  requires  an  urgent  and  steep  rise
in  energy  investment  and  finance, including investments in clean
technologies and quality infrastructure with a  priority focus on the needs of
the world’s least developed countries and on universal  access  to  electricity,
and  in  that  regard  calls  upon  countries,  public  and  private  financial
institutions and other stakeholders to  scale up the provision of finance for
developing countries;     4.  Strongly encourages Governments and other relevant
stakeholders to take  actions  to  achieve  universal  access  to  affordable,
reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy,  increase  the  global  share  of
renewable  energy,  improve  the  inclusion  of  developing countries in energy
sector cooperation, where relevant, and increase the  rate  of  improvement  in
energy  efficiency  for  a  clean,  low -emission,  low-carbon,  climate-
resilient, safe, efficient, modern, affordable, reliable and sustainable energy
system,  given  the  systemic  sustainable  development  benefits,  while
taking  into  consideration  the diversity  of  national  situations,
priorities,  policies,  specific needs  and challenges and capacities of
developing countries, including their energy mix and  energy systems;    5.
Calls  for ensuring  access  to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and  modern
energy for all, as such services are an integral part of poverty eradication
measures,  human dignity, quality of life, economic opportunity, the combating
of inequality, the  promotion  of  health  and  the  prevention  of  morbidity
and  mortality,  access  to  education,  safe  drinking  water  and  sanitation,
food  security,  nutrition,  disaster  risk  reduction  and  resilience,
climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation,  environmental
__________________  16  A/77/211.  17  2018 and 2019.      22-27315  7/12
A/77/443/Add.9      impact reduction, social inclusion and gender equality,
including for persons affected  by humanitarian emergencies;   6.  Underscores
the  importance  of  access  to  cleaner  and  more  efficient  and  sustainable
cooking  and  heating  methods,  welcomes  ongoing  efforts,  and  in  this
regard  calls  for  the  promotion  of  an  enabling  environment  at  the
national  and  international levels for the increased usage of sustainable,
cleaner and more efficient  cooking and heating methods in all countries, in
particular developing countries;     7.  Acknowledges  that  means  of
implementation  must  be  significantly  strengthened,  to  enable  decisive
action  and  focusing  in  particular  on  additional  finance and investment in
line with target 7.a of the Sus tainable Development Goals,  and  agrees  that,
without  a  strong  push  on  innovation,  new  technologies,  capacity -
building and quality data, global efforts to achieve Goal 7 are bound to fail;
8.  Encourages  Governments,  the  United  Nations  system  and  relevant
stakeholders to leverage the cost-competitiveness of renewable energy,
especially in  off-grid  areas,  in  order  to  achieve  universal  energy
access,  such  as  by  establishing  policy  frameworks,  including  for
metering  and  payment  systems,  cost  comparisons  between grid extension and
off-grid solutions, facilitating investment by domestic and  foreign banks  and
educating  students,  communities,  investors  and entrepreneurs on  renewable
energy, energy efficiency and conservation, among other activities, where
feasible and appropriate;     9.  Recognizes  the  role  that  natural  gas  can
play  in  supporting  transitions  towards lower-emission energy systems, and
calls upon Governments to enhance and  collaborate  on  energy  security,
including  through  the  sharing  of  best  practices  a nd  knowledge for the
security of gas supply and demand, in the broader context of the  transition
towards lower-emission energy systems;    10.  Supports  energy  access  in
accordance  with  the  national  needs  of  developing  countries,  in
particular  the  least  developed  countries  and  small  island  developing
States, to tackle their energy access challenges according to the specific
needs of each  country  by  mobilizing  technical  and financial  assistance
and tools to  deploy  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy
solutions  to  tackle  the  energy access deficit;     11.  Calls  upon
Governments  to  expand  the  use  of  renewable  energy  beyond  the power
sector, taking into account national priorities and constraints, to industry,
heating and cooling, construction and infrastructure and, in particular, the
transport  sector,  including  through  sustainable  sector  coupling  and
sustainable  and  modern  bioenergy and hydrogen in the context of sustainable
development, including climate  change, and calls for supportive policy
initiatives and investments at the national and  international levels;     12.
Recognizes  that  current  global  progress  in  improving  energy  efficiency
falls well below the pace necessary to double the global rate of improvement in
energy  efficiency by 2030, and encourages, in accordance with national laws and
regulations,  the promotion of widespread energy efficiency initiatives in all
economic sectors, the  adoption  and  updating  of  building  performance  codes
and  standards,  energy  efficiency labelling, the promotion of energy
management systems, the retrofitting of  existing  buildings  and  public
procurement  policies  on  energy,  among  other  modalities, as appropriate, as
well as the prioritization of smart grid systems, district  energy systems and
community energy plans to improve synergies among clean and  effective use of
traditional resources, renewable energy and energy efficiency, which  aim to
promote the interconnectivity of clean and renewable energy infrastructure and
improve energy efficiency;     22-27315  8/12    A/77/443/Add.9      13.  Calls
for  strengthened  cooperation  at  the  regional  level  to  promote
innovation  and  facilitate  financing,  support  regional  cross -border  power
grid  connectivity,  as  appropriate,  to  advance  economic  integration  and
sustainable  development and share best practices that are responsive to
regional needs with regard  to Sustainable Development Goal 7 and its
interlinkages with the other Goals, and in  this  regard  encourages
Governments  to  reinforce  their  energy  interconnections,  connecting
regional energy markets and increasing energy security at the global level;
14.  Calls  upon  Governments,  as  well  as  relevant  international  and
regional  organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as
appropriate,  the  increased  use  of  new  technologies  and  renewable  energy
resources,  other  low -  or  zero-emissions  solutions,  more  efficient  use
of  energy  and  greater  reliance  on  advanced energy technologies, including
technologies that avoid, abate and remove  greenhouse gas emissions;    relevant
15.  Encourages  Governments,  regional  organizations and other relevant
stakeholders to promote investments in developing  sustainable, reliable,
modern, inclusive  and  equitable  energy  systems,  inter  alia,  by
strengthening energy systems through cross-border grid connections, as
appropriate,  and  to  consider  incorporating  decentralized  renewable  energy
solutions  in  energy  planning,  as  appropriate,  and  recognizes  that
energy  transitions  will  take  different  paths in different parts of the
world;   international  and    16.  Encourages  Governments  and  all  relevant
stakeholders  to  increase  investment  and  actions  to  support  the
implementation  of  Sustainable  Development  Goal 7, and to integrate
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy solutions  to enhance
responses to and recovery from COVID-19, in line with resilient, inclusive  and
sustainable  development  pathways,  and  to  ensure  energy  security,  and
urges  developed  countries,  relevant  international  and  regional
organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders  to  support  the  efforts  of
developing  countries,  especially  the  poorest  and  most  vulnerable,  taking
into  consideration  the  different  national  circumstances  and  in  line
with  the  national  development  priorities  of  developing  countries,
including  through  multi-stakeholder  partnerships,  in  order  to  fulfil  the
commitment  on  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and
modern  energy for all by 2030, recognizing that increased investments in
affordable, reliable,  sustainable and  modern  energy  solutions  and
accelerated action beyond  a business - as-usual  recovery  will  aid  countries
in  responding  to  the  pandemic  and  economic  crisis,  for  a  sustainable,
resilient  and  inclusive  recovery,  including  by  reducing  emissions,
creating jobs  and promoting  resource  efficiency,  and  in advancing  long -
term  resilience  and  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals,  which  are  integ
rated  and  interrelated;     17.  Encourages  Governments, relevant
international organizations  and other  relevant  stakeholders  to  use  and
promote  an  integrated  resource  planning  and  management approach in their
energy strategies that considers energy choices i n the  context  of  linked
sectors,  inter  alia,  water,  waste,  air  quality  and  food,  taking  into
account national circumstances;     18.  Recognizes that sustainable energy
access and its deployment can be both  improved and accelerated by gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and  girls, and calls upon
Governments, the United Nations development system and other  stakeholders to
increase educational and capacity-building programmes for women in  the  sector,
further  advance  equal  pay  and  leadership  and  other  opportunities  for
women in the energy sector, promote women’s full, equal and effective
participation  and leadership in the design and implementation of energy
policies and programmes,  mainstream  a  gender  perspective  in  such  policies
and  programmes  and  e nsure  women’s  full  and  equal  access  to  and  use
of  sustainable  energy  to  enhance  their    22-27315  9/12    A/77/443/Add.9
economic  and  social  empowerment,  including  employment  and  other  income -
generating opportunities;   19.  Encourages  Governments,  with  the  support
of  relevant  stakeholders,  as  appropriate, to accelerate the transition
towards sustainable economies, according to  national policies and plans,
through mitigation and adaptation strategies that improve  energy  efficiency
and  create  more  and  better  employment  opportunities  for  all,  including
young people, in wage and self-employment;     20.  Emphasizes the potential of
sustainable energy use to contribute to climate  change  mitigation  and
adaptation,  recognizes  that  increasing  the  deployment  of  renewable energy
and enhancing energy efficiency are components of many countries’  nationally
determined  contributions  under  the  Paris  Agreement  adopted  under  the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and urges effective and
timely support for the full implementation of all those contributions, as
applicable;     21.  Notes that the impacts of climate change can also threaten
access to and  the supply of energy, and also notes the importance of increasing
the resilience of the  energy  sector  to  climate  change,  which  can  be
facilitated  by   the  expansion  of  renewable energy;     22.  Emphasizes,
while  noting  progress,  that  the  large-scale  deployment  of  clean  energy
technologies  has  been  insufficient  and  uneven,  and  that  support  is
required  to  realize  their  potential,  along  with  appropriate  poli cy
initiatives  and  investments  at  the  national  and  international  levels,
with  Governments  working  in  collaboration with relevant stakeholders,
including the private sector;      23.  Also emphasizes the value of regional
and interregional approaches, which  can, among other advantages, enhance the
deployment of renewable and sustainable  energy by facilitating the  sharing of
experiences, reduce transaction costs, leverage  economies of scale, enable
greater cross-border interconnectivity to promote energy  system  reliability
and  resilience  and  augment  domestic  capacity-building,  and  recognizes the
work of organizations and initiatives in that regard;      24.  Invites  all
relevant  funding  institutions  and  bilateral  and  multilateral  donors,  as
well  as  the  private  sector  and  non-governmental organizations, to continue
ongoing efforts and take further action  to  provide  financial  resources,  as
appropriate,  to  support  efforts  aimed  at  ensuring  access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy in developing countries  and countries
with economies in transition, including low -emission, low-carbon and  climate-
resilient  new  resources  of  energy  of  demonstrated  viability,  especially
focused  on  energy  access  and  eco nomic  development in both urban and rural
areas, while noting the potential catalytic effect  of  concessional  and  other
finance  and  taking  fully  into  account  the  development  structure of
energy-based economies of developing countries;    funding  regional
institutions,  technologies  and  renewable  25.  Encourages  the  development,
dissemination,  diffusion  and  transfer  of  environmentally  sound
technologies  to  developing  countries  on  mutually  agreed  terms, including
concessional and preferential terms, and highlights the importance  of
integrating sustainable energy in the Technology Facilitation Mechanism;    26.
Stresses the importance of strategies and contributions by Governments and
relevant stakeholders to multi-stakeholder partnerships in ensuring access to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all,  and
encourages  coordination  and  collaboration between the United Nations and
relevant multi-stakeholder partnerships  and international organizations, such
as Sustainable Energy for All;      27.  Recognizes the catalytic effect of the
sharing of knowledge and experience,  capacity-building  and  technical
assistance  on  sustainable  energy  deployment,  and    22-27315  10/12
A/77/443/Add.9      encourages existing and new efforts to enable Governments of
developing countries  and relevant stakeholders to plan, finance, implement and
monitor sustainable energy   projects to further strengthen their national
institutions and capacities;    28.  Encourages  the  development  of  viable
market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in further rapid reductions in
the cost of new technologies and renewable  resources  of  energy  and  could
further  increase  the  competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including
through  the  adoption,  as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,
development  and  market  deployment,  including  phasing  out  inefficient
fossil  fuel  subsidies  that  encourage  wasteful  consumption  while
providing  targeted  support to the poor and most vulnerable, in accordance with
national circumstances;    29.  Emphasizes  the  value  of  education,
academia,  technology  and  entrepreneurship in developing solutions to face
energy challenges and achieve energy  sustainability, as well as the importance
of investing in research and development and  demonstrations in sustainable and
clean energy technologies, and also emphasizes in  this context the urgent need
to enhance international cooperation to facilitate access  to  clean  energy
research  and  technology,  including  renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency,
hydrogen,  energy  storage,  carbon  capture,  utilization  and  storage,
bioenergy  with  carbon  capture  and  storage,  and  advanced  and  cleaner
fossil -fuel  technologies,  including  technologies  that  avoid,  abate  and
remove  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  and  infrastructures  for  supplying
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable and modern energy for all;    improved  30.
Calls  for  national  efforts  to  promote  access  to  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all  and  strengthened  local  engagem
ent  to  complement  current  approaches,  and  reaffirms  the  commitment  to
supporting  subnational  and  local  efforts,  taking  advantage  of  their
direct  control,  where  applicable, of local infrastructure and codes to foster
uptake in end -use sectors, such  as  residential,  commercial  and  industrial
buildings,  industry,  agriculture,  transport,  waste and sanitation;     31.
Encourages  the  Secretary-General  to  continue  efforts  to  promote  the
provision  of  stable,  adequate  and  predictable  financial  resources  and
technical  assistance for sustainable energy and to enhance the effectiveness,
coordination and  full utilization of appropriate international funds for the
effective implementation of  national and regional high-priority projects for
ensuring access to affordable, reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for
all,  and  recalls  the  convening  of  the  high -level  dialogue on the
midpoint review of the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy  for All
(2014–2024), held on 23 and 24 May 2019;     32.  Takes note of the high-level
dialogue on energy held on 24 September 2021  to  promote  the  implementation
of  the  energy-related  goals  and  targets  of  the  2030  Agenda for
Sustainable Development in support of the implementation of the United  Nations
Decade of Sustainable Energy for All and the voluntary commitments in the  form
of 200 energy compacts, and also takes note of the Secretary-General’s proposed
road map for accelerated action on Goal 7, as described in the report of the
Secretary - General, and the high-level political forum on sustainable
development;     33.  Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  continue  engagement
with  Member  States on the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 7, in
a comprehensive  and evidence-based manner, as a follow-up to the high-level
dialogue on energy and  the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All;
34.  Requests  the  President  of  the  General  Assembly  to  convene  a
global  stocktaking, funded from extrabudgetary resources, to be held in 2024,
marking the  completion of the ongoing efforts to implement the plan of action
of the Decade, and    22-27315  11/12    A/77/443/Add.9      building on the
follow-up to the high-level dialogue on energy, to further accelerate  the
implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 7 of the 2030 Agenda;    35.
Calls  upon  the  United  Nations  development  system  to  work  through
existing initiatives and resources and within its mandate with relevant
stakeholders,  such as international financial institutions, along with
development partners, such as  multilateral  and  regional  development  banks
and  the  private  se ctor,  to  address  capacity and funding gaps,
particularly in developing countries, to scale up energy - related investments
and to provide support to countries in need so as to ensure access  to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all;      36.
Encourages UN-Energy to support coherence and coordination among the  energy-
related  activities  of  the  entities  of  the  United  Nations  development
system,  within  their  respective  mandates,  and  with  existing  resources
in  line  with  the  implementation of resolutions 71/243 of 21 December 2016,
72/279 of 31 May 2018  and 74/297 of 11 August 2020 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 2019/15  of 8 July 2019, in order to assist countries, in
particular at the country level, inter alia  through  normative  support  and
expertise  to  the  resident  coordinator  system,  upon  request  by  their
Governments,  by  leveraging  partnerships  with  other  international
organizations, donors and relevant stakeholders, including in their efforts to
achieve  universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy
for all an d to  accelerate its deployment;     37.  Reaffirms the commitment at
the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave  no  one  behind  and  commit  to
taking  more  tangible  steps  to  support  people  in  vulnerable  situations
and  the  most  vulnerable  countries  and  to  reach  th e  furthest  behind
first;     38.  Calls  upon  the  Secretary-General  to  promote  renewable
energy,  energy  efficiency  and  related  sustainable  practices  in  all
United  Nations  facilities  and  operations around the world, where appropriate
and economically viable;      39.  Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  submit
to the  General Assembly at its  seventy-eighth  session  a  report  on  the
implementation  of  the  present  resolution,  including  activities  carried
out  to  mark  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy for All,
and decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy -eighth
session,  under  the  item  entitled  “Sustainable  development”,  the  sub
-item  entitled  “Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all”.       22-27315  12/12