A/RES/63/210    United Nations  Distr.: General  3 February 2009  General
Assembly    Sixty-third session  Agenda item 49    Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 19 December 2008  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/63/414 and Corr.1)]  63/210.  Reliable and stable transit of energy and its
role in  ensuring sustainable development and international  cooperation
The General Assembly,    Bearing in mind the growing role of the transit of
energy in global processes,    Recognizing  the  importance  of  Central  Asia
and  all  other  transportation  and  communication  hubs  and  their  vital
role  in  the  production  of  energy  and  its  transportation to international
markets,    Noting that stable, efficient and reliable energy transportation, as
a key factor    of sustainable development, is in the interest of the entire
international community,  Reiterating  the  principles  of  the  Rio
Declaration  on  Environment  and  2 and recalling the recommendations and
conclusions  Development0F contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation  of  the
World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development 2F   1 and of Agenda 21,1F 3
concerning energy for sustainable development,  1.  Welcomes international
cooperation in developing transportation systems    and pipelines;  Recognizes
in  determining  ways  of  ensuring  the  reliable  transportation  of  energy
to  international  markets through pipelines and other transportation systems;
international  cooperation  for  extensive  the  need  2.    3.  Welcomes the
initiative of Turkmenistan to convene in 2009 a high-level  international
conference  to  discuss  the  issue  of  ensuring  the  reliable  and  stable
transportation of energy to international markets.      72nd plenary meeting  19
December 2008  _______________  1 Report of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June  1992,  vol. I,
Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales
No. E.93.I.8  and  corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.  2 Ibid., annex II.  3
Report  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development,  Johannesburg,
South  Africa,  26 August– 4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution  2, annex.  08-48339