A/RES/69/225    United Nations  Distr.: General  3 February 2015  General
Assembly    Sixty-ninth session  Agenda item 19 (i)    Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 19 December 2014  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/69/468/Add.9)]  69/225.  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
The General Assembly,      Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999,  55/205  of  20 December  2000,  56/200
of  21 December  2001,  58/210  of  23 December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December
2005,  62/197  of  19 December  2007,  64/206  of  21 December  2009  and
66/206  of  22 December  2011,  as  well  as  its  resolutions  65/151  of  20
December  2010  on  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All
and  67/215  of  21 December  2012,  in  which  it  decided  to  declare
2014–2024 the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,    Recalling
also  its  resolution  55/2  of  8 September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted  the
United Nations Millennium Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome,1 the
outcome  document  of  the  high-level  plenary  meeting  of  the  General
Assembly  on  the Millennium Development Goals2 and the outcome document of the
special event  of  the  President  of  the  General  Assembly  to  follow  up
efforts  made  towards  achieving the Millennium Development Goals, held on 25
September 2013,3    Reaffirming  the  principles  of  the  Rio  Declaration  on
Environment  and  Development 4  and  of  Agenda 21, 5  and  recalling  the
recommendations  and  conclusions  contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation
of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation)6 and the outcome  document  of  the  United  Nations  Conference
on  Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The future we want”,7  _______________
1 Resolution 60/1.  2 Resolution 65/1.  3 Resolution 68/6.  4 Report  of  the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and Development, Rio  de  Janeiro,
3-14 June  1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United
Nations  publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8  and  corrigendum), resolution 1,
annex I.  5 Ibid., annex II.  6 Report  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable
Development,  Johannesburg,  South  Africa,  26 August– 4 September 2002 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.  7 Resolution 66/288, annex.  14-67800 (E)  *1467800*    Please
recycle    A/RES/69/225  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
Recalling the high-level  event on Sustainable  Energy  for  All, which was held
at its sixty-seventh session and which focused on access to energy, energy
efficiency  and renewable energies,      Noting  the  launch,  on  5 June  2014,
of  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  as  part
of  the  first  annual  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Forum, and noting also
the initial two-year focus on energy for women, children and  health,    Taking
note of the Secretary-General’s Sustainable Energy for All initiative in  this
regard,    Taking  note  also  of  the  outcome  document  of  the  third
International  Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in Apia from 1
to 4 September  2014,  entitled  “SIDS  Accelerated  Modalities  of  Action
(SAMOA)  Pathway”, 8 in  particular  the  call  for  actions  to  promote
sustainable  energy  in  small  island  developing States,    Noting  the
conclusion  of  the  Secretary-General’s  Climate  Summit,  and  welcoming  its
contribution  to  the  existing  political  momentum,  with  a  view  to
galvanizing action to address climate change,    Recalling  its  resolution
68/309  of  10 September  2014,  in  which  it  welcomed  the  report  of  the
Open  Working  Group  on  Sustainable  Development  Goals 9 and  decided  that
the  proposal  of  the  Open  Working  Group  shall  be  the  main  basis  for
integrating  sustainable  development  goals  into  the  post-2015  development
agenda,  while recognizing that other inputs will also be considered, in the
intergovernmental  negotiation process at the sixty-ninth session of the General
Assembly,    Noting that in its report the Open Working Group proposes a goal on
ensuring  access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all,
Concerned  that  the  lack  of  access  to  energy  and  sustainable  modern
energy  services  is  an  important  factor  that  directly  affects  efforts
towards  poverty  eradication,  the  greatest  global  challenge  facing  the
world  today,  and  the  achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in the
developing world,    Deeply  concerned  that  2.6 billion  people  in
developing  countries  rely  on  traditional  biomass  for  cooking  and
heating,  that  1.2 billion  people  are  without  electricity  and  that,  even
when  energy  services  are  available,  millions  of  poor  people are unable
to pay for them,    Emphasizing  that  the  increased  use  and  promotion  of
new  and  renewable  sources of energy for sustainable development could make a
significant contribution  towards the achievement of sustainable development and
the internationally agreed  development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals,    Emphasizing  also  the  need  to  take  further  action
to  mobilize  the  provision  of  adequate financial resources of sufficient
quality and arriving in a timely manner, as  well as the transfer of technology
on mutually agreed terms, to developing countries  and  countries  with
economies  in  transition  for  the  provision  of  the  efficient  and  wider
use of energy sources, in particular new and renewable sources of energy,
_______________  8 Resolution 69/15, annex.  9 A/68/970 and Corr.1.  2/5
Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy  A/RES/69/225   Reaffirming
that  each  country  must  take  primary  responsibility  for  its  own
development and that the role of national policies and development strategies
cannot  be overemphasized in the achievement of sustainable development, and
recognizing  the need for the creation of an enabling environment at all levels
for investment and  sustained financing,      Noting  with  appreciation  the
work  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency,  which  is  aimed  at
promoting  the  widespread  and  increased  adoption  and  sustainable use of
all forms of renewable energy,    Highlighting  the  importance  of  the
empowerment  of  developing  countries  as  the  way  to  achieve  a  rapid
expansion  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  worldwide,    Stressing
the need for a coherent, integrated approach to energy issues and the  promotion
of  synergies  across  the  global  energy  agenda  for  sustainable
development,  with  a  focus  on  eradicating  poverty  and  achieving  the
Millennium  Development Goals,  1.    Takes  note  of  the  report  of  the
Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Decade of Sustainable Energy for
All,10 and encourages the rapid implementation of  the strategic objectives
defined in the global plan of action for the Decade;  2.    Also  takes  note
of  the  report  of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  promotion  of new and
renewable sources of energy;11  3.    Further  takes  note  of  the  report  of
the  Director  General  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency  on
its  work  programme  and  budget  for  2014–2015,  and  encourages  the  Agency
to  support  its  member  States  in  the  achievement of their renewable energy
objectives;  4.    Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  prepare,  in
consultation  with  Member  States and other relevant stakeholders, a report on
the activities carried out to mark the  Decade,  related  activities  within
the  United  Nations  system  and  the  long-term  institutional  arrangements
and  accountability  arrangements  to  all  stakeholders  of  the  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  initiative  for  submission  to  the  General  Assembly  at
its  seventieth session;  5.    Stresses  the  need  to  increase  the  share
of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy in the global energy mix as an
important contribution to achieving universal  access  to  sustainable  modern
energy  services,  and  recognizes  that  the  activities  of  countries in
broader energy-related matters are prioritized according to their specific
challenges, capacities and circumstances, including their energy mix;  6.
Emphasizes  that  improving  energy  efficiency,  increasing  the  share  of
renewable  energy  and  promoting  cleaner  and  energy-efficient  technologies
are  important for sustainable development;  7.    Recognizes that the current
share of new and renewable sources of energy  in the global energy supply is
still low owing to, among other factors, high costs and  lack  of  access  to
appropriate  technologies,  and  calls  for  action  to  achieve  the  economic
viability  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  through  enhanced
research  and  development  support  along  with  appropriate  policy
initiatives  and  _______________  10 A/69/395.  11 A/69/323.  3/5  A/RES/69/225
Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy   investments  at  the
national  and  international  levels,  with  Governments  working  in
collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the private sector;  8.
Calls upon Governments to take further action to mobilize the provision  of
financial  resources,  technology  transfer  on  mutually  agreed  terms,
capacity- building and  the diffusion  of new and existing environmentally
sound technologies  to developing countries and countries with economies in
transition, as set out in the  Johannesburg Plan of Implementation; 6    9.
Encourages efforts by Governments aimed at creating and developing an  enabling
environment  at  all  levels  to  ensure  the  promotion  and  use  of  new  and
renewable sources of energy;  10.  Emphasizes    the  need  to  reliable,
affordable,  economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound
energy services  and  resources  for  sustainable  development,  and  takes
into  consideration  the  diversity  of  situations,  national  policies  and
specific  needs  of  developing  countries  and countries with economies in
transition;  improve  access  to  11.  Reaffirms  its  determination  to  act
to  make  sustainable  energy  for  all  a    reality;  12.  Recognizes  the
importance  of  giving  due  consideration  to  energy  issues    in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda;  13.  Calls  upon  Governments,
as  well  as  relevant  international  and  regional  organizations  and  other
relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as  appropriate,  the  increased use of
new and renewable energy resources, more efficient use of energy,  greater
reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel
technologies,  and  the  sustainable  use  of  traditional  energy  resources,
which  could  meet the growing need for energy services in the longer term to
achieve sustainable  development;    14.  Calls  upon  Member  States  to
galvanize  efforts  to  make  universal  access  to  sustainable  modern  energy
services  a  priority,  as  such  services  contribute  to  poverty
eradication,  improve  the  quality  of  life,  reduce  inequality,  save
lives,  improve  health  and  help  to  provide  for  basic  human  needs,  as
well  as  curb  environmental  risks,  including  those  associated  with
climate  change,  and  stresses  that these services are essential to social
inclusion and gender equality;    15.  Calls  upon  Governments  to  promote
women’s  full,  equal  and  effective  participation and leadership in the
design and implementation of energy policies and  to mainstream a gender
perspective into such policies;    16.  Also calls upon Governments to ensure
women’s full and equal access to  and  use  of  new,  renewable  and
sustainable  energy  to  enhance  their  economic  empowerment, including
employment and other income-generating opportunities;    17.  Encourages  the
development  of  viable  market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in the
most rapid reduction in the cost of new and renewable sources of  energy  and
increase  the  competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including  through
the  adoption,  as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,
development  and  market deployment;    18.  Reiterates its call upon all
relevant funding institutions and bilateral and  multilateral  donors,  as  well
as  regional  funding  institutions  and  non-governmental  organizations,  to
continue  to  support,  as  appropriate,  efforts  aimed  at  the  development
of  the  energy  sector  in  developing  countries  and  countries  with    4/5
Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy  A/RES/69/225   economies  in
transition  on  the  basis  of  environment-friendly  new  and  renewable
sources  of  energy  of  demonstrated  viability,  while  taking  fully  into
account  the  development  structure  of  energy-based  economies  of
developing  countries,  and  to  assist  in  the  attainment  of  the  levels
of  investment  necessary  to  expand  energy  supplies, including beyond urban
areas;  19.  Encourages the Secretary-General to  continue  his  efforts to
promote the  mobilization  of  stable  and  predictable  financial  resources
and  technical  assistance  and  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  and  the  full
utilization  of  existing  international  funds  for  the  effective
implementation  of  national  and  regional  high-priority  projects in the area
of new and renewable sources of energy;    20.  Requests the Secretary-General
to submit to the General Assembly at its  seventy-first session a report on the
implementation of the present resolution, taking  into  account,  inter  alia,
the  initiatives  taken  by  Member  States  and  international  organizations
to create  an  enabling environment  at all levels  for the promotion  and  use
of  new  and  renewable  energy,  including  measures  to  improve  access  to
such  technologies;    21.  Calls  upon  the  Secretary-General  to  promote
renewable  energy  and  related sustainable practices in all United Nations
facilities around the world and to  include in his report to the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session the results  of related actions;    22.
Decides to include in the provisional  agenda of its seventy-first session,
under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item entitled
“Promotion  of new and renewable sources of energy”.      75th plenary meeting
19 December 2014    5/5