A/RES/65/151    United Nations  Distr.: General  16 February 2011  General
Assembly    Sixty-fifth session  Agenda item 20    Resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 December 2010  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/65/436 and Corr.1)]  65/151.  International Year of Sustainable Energy for
All      The General Assembly,      Reiterating  the  principles  of  the  Rio
Declaration  on  Environment  and  2  and  recalling  the  recommendations  and
Development 0F conclusions  contained  in  the  Plan  of  Implementation  of
the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  (“Johannesburg  Plan  of
Implementation”)  concerning  energy for sustainable development, 2F 1  and  of
Agenda 21, 1F 3    Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of
25 July 1980 on  international  years  and  anniversaries  and  General
Assembly  resolutions  53/199  of  15 December  1998  and  61/185  of  20
December  2006  on  the  proclamation  of  international years,  Recalling  also
its  resolution  55/2  of  8 September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted    the
United Nations Millennium Declaration,    Recalling further the High-level
Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on  4  the Millennium Development Goals
and its outcome document, 3F   Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999  and  55/205  of  20 December  2000,  as
well  as  its  resolutions  56/200  of  21 December  2001,  58/210  of  23
December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197  of  19 December  2007,
63/210  of  19 December  2008  and  64/206  of  21 December 2009,  Concerned
that  over  three  billion  people  in  developing  countries  rely  on
traditional  biomass  for  cooking  and  heating,  that  one  and  a  half
billion  people  are    _______________  1 See Report of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June  1992,
vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United  Nations
publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8  and  corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.  2
Ibid., annex II.  3 See Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September  2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2,
annex.  4 See resolution 65/1.  10-52160  *1052160*  Please rec cle ♲
A/RES/65/151  without  electricity  and  that,  even  when  energy  services
are  available,  millions  of  poor people are unable to pay for them,
Recognizing  that  access  to  modern  affordable  energy  services  in
developing  countries is essential for the achievement of the internationally
agreed development  goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
sustainable  development,  which would help to reduce poverty and to improve the
conditions and standard of  living for the majority of the world’s population,
Emphasizing  the  importance  of  investing  in  access  to  cleaner  energy
technology  options  and  a  climate-resilient  future  for  all  and  the  need
to  improve  access  to  reliable,  affordable,  economically  viable,  socially
acceptable  and  environmentally  sound  energy  services  and  resources  for
sustainable  development,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  diversity  of
situations,  national  policies  and  specific needs of countries, in particular
developing countries,    Emphasizing  also  the  need  to  take  further  action
to  mobilize  the  provision  of    adequate financial resources of sufficient
quality and arriving in a timely manner,    Reaffirming support for the
implementation of national policies and strategies  to combine, as appropriate,
the increased use of new and renewable energy sources  and low-emission
technologies, the more efficient use of energy, greater reliance on  advanced
energy  technologies,  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies,  and  the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources, as well as the promotion of
access to  modern, reliable, affordable and sustainable energy services and the
enhancement of  national capacities to meet the growing energy demand, as
appropriate, supported by  international cooperation in this field and by the
promotion of the development and  dissemination of appropriate, affordable and
sustainable energy technologies and the  transfer of such technologies, on
mutually agreed terms, to developing countries and  countries with economies in
transition,  1.  Decides to declare 2012 the International Year of Sustainable
Energy for    All;   2.  Notes the efforts of the United Nations system to work
towards ensuring  energy access for all and to protect the  environment through
the  sustainable use  of  traditional energy resources, cleaner technologies and
newer energy sources; 4F   5  3.    Requests  the  Secretary-General,  in
consultation  with  relevant  agencies  within the United Nations system and UN-
Energy, and mindful of the provisions of  the  annex  to  Economic  and  Social
Council  resolution  1980/67,  to  organize  and  coordinate activities to be
undertaken during the Year;   Encourages  all  Member  States,  the  United
Nations  system  and  all  other  actors  to  take  advantage  of  the  Year  to
increase  awareness  of  the  importance  of  addressing  energy  issues,
including  modern  energy  services  for  all,  access  to  affordable  energy,
energy  efficiency  and  the  sustainability  of  energy  sources  and  use, for
the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including  the
Millennium Development Goals, sustainable development and the protection of  the
global  climate,  and  to  promote  action  at  the  local,  national,  regional
and  international levels;  4.    _______________  5 See  the  report  of  the
Secretary-General’s  Advisory  Group  on  Energy  and  Climate  Change  entitled
“Energy for a sustainable future”. Available from www.unido.org.   2
A/RES/65/151  5.  Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its  sixty-seventh  session  a  report  on  the  implementation  of
the  present  resolution,  taking  into  account,  inter  alia,  the
initiatives  taken  by  Member  States  and  international  organizations  to
create  at  all  levels  an  enabling  environment  for  the  promotion  of
access  to  energy  and  energy  services  and  the  use  of  new  and
renewable  energy  technologies,  including  measures  to  improve  access  to
such  technologies.      69th plenary meeting  20 December 2010  3