A/RES/64/206    United Nations  Distr.: General  11 March 2010  General Assembly
Sixty-fourth session  Agenda item 53 (i)    Resolution adopted by the General
Assembly on 21 December 2009  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/64/420/Add.9)]  64/206.  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
The General Assembly,      Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999 and 55/205 of 20 December 2000, and
recalling also its resolutions 56/200 of  21 December 2001, 58/210 of 23
December 2003, 60/199 of 22 December 2005 and  62/197  of  19 December  2007  on
the  promotion  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy,  1   Recalling
also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 0F   2  3 and recalling the recommendations
and conclusions contained in  and of Agenda 21, 2F the  Plan  of  Implementation
of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  4  concerning  energy  for
sustainable  (“Johannesburg  Plan  of  Implementation”) 3F development,
Reiterating the principles of the Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development1F   Recalling with appreciation the  Interactive Thematic  Dialogue
of the  General  Assembly  on  “Energy  efficiency,  energy  conservation  and
new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy”  held  on  18 June  2009  and  the
intergovernmental dialogue on energy issues,  its  contribution  to  Welcoming
the political impetus recently given to the development of new and  renewable
sources  of  energy  worldwide,  including  in  particular  in  developing
countries and in countries with economies in transition,    Welcoming  also  the
offer  of  the  Government  of  India  to  host  the  Delhi    International
Renewable Energy Conference from 27 to 29 October 2010,  _______________  1 See
resolution 60/1.  2 Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3–14 June  1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by
the  Conference  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8  and
corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.  3 Ibid., annex II.  4 Report of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4
September  2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and
corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.  09-47419  *0947419*  Please rec cle
♲ A/RES/64/206  Welcoming  further  initiatives  that  aim  to  improve  access
to  reliable,  affordable,  economically  viable,  socially  acceptable  and
environmentally  sound  energy  services  for  sustainable  development  in
order  to  contribute  to  the  achievement  of  the  internationally  agreed
development  goals,  including  the  Millennium Development Goals,
Recognizing  that  the  development  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of
energy  plays  a  significant  role  in  the  diversification  of  the  energy
mix,  achieving  greater  energy  efficiency,  supporting  and  accelerating
economic  growth  and  social  development,  creating  employment
opportunities,  ensuring  energy  access  and  availability,  promoting  energy
cooperation  and  rendering  environmental  benefits,  thus  contributing  to
achieving  sustainable  development  and  the  Millennium  Development Goals,
Emphasizing  that  the  increased  use  and  promotion  of  new  and  renewable
sources  of  energy  solar-thermal,  sustainable  development,  photovoltaic,
biomass, wind, hydro, tidal, ocean and geothermal forms, could make  a
significant  contribution  towards  the  achievement  of  sustainable
development  and  the  the  Millennium  Development Goals,     for  including
internationally  agreed  development  goals,  including  Acknowledging  that
increased  use  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy    could offer
increased access to modern energy services,     Noting  that,  in  addition  to
increasing  the efficiency  of  energy  production  and  use, expanding the use
of new and renewable sources of energy and advanced clean  energy technology
offers options that could improve global and local environmental  conditions,
Recognizing that the current share of new and renewable sources of energy in
the global energy supply is still low, which is due, among other factors, to the
high  costs  of  many  renewable  energy  technologies,  particularly  in  their
development  phase, and underlining the critical contribution that a rapid
reduction in those costs  could make to the promotion of such technologies,
Recognizing also the contributions of new and renewable sources of energy to
the  reduction  of  greenhouse  gases  and  addressing  climate  change,  which
poses  serious risks and challenges,     Noting that the global demand for
energy continues to rise, while recognizing  that  the  share  of  energy
derived  from  new  and  renewable  resources  remains  increase,  and
considerably  below  underlining in this regard the need to continue to tap new
and renewable sources of  energy,     its  significant  potential  despite  a
recent  Emphasizing  the  need  to  take  further  action  to  mobilize  the
provision  of  adequate  financial  resources,  of  sufficient  quality  and
arriving  in  a  timely  manner,  as well as the transfer of advanced technology
to developing countries and countries  with economies in transition for
providing efficient and wider use of energy sources,  in particular new and
renewable sources of energy,     Reaffirming  that  each  country  must  take
primary  responsibility  for  its  own  development and that the role of
national policies and development strategies cannot  be overemphasized in the
achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing  the need for the
creation of an enabling environment at all levels for investment and  sustained
financing,    2  A/RES/64/206  Acknowledging  that  the  Commission  on
Sustainable  Development  and  the  Economic  and  Social  Council  continue  to
play  a  pivotal  role  as  forums  for  the  discussion of new and renewable
sources of energy and sustainable development,    Welcoming  efforts  by
Governments  and  institutions  that  have  embarked  on  policies and
programmes that seek to expand the use of new and renewable sources  of energy
for sustainable development, and recognizing the contributions of regional
initiatives, institutions and regional economic commissions in supporting the
efforts  of  countries,  in  particular  developing  countries  and  countries
with  economies  in  transition, in this respect,     Noting  with  appreciation
the  establishment  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency,  which
aims  at  promoting  the  diffusion  and  sustainable  use  of  all  forms of
renewable energy,     Noting  also  with  appreciation  regional  mechanisms
and  initiatives  for  energy  cooperation  and  integration  to  encourage  the
use  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  such  as,  inter  alia,  the
PetroCaribe  Alternative  Energy  Source  Financing  Fund,  the  Mesoamerican
integration  and  development  project,  the  Caribbean  Renewable  Energy
Development  Programme,  the  energy  initiative  of  the  New  Partnership  for
Africa’s  Development,  the  Mediterranean  Solar  Plan,  the  Africa- European
Union Energy Partnership, the Baltic Sea Region Energy Cooperation, and  the
Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate,     Noting  with
concern  that  millions  of  poor  people  are  unable  to  afford  to  pay  for
modern  energy  services,  even  when  those  services  are  available,  and
emphasizing  the  need  to  address  the  challenge  of  access  to  and
affordability  of  modern energy services for all, in particular the poor,
Emphasizing  the  need  to  promote  an  enabling  environment  for  the
promotion  and use of new and renewable energy, including through the removal of
obstacles at  all levels,     5   Takes note of the report of the Secretary-
General; 4F 1.    2.    Stresses  the  urgent  need  to  continue  to  increase
the  share  of  new  and  renewable sources of energy in the global energy mix;
3.  Implementation,4  as    Reaffirms the need for the full implementation of
the Johannesburg Plan  for  sustainable  intergovernmental  framework  the  of
development;   4.    the  need  Emphasizes  to  reliable,  affordable,
economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy
services  and  resources  for  sustainable  development,  and  takes  into
consideration  the  diversity  of  situations,  national  policies  and
specific  needs  of  developing  countries  and countries with economies in
transition;   improve  access  to  Encourages  the  development  of  viable
market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in the most rapid reduction of
the cost of new and renewable sources of  energy  and  increase  the
competitiveness  of  those  technologies,  including  through  the  adoption,
as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for  research,  development  and  market
deployment;  5.    _______________  5 A/64/277.  3  A/RES/64/206  6.  Emphasizes
the need to intensify research and development in support of  energy  for
sustainable  development,  which  will  require  increased  commitment  on  the
part  of  Governments  and  all  other  relevant  stakeholders,  as
appropriate,  including the  private sector, civil society and international
organizations, to deploy  financial and human resources for accelerating
research efforts;     Encourages efforts by Governments aimed at creating and
developing an  enabling  environment  at  all  levels  to  ensure  the
promotion  and  use  of  new  and  renewable sources of energy;  7.    8.  Calls
upon  Governments,  as  well  as  relevant  international  and  regional
organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  to  combine,  as
appropriate,  the  increased use of new and renewable energy resources, more
efficient use of energy,  greater  reliance  on  advanced  energy  technologies,
including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies,  and  the  sustainable  use  of
traditional  energy  resources,  which  could  meet the growing need for energy
services in the longer term to achieve sustainable  development;     Encourages
global,  regional  and  national  initiatives  on  new  and  renewable  energies
to  promote  access  to  energy,  including  new  and  renewable  sources of
energy, for the poorest and to improve energy efficiency and conservation  by
resorting  to  a  mix  of  available  technologies,  taking  fully  into
account  the  provisions  of  the  Johannesburg  Plan  of  Implementation
concerning  energy  for  sustainable development;   9.    10.  Welcomes  the
efforts  of  some  Member  States  to  establish  national  voluntary  new  and
renewable  sources  of  energy  and  energy  efficiency  targets,  and
encourages others to do the same;    11.  Encourages Member States to make
greater use of effective policy tools  such  as  voluntary  national,
subnational  or  regional  goals,  programmes  and  targets,  as  appropriate,
to  increase  access  to  energy,  energy  efficiency  and  the  share  of
renewable energies;    12.  Calls upon Governments to take further action to
mobilize the provision  of  financial  resources,  technology  transfer,
capacity-building  and  the  diffusion  of  environmentally  sound  technologies
to  developing  countries  and  countries  with  economies in transition, as set
out in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;    13.  Calls  upon  the
international  community  to  support  the  efforts  of  the  African  countries
in  promoting  the  development,  production  and  use  of  new  and  renewable
sources of energy, recognizing the special needs of Africa for reliable and
affordable energy supplies and services;     14.  Also  calls  upon  the
international  community  to  support  the  least  developed  countries,  the
landlocked  developing  countries  and  the  small  island  developing States in
their efforts to develop and  utilize new and renewable  energy,  inter alia,
through financial and technical assistance and capacity-building;    15.
Reiterates  its  call  for  all  relevant  funding  institutions  and  bilateral
and  multilateral  donors,  as  well  as  regional  funding  institutions  and
non-governmental  organizations,  to  continue  to  support,  as  appropriate,
efforts  aimed  at  the  development  of  the  energy  sector  in  developing
countries  and  countries  with  economies  in  transition  on  the  basis  of
environment-friendly  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  of  demonstrated
viability,  while  taking  fully  into  account  the  development  structure  of
energy-based  economies  of  developing  countries,  and  to    4  A/RES/64/206
assist  in  the  attainment  of  the  levels  of  investment  necessary  to
expand  energy  supplies, including beyond urban areas;   16.  Notes and
encourages ongoing activities related to the promotion of new  the  United
Nations  system,  and  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  within  acknowledges
the role of UN-Energy in promoting system-wide collaboration in the  area of
energy;     17.  Encourages the United Nations system to continue to raise
awareness of  the  importance  of  energy  for  sustainable  development,
including  the  need  for  the  promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
and the increased role they can  play  in  the  global  energy  supply,
particularly  in  the  context  of  sustainable  development and poverty
eradication;     18.  Encourages the Secretary-General to  continue  his
efforts to promote the  mobilization  of  financial  resources,  in  a  stable
and  predictable  manner,  and  technical  assistance,  and  to  enhance  the
effectiveness  and  the  full  utilization  of  existing  international  funds
for  the  effective  implementation  of  national  and  regional high-priority
projects in the area of new and renewable sources of energy;     19.  Stresses
that  the  wider  use  and  exploration  of  available  and  additional  new and
renewable sources of energy require technology transfer and diffusion on a
triangular  global  scale,  cooperation;     through  North-South,  South-South
and  including  20.  Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its  sixty-sixth  session  a  report  on  the  implementation  of
the  present  resolution,  taking  into  account,  inter  alia,  the
initiatives  taken  by  Member  States  and  international  organizations to
create  an  enabling environment  at all levels  for the promotion  and  use  of
new  and  renewable  energy,  including  measures  to  improve  access  to  such
technologies;     21.  Decides  to  include  in  the  provisional  agenda  of
its  sixty-sixth  session,  under the item entitled “Sustainable development”,
the sub-item entitled “Promotion  of new and renewable sources of energy”.
66th plenary meeting  21 December 2009  5