A/RES/62/197    United Nations  Distr.: General  22 February 2008  General
Assembly    Sixty-second session  Agenda item 54 (i)    Resolution adopted by
the General Assembly on 19 December 2007  [on the report of the Second Committee
(A/62/419/Add.9)]  62/197.  Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
The General Assembly,       Recalling  its  resolutions  53/7  of  16 October
1998,  54/215  of  22 December  1999 and 55/205 of 20 December 2000, and
recalling also its resolutions 56/200 of  21 December 2001, 58/210 of 23
December 2003 and 60/199 of 22 December 2005,  on  the  promotion  of  new  and
renewable  sources  of  energy,  including  the  implementation of the World
Solar Programme,   1  Recalling also the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 0F
Noting  that  the  World  Solar  Programme  1996–2005  made  a  contribution  to
raising  awareness  of  the  increased  role  that  new  and  renewable  sources
of  energy  can play in the global energy supply,   2  3 and recalling the
recommendations and conclusions contained in  and of Agenda 21, 2F the  Plan  of
Implementation  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development  4
concerning  energy  for  sustainable  (“Johannesburg  Plan  of  Implementation”)
3F development,   Reiterating the principles of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development1F     Recalling  the  holding  of  the  Beijing
International  Renewable  Energy  Conference  on  7  and  8 November  2005,  in
follow-up  to  the  International  Conference for Renewable Energies, held in
Bonn, Germany, from 1 to 4 June 2004,  and noting the offer of the Government of
the United States of America to convene  the  Washington  International
Renewable  Energy  Conference  from  6  to  8 March  2008,   Welcoming
initiatives  that  aim  to  improve  access  to  reliable,  affordable,
economically viable, socially acceptable and environmentally sound energy
services for    _______________  1 See resolution 60/1.  2 Report  of  the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and Development, Rio  de  Janeiro,
3-14 June  1992,  vol. I,  Resolutions  Adopted  by  the  Conference  (United
Nations  publication,  Sales  No. E.93.I.8  and  corrigendum), resolution 1,
annex I.  3 Ibid., annex II.  4 Report  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable
Development,  Johannesburg,  South  Africa,  26 August– 4 September 2002 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.  07-47559  A/RES/62/197  sustainable development in order to
contribute to the achievement of the internationally  agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals,     Emphasizing  that  the
increased  use  and  promotion  of  all  forms  of  new  and  solar-thermal,
sustainable  development,  renewable  photovoltaic, biomass, wind, hydro, tidal,
ocean and geothermal forms, could make  a  significant  contribution  towards
the  achievement  of  sustainable  development  and  the  the  Millennium
Development Goals,   for  energy  including  internationally  agreed
development  goals,  including  Acknowledging  that  increased  use  of  new
and  renewable  sources  of  energy  could  offer  important  options  for  the
provision  of  energy  for  sustainable  development and increased access to
modern energy services,     Noting  that,  in  addition  to  increasing  the
efficiency  of  energy  production  and  use, expanding the use of new and
renewable sources of energy and advanced clean  energy technology offers options
that could improve global and local environmental  conditions,     Recognizing
the  contributions  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  to  the
reduction  of  greenhouse  gases  and  addressing  climate  change,  which
poses  serious  risks and challenges,     Noting that the global demand for
energy continues to rise, while recognizing  that  the  share  of  energy
derived  from  new  and  renewable  resources  remains  considerably below its
significant potential, and underscoring in this regard the need  to tap new and
renewable sources of energy,     Emphasizing  the  need  to  take  further
action  to  mobilize  the  provision  of  adequate  financial  resources,  of
sufficient  quality  and  arriving  in  a  timely  manner,  as well as the
transfer of advanced technology to developing countries and countries  with
economies in transition for providing efficient and wider use of energy sources,
in particular new and renewable sources of energy,     Reaffirming  that  each
country  must  take  primary  responsibility  for  its  own  development and
that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot  be
overemphasized in the achievement of sustainable development, and recognizing
the need for the creation of an enabling environment at all levels for
investment and  sustained financing,     Acknowledging  that  the  Commission
on  Sustainable  Development  and  the  Economic  and  Social  Council  continue
to  play  a  pivotal  role  as  forums  for  the  discussion of new and
renewable sources of energy and sustainable development,     Welcoming  efforts
by  Governments  and  institutions  that  have  embarked  on  policies and
programmes that seek to expand the use of new and renewable energy  for
sustainable  development,  and  recognizing  the  contributions  of  regional
initiatives, institutions and regional economic commissions in supporting the
efforts  of  countries,  in  particular  developing  countries  and  countries
with  economies  in  transition, in this respect,     5  Takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General; 4F 1.    _______________  5 A/62/208.  2
A/RES/62/197  2.  Reaffirms the need for the full implementation of the
Johannesburg Plan  of  Implementation4  as  the  intergovernmental  framework
for  energy  for  sustainable  development;     3.    the  need  Emphasizes  to
reliable,  affordable,  economically viable, socially acceptable and
environmentally sound energy services  and  resources  for  sustainable
development,  and  takes  into  consideration  the  diversity  of  situations,
national  policies  and  specific  needs  of  developing  countries  and
countries with economies in transition;   improve  access  to  Also  emphasizes
the  need  to  intensify  research  and  development  in  support  of  energy
for  sustainable  development,  which  will  require  increased  commitment  on
the  part  of  Governments  and  all  other  relevant  stakeholders,  as
international  appropriate,  organizations,  to  deploy  financial  and  human
resources  for  accelerating  research  efforts;   4.    the  private  sector,
civil  society  and  including  5.  Calls  upon  Governments,  as  well  as
relevant  international  and  regional  organizations  and  other  relevant
stakeholders,  to  combine,  as  appropriate,  the  increased use of new and
renewable energy resources, more efficient use of energy,  greater  reliance  on
advanced  energy  technologies,  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies,
and  the  sustainable  use  of  traditional  energy  resources,  which  could
meet the growing need for energy services in the longer term to achieve
sustainable  development;     Encourages  global,  regional  and  national
initiatives  on  new  and  renewable  energies  to  promote  access  to  energy,
including  new  and  renewable  sources of energy, for the poorest and to
improve energy efficiency and conservation  by  resorting  to  a  mix  of
available  technologies,  taking  fully  into  account  the  provisions  of  the
Johannesburg  Plan  of  Implementation  concerning  energy  for  sustainable
development;   6.    7.  Calls upon Governments to take further action to
mobilize the provision  of  financial  resources,  technology  transfer,
capacity-building  and  the  diffusion  of  environmentally  sound  technologies
to  developing  countries  and  countries  with  economies in transition, as set
out in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;     8.  Calls  upon  the
international  community  to  support  the  efforts  of  the  African  countries
in  promoting  the  development,  production  and  use  of  new  and  renewable
sources of energy, recognizing the special needs of Africa for reliable and
affordable energy supplies and services;     Also  calls  upon  the
international  community  to  support  the  least  developed  countries,  the
landlocked  developing  countries  and  the  small  island  developing States in
their efforts to develop and utilize energy resources, including  new and
renewable energy, inter alia, through financial and technical assistance;   9.
10.  Reiterates  its  call  for  all  relevant  funding  institutions  and
bilateral  and  multilateral  donors,  as  well  as  regional  funding
institutions  and  non-governmental  organizations,  to  continue  to  support,
as  appropriate,  efforts  aimed  at  the  development  of  the  energy  sector
in  developing  countries  and  countries  with  economies  in  transition  on
the  basis  of  environment-friendly  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy
of  demonstrated  viability,  while  taking  fully  into  account  the
development  structure  of  energy-based  economies  of  developing  countries,
and  to  assist  in  the  attainment  of  the  levels  of  investment  necessary
to  expand  energy  supplies, including beyond urban areas;     3  A/RES/62/197
11.  Notes and encourages ongoing activities related to the promotion of new
and renewable sources of energy within the United Nations system;   12.
Encourages the United Nations system to continue to raise awareness of  the
importance  of  energy  for  sustainable  development,  including  the  need
for  the  promotion  of  new  and  renewable  sources  of  energy  and  of  the
increased  role  they  can  play  in  the  global  energy  supply,  particularly
in  the  context  of  sustainable  development and poverty eradication;     13.
Encourages the Secretary-General to  continue  his  efforts to promote the
mobilization  of  financial  resources,  in  a  stable  and  predictable
manner,  and  technical  assistance,  and  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  and
the  full  utilization  of  existing  international  funds  for  the  effective
implementation  of  national  and  regional high-priority projects in the area
of new and renewable sources of energy;     14.  Stresses  that  the  wider  use
and  exploration  of  available  and  additional  new and renewable sources of
energy require technology transfer and diffusion on a  global  scale,
triangular  cooperation;     through  North-South,  South-South  and  including
15.  Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
16.  Decides  to  include  in  the  provisional  agenda  of  its  sixty-fourth
session,  under the item entitled “Sustainable development”, the sub-item
entitled “Promotion  of new and renewable sources of energy”.      78th plenary
meeting  19 December 2007  4