A/RES/73/236  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  15
January 2019          Seventy-third session  Agenda item 20 (i)
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly    on 20 December 2018      [on the
report of the Second Committee (A/73/538/Add.9)]            73/236.  Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern  energy for all      The
General Assembly,    Recalling its resolutions 53/7 of 16 October 1998, 54/215
of 22 December 1999,  55/205 of 20 December 2000, 56/200 of 21 December 2001,
58/210 of 23 December  2003,  60/199  of  22 December  2005,  62/197  of  19
December  2007,  64/206  of  21 December  2009,  66/206  of  22 December  2011,
69/225  of  19 December  2014,  70/201  of  22 December  2015,  71/233  of  21
December  2016  and  72/224  of  20 December  2017,  as  well  as  its
resolutions  65/151  of  20 December  2010  on  the  International Year of
Sustainable Energy for All and 67/215 of 21 December 2012, in  which  it
decided  to  declare  2014–2024  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable
Energy for All,    Reaffirming  its  resolution  70/1  of  25 September  2015,
entitled  “Transforming  our  world:  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable
Development”,  in  which  it  adopted  a  comprehensive, far-reaching and
people-centred set of universal and transformative  Sustainable Development
Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for  the  full
implementation  of  the  Agenda  by  2030,  its  recognition  that  eradicating
poverty  in  all  its  forms  and  dimensions,  including  extreme  poverty,  is
the  greatest  global  challenge  and  an indispensable requirement  for
sustainable  development,  its  commitment  to  achieving  sustainable
development  in  its  three  dimensions  —  economic, social and environmental
— in a balanced and integrated manner, and to  building upon the achievements of
the Millennium Development Goals and see king  to address their unfinished
business,    Reaffirming  also  its  resolution  69/313  of  27 July  2015  on
the  Addis  Ababa  Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development,  which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, supports  and complements it, helps to contextualize
its means of implementation targets with  concrete  policies  and  actions,  and
reaffirms  the  strong  political  commitment  to    18-22559 (E)    170119
*1822559*      A/RES/73/236  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all    address the challenge of financing and
creating an enabling environment at all levels  for sustainable development in
the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,    Welcoming the Paris
Agreement1 and its early entry into force, and encouraging  all  its  parties
to  fully  implement  the Agreement  and  parties  to  the  United  Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change 2 that have not yet done so to deposit
their  instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where
appropriate, as  soon as possible,     Looking forward to the climate summit
called for by the Secretary-General, to    be held in New York in 2019, to
accelerate global action on climate change,   Highlighting the synergies between
the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement,     Recalling  its  resolution  55/2
of  8 September  2000,  by  which  it  adopted  the  United Nations Millennium
Declaration, the 2005 World Summit Outcome 3 and the  outcome document of the
high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the  Millennium
Development Goals,4     Reaffirming  the  Rio  Declaration  on  Environment  and
Development 5  and  Agenda 216 and the principles set out therein, and recalling
the recommendations and  conclusions  contained  in  the  Plan  of
Implementation  of  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable  Development
(Johannesburg Plan  of Implementation) 7 and  the outcome  documents of the
United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development,  entitled  “The
future we want”,8 the third International Conference on Small Island Developing
States,  entitled  “SIDS Accelerated  Modalities  of Action  (SAMOA)  Pathway”,9
the  second  United  Nations  Conference  on  Landlocked  Developing  Countries,
entitled  “Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for
the Decade  2014–2024”,10 and  the  Fourth  United  Nations  Conference  on  the
Least  Developed  Countries, entitled “Istanbul Programme of Action for the
Least Developed Countries  for the Decade 2011–2020”,11    Reaffirming  also
the  New  Urban  Agenda,  adopted  at  the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Housing  and  Sustainable  Urban  Development  (Habitat III),  held  in  Quito
from 17 to 20 October 2016,12     Reaffirming  further  that  each  country
must  take  primary  responsibility  for  its  own  development  and  that  the
role  of  national  policies  and  development  strategies  cannot  be
overemphasized  in  the  achievement  of  sustainable  development,  and
recognizing  the  need  for  the  creation  of  an  enabling  environment  at
all  levels  and  across all sectors for the achievement of sustainable
development,      __________________  1  Adopted under the UNFCCC in
FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.  2  United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
1771, No. 30822.  3  Resolution 60/1.  4  Resolution 65/1.  5  Report of the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro,  3−14
June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted by the Conference (United Nations
publication,  Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
6  Ibid., annex II.  7  Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development,
Johannesburg, South Africa,  26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and  corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2,
annex.      8  Resolution 66/288, annex.  9  Resolution 69/15, annex.  10
Resolution 69/137, annex II.  11  Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul,          Turkey, 9–13 May 2011
(A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.  12  Resolution 71/256, annex.    18-22559  2/8
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/73/236    Emphasizing  that  universal  access  to  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable  and  modern energy for all is an integral part of poverty
eradication and the achievement  of  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable
Development,  and  that  the  increased  use  and  promotion  of  new  and
renewable  energy,  including  in  off-grid  and  decentralized  systems, and
energy efficiency could make a significant contribution in that regard,
Deeply  concerned  that  nearly  2.7 billion  people  in  developing  countries,
especially in rural areas, rely on traditional biomass, coal and kerosene  for
cooking  and  heating,  with  disproportionate  health  and  workload  impacts
on  women  and  children,  including  an  estimated  3.8 million  deaths
annually,  that  close  to  1 billion  people  are  without  access  to
electricity,  that Africa  accounts  for  more  than  half  of  both access
figures and that, even when energy services are available, millions of poor
people are unable to pay for them,     Noting with concern that energy
represents less than 1 per cent of overall United  Nations  expenditure  on  the
Sustainable  Develop ment  Goals,  despite  its  critical  importance also in
achieving other goals,    Expressing concern that, at current rates of progress,
none of the global energy    targets of the Sustainable Development Goals will
be achieved by 2030,    Emphasizing  the  critical  socioeconomic  benefits  of
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable and modern energy and the need to reframe
the understanding of energy  from  a  technical  unit  to  a  requirement  for
basic  social  services,  economic  development and poverty eradication,
Highlighting  the  importance  of  the  empowerment  of  developing  countries
to  achieve universal access through the rapid expansion of affordable
sustainable energy  worldwide,     Recognizing that each country has primary
responsibility for its own economic  and  social  development  and  that  this
will  include  the  mobilization  of  financial  resources,  as  well  as
capacity-building  and  the  transfer  of  environmentally  sound  technologies
to developing countries on favourable terms, including on concessional  and
preferential terms, as mutually agreed,    Welcoming  the  significant
reductions  in  the  cost  of  renewable  energy,  the  sector’s net positive
job contributions and the rapid expansion of renewable energy  capacity
additions,  which  are  now  greater  than  those  of  other  reso urces  in
the  electricity sector, and noting that the levelized cost of solar and wind
energy in many  regions of the world is fully competitive with traditional
energy resources,      Taking note of the work of multi-stakeholder
partnerships, including Sustainable  Energy  for All,  which  has  given  strong
momentum  to  the  promotion  of  renewable  energy and energy efficiency, the
initiatives of the Global Climate Action Agenda, the  Small Island Developing
States Lighthouses Initiative, SIDS DOCK, the International  Partnership  for
Energy  Efficiency  Cooperation  and  others  that  can  contribute  to
reaching  the  objective  of  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable  and  modern energy for all,    Noting  with  appreciation  the
work  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy  Agency, which facilitates the
widespread and increased adoption and sustainable use  of all forms of renewable
energy,     Noting  with  appreciation  also  that  the  transformation  of  the
world’s  energy  systems is being accelerated by advances in technology, rapid
declines in the cost of  renewable  energy,  the  deployment  of  least-cost
decentralized  solutions,  policy  support,  new  business  models  and  the
sharing  of  best  practices,  welcoming  the  establishment of the
International Solar Alliance as an international or ganization, and  noting the
continuing work of the International Renewable Energy Agency,     18-22559  3/8
A/RES/73/236  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy for all    Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to
energy issues and the  promotion of synergies across the global energy agenda,
with a focus on eradicating  poverty and achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals,      Reiterating  the  pledge  that  no  one  will  be  left  behind,
reaffirming  the  recognition that the dignity of the human person is
fundamental, and the wish to see  the Goals and targets met for all nations and
peoples and for all segments of society,  and recommitting to endeavour to reach
the furthest behind first,      Recommitting to ensuring that no country or
person is left behind and to focusing  our effort where the challenges are
greatest, including by en suring the inclusion and  participation of those who
are furthest behind,    1.  Takes  note  of  the  report  of  the  Secretary-
General  on  ensuring  access  to    affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all; 13   2.  Also  takes  note  of  the  role  and
activities  of  the  International  Renewable  Energy Agency,  encouraging  the
Agency  to  continue  to  support  its  members  in  the  achievement of their
renewable energy objectives, as well as the contributions of the  International
Solar  Alliance,  and  encourages  its  work  to  collectively  address  key
common challenges to the scaling-up of solar energy;     3.  Strongly encourages
Governments and other relevant stakeholders to take  actions  to  achieve
universal  access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy,
increase the global share of new and renewable energy, improve the inclusion  of
developing  countries  in  energy  sector  cooperation,  where  relevant,  and
increase  the rate of improvement in energy efficiency for a clean, low-
emission, low-carbon,  climate-resilient,  safe,  efficient,  modern,
affordable  and  sustainable  energy  system,  given the systemic sustainable
development benefits, while taking into consideration  the diversity of national
situations, priorities, policies, specific needs and challenges  and  capacities
of  developing  countries,  including  their  energy  mix  and  energy  systems;
4.  Calls  for ensuring  access  to affordable, reliable,  sustainable and
modern  energy for all, as such services are an integral part of poverty
eradication measures,  human dignity, quality of life, economic opportunity, the
combating of inequality, the  promotion  of  health  and  the  prevention  of
morbidity  and  mortality,  access  to  education,  safe  drinking  water  and
sanitation,  food  security,  disaster  risk  reduction  and  resilience,
climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation,  environmental  impact  reduction,
social  inclusion  and  gender  equality,  including  for  persons  affected  by
humanitarian emergencies;     5.  Underscores  the  importance  of  access  to
cleaner  and  more  efficient  and  sustainable  cooking  and  heating  methods,
welcomes  ongoing  efforts,  and  in  this  regard  calls  for  the  promotion
of  an  enabling  environment  at  the  national  and  international levels for
the increased usage of sustainable, cleaner and more efficient  cooking and
heating methods in all countries, in particular developing countries;    6.
Encourages  Governments,  the  United  Nations  system  and  relevant
stakeholders to leverage the cost-competitiveness of renewable energy,
especially in  off-grid  areas,  in  order  to  achieve  universal  energy
access,  such  as  by  establishing  policy  frameworks  for  metering  and
payment  systems,  requiring  cost  comparisons  between grid extension and off-
grid solutions, facilitating investment by domestic and  foreign  banks  and
educating  students,  communities,  investors  and entrepreneurs on  renewable
energy, energy efficiency and conservation, among other activities, where
feasible and appropriate;     __________________  13  A/73/267.    18-22559  4/8
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
A/RES/73/236    7.  Calls  upon  Governments  to  expand  the  use  of
renewable  energy  beyond  the power sector, taking into account national
priorities and constraints, to industry,  heating and cooling, construction and
infrastructure and, in particular, the transport  sector,  including  through
sustainable  sector  coupling,  in  the  context  of  sustainable  development,
including climate change, and calls for supportive policy initiatives and
investments at the national and international levels;      8.  Recognizes  that
current  global  progress  in  improving  energy  efficiency  falls well below
the pace necessary to double the global rate of improvement in energy
efficiency by 2030, and encourages, in accordance with national laws and
regulations,  the promotion of widespread energy efficiency initiatives in  all
economic sectors, the  adoption  and  updating  of  building  performance  codes
and  standards,  energy  efficiency labelling, the promotion of energy
management systems, the retrofitting of  existing  buildings  and  public
procurement  policies  on  energy,  among  o ther  modalities, as appropriate,
as well as the prioritization of smart grid systems, district  energy systems
and community energy plans to improve synergies among clean and  effective use
of traditional resources, renewable energy and energy efficiency, wh ich  aim to
promote the interconnectivity of clean and renewable energy infrastructure and
improve energy efficiency;     9.  Calls  for  strengthened  cooperation  at
the  regional  level  to  promote  innovation  and  facilitate  financing,
support  regional  cross -border  power  grid  connectivity,  as  appropriate,
to  advance  economic  integration  and  sustainable  development and share best
practices that are responsive to regional needs with regard  to Sustainable
Development Goal 7 14 and its interlinkages with the other Sustainable
Development Goals;     10.  Calls  upon  Governments,  as  well  as  relevant
international  and  regional  organizations  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,
to  combine,  as  appropriate,  the  increased use of new and renewable energy
resources, more efficient use of e nergy,  greater  reliance  on  advanced
energy  technologies,  including  cleaner  fossil  fuel  technologies, and the
sustainable use of traditional energy resources;     relevant  11.  Encourages
Governments,  regional  organizations and other relevant  stakeholders to
promote investments in developing  sustainable,  inclusive  and  equitable
energy  systems,  including,  inter  alia,  by  strengthening energy systems
through cross-border grid connections, as appropriate,  and  to  consider
incorporating  decentralized  renewable  energy  solutions  in  energy
planning,  as  appropriate,  and  recognizes  that  energy  transition  will
take  different  paths in different parts of the world;   international  and
12.  Also  encourages  Governments,  relevant  international  organizations  and
other relevant  stakeholders  to  use and  promote an  integrated resource
planning  and  management approach in their energy strategies that considers
energy choices in the  context  of  linked  sectors,  inter  alia,  water,
waste,  air  quality  and  food,  taking  into  account national circumstances;
13.  Recognizes that sustainable energy access and its deployment can be both
improved and accelerated by gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls, and calls upon Governments, the United Nations development system and
other  stakeholders to increase educational and capacity-building programmes for
women in  the  sector,  further  advance  equal  pay  and  leadership  and
other  opportunities  for  women in the energy sector, promote women’s full,
equal and effective participation  and leadership in the design and
implementation of energy policies and programmes,  mainstream  a  gender
perspective  in  such  policies  and  programmes  and  ensure  women’s  full
and  equal  access  to  and  use  of  sustainable  energy  to  enhance  their
__________________  14  See resolution 70/1.    18-22559  5/8    A/RES/73/236
Ensuring access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
economic  and  social  empowerment,  including  employment  and  other  income-
generating opportunities;   14.  Encourages  Governments,  with  the  support
of  relevant  stakeholders,  as  appropriate, to accelerate the transition
towards sustainable economies, according to  national policies and plans,
through mitigation and adaptation strategies that improve  energy  efficiency
and  create  more  and  better  employment  opportunities  for  all,  including
young people, in wage and self-employment;     15.  Emphasizes the potential of
sustainable energy use to contribute to climate  change  mitigation  and
adaptation,  recognizes  that  increasing  the  deployment  of  renewable
energy  and  enhancing  energy  efficiency  are  components  of  many
countries’  nationally  determined  contributions  under  the  Paris  Agreement
adopted  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate
Change, 1  and  urges  effective  and  timely  support  for  the  full
implementation  of  those  contributions,  as  applicable;     16.  Notes that
the impacts of climate change can also threaten access to and  the supply of
energy, and also notes the importance of increasing the resilience of the
energy  sector  to  climate  change,  which  can  be  facilitated  by  the
expansion  of  renewable energy;     17.  Emphasizes,  while  noting  progress,
that  the  large-scale  deployment  of  technologies has been insufficient and
uneven and that support is required to realize  their  potential,  along  with
appropriate  policy  initiatives  and  investments  at  the  national  and
international  levels,  with  Governments  working  in  collaboration  with
relevant stakeholders, including the private sector;      18.  Also emphasizes
the value of regional and interregional approaches, which  can, among other
advantages, enhance the deployment of renewable and sustainable  energy by
facilitating the  sharing of  experiences, reduce transaction costs, leverage
economies of scale, enable greater cross-border interconnectivity to promote
energy  system  reliability  and  resilience  and  augment  domestic  capacity-
building,  and  recognizes the work of organizations and initiatives in that
regard;     19.  Invites  all  relevant  funding  institutions  and  bilateral
and  multilateral  the  private  sector  and  donors,  as  well  as  non-
governmental organizations, to continue ongoing efforts and take further action
to  provide  financial  resources,  as  appropriate,  to  support  efforts
aimed  at  ensuring  access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern
energy in developing countries  and countries with economies in transition,
including low-emission, low-carbon and  climate-resilient  new  and  renewable
resources  of  energy  of  demonstrated  viability,  especially  focused  on
energy  access  and  economic  development  in  both  urban  and  rural  areas,
while  noting  the  potential  catalytic  effect  of  concessional  and  other
finance  and  taking  fully  into  account  the  development  structure  of
energy -based  economies of developing countries;     funding  regional
institutions,  20.  Encourages  the  development,  dissemination,  diffusion
and  transfer  of  environmentally  sound  technologies  to  developing
countries  on  favourable  terms,  including on concessional and preferential
terms, as mutually agreed, and highlights  the  importance  of  integrating
sustainable  energy  in  the  Technology  Facilitation  Mechanism;    21.
Stresses  the  importance  of  strategies  and  contributions  by  Governments
and  relevant  stakeholders  to  multi-stakeholder  partnerships  in  ensuring
access  to  affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all,
and  encourages  coordination  and  collaboration  between  relevant  multi-
stakeholder partnerships, such as Sustainable Energy for All;      the  United
Nations  and  18-22559  6/8    Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all  A/RES/73/236    22.  Recognizes  the
catalytic  effect  of  the  sharing  of  knowledge  and  experience,  capacity-
building  and  technical  assistance  on  sustainable  energy  deployment,  and
encourages  existing  and  new  efforts  to  enable  Governments  from
developing  countries  and  relevant  stakeholders  to  plan,  finance,
implement  and  monitor  sustainable  energy  projects  to  further  strengthen
their  national  institutions  and capacities;     23.  Encourages  the
development  of  viable  market-oriented  strategies  that  could result in
further rapid reductions in the cost of new and renewable resources of  energy
and  could  further  increase  the  competitiveness  of  those  technologies,
including  through  the  adoption,  as  appropriate,  of  public  policies  for
research,  development  and  market  deployment,  including  rationalizing
inefficient  fossil  fuel  subsidies  that  encourage  wasteful  consumption  by
removing  market  distortions,  in  accordance with national circumstances;
24.  Emphasizes  the  value  of  education,  academia,  technology  and
entrepreneurship to develop solutions to face energy challenges and achieve
energy  sustainability, as well as the importance of investing in research and
development in  sustainable energy technologies, and also emphasizes in this
context the urgent need  to enhance international cooperation to facilitate
access to upgraded technologies and  improved  infrastructures  for  supplying
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy for all;    25.  Calls
for  national  efforts  to  promote  access  to  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all  and  strengthened  local  engagement
to  complement  current  approaches,  and  reaffirms  the  commitment  to
supporting  subnational  and  local  efforts,  taking  advantage  of  their
direct  control,  where  applicable, of local infrastructure and codes to foster
uptake in end -use sectors, such  as  residential,  commercial  and  industrial
buildings,  industry,  agriculture,  transport,  waste and sanitation;     26.
Encourages  the  Secretary-General  to  continue  efforts  to  promote  the
provision  of  stable,  adequate  and  predictable  financial  resources  and
technical  assistance for sustainable energy and to  enhance the effectiveness,
coordination and  full utilization of appropriate international funds for the
effective implementation of  national and regional high-priority projects for
ensuring access to affordable, reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for
all,  and  in  this  regard  invites  the  Secretary- General,  within  existing
resources,  to  convene  dialogues,  which  could  consist  of  a  series  of
events,  including  discussions  among  energy  policymakers  and  other
stakeholders,  in  2019,  to  be  supported  by  the  Secretariat,  in  order
to  discuss  the  implementation  of  the  United  Nations  Decade  of
Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  including the global plan of action for the
Decade, as described in the report of the  Secretary-General, the summary of the
deliberations of which wo uld be incorporated  into the report on the
implementation of the present resolution;      27.  Encourages the entities of
the United Nations development system, within  their respective  mandates and
taking into account the need to improve coordination  among  them,  in  the
context  of  the  implementation  of  resolutions  71/243  of  21 December  2016
and  72/279  of  31 May  2018,  to  assist  countries,  in  particular  at  the
country  level,  upon  request  by  their  Governments,  by  explicitly
leveraging  partnerships with other international organizations, donors and
relevant stakeholders,  including  in  their  efforts  to  achieve  universal
access  to  sustainable  energy  and  to  accelerate its deployment;     28.
Calls upon the relevant organizations of the United Nations system, within
their respective mandates and resources, to ensure that no one is left behind
and no  country is left behind in the implementation of the present resolution;
18-22559  7/8    A/RES/73/236  Ensuring access to affordable, reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all    29.  Calls  upon  the  Secretary-
General  to  promote  renewable  energy,  energy  efficiency  and  related
sustainable  practices  in  all  United  Nations  facilities  and  operations
around the world, set implementation targets and timelines by the end of  2019,
building  on  and  avoiding  duplication  with  existing  initiatives,  and
report  on  progress, within the most relevant existing reporting frameworks;
30.  Requests  the  Secretary-General  to  submit to the  General Assembly at
its  seventy-fourth  session  a  report  on  the  implementation  of  the
present  resolution,  including  activities  carried  out  to  mark  the  United
Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy for All, and decides to include in the
provisional agenda of its seventy -fourth  session,  under  the  item  entitled
“Sustainable  development”,  the  sub-item  entitled  “Ensuring access to
affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all ”.      62nd plenary
meeting   20 December 2018    18-22559  8/8