United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for Project
Services DP/DCP/AGO/ Distr: General  July 2019 Original: English Second regular
session 2019  to  September 2019, New York Item  of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters Country programme document for Angola ()
Contents  Programme rationale II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… ………… III Programme and risk management  IV
Monitoring and evaluation ………………………………………………………………………… Annex Results and
resources framework for Angola () Page     10 19-11135X () 230719 *1911135*
DP/DCP/AGO/  Programme rationale  The 2017 general elections ushered in  new era
in Angola, with  change of President after 38 years There is strong political
commitment to strengthen democratic governance, justice and human rights, and
fight corruption Creating the first-ever elected local governments in 2020 is
flagship policy  Governance, justice and human rights institutions at national
and local levels remain fragile in responding to ongoing structural reforms and
meeting citizens’ growing demand for inclusive, participatory governance,
transparency and accountability in public management and for effective service
delivery  Advances in democracy and rights are taking place in  context of tight
fiscal space and deceleration of economic growth, as result of the sharp
decrease in oil prices and its related tax revenues Oil revenues accounted for
96 per cent of total revenues in This caused public debt to rise to 91 per cent
of gross domestic product (GDP) Public debt operations account for per cent of
the state budget in 2019 and consume 70 per cent of fiscal revenues  Within this
tight fiscal space, Angola aims to eradicate poverty Thirty-six per cent of
Angolans live in extreme poverty In 2018, per cent of Angolans were
multidimensionally poor, with per cent in urban and per cent in rural areas The
2018 Multiple Overlapping Deprivation Analysis (MODA) on multidimensional child
poverty in Angola concluded that per cent of children under 18 are poor The Gini
coefficient was 43 in Due to higher life expectancy, Angola improved its human
development index (HDI) to medium human development status, ranking 147 out of
189 countries in 2017, with an HDI of The tight fiscal space underscores the
importance of increased private investments that support achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals  Angola will graduate from the least developed
country (LDC) category in February 2021, based on the income-only criterion The
2019 World Bank Ease of Doing Business Report ranks Angola 173 out of 190
countries The country is currently implementing the Programme to Support
Production, Diversification of Exports and Substitution of Imports (PRODESI) The
unemployment rate is per cent: 27 per cent for men, 31 per cent for women Young
people ages 15 to 24 face higher unemployment rates, at per cent  The major
causes of poverty and unemployment are: non-inclusive economic growth due to
limited economic diversification, low investment in human capital,  challenging
business environment, lack of effective employment generation programmes, gaps
between skill supply and demand, limited access to quality technical and
vocational education and training (TVET) and constraints faced by micro, small
and medium-sized enterprises (MSME)  The population is projected to grow
rapidly, from million in 2014 to million people by In 2018, per cent of Angolans
were 14 years old or less10 In December 2018, Angola agreed with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) on an extended fund facility for $ billion,
and committed to implementing several fiscal reforms that impact the poor and
most vulnerable  Real GDP shrank  per cent in 2016,  per cent in 2017 and  per
cent in Source: National Bank of Angola  Source: Government of Angola
Government of Angola 2008 (new data will be available before final submission of
the country programme)  Source: UNDP and Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative (OPHI)  Source: The National Institute of Statistics (INE)  Source:
INE  Source: UNDP  Source: INE 10 Source: INE  DP/DCP/AGO/  Angola presents high
maternal, child and youth mortality rates, and  high incidence of malaria,
tuberculosis and other communicable and non-communicable diseases HIV prevalence
is  per cent among women,  per cent among men,  per cent among 15 to 24-year-old
adolescent girls and young women,  per cent among female sex workers, and  per
cent among men having sex with men Social determinants of health in Angola
include the limited knowledge of prevention methods and access to prevention
commodities, high cost of treatment and related services, poor housing and
sanitation, and gender inequalities Youth, women, urban poor and socially
marginalized groups tend to be the most vulnerable to infectious diseases
Climate change has severely affected Angola In , El Niño-induced drought in the
southern provinces caused $750 million in damages and losses, with  million
people affected, mostly women and children11 The Government has developed
drought recovery framework for , including the investment plan to enhance
resilience Lack of information on deforestation, wildlife depletion and
overfishing is  challenge; existing data show Angola is losing natural
resources12 Angola has large protected areas and is planning its first marine
protected area Solid waste management remains  challenge, with  million tonnes
of household waste produced yearly in the capital Angola has made  strong
commitment through its nationally determined contributions to reduce carbon
emissions by 35 per cent13 Only 42 per cent of the total population has access
to electricity14 Traditional energy sources are still widely used, including
charcoal Of the electricity produced and consumed, 64 per cent is from renewable
sources, mainly hydropower15 Seven solar hybrid plants were commissioned in
Although the Government promotes private investment in renewables, and there is
growing private interest, the insufficient legal and regulatory environment, low
cost of conventional energy, and limited access to foreign currency remain
barriers Gender and women’ rights and participation remain  challenge because of
patriarchal customs and practices Gender-based violence is widespread, with  per
cent of women between 15 and 49 claiming to have suffered some type of sexual
violence; 35 per cent among ever-married women aged 15 to 16 Women represent per
cent of senior government positions17 Gender barriers remain inherent in the HIV
context, such as unequal age of consent to marry and gaps in sexual and
reproductive health rights The National Development Plan (NDP), , has six
pillars: () human development and wellbeing; () inclusive, diversified and
sustainable economic development; () infrastructure for development; ()
democracy, good governance, state reform and decentralization; () harmonious
development of territory; and () stability, territorial integrity and the
country’ role in the regional and international contexts Financing for the $97
billion plan18 is primarily domestic, with additional funding from international
financing institutions (IFI) and an IMF loan In contrast, the official
development assistance (ODA) estimate for  is $175 million19 As Angola is
undergoing political reforms and addressing major economic challenges, the NDP,
, puts significant emphasis on maintaining stability and peace Main challenges
include managing the growing civic space, without risking instability, and
effectively addressing socioeconomic challenges The UNDP rapid integrated
assessment of the NDP, , revealed that overall alignment to Sustainable
Development Goals-related targets is at 52 per cent More investment in 11
Source: National Commission for Civil Protection (CNPC) 12 Source: National
Millennium Development Goals report 13 Source: Government of Angola, Intended
Nationally Determined Contributions, 14 Source: Government of Angola 15 Source:
Government of Angola 16 Source: INE 17 Source: Government of Angola 18 IMF
estimate (2019) 19 UNDP Angola Partnership Strategy DP/DCP/AGO/ acceleration is
particularly needed for Goals , , 10, 12, 14 and The INE published the first
national baseline indicators report for the Goals in 2018, reporting on 41 per
cent of total Goals indicators Additional efforts are needed to improve access
and quality of statistical information and promote  coordinated multi-
stakeholder approach to monitor implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development The voluntary national review of Angola will contribute
to this Over the last three years, the UNDP country office has undergone  major
transformation and is, at the start of the next country programme,  convener of
multiple partners for the Goals and Agenda UNDP delivers quality policy advice
and technical support and assists Angola in meeting targets and requirements of
complex funding mechanisms, such as the Global Environment Facility and the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Because funding through core
resources is decreasing,20 reflecting the country’ forthcoming LDC graduation,
Government funding to the country programme has increased significantly The UNDP
independent evaluation of the country programme for Angola, , found it
contributed to: () poverty eradication, including mainstreaming the Goals into
national development policies and substantive support to boost the national
response to HIV/AIDS; () the country’ graduation process, through technical
support for elaboration of the first national report on graduation to the
Economic and Social Council and roadmap; () resilience, by improving access to
environment funds, enhancing efforts to expand protected areas, drafting  new
national climate change strategy, and developing provincial contingency plans in
disaster-prone provinces; () participatory and inclusive governance, by helping
the Government define strategies to improve human rights, access justice and
rule of law, and strengthen human rights and justice institutions; () gender
mainstreaming, by supporting the Ministry of Social Action, Family and Women’
Promotion (known nationally as MASFAMU) The evaluation report recommended that
UNDP engage further in mainstreaming gender, eradicating poverty, reducing
inequalities, and enhancing integration and synergies among thematic areas It
recommended the development of thorough resource mobilization and sound human
resources strategies II Programme priorities and partnerships The UNDP country
programme, , is based on the premise of ‘leaving no one behind’ and ‘reaching
those furthest behind first’ The programme includes integrated solutions to
complex, interconnected development challenges Three complementary priorities
define the  programme: () fostering poverty eradication and inclusive economic
growth; () increasing resilience to shocks and crises and enhancing management
of natural resources for conservation and economic development; and ()
strengthening inclusive democracy, human rights, justice and rule of law The
components of these three priority areas are based on the assumption that – if
poverty eradication and inclusive economic growth are promoted, resilience is
reinforced, and participatory and inclusive governance is strengthened – Angola
will be able to accelerate its human development progress, end poverty in all
its forms and reduce inequalities The country programme will support Angola in
effectively managing its development resources and bolstering the voice of those
furthest behind and their ability to hold government accountable It will do this
while building their resilience to shocks and crises through effective disaster
and climate risk management, and increasing their access to inclusive, equitable
employment Within the three programme components, UNDP will support the
Government on the overarching national objective in the NDP, , of maintaining
stability and peace 20 56 per cent decrease in period 2015-DP/DCP/AGO/
Operationalizing General Assembly resolution 72 on the repositioning of the
United Nations development system, the country programme represents the UNDP
vehicle for delivering- as-one in Angola, guided by its United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) Within each of the three pillars, UNDP
will deliver against the strong joint United Nations commitment on youth, women
and people with disabilities (UNDAF outcome ) UNDP will work closely with United
Nations organizations through the common chapter of their strategic plans The
new UNDP country programme is aligned with the UNDP gender equality strategy,
2018- It will address gender inequalities, including discriminatory practices
and social norms, and will strengthen investments in gender expertise and
capacities The country programme directly supports the country’ international
commitments, including Agenda 2030, African Union Agenda 2063, the NDP,  and key
national strategies, and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-UNDP will respond to
government priorities through its six signature solutions and contribute to the
achievement of specific targets defined in the UNDAF for Goals , , , , , 10, 11,
13, 14, 15, 16 and UNDP will continue to work with the Government at all levels
for effective implementation of policies and programmes, including projects
funded from national budgets and IFIs This includes supporting the Government in
aligning the NDP, , to the Goals and assisting in ensuring  multi-partner
response to key multidimensional development challenges UNDP will continue to
act as operational support platform for other development organizations, and
partner with civil society and academia in advancing development agendas and
building capacities Innovation will be  core element of the country programme
UNDP will devote  per cent of its core budget to delivering innovative solutions
to development challenges The UNDP country office is establishing an accelerator
lab to create  learning network to test innovative ways of addressing
development challenges Fostering poverty eradication and inclusive economic
growth UNDP will significantly deepen its engagement to end poverty in Angola
and reduce inequality through substantive analysis, dialogue and technical
advice to develop more effective national policies and programmes The
accelerator lab and South-South and triangular cooperation will be vehicles for
prototyping new solutions It will provide technical support, including for data
analysis, in partnership with INE, government partners, the World Bank,
academia, civil society organizations (CSOs) and United Nations partners UNDP
will strengthen its partnership with the Government on analytics of expenditures
and loan portfolio, measuring their impact in achieving the Goals In support of
PRODESI economic growth objectives, UNDP will work in partnership with MASFAMU,
Ministry of Economy and Planning (MEP), Ministry of Finance (MINFIN), academia,
CSOs, the World Bank and African Development Bank (ADB), focusing on inclusive
strategies that help lift people out of poverty and increase their resilience to
shocks and crisis UNDP assistance will have two main elements First, it will
support policies and initiatives for self-employment and growth of micro and
small enterprises, targeting sectors with high impact on poverty reduction and
addressing inclusion of the informal economy Second, as part of government
initiatives to strengthen entrepreneurship and employment for young Angolans
ages 18 to 35, it will support government policy on vocational training,
institutional development and testing of innovative models, ensuring the most
vulnerable sections of the workforce have access to skills and resources that
match labour market demand This will be done in collaboration with TVET network,
private sector and International Labour Organization (ILO) UNDP will continue
its youth internship programme and enhance it with the national volunteer
programme Through its global impact initiatives for the Goals, UNDP will
contribute to mobilizing international and national private capital for
financing development projects within the context of  DP/DCP/AGO/ the NDP,
2018-UNDP will help create menus and financial vehicles that stimulate impact
investments in key sectors In its integrator role, UNDP will facilitate the
establishment of an engaged private sector platform through the umbrella of the
Angolan Corporate Social Responsibility Network and Public-Private Partnership
Initiative UNDP will strengthen its support to national efforts for sustainable
solutions in health, in line with the UNDP HIV, health and development strategy,
(HHD) Building on its Global Fund principal recipient role, UNDP will deliver
packages of HIV prevention services to adolescent girls and young women, female
sex workers, men having sex with men, and treatment services to people living
with HIV, including pregnant women The UNDP core programming approach will be
the social empowerment of these population groups through capacity development,
involvement in service delivery and advocacy for sexual and reproductive health
and rights UNDP will contribute to strengthening the national health procurement
and supply management system To reduce gender, legal and human rights-related
barriers to accessing basic social services, UNDP will promote national
ownership of the 2018 HIV legal environment assessment report and the national
strategy for key populations, and revision of the 2004 HIV law UNDP will deliver
capacity-building packages for advocacy to CSOs Key UNDP partners include
National HIV/AIDS Institute (INLS,) National Network Civil Society Organizations
for HIV/AIDS (ANASO), CSOs, key populations-led associations, parliament health
and youth commissions, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Justice, the
Ombudsperson, United States Agency for International Development (USAID), Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), United States President’
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), UNFPA, United Nations Children’ Fund
(UNICEF) and World Health Organization (WHO) Increasing resilience to shocks and
crises and enhancing management of natural resources for conservation and
economic development Building on the NDP, , commitments and early achievements
in non-fossil fuel options, UNDP will support low-carbon development The UNDP
de-risking renewable energy investments (DREI) initiative will provide policy
support to boost private investments in renewable energies, including in remote
areas UNDP is supporting private investment in off-grid solutions, and renewable
electricity for public infrastructure, including in the health sector Through
policy advice and implementation of GEF projects, UNDP will support the
Government in the conservation of forest and protected areas by rehabilitating
infrastructure, training, equipment, preparation of management plans, surveys of
flora and fauna, engagement with communities, combatting illegal wildlife trade,
and establishing the first marine protected areas These actions will be
implemented in partnership with the Ministry of Environment (MINAMB), Ministry
of Agriculture and Forests (MINAGRIF) and Ministry of Fisheries and Oceans
(MINPESMAR) UNDP will scale up gender responsive disaster and climate risk
management support, building on its demonstrated results, adopting an integrated
approach to resilience Partnering with Ministry of Energy and Waters (MINEA) and
relevant institutes at local level, UNDP will help to strengthen water
management practices at the community level and adopt flood warning systems UNDP
will provide training to strengthen capacities to cope with shocks and crises It
will achieve this in cooperation with the National Civil Protection Commission
(NCPC), MINFIN, MEP, Ministry of Territorial Administration and State Reforms
(MAT), sector ministries and United Nations partners Partnering with IFIs, the
European Union and bilateral agencies, as integrator, UNDP will help to boost
investments in building the resilience of the  million drought-affected people
in the south, within the innovative common framework established  DP/DCP/AGO/
Addressing the country’ solid waste management challenge, UNDP will provide
technical and financial assistance to promote recycling, through the UNDP
country accelerator lab, and support the elimination of toxic waste Through
integration and synergies within the country programme areas, UNDP will support
entrepreneurship and promote green jobs, including for biodiversity and waste
management UNDP will facilitate access to international funding, including
through GEF, Green Climate Fund (GCF), and South-South and triangular
cooperation Strengthening inclusive democracy, human rights, justice and rule of
law UNDP will support efforts to ensure the first-ever elected local governments
deliver on promises for democratic development and improved local service
delivery UNDP will strengthen the capacity of elected local governance
institutions and support participation mechanisms, such as participatory
budgeting and civil society involvement in policy formulation, implementation
and monitoring Key partners include MAT, MASFAMU, Parliament, local governments,
CSOs and bilateral donor partners Through technical support and South-South and
triangular cooperation with countries such as Brazil and Cabo Verde, UNDP will
support transparency and accountability in public management to improve services
and finance development UNDP will partner with the Office of the Attorney
General, General Inspection Services, Court of Auditors, Parliament and Public
Procurement Services in developing standard operating procedures and tools for
public management to strengthen prevention and fight corruption UNDP will
coordinate international assistance for the implementation of the national anti-
corruption strategy, , launched with UNDP support UNDP will support the capacity
of justice and human rights institutions at national and local levels to handle
citizens’ grievances and address human rights cases, including economic, social
and cultural rights This includes the core ombudsman function of the Provedor de
Justiça and its possible accreditation as the national human rights institution
(NHRI) UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights, Ministry
of the Interior, Parliament, United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and CSOs UNDP will help to strengthen the policy and legal environment,
alignment with international human rights principles and commitments, and
support initiatives on crime prevention and security UNDP will promote the
inclusion of women in development and service delivery and their effective
participation and representation in decision-making processes UNDP will partner
with MASFAMU and Parliament on capacity building and advocacy for sensitive
gender-budgeting and development of gender statistics systems UNDP will partner
with MASFAMU, MAT and CSOs to promote  gender-inclusive framework for local
elections and support capacity-building for women to participate as candidates
in local elections in 2020-UNDP will support the participation of youth in
governance processes by advocating for pro- youth participatory processes and
mechanisms For this, UNDP will partner with MAT, Ministry of Youth, Parliament,
the national youth platforms, CSOs and local governments III Programme and risk
management National and direct execution modalities will be applied for
programme implementation, and the harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT)
will be used to manage financial risks In accordance with Board decision 2013,
all direct costs associated with project implementation will be charged to
concerned projects Together with other United Nations organizations, UNDP will
implement the joint programming framework and business operations strategy as
part of delivering-as-one The country office will review its capacity to ensure
it is positioned for effective programme implementation  human resources
strategy will be developed and implemented, including to support gender
mainstreaming within the country office, with the aim of ensuring country
DP/DCP/AGO/ presence and profile with qualified, credible staff, backed by
efficient operations The country programme will benefit from the UNDP global
policy network Four major risk sources are: () financial and economic shocks
leading to limited fiscal space; () fragmentation and limited cross-sectoral
coordination to address development challenges; () inability to mobilize
resources from key donors in the context of LDC graduation; and () ensuring UNDP
space for technical advice vis--vis development agencies offering larger
financial contributions to Angola in order to address UNDP will mitigate
development financing risks by advocating for budget prioritization and
reinforcement of national capacities in result-based budgeting It will address
fragmentation and limited cross-sectoral coordination through national capacity
development on integrated development approaches, institutional bottlenecks,
planning and implementation of the governance and human rights agenda Within the
country office’ resource mobilization strategy, the country programme is
expected to be implemented using increased resources from the state budget, in
addition to donor and core resources The country programme foresees expanding
partnerships with IFIs, including UNDP support for accelerating implementation
of loans With graduation from LDC status, core funding is expected to continue
to decrease The country office is developing  country programme action plan
(CPAP), which includes  partnerships strategy and action plan for resource
mobilization, with Bureau of External Relations and Advocacy (BERA) support, and
communication strategy All projects will undergo systematic review to ensure
environmental and social safeguards, costs and benefits of an intervention are
evaluated in accordance with UNDP policies and standards Interventions will be
scaled up or down depending on resource availability Risk mitigation plans will
be developed during preparation of programmes/projects, in collaboration with
national stakeholders Accelerated procedures can be adopted to provide rapid
response to crisis situations and to respond effectively to new requests for
UNDP support The country office will invoke the business continuity plan in the
case of crises affecting its normal operations This country programme document
outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit
of accountability to the Board for results alignment and resources assigned to
the programme at country level The accountabilities of managers at country,
regional and headquarter levels with respect to the country programme is
prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies and procedures
and the internal control framework IV Monitoring and evaluation strong results
framework (annex ) supports monitoring and evaluation of the country programme,
aligned with national priorities, the UNDAF, , the UNDP Strategic Plan, , the
Goals and other international and national commitments Based on the evaluation
of the previous country programme, indicators are included to track change at
outcome level The programme theory of change will be reviewed on an annual basis
and relevant changes reflected as necessary UNDP will use, as far as possible,
the national statistical systems and Goals targets to monitor its contribution
to national results When needed, it will use data generated by international
agencies UNDP will contribute to mitigate risks related to monitoring and
evaluation, such as limited capacities and availability of nationally owned
data, by strengthening existing data and information systems, including
improving data quality, analysis and use UNDP will work towards ensuring
interoperability of existing data systems and advocate for increased use of data
for evidence-informed policymaking and monitoring of development results UNDP
will collaborate with academia, civil society, local and global think tanks in
analyzing socioeconomic disaggregated data to provide evidence of trends on
vulnerabilities, poverty, income and gender inequalities  UNDP will evaluate and
monitor the country programme and related projects in line with the UNDAF
monitoring system and UNDP corporate policies It will set aside at least  per
cent of its programme resources for monitoring and evaluation The UNDP gender
marker will be used to assess programme results, as  proxy for monitoring the
programme’ responsiveness to the gender equality agenda DP/DCP/AGO/  DP/DCP/AGO/
Annex Results and resources framework for Angola () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
National Development Plan, :  Human development and wellbeing;  Inclusive and
sustainable economic development Goals: ,,,,,,,UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP: By 2022, the Angolan population, particularly the most
vulnerable (children, adolescents, youth, women, people with disabilities), have
greater access to quality, integrated, social services as well as to
diversified, job and income-creating economy, thereby realizing their rights in
accordance with the Goals Major partners/partnerships frameworks Indicative
resources by outcome (United States dollars) MEP, MASFAMU, MAPTSS, Ministry of
Trade, MININDU; MTES, INAPEM, INE Regular: 691,000 Other:26,137,000 United
Nations, IFIs CSOs, academia Private sector RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions UNDAF outcome,
indicators baselines, targets Data source, frequency of data collection,
responsibilities Indicative outputs Indicator: Proportion of population living
below the national poverty line by sex Baseline: % (men %, women %) Target: 25%
Source: INE Frequency: Annual Responsibility: INE, MEP, MASFAMU Output  National
and subnational institutions have strengthened technical capacities to develop,
implement and monitor strategies and programmes to end extreme poverty Indicator
Extent to which national strategies and programmes to end poverty are developed,
implemented, budgeted and monitored Baseline: 221 Target: 522 Data source: MEP,
MASFAMU, INE, the President’ Office, National Assembly Frequency: Annual
Indicator1 Existence of national platform to operationalize strategies to tackle
multidimensional poverty and promote the Goals Baseline: No Target: Yes 22
Scale: Strategies and programmes: () not implemented, budgeted and monitored; ()
partially implemented, budgeted and monitored, 25 per cent or less; () partially
implemented, budgeted and monitored, 50 per cent or less; () partially
implemented, budgeted and monitored, 75 per cent or less; () fully implemented,
budgeted and monitored 10 Source: INE, MAPTSS Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
INE, MAPTSS, MEP, MTES, MJD Indicator: Unemployment rate by sex, age and
geographical location Baseline: % in 2015 (men 18%, women 22%; urban 25%, rural
%) Target: TBD DP/DCP/AGO/ Data source: MEP, MASFAMU, INE, the President’
Office, National Assembly Frequency: Annual Output  National institutions and
programmes support job creation and inclusive growth through the strengthening
of micro, small and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) and professional skills
development, particularly for women and youth Indicator  Number of high- quality
plans, strategies and analytical reports on labour market and entrepreneurship
ecosystem produced, disaggregated data by sex, age and geographical location
Baseline:  Target:  Data source: INE, MEP, UNDP Frequency: Annual Indicator
Extent to which  programme to support MSME and enhance the economic inclusion of
youth and women that targets poverty reduction is implemented and operational
Baseline: 122 Target: 523 Data source: MEP, INE, UNDP Frequency: Annual Output
Private sector platforms enabled to participate in the achievement of the Goals
22 Scale: Programme: () not implemented nor operational; () partially
implemented and operational, 25 per cent or less; () partially implemented and
operational, 50 per cent or less; () partially implemented and operational, 75
per cent or less; () fully implemented and operational 11 DP/DCP/AGO/ Source:
INE, INLS; NGOs; UNDP, MCN Frequency: Annual Responsibility: INE, INLS, MINSA
Indicator: Number and percentage of people living with HIV, disaggregated by sex
Baseline: Female: %; Men: % Target: TBD 12 INLS, MINSA MASFAMU, MINJUD, MINARS,
MAPTSS NGOs, CSOs, private sector United Nations, USAID Indicator  Extent to
which an innovative solution for social impact investment initiatives is
implemented and operational Baseline: 122 Target: 522 Data source: MEP, INAPEM,
private sector Frequency: Annual Indicator  Existence of an operational new
public-private partnership that contributes to the SDGs Baseline: No Target: Yes
Data source: MEP, private sector Frequency: Annual Output  Capacities at
national and local levels strengthened to deliver HIV and related services,
including for people living with HIV, adolescent girls and young women, and key
populations Indicator  Number of people living with HIV currently receiving
antiretroviral treatment, including adolescent girls and young women, and key
populations Baseline: 77,Target: 122,Data source: INLS Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Number of HIV positive pregnant women who received antiretroviral
treatment during pregnancy to reduce the risk of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV Baseline:  008 DP/DCP/AGO/ Target: 15,537 Data source: INLS Frequency:
Annual Indicator  Number of: () adolescent girls and young women; and () female
sex workers reached with HIV prevention services Baseline: () 27,859; ()
,Target: () 90,000; () 16,Data source: NGOs Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY
OR GOAL: National Development Plan, :  Human development and wellbeing;
Inclusive and sustainable economic development;  Ensuring stability and
territorial integrity of Angola and reinforcing its role in the international
and regional context Goals: , , 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, UNDAF (OR EQUIVALENT)
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: By 2022, the vulnerable population is resilient to
climate change and disaster risk, with sustainable and inclusive production,
planning and management of the territory, cities, natural resources and the
environment RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  Build resilience to shocks and
crises Indicator: Percentage of public expenditure on environment, natural
resources and climate change Source: INE, ENAC, UN, UNDP Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: INE, MINAMB, MINAGRI, MINEA Baseline: % Target: 25% MINAMB,
MINAGRI, MINEA, MINPESMAR Regular:,110,000 Other:37,590,000 Provincial
governments Local communities United Nations, GEF, CSOs, academia, private
sector Output  Government institutions and local communities have enhanced
technical capacity to implement low-carbon development pathways and promote
renewable energy access Indicator  Existence of targets for low emission and/or
climate-resilient development in development plans and strategies Baseline: No
Target: Yes Data source: Ministries, UNDP Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number
and proportion of households benefitting from clean, affordable and sustainable
energy access in rural areas Baseline: 180,000 (%) 13 DP/DCP/AGO/ 14 Target:
300,000 (%) Data source: Ministries, UNDP Frequency: Annual Output  Solutions
scaled up for sustainable management of natural resources, including sustainable
commodities and green and inclusive value chains Indicator  Natural resources
that are managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access and benefit-
sharing regime: () area of land and marine habitat under protection (hectares);
() area of existing protected area under improved management (hectares); ()
number of shared water ecosystems (fresh or marine) under cooperative
management; () amount of harmful chemicals reduced or disposed (metric tonnes);
() number of companies involved in solid waste recycling Baseline: () 16,264,200
land;  marine; () ,615,000; () ; () ; () 20 Target: () 16,500,000 land, 150,000
marine; () ,657,000; () ; () TBD; () Data source: Ministries, UNDP Frequency:
Annual Indicator  Number of renewable energy supply chains improved, with
involvement of national institutions Baseline:  Target:  Sources of information:
Ministries, UNDP Frequency: Annual Indicator: Number of: () deaths, () missing
persons and () affected people attributed to disasters, per 100,000 population
Baseline: () ; () TBD; () ,538 () Target: TBD Source: INE, national disaster
loss database Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Ministry of Interior (MININT),
sectoral ministries MININT, MEP, MINFIN, MAT, sectoral ministries IFIs, European
Union, bilateral partners United Nations development system organizations
Academia, CSOs, private sector Local communities Output  Most vulnerable
communities have strengthened technical capacities to respond to natural and
human-induced risks and disasters and adapt to climate change Indicator  Number
of operational agrometeorological monitoring and early warning systems
established to limit the gender-differentiated impact of natural hazards
Baseline:  Target: 15 Data source: CNPC Frequency: Annual Output  The Government
has increased technical and financial capacities to support drought recovery and
resilience building in the southern provinces Indicator  Number of newly
designed gender-responsive disaster risk reduction plans/strategies budgeted,
implemented and monitored in accordance with the drought recovery framework, the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk reduction, and the NDP, 2018- Baseline:
Target:  Data Source: CNPC Frequency: Annual DP/DCP/AGO/ 15 DP/DCP/AGO/ NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Development Plan, :  Consolidation of peace,
democracy and rule of law, good governance state reform and decentralization;
Ensuring the stability and territorial integrity of Angola and reinforcing its
role in the international and regional contexts Goals: , 16, UNDAF (OR
EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP :  () By 2022, citizens participate and
exercise governance oversight, people have access to justice, and human rights
are observed in  context of regional peace and stability Regular: ,922,000
Other:,893,000 MAT, MJHR, MININT), MASFAMU, MJD, MINFIN, INE, Parliament
Ombudsperson, CSOs, private sector, OHCHR General Attorney Office, local
administrations Parliament IFIs, European Union, bilateral partners RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Accelerate structural transformations for
sustainable development Indicator: Percentage of seats held by youth and women
in local elected institutions Baseline:  Target: 30% Source : MAT, MASFAMU,
MINFIN, CNE, INE, Parliament Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MAT, MASFAMU,
Parliament Output  Inclusive and participatory local governance model, laws and
regulations enabled for effective participation of individuals, particularly
women and youth Indicator  Percentage of women and youth under 35 years that
participate as candidates in local governance elections Baseline:  Target:
Women: 30%; youth: 10% Data source: CNE, local elections 2020- Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Percentage of supported municipalities with platforms for
participatory engagements of youth in budgetary development processes Baseline:
Target: 20% Data source: Local authorities, United Nations Frequency: Annual
Indicator  Existence of  functioning gender-responsive advocacy platform for
pro-youth policies and programmes Baseline: No Target: Yes Data source: Youth
platforms and Ministry of Youth reports Frequency: Annual Output  Institutions
and systems enabled to address awareness, prevention and enforcement of anti-
corruption measures to maximize availability of resources for poverty
eradication Indicator: The country’ ranking in the African corruption percentage
index improved Baseline: 41 out of 54 countries (on safety and rule of law,
including public transparency and accountability for 2017) Target:  out of 54
countries Source: PGR, IGAE, UIF, SNCP, AGT, Supreme Audit Authority, Parliament
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MINJUS, PGR, Parliament 16 Indicator:
Percentage of international human rights treaties ratified by Angola Baseline: %
Target: 100% Source: MINJUS, CSOs, OHCHR Parliament Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: MINJUS DP/DCP/AGO/ Indicator  Percentage of public institutions
that implement the national anti-corruption plan, , for effective assessment of
risks and prevention of the impact of corruption on public interest Baseline:
Target: 20% Data source: Institutional reports Frequency: Annual Indicator
Extent to which institutions at the national and local levels carryout gender
responsive service delivery Baseline: 223 Target: 523 Data source: Sectoral
authority reports Frequency: Annual Output  Capacities, functions and financing
of rule of law and national human rights institutions and systems strengthened
to expand access to justice and combat discrimination, with  focus on women and
other marginalized groups Indicator  Existence of strengthened local level
institutions and systems supporting fulfilment of nationally and internationally
ratified human rights obligations Baseline:15 Provincial Human Right Committee
(PHRCs) Target: 18 provincial human rights committees (PHRC) Data source:
MINJUS, CSOs, OHCHR Frequency: Annual Indicator  Percentage of people who have
access to justice, disaggregated by sex and marginalized groups Baseline: 60%
Target: 80% 23 Scale: () Never; () Rarely; () Sometimes; () Most of the Time; ()
Always 17 Data source: MINJUS Frequency: Annual Indicator  Percentage of gender-
based violence cases reported and cases prosecuted Baseline: 41% Target: 71%
Data source: MASFAMU, INE, CSOs Frequency: Annual DP/DCP/AGO/ 18