 United Nations Development Programme United Nations Development Programme
Terminal Evaluation of UNDP/GEF Project: Belarus: Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings (GEF Project ID: 4228; UNDP PIMS ID: 4290) Terminal
Evaluation Report Mission Members: Mr Roland Wong, International Consultant Ms
Viktoryia Kalosha, National Consultant June 2018 Table of Contents:
INTRODUCTION : Page:   PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT : Page:
FINDINGS : Page:  Table of Contents:  CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS AND LESSONS :
Page: 47 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings SYNOPSIS Title of UNDP
supported GEF financed project: Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings in the Republic of Belarus (IEERB) UNDP Project ID: PIMS 4290 GEF
Project ID: 4228 Evaluation time frame: July 2012 to February 2018 CEO
endorsement date: 31 July 2012 Project implementation start date: 31 July 2012
Project end date: 30 June 2018 Date of evaluation report:  April 2018 Region and
Countries included in the project: Belarus GEF Focal Area Objective: SP- (for
GEF-): Promoting energy efficient technologies and practices in the appliance
and building sectors Implementing partner and other strategic partners:
Implementing partner: Department on Energy Efficiency (DEE) under the State
Committee on Standardization of Belarus Evaluation team members: Mr Roland Wong,
International Consultant Ms Viktoryia Kalosha, National Consultant
Acknowledgements: The Evaluators wish to acknowledge with gratitude the time and
effort expended by all project participants and stakeholders during the course
of the IEERB Project Terminal Evaluation In particular, we wish to thank the
UNDP Belarus, the Department on Energy Efficiency, the Ministry of Architecture
and Construction, the Ministry of Housing and Utilities as well as the technical
experts working under RUE StroyTechNorm, RUE NIPTIS, the Mahilioŭ Oblast
Department of Capital Construction, MAPID JSC, RUE “Institute of
GrodnoGrazhdanProject”, RUE Belarusian Center “Ecology”, the Construction
Faculty of the Belarusian National Technical University (BNTU) in Minsk and the
homeowner’ associations in Mahilioŭ, Minsk and Grodno for making the efforts to
recall details of their time participating on the IEERB Project Thank you to all
you for your time during the mission for your hospitality and insights We
sincerely hope that this report contributes towards  lower carbon and energy
efficient future for buildings in Belarus iii Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP
– Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings EXECUTIVE SUMMARY This report summarizes the
findings of the Terminal Evaluation Mission conducted during the  February 2018
period for the GEF project: “Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings in the Republic of Belarus” (hereby referred to as IEERB or the
Project), where UNDP received  US$50 million grant from the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) in July 30, Project Summary Table Project Title: Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings in the Republic of Belarus (IEERB) GEF
Project ID: at completion (Million US$) at endorsement (Million US$) 4228 UNDP
Project ID: GEF financing: 4290 500 500 Country: Belarus Region: Europe and CIS
Focal Area: Climate Change IA/EA own: Government: 700 000 400 600 Other: 000 627
FA Objectives, (OP/SP): Total co- financing: SP1 for GEF : Promoting energy
efficient technologies and practices in the appliance and building sectors
Department on Energy Efficiency (DEE) under the State Committee on
Standardization of Belarus 700 227 Executing Agency: Total Project Cost: 200 727
Other Partners involved: ProDoc Signature (date project began): 30 July 2012
(Operational) Closing Date: Proposed: 31 December 2016 Actual: 30 June 2018
Project Description The Project “Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings in the Republic of Belarus” (IEERB) in Belarus sought to reduce energy
consumption (imported fuel) and related GHG emissions with  focus on new
residential buildings through the introduction of new performance-based building
design and construction standards with improvements to their implementation and
enforcement The IEERB Project was approved with the Government of Belarus’
commitment to introduce legislation promoting new EE building standards that are
compatible with the EU Energy Efficiency Performance Buildings Directive (EEPBD)
or 2010/EU With the energy supply of Belarus being highly dependent on imports
from Russia, and the lack of indigenous energy resources, the country’ focus on
energy efficiency in urban areas is an important priority for the Government of
Belarus The energy consumption for heating of Belarus’ residential sector
growing from 40% in 2008 to 45% in 2015 of all primary energy sources in Belarus
is one indicator that little attention has been given to energy efficiency in
buildings Typical annual demand for space heating for residential buildings in
Belarus is in the range of  kWh/m2,  value that is not in line with the EEPBD In
early 2014, the residential iv Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government
of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings building stock was close to 250 million m2 including about
170 million m2 of old buildings constructed before 1994 according to the old
Soviet practices and norms with specific energy consumption (SEC) for heating in
the range of 150 to 200 kWh/m2/yr The primary legislation driving the IEERB
Project is the “Law on Energy Saving” adopted in 1998 but was replaced by  new
“Law on Energy Saving” (No239- of January , 2015) that entered into force in
Complementary building energy efficiency regulations relevant to Belarus today
to the Law on Energy Savings (see Para 18) includes: • annual energy consumption
for space heating of new buildings to 60 kWh/m2; • the “Comprehensive Programme
for the Design, Construction and Reconstruction of Energy-Efficient Homes in the
Republic of Belarus for  and until 2020”, by which systems for heat recovery
from buildings ventilation air should be installed in all newly constructed
buildings by 2020 with the aim of reducing energy consumption of all new
residential buildings below 40 kWh/m2 by 2020; • adjusting electricity and
heating tariffs towards higher rates of cost-recovery and improving collection
rates Since 2005, the rate of subsidization of heating and electricity tariffs
has been increasing in Belarus with 2017 heating and electricity tariffs at %
and % respectively of their real cost (see Para 19 and Figure ) Project Results
Actual outcomes of the IEERB Project are summarized on Table  in comparison with
intended outcomes Table : Comparison of Intended Project Outcomes from the
Inception Report to Actual Outcomes Intended Outcomes in revised Project Results
Framework of October 2013 (see Appendix ) Objective: To reduce the energy
consumption (imported fuel) and related GHG emissions with the focus on new
residential buildings Actual Outcomes as of March 2017 Actual achievement toward
objective: Measures to reduce energy consumption and GHG emission reductions on
new residential buildings have been demonstrated on this Project Notwithstanding
the new TC-EPB standards for energy efficiency of buildings, the timing of
adoption of energy efficient heating equipment by owners of new buildings is
difficult to assess considering the uncertainty of when existing heating tariffs
will be raised from  recovery rate of % to an estimated 50% that will
economically justify the installation of such measures Furthermore, the
dissemination of positive information of actual energy saved from these measures
under normal occupancy conditions in new buildings would accelerate widespread
adoption Actual Outcome : Legal and regulatory framework to support the
enforcement of the Technical Code for Energy Performance of Buildings (TC-EPB)
has been strengthened Outcome : Strengthened legal and regulatory framework and
mechanisms to enforce the legislation for improving the energy efficiency of the
building sector Outcome : Enhanced expert capacity of the Belarusian specialists
to implement new energy efficiency standards and construction norms Outcome :
Demonstrated energy and cost-saving potential of new energy Actual Outcome : The
capacity of the Belarusian building specialists has been enhanced to enforce
implementation of new energy efficiency standards according to the TC-EPB with
an initial focus on residential buildings Actual Outcome : Demonstration energy
efficient buildings have been completed, and will be able to generate normal
energy  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings Intended Outcomes in revised Project Results Framework of October 2013
(see Appendix ) efficiency measures in at least three new residential buildings
in three Belarusian cities (as provided on pg 30 of the ProDoc)  Outcome :
Documented, disseminated and institutionalized project results providing  basis
for further replication Actual Outcomes as of March 2017 consumption data within
18 to 24 months when these buildings are under normal occupancy conditions
Actual Outcome : Project results on supporting legal and regulatory framework of
the TC-EPB has been institutionalized as well as the results of the energy
savings from the pilot EE buildings (to comply with the Order of July , 2017
No04/26p by the Deputy Prime Minister that was initiated by the Project Summary
of Conclusions, Recommendations and Lessons The IEERB Project has provided
excellent support within  -year period to improve the enabling environment for
increased investments into EE residential buildings in Belarus, notwithstanding
the Project had  very weak Project Results Framework (PRF) which did not convey
to the Evaluation Team the targets that the Project needed to meet to achieve
its overall objective With strong and stable leadership of the IEERB Project
from  highly experienced and top Belarussian climate change expert, the IEERB
PMU was able to facilitate significant achievements for energy efficiency in the
building sector in Belarus including raised awareness of building energy
efficiency amongst all key stakeholders,  draft of  Technical Code on Energy
Performance of Buildings (TC-EPB) aligned with EU Directive 2010/EU ready for
approval by the Council of Ministers, strengthened capacities of building
professionals on all aspects of energy performance of buildings, and the
completion of  energy efficient residential buildings that will serve as an
excellent resource for generating information on EE buildings, and inform policy
improvements for the Government of Belarus to the TC-EPB (see Para 103) The
long-term sustainability of the IEERB Project of reducing energy consumption and
GHG emission reductions on new residential buildings, however, is difficult to
assess This is considering that existing heating tariff rates are too low for
economic justification of the installation of energy efficient heating equipment
in buildings, and the uncertainty of when these heating tariffs will be raised
from  % to  50% recovery rate that is considered by most EE experts in Belarus
to be  level where such investments would be economically feasible
Notwithstanding that TC-EPB will be mandatory likely in 2018, Belarusian
building developers may be slow in adopting these energy efficiency measures if
heating tariffs remain at their current levels In addition, the building sector
will continue to need Government support to sustain further reductions of energy
consumption and GHG emissions from the sector (see Para 105) including: •
periodic refresher courses for building technicians, operators and owners to
ensure minimization of fossil fuel consumption for heat generation from district
CHPs; refocused efforts implementing energy efficiency measures for the existing
building stock which is more than 98% of all buildings in Belarus; and • •
efforts to strengthen and institutionalize GHG emission reduction calculations
from energy efficiency of new buildings as well as retrofitted existing
buildings with the involvement of MoNREP vi Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Corrective actions for the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Project: Action  (to UNDP): To
improve design of the future CCM projects including any follow-up “building
energy efficiency” project, the design should include: •  clear logical
framework matrix with SMART indicators and measurable targets that can be
effectively monitored by PMU staff to reflect progress towards global benefits
of energy efficiency for the building sector; •  more detailed Project Results
Framework (PRF) using the Theory of Change (ToC) analysis, and with targets that
are reflected in the project outputs; specific & activities that can help
project teams focus on specific indicators for monitoring (in an improved PRF)
which would minimize the workload of the Implementing Partner and the PMU This
should include IP and IA access to  functional database of existing and new
buildings that can provide progress reports on important and relevant metrics
such as actual buildings (new and existing) with floor area in square metres,
and reports from building owners and operators on energy consumption; and • •
allocation of sufficient resources for capacity building of building owners and
operators to monitor energy consumption (see Action ) See Para 107 for details
Action  (to UNDP): To improve implementation of future projects similar to
IEERB, the PRF (strengthened through ToC analysis and ROtI) needs to be used as
guide for preparing project work plans See Para 108 for details Actions to
follow up or reinforce initial benefits from the Project: Action  (to MoHU with
assistance from DEE and UNDP): Continue training workshops in oblast training
centres to ensure the availability of  critical mass of certified EE building
operational personnel to monitor and mitigate any trends of deterioration of the
energy performance of EE equipment for these buildings due to lack of knowledge
of proper maintenance practices See Para 109 for details Action  (to MoHU with
assistance from DEE and UNDP): Set up  program that continually informs
occupants of EE buildings on optimizing use of their EE systems for hot water,
heating and fresh air ventilation systems See Para 110 for details Action  (to
MoAC with assistance from DEE and UNDP): Continue training programs to ensure
the availability of  critical mass of building design personnel to enforce
compliance to the TC-EPB Similar to Action , oblasts training centres will
deliver these training programs for TC-EPB and updates to these building
designers and technicians that will provide continuous access to the latest best
international practices for the design of energy efficiency in buildings as
mentioned in Para Proposals for future directions underlining main objectives of
the IEERB Project: Action  (to DEE and MoHU): Monitor progress of Decree No1037
of 2017 on the “Concept of Improvement and Development of Housing and Utility
Services until 2025” addressing elimination of cross- subsidies and upward
adjustment of low heating tariff rate towards 50% and higher that should provide
vii Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
sufficient incentives for  shorter cost recovery period for building developers
and investors for EE measures in residential buildings Action  (to DEE and
MoAC): Continue to disseminate actual monitored energy consumption data from
demo buildings to the Government policymakers and investors in line with Deputy
Prime Minister’ Order No04/26p of July , 2017, with more emphasis on the time
when the pilot buildings are fully occupied and when the tenants have been in
their units for  sufficient time during which their energy consumption would be
normalized; this could be as long as  months when all units are occupied
although the currently monitored data are being provided for decision makers See
Para 113 for details Action  (to MoNREP): Provide support to appropriate
institutions to help formalize protocols and methodologies developed by the
Project for reporting GHG emission reductions for EE buildings and retrofits
that includes support to the RUE Belarusian Research Centre “Ecology” needs to
be continued after the EOP See Para 114 for details Action  (to DEE): Support
future retrofit programs or construction of new EE buildings (supported either
by GoB or donors) through training of building energy operators and energy
managers using experiences gained through the Project including training of
building energy managers, both state personnel (with MoHU) and private
individuals and companies (ESCOs) on latest best practices for operating EE
systems in buildings including introduction of energy management information
systems (EMIS) building on UNDP experiences in other countries in the region;
roundtables on  strengthened ESCO modality in Belarus for thermal system
installations (if deemed appropriate), upkeep of operational personnel skills
that can result in minimized use of fossil-fuel generated heat and hot water;
and training on EE building materials as well as targeted research and
development on EE building materials that can be domestically produced See Para
115 for details Best and worst practices in addressing issues relating to
relevance, performance and success: Best practice: This UNDP project has been
well-managed due to the recruitment of  well-qualified project manager with good
management skills as well as strong knowledge and technical skill in the subject
matter See Para 116 for details Scope for improved practice: Many country
offices including Belarus need assistance in the preparation of ProDocs, most
notably the Project Results Framework which needs to be focused with insertion
of SMART indicators that directly contribute to an intended outcome The PRF
could be further strengthened through adoption of ToC and ROtI analyses with the
assistance of personnel from Regional Centers viii Terminal Evaluation June 2018
UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Evaluation Ratings1  Monitoring and
Evaluation Rating  IA & EA Execution Rating & design at entry  Quality of
Implementation Agency - UNDP Quality of Execution - Executing Entity (DEE)
Overall quality of Implementation / Execution  & Plan Implementation   Overall
quality of &    Sustainability2  Assessment of Outcomes Rating    Rating
Relevance3 Effectiveness Efficiency Financial resources Socio-political
Institutional framework and governance Environmental Overall likelihood of
sustainability Overall Project Outcome Rating     Evaluation rating indices
(except sustainability – see Footnote , and relevance – see Footnote ): =Highly
Satisfactory (HS): The project has no shortcomings in the achievement of its
objectives; =Satisfactory (): The project has minor shortcomings in the
achievement of its objectives; =Moderately Satisfactory (MS): The project has
moderate shortcomings in the achievement of its objectives; =Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU): The project has significant shortcomings in the achievement
of its objectives; =Unsatisfactory () The project has major shortcomings in the
achievement of its objectives; =Highly Unsatisfactory (HU): The project has
severe shortcomings in the achievement of its objectives  Sustainability
Dimension Indices:  = Likely (): negligible risks to sustainability;  =
Moderately Likely (ML): moderate risks to sustainability;  = Moderately Unlikely
(MU): significant risks to sustainability; and  = Unlikely (): severe risks to
sustainability Overall rating is equivalent to the lowest sustainability ranking
score of the  dimensions  Relevance is evaluated as follows:  = Relevant ();  =
Not relevant (NR) ix Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings ABBREVIATIONS Acronym APR BNTU CAD CCM CHP CIS CO DEE EBPD
EE EEPBD EMIS EN EOP EPB ESCO EU FSP GDP GEF GEFSEC GHG GJ GOST HVAC IA IEERB IP
IPMV JSC kWh MBEPS MEPS MIV MoAC MoE MoNREP MoHU MTR & MWh NEX NIPTIS NPD PIF
PIR PMU Meaning Annual Progress Report Belarusian National Technical University
Computer assisted drafting Climate change mitigation Combined heat and power
Commonwealth of Independent States Country Office Department of Energy
Efficiency EU’ Energy Performance for Buildings Directive Energy efficiency EU
Energy Efficiency Performance Buildings Directive (EEPBD) or 2010/EU Energy
management information system European standards or norms End of Project Energy
Performance of Buildings Energy service company European Union Full Sized
Project Gross domestic product Global Environment Facility Global Environment
Facility Secretariat greenhouse gas Gigajoules Government Standard Heating,
ventilation and air conditioning Implementing agency Improving Energy Efficiency
in Residential Buildings Implementing partner International Performance
Measurement and Verification Joint stock company Kilowatt-hour Minimum building
energy performance standards Minimum Energy Performance Standard Monitoring,
Inspection and Verification Ministry of Architecture and Construction Ministry
of Economy Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Ministry
of Housing and Utilities Midterm Review Monitoring and evaluation Megawatt hour
UNDP’ National Execution Modality State enterprise of the Institute of Housing
under MoAC National Project Director Project Identification Form GEF Project
Implementation Report Project Management Unit  Terminal Evaluation June 2018
UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Acronym PPG PRF ProDoc PSC PV ROtI
SEC SMART STAP STB STN TC-EPB TCS TE ToC ToR UNDAF UNDP UNDP-GEF UNECE UNFCCC
Meaning Project Preparation Grant Project results framework UNDP Project
Document Project Steering Committee Photovoltaic Review of Outcomes to Impacts
Specific energy consumption Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time-
bound GEF Scientific Technical Advisory Panel National standard of Belarus RUE
StroyTechNorm Technical Code for Energy Performance of Buildings Technical
Committee on Standardization Terminal Evaluation Theory of Change Terms of
Reference United Nations Development Assistance Framework United Nations
Development Programme UNDP Global Environmental Facility United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change xi
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
INTRODUCTION  This report summarizes the findings of the Terminal Evaluation
Mission conducted during the  February 2018 period for the GEF-financed Project
entitled: “Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings in the Republic
of Belarus” (herein referred to as the “IEERB Project” or the “Project”) where
UNDP received  US$ 50 million grant from the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)
The IEERB Project has the objective of reducing the energy consumption (imported
fuel) and related GHG emissions with the focus on new residential buildings by
introducing new performance based building design and construction standards
with related energy certification schemes and by ensuring their effective
implementation and enforcement The IEERB Project was approved along with the
commitment of the Government of Belarus to introduce legislation to promote new
EE building standards that are compatible with the EU Energy Efficiency
Performance Buildings Directive (EEPBD) or 2010/EU New legislation was intent on
reducing energy consumption of new buildings by: • 70% in comparison with
existing building stock of Belarus constructed before 1993; and • 40% when
comparing buildings constructed in accordance to current construction norms and
thermal standards  The Project was designed to achieve this objective by
strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework, training of local experts
and other key stakeholders to implement buildings compliant with the new
directives, construction of three EE demo buildings to test and gain practical
experience on implementing energy efficient buildings, and related outreach and
dissemination of the lesson learnt This terminal evaluation covers these
activities managed by UNDP Belarus  Purpose of the Evaluation  The Terminal
Evaluation (TE) for the IEERB Project was to evaluate the progress towards the
attainment of global environmental objectives, project objectives and outcomes,
capture lessons learned and suggest recommendations on major improvements The TE
was to serve as an agent of change and play  critical role in supporting
accountability As such, this TE serves to: • promote accountability and
transparency, and to assess and disclose levels of Project accomplishments;
synthesize lessons that may help improve the selection, design and
implementation of future GEF activities; • • provide feedback on issues that are
recurrent across the portfolio and need attention, and on improvements regarding
previously identified issues; and contribute to the GEF Evaluation Office
databases for aggregation, analysis and reporting on effectiveness of GEF
operations in achieving global environmental benefits and on the quality of
monitoring and evaluation across the GEF system •  Outputs from this TE will
provide an outlook and guidance in charting future directions on sustaining
current efforts by UNDP, the Government of Belarus, their donor partners, to
sustain the capacities  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings of relevant Belarusian government institutions to promote
and regulate improved energy efficiency in the building sector throughout
Belarus   Scope and Methodology The scope of the TE for the IEERB Project was to
include all activities funded by GEF and activities from parallel co-financing
The Terms of Reference (ToRs) for the TE are contained in Appendix  Key issues
addressed on this TE include: • To what extent have Project activities led to
improved new legislation including the adoption of minimum building energy
performance standards (MBEPs)? This would involve the Project’ contribution to
the Technical Code on "Energy Efficiency of Buildings",  regulatory enactment
that contains, inter alia, the MBEP requirements, corresponding provisions for
energy certification and compliance checking systems and energy audit; • To what
extent have Project activities led to the enhancement of knowledge of building
energy efficiency issues in Belarus? This involves  wide range of training
beneficiaries including building and energy efficiency practitioners within the
Government of Belarus (Department of Energy Efficiency or DEE), Ministry of
Architecture and Construction (MoAC), Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection (MoNREP), state and private construction companies,
academia and private consultants; • To what extent have Project activities led
to the completion of demonstration of energy efficient measures that comply with
new energy efficiency standards developed by the Project?; • Has the Project
developed any new tools to monitor compliance with higher energy efficient
standards for new buildings, and to what extent are they being used to assist
the Government of Belarus achieve  higher rate of compliance with improved
energy efficiency standards for buildings, both new buildings and existing
buildings?  Outputs from this TE provides an outlook and guidance in charting
future directions on sustaining current efforts by UNDP and the Government of
Belarus on strengthening the legal and regulatory framework for energy
efficiency of building stock in Belarus, and improving the knowledge base of
energy efficiency issues in buildings amongst public, private and academia
stakeholders involved with building energy efficiency in Belarus In addition,
the TE will assess the value of the pilot projects implemented and the
effectiveness of the mechanisms for disseminating information of these pilots
The methodology adopted for this evaluation includes: • Review of project
documentation ( APR/PIRs, meeting minutes of Project Steering Committee or
multipartite meetings) and pertinent background information; Interviews with key
Project personnel including the current Project Manager, technical advisors
(domestic and international), and Project developers; Interviews with relevant
stakeholders including other government agencies, engineering and architectural
professionals and academic institutions; and • • • Field visits to selected
Project’ pilot sites and interviews with beneficiaries  detailed itinerary of
the Mission is shown in Appendix   full list of people interviewed and documents
reviewed are given in Appendix  and Appendix  respectively The Evaluation
Mission for the UNDP-GEF Project was comprised of one lead international expert
and one national expert  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings  The Project was evaluated for overall results in the
context of: • Relevance – the extent to which the outcome is suited to local and
national development priorities and organizational policies, including changes
over time; • Effectiveness – the extent to which an objective was achieved or
how likely it is to be achieved; • Efficiency – the extent to which results were
delivered with the least costly resources possible; and • Sustainability - The
likely ability of an intervention to continue to deliver benefits for an
extended period of time after completion All possible efforts have been made to
minimize the limitations of this independent evaluation There were 15 days spent
by the mission to meet all relevant stakeholders in Minsk, along with site
visits to all demonstration buildings completed by the Project in Minsk,
Mahilioŭ and Hrodna In addition, the evaluation team had time to collect and
triangulate as much information as possible with follow- up -mails between the
Evaluation Team and the Project after the terminal evaluation mission to fill in
information gaps  Structure of the Evaluation This evaluation report is
presented as follows: • An overview of Project activities from commencement of
operations on 31 July 2012 to the present activities of the IEERB Project; • An
assessment of results based on Project objectives and outcomes through
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency criteria; • Assessment of sustainability
of Project outcomes; • Assessment of monitoring and evaluation systems; •
Assessment of progress that affected Project outcomes and sustainability; and •
Lessons learned and recommendations This evaluation report is designed to meet
GEF’ “Guidelines for GEF Agencies in Conducting Terminal Evaluations, Evaluation
Document No ” of 2008:  The Evaluation also meets conditions set by: • the UNDP
Document of 2012 entitled “UNDP GEF – Terminal Evaluation Guideline”:  the UNDP
Document entitled “Handbook on Planning, Monitoring and Evaluating for
Development Results”, 2009:  and the “Addendum June 2011 Evaluation”:  June-pdf
• •  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTEXT  Project Start and Duration The
“Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings” Project officially
commenced implementation on 31 July 2012, the date when the Belarusian
government signature for the Project document (ProDoc) was obtained The Project
duration originally was planned for  years beginning in January 2012 (the formal
start date as per the ProDoc) and ending in December In December 2014, the Mid-
Term evaluation recommended that an extension for the Project should be
considered for another 12 months to complete the demonstration buildings and
allow sufficient time for monitoring of energy consumption Currently, the final
terminal date of the IEERB Project is 30 June  Problems that IEERB Project
Sought to Address The IEERB ProDoc provides details on the problems that the
Project sought to address The price and other delivery terms of the gas and oil
imported from Russia and its transit to other European countries through Belarus
have been subject to several disputes between the Governments of Belarus and
Russia since The previous low price paid by Belarus for the Russian gas has been
gradually increasing, thereby providing  higher impetus also for different
energy efficiency measures This has led to the country’ issues related to
increased energy security and greater energy independence remaining high on the
Government agenda The energy supply in Belarus is highly dependent on imports,
mainly from Russia Apart from small deposits of natural gas, oil, peat and some
hydro resources as well as the forests covering close to 40% of the country,
there are no significant other indigenous energy resources available In 2015,
the imports covered close to 88% of the total primary energy use for heating,
and close to 98% for electricity generation4 With more than 75% of Belarus’
million citizens living in urban areas, the country’ focus on energy efficiency
in urban areas is an important priority for the Government of Belarus As
percentage of all primary energy resources available in Belarus, energy
consumption for residential sector heating in Belarus has grown from 40% in 2008
to 45% in 2015, while electricity consumption in this sector has only grown from
21% in 2008 to % in This is one indicator that little attention has been given
to energy efficiency in buildings resulting in typical annual demand for space
heating of about  kWh/m2,  value that is not in line with EU Directives In early
2014, the residential building stock was close to 250 million m2 including about
170 million m2 of old buildings constructed before 1994 according to the old
Soviet practices and norms with specific energy consumption (SEC) for heating in
the range of 150 to 200 kWh/m2/yr Since 1993, the Government of Belarus has been
seeking improvements to specific consumption of heat energy: • In 1993,  new
national standard “Construction Heat Engineering” was adopted, enhancing the
requirements for the insulation of the building envelope to annual space-heating
demand of 86-  IEA Energy Statistics 2015 available on:   Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings 91 kWh/m2 for buildings of
floors or higher and to  kWh/m2 for  typical - storey building While comparable
to similar norms in Russia and Ukraine, these standards were not in line with EU
countries; • The “Law on Architecture, Urban Planning and Construction
Activities in the Republic of Belarus" (2004, amended in 2009), set the
framework for relations between governmental agencies, private organizations and
individuals engaged in architecture, urban planning and construction activities
This is relevant to the IEERB Project in the context of the institutions
responsible for enforcing compliance with technical regulations, contracts, as
well as non-contractual obligations; • The “Regulation on Preparation and
Issuance of Construction Permits” (2007, amended in 2010) established procedures
for obtaining permits for construction, reconstruction, restoration and repair
of buildings The process would include obtaining the required permits and
approvals for building retrofits and new building permits that would need to
comply with any new regulations and standards on building heating energy
consumption; • The installation of heat meters and automatic regulation of
heating in residential and public buildings has been mandatory since 2007; • The
“Law on Energy Saving” adopted in 1998 but was replaced by  new “Law on Energy
Saving” (No239- of January , 2015) that entered into force in Complementary
building energy efficiency regulations around the current Law on Energy Savings
that are relevant to the energy situation in Belarus today, specifically the
building energy efficiency, includes:  New thermal standards introduced in 2010
to reduce annual energy consumption for space heating of new buildings to 60
kWh/m2 At this time, many EU countries were developing new regulations reducing
space-heating energy consumption to less than 30 kWh/m2/yr with the best
achieved engineering solutions leading to about 15 kWh/m2/yr;  The
“Comprehensive Programme for the Design, Construction and Reconstruction of
Energy-Efficient Homes in the Republic of Belarus for  and until 2020”, by which
systems for heat recovery from buildings ventilation air should be installed in
all newly constructed buildings by This is in accordance with the stated goal of
the energy efficiency program to reduce space-heating energy consumption of all
new residential buildings below 40 kWh/m2 by 2020;  Electricity and heating
tariffs with the intention of: (cid:) (cid:) (cid:) increasing tariffs to cost-
recovery levels (at the Belenergo level); reducing cross-subsidies between
different consumer groups; and improving payment discipline to improve the
collection rate and eliminate barter • MoAC with support of the State
Standardization Committee’ DEE implemented  couple of pilot projects (prior to
the commencement of IEERB) to demonstrate that there is still large energy
savings potential while introducing some other state-of-the-art techniques into
building construction practice As of October 2010, the district heating tariffs
in Belarus were about €008 euro cents per kWh, roughly 37% of the real tariff
costs, and €0042 per kWh for electricity, roughly 59% of the real electricity
tariff As of 2017, the heating tariff has decreased to %, an increase in the
level of the electricity tariff now at 80% of the real cost Figure  provides an
overview of heating and electricity tariffs between 2005 and 2017 as  percentage
of their real cost These highly regressive subsidies only add costs to business,
and create significant fiscal risks and macroeconomic vulnerabilities Studies
indicate that negative social impact is manageable if  tariff increase is
accompanied by countervailing measures to compensate for the loss of purchasing
power, in particular of the poor, through targeted social assistance and energy
efficiency programs While the goal of the  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Government is to reduce the subsidies to
zero5, the further subsidization resulted from unforeseen circumstances
including the  devaluation of the Russian rouble, and the resulting increase of
heating costs to the population Notwithstanding, the energy efficiency of
buildings is high on the GoB’ development agenda Figure : Belarus Electricity
and Heating Tariffs as  % of Real Cost6 In 2010, the Government also made
projections on an increase of more than 120 million m2 of new residential
buildings during the period of 2012-Along with the aforementioned legislation
for building energy efficiency in Para 18, MoAC set an objective and adopted
program to move towards mass construction of energy efficient buildings in
Belarus Despite the availability of technical skills, appropriate building
materials and equipment as well as basic engineering capacity in Belarus to
implement such  program, barriers to the full adoption of the program remained
including: • the prevalence of traditional approaches to building design within
the engineering and architectural professions in Belarus As such, design of the
energy performance of  building is undertaken without  holistic view of the
energy performance of the entire building; the absence of  legal and regulatory
framework that is less prescriptive in its approach to energy efficiency in
buildings, and more encouraging towards minimum energy performance standards for
the entire building; •  Decision № 1180 of the Council of Ministers of Belarus
dated August , 2010 on “Approval of the development strategy of the energy
potential of the Republic of Belarus” which calls for the phase out of all
energy tariff subsidies including those for natural gas used for food
preparation by 2011, for electricity by 2013 and for district heating by
Accessible from Belenergo website:  politika/indexphp?sphrase_id=1065  Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings •  lack of
comprehensive energy audits on buildings in Belarus; • lack of guidance in the
context of technical details of energy efficient equipment, and proper methods
of their installation; and lack of financial incentives to catalyze the
construction of energy efficient buildings • The IEERB Project seeks to address
the lowering of these barriers and catalyze instruction of energy efficient
buildings in the residential sector in Belarus  Development Objective of IEERB
Project The objective of the IEERB Project was to “reduce the energy consumption
(imported fuel) and related GHG emissions with the focus on new residential
buildings” This objective was to be achieved through the meeting of the targets
of 80 new buildings (roughly 10% of all new buildings in Belarus) that have in
their design an SEC of 60 kWh/m2/yr for space heating and hot water and
resulting lifetime GHG emission reduction target of 220,000 tonnes CO2 These are
defined in the Project Results Framework (PRF) for the IEERB Project that was
amended and approved in June This PRF is contained in Appendix   Baseline
Indicators Established The baseline value for all these indicators of the IEERB
Project can be found in the approved PRF in Appendix   Main Stakeholders The
formulation and implementation of energy saving policies in Belarus was started
in 1993 together with the establishment of an inter-institutional body, the
State Committee for Energy Efficiency and Energy Control of Belarus This entity
was transformed in 2001 to the Committee on Energy Efficiency under the Council
of Ministers and in 2006 to the Department on Energy Efficiency (DEE) under the
State Committee on Standardization The ground level implementation of energy
saving policies is done through the development and implementation of national,
regional and sectoral energy efficiency programs DEE, the Ministry of Economy
(MoE) and other national stakeholders are setting national targets for energy
conservation, which are further transformed to mandatory tasks to be implemented
by different line ministries, other governmental agencies and state-owned
enterprises listing of groupings of stakeholders of interest to the Evaluation
includes: • Stakeholders within the Government of Belarus including those
involved with the Project in the DEE, MoAC and MoE, notably those involved with
the setting of energy efficiency standards and policies (including those
advocating the removal of fuel subsidies), enforcement of these standards and
policies, and those with oversight on financial mechanism programs (such as
interest rate subsidies) to catalyze interest in energy efficient buildings; •
Building and energy efficiency practitioners within state construction
companies, private engineering firms and academia, notably those who have been
involved with engineering and design of buildings that comply with the policies
and standards, and those involved with  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings construction inspection of new buildings the
need to comply with new energy efficient standards and policies; • Energy
auditors who have developed their skills in preparing reports on building energy
consumption with  focus on primary energy consumed for HVAC and hot water on new
and retrofitted buildings; • Building owners and managers on their satisfaction
in undertaking EE measures for their residential buildings; and • Building
operators whose capacities to manage and minimize building energy consumption
are important towards maximizing GHG emission reductions from the building
sector complete listing of stakeholders who have participated on the IEERB
Project is provided in Section  (Paras )  To achieve the specific IEERB
objective to “reduce the energy consumption (imported fuel) and related GHG
emissions with the focus on new residential buildings”, the IEERB Project was
designed with the following expected Project outcomes: Expected Results •
Outcome : Strengthened legal and regulatory framework and mechanisms to enforce
the legislation for improving the energy efficiency of the building sector; •
Outcome : Enhanced expert capacity of the Belarusian specialists to implement
new energy efficiency standards and construction norms; • Outcome :
Implementation of demonstration projects for energy efficient buildings; •
Outcome : Documented, disseminated and institutionalized project results
providing  basis for further replication  Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings  FINDINGS  Project Design and Formulation
Design of the IEERB Project was first conceived in 2010 after Belarus had
introduced new thermal standards for buildings in support of the Law on Energy
Savings of The IEERB ProDoc packaged these designs into  GEF climate change
mitigation project that would support the country’ efforts to lower the barriers
to the full adoption in Belarus of  program to build energy efficient buildings
as described in Para The strategy of the IEERB Project to lower these barriers
included implementing Project activities divided into  components, the outcomes
of which are described in Para However, prior to presenting Project results, an
analysis of the IEERB Project design is presented in this section  Analysis of
Project Results Framework The Project Results Framework (PRF) for the IEERB
Project was slightly revised after the Inception Phase workshop of June 2013 and
the MTR of December 2014 in consideration of the -month delay to start-up the
IEERB Project (see Para 42 for details) The PRF only contains  objective level
indicators and  indicators for  outcomes In the context of best practices for
preparing PRF’ for GEF projects, the wording of the indicators and targets are
poorly formulated and do not meet SMART criteria7 Some specific comments on the
2013 PRF includes: •  of the outcome indicators not being specific and
measurable This includes indicators such as “demonstrated capacity” and the
“status” of regulatory documents and demonstration projects, both of which are
not specific or measurable for the purposes of monitoring the progress of the
Project; indicator descriptors should be  short description reflecting the
numerical value of the target; the EOP target should be just  number with
footnote to describe the conditions of meeting that target (such as an indicator
“tonnes CO2 emissions reductions by the EOP” and  target of “220,000” with
footnote to indicate “these are lifetime CO2 emission reductions for which
construction has started or which have adopted into their design new energy
efficiency elements that reduce energy consumption for heating and hot water in
residential buildings”); in instances where the “status” needs to be measured
(such as in Outcome  on the status of national laws or Outcome  on this status
of demonstration projects), the PRF should have entered output level targets
such as Output  with an indicator of number of completed energy audits and the
target of 50, or Output  with an indicator of number of demonstration buildings
covered in monitoring reports with  target of  • • • While this Evaluation
points out the shortcomings of this PRF that may add to the difficulties of
properly evaluating progress of most GEF projects, the PMU for the IEERB Project
was still able to effectively monitor progress of the IEERB Project towards its
intended objective, outcomes and outputs The GHG emission reductions target of
the IEERB Project is 220,000 tonnes CO2 that are lifetime emission reductions
generated mainly from more than 80 EE new residential buildings which comply
Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time-bound  Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings to Technical Code “Energy
Efficiency of Buildings” which is actually the Technical Code for Energy
Performance of Buildings (TC-EPB) This was to be calculated by taking the
baseline annual specific energy consumption (SEC) for space heating demand from
the average of 60 kWh/m2 (as adopted in 2010) to 20 kWh/m2 and the annual heat
demand for sanitary hot water from the current average of 65 kWh/m2 similarly to
40 kWh/m2 The Ministry of Architecture and Construction (MoAC) maintain
database of buildings that are approved for construction and compliance with EEB
Technical Code, complete with the actual SEC values of the new building and the
building area in m2 GHG emission reductions can then be calculated by applying
an average energy emissions factor in Belarus (consisting of composite
electricity and heat factors) Table  provides  sample calculation from the IEERB
ProDoc of the direct GHG reduction impact with the target of 65 kWh/m2/yr
savings in final energy use compared to similar constructed buildings in
accordance with the construction norms in force in This analysis would also be
applicable to the detailed design of the  demo buildings that were implemented
on this Project as well as other buildings that are approved for construction
and in compliance to the TC-EPB Table : Summary of the assumptions and results
from calculating the direct (lifetime) GHG reduction impact of the Project
36,000 m2 Estimated total demonstration project floor area 40 Average annual
savings in space heating demand Average annual savings in the use of heat for
sanitary hot water preparation 25 30 Calculation period for energy savings in
space heating 15 Calculation period for energy savings in sanitary hot water
preparation ,575 Total energy savings over the calculation period 216 Average
emission factor for final energy use Demo project CO2 reduction over the
calculation period kWh/m2/yr kWh/m2/yr years years kWh/m2 kgCO2/kWh kt CO2eq The
objective level target in the PRF of 220 ktCO2eq for GHG emission reductions
would appear to be reasonable based on 80 buildings adopting the energy
efficiency norms for buildings of the EEB Technical Code, for which the design
or construction has started during the project implementation With the
enforcement system in place with MoAC approving project designs that are in
compliance with the TC-EPB, the PMU will be reliant on reporting from the
implementing partner, DEE, of buildings that have received these design and
construction approvals The target of 80 buildings assumes approximately 800,000
m2 of floor area for each of the 80 buildings  Risks and Assumptions number of
assumptions were identified in the PRF from 2012 as well as the revised PRF in
June 2013 and Dec 2014 as keys to the achievement of IEERB Project objectives
This included: • suggested EE measures are adopted by design institutes and
construction companies into the design of new buildings; • continued commitment
of the Government of Belarus to proceed with suggested legislation; •
demonstration projects adding value to new approaches for targeted building
practitioners; • the assumption that the design of the demonstration buildings
would be completed in the first 18 months of IEERB, and construction would be
completed at the end of Year  10 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government
of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings The ProDoc also identified  risks in  draft risk log Many
of the risks identified in the ProDoc’ Annex - represent the barriers to be
removed by the Project One exception is Risk # which identifies local energy
pricing policies not being supportive of energy efficiency investments While
this risk was initially rated as relatively low, the devaluation of the Russian
ruble between 2012 and 2015 only made the price of natural gas and heating more
costly for Belarusian citizens, making it more difficult for the Government of
Belarus to eliminate heating subsidies (that are mentioned in Paras 18 and 19)
This risk would have been difficult to have predict by IEERB Project designers
Lessons from Other Relevant Projects Incorporated into IEERB Project Design The
ProDoc of the IEERB Project does not list any other relevant Projects into its
design  Planned Stakeholder Participation One of the primary purposes of IEERB
Project was to increase the knowledge and build the capacity of key
stakeholders8 while concurrently strengthening the legal and regulatory
framework to support the Law on Energy Savings, and defining minimum energy
performance standards (MEPS) for energy efficiency in buildings in line with
best international practice In addition, the IEERB Project also planned stronger
engagement of stakeholders implementation of demonstration energy efficient
buildings and disseminating positive information of these EE buildings to raise
the confidence of targeted stakeholders through supporting The stakeholder
involvement approach in the IEERB ProDoc involves  wide spectrum of stakeholders
including: • the Government of Belarus including the implementing partner, DEE
(under the State Committee on Standardization of the Council of Ministers), the
Ministry of Architecture and Construction, and the Ministry of Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection; state enterprises such as Stroytechnorm and
Institute of Housing (NIPTIS) who are responsible for formulating policies; • •
municipal and private engineering and construction enterprises who are
responsible for design and construction of energy efficiency in buildings;
various universities and educational institutes with building construction
faculties to build the capacity of engineers and technicians involved in energy
efficiency in building projects throughout Belarus • In reviewing the intended
outcomes of the IEERB Project, this level of stakeholder involvement appears
sound  Replication Approach The Project design envisaged  replication approach
by improving and adopting mandatory minimum energy performance standards (MEPS)
in the process for approvals of new building construction Replication would be
bolstered through new building designs needing to comply with these mandatory
MEPS, increased knowledge of all building practitioners to implement energy
efficient  Government personnel, building owners, engineers and architects of
state and private construction companies, and building practitioners from
private firms and academia 11 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of
the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings designs in residential buildings, and increased confidence
of building practitioners to implement energy efficient residential buildings
through examples set in completed demonstration EE buildings  UNDP Comparative
Advantage UNDPs comparative advantage to other donor agencies is its focus on
policy-based and cross-sectoral approaches as well as building local capacities
through effective collaboration with  wide range of local stakeholders, ranging
from the public and private sectors to technical experts, civil society and
grassroots level organizations These approaches are strongly applicable on
energy efficiency projects such as this IEERB Project In particular, UNDP has
carried out over 15 projects related to energy efficiency in buildings in the
Europe & CIS region over the past 10 years Given UNDP’ long track record on
wide variety of projects within the energy sector, UNDP is suited as an
implementing agency for this Project  Linkages between IEERB Project and Other
Interventions within the Sector The IEERB Project was intended to be linked with
several completed energy sector related projects by the Government of Belarus
with their donor partners including: • The UNDP/GEF project “Biomass Energy for
Heating and Hot Water Supply” with an objective to reduce GHG emissions of
Belarus by removing barriers to economically feasible wood and wood waste
utilization for heat and hot water supply The project was completed in 2008 with
satisfactory rating; • UNDP/GEF project “Removing the Barriers to Improving
Energy Efficiency in the State Sector of Belarus” with an objective to attract
investments in the implementation of energy efficiency activities in the state
sector The project was completed in 2011 with  satisfactory rating; • World Bank
Social Infrastructure Retrofitting Project was approved in The project aims to
improve the social sector facilities with particular emphasis on reducing energy
consumption The project has two main components The first component supports
investment in physical infrastructure Energy retrofitting measures in schools
and medical facilities include building envelope and heating system improvements
as well as conversion or replacement of individual autonomous boilers
Rehabilitation of limited parts of the district heating network is also
included, when deemed as necessary, to capture savings at the heat production
source Project was completed in 2010 with  satisfactory rating; • World Bank
Energy Efficiency Project was approved in May The objective of the project is to
improve energy efficiency in heat and power generation in selected towns of
Belarus The project has three components: The first component is the conversion
of existing heat-only-boiler plants to combined heat and power plants at six
sites The Project has had  satisfactory completion in December  Management
Arrangements The national implementing partner of the IEERB Project is the
Department of Energy Efficiency (DEE) under the State Committee on
Standardization of Belarus The IEERB Project was to be implemented in accordance
with UNDPs National Implementation Modality (now referred to as National
Execution or NEX modality) NEX modality tasks DEE with responsibility for
certifying work plans and approved budgets, reporting on procurement,
coordinating and tracking co-financing, terms of reference for 12 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings contractors
and tender documentation, and chairing the Project Steering Committee (PSC) The
Chair of the PSC was to be the National Project Director (NPD) from DEE In the
ProDoc, UNDP provides Project implementation support to DEE by managing the
budget and project expenditures, contracting project personnel, executing
actions for procurement, and implementing the day-to-day management and
monitoring of the project operations An organogram of the IEERB Project
implementation arrangements is provided on Figure  Figure : Current Management
Arrangements for the UNDP-GEF Project “Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings” (IEERB) Project Organisation Structure Project Steering
Committee (PSC) Senior Beneficiaries MoAC, private and state-owned engineering
and construction companies Executive DEE under the State Committee on
Standardisation of Belarus Senior Supplier UNDP Belarus Project Assurance UNDP
National Project Director (NPD) Project Management Unit (PMU) within IEERB
Project  National Project Manager  Project Communications Officer  Project
Associate -State enterprises and private engineering and construction firms
-International and National Consultants  Project Implementation The following is
compilation of critical path events and issues of IEERB Project implementation
in chronological order: • The IEERB Project was approved by the GEF CEO on 15
December 2011; 13 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings • The Government of Belarus signed the ProDoc on July 31,
2012 and registered it on August 10, 2012 marking the official commencement of
the IEEERB Project; • The Project Management Unit (PMU) for the IEERB Project
was only established in December This coincided with the hiring of the first and
only National Project Manager for the IEERB Project (17 December 2012), nearly
11 months after the formal start of IEERB according to the ProDoc and  months
after its official registration by the Belarusian Government on Aug 10, 2012; •
The Project’ Inception Workshop was conducted in June 2013 (three months later
than anticipated) due to long-lasting negotiations between the PMU, DEE and the
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection (MoNREP) to verify
and secure MoNREP' co-financing commitments; In November 2013, MoNREP formally
withdrew from its co-financing commitments on the IEERB Project; • •  Mid Term
Review (MTR) for the IEERB Project was conducted during the September-December
2014 period; • Support was provided to selected policymakers and building
development practitioners for study tours to Austria, Czech Republic, United
Kingdom and Germany in ; • During 2014 and 2015, the Project initiated and
helped organize  “Technical Committee” to lead development of the Technical Code
for Energy Performance of Buildings along with several interrelated standards in
support of the TC-EPB’ key provisions This subsequently led to  draft of the TC-
EPB that was approved by the State Standardization Committee (GosStandard) on 21
December 2015, and  recommendation by the GosStandard to the Council of
Ministers for full adoption; • Studies into the construction and designs of the
demonstration buildings commenced during 2014 and 2015; • Since June-July 2016,
the Project has been sharing its experiences with UNDP-GEF sister projects in
building energy efficiency in Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan; •
Approval of an 18-month extension on 10 November 2016 from 31 December 2017 to
30 June 2018; • By December 2016, demonstration buildings in Mahilioŭ and Minsk
were completed; • By May 2017, demonstration building in Hrodna was completed; •
By early 2016, the Belarusian National Technical University (BNTU) adopted
educational materials, tutorials and reference books on building energy
efficiency developed by the IEERB Project into their Construction Faculty
curriculum; • During , the Project organized and held more than 100 different
informational campaigns (international and national conferences, seminars,
roundtables, trainings, press- conferences, etc) • Since June 2017, extensive
training campaigns started both for residents of the pilot buildings and
specialists from the housing and utility companies responsible for operation and
maintenance of the buildings  Adaptive Management Adaptive management is
discussed in GEF terminal evaluations to gauge performance of project personnel
to adapt to changing regulatory and environmental conditions, common occurrences
that afflict the majority of GEF projects Without adaptive management, GEF
investments would not be 14 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of
the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings effective in achieving their intended outcomes, outputs
and targets Examples of adaptive management during implementation of the 75-year
duration of the IEERB to March 2018 included: • The PMU needing to accelerate
performance of all activities considering the delay from July 2012 to May 2013
to put in place the PMU and to setup activities and consultants for the
identification of appropriate consultants and stakeholders for the design and
construction of  energy efficient pilot buildings to be done under Component
Under  compressed timeframe of less than  years, the PMU needed to engage local
consultants, organize and conduct the necessary training workshops and seminars
required to catalyze interest in energy efficiency in buildings, and perform the
necessary energy audits to show the opportunities for energy savings that could
be realized under Component  activities; • Actions required to identify co-
financing with the withdrawal of the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection co-financing for  pilot building as of  November
Despite the approval of the PSC in April 2014 for the construction of  pilot
buildings in Hrodna, Minsk and Mahilioŭ, this withdrawal of co-financing
affected negotiations with “RUE Mahilioŭ UKS”,  building construction owner that
did not yet have  legally binding contract with  building, raising the risk of
delays to the completion date of the IEERB Project The PMU recommended DEE to
consider directly contracting NIPTIS, the developer of pilot buildings in Grodno
and Minsk This recommendation was accepted in December 2013 and contributed to
reducing the risk of delay and avoid the long international tendering process;
Inclusion of training of building operators and residents in energy efficient
buildings which was not originally envisioned in the ProDoc Para 77 has more
details; • • The inclusion of the Ministry of Housing and Utilities (MoHU) into
the list of Project’ key stakeholders that was initiated by PMU through  special
PSC meeting and  memorandum duly registered by the Government Their inclusion,
which was not envisioned in the ProDoc, was important since MoHU’ entities have
responsibilities over  number of public housing projects as well as the
operation of residential buildings Besides, the MoHU cooperates with Oblast
Executive Committees and the Ministry of Economy as to the rationale and setting
of heating tariffs With the emergence of heating tariffs not being amended
towards full cost recovery during IEERB implementation, inclusion of MoHU has
led to Project discussions on the importance of mitigating this significant risk
• The inclusion of MoHU also opened doors for  wider training campaign that
addressed operation of energy efficient buildings and the procurement,
installation and handover of all necessary training models, samples, and
simulators to the Housing & Utility Training Centers; • Development of
communications strategy by the Project’ communication specialist to more
effectively disseminate the positive results of IEERB activities The strategy
provided identification of target audiences of the strategy including technical,
the public sector, EE building tenants and the general public, and appropriate
communications to each target group with the assistance of IEERB technical staff
and its experts; • Adjustments resulting from the IEERB Mid-Term Review (MTR) of
December The PMU provided  Management Response to the MTR,  summary of which is
provided on Table  In general, the PMU implemented these recommendations to the
extent that they were feasible within the time frame of the Project including
the 18-month extension In conclusion, UNDP’ efforts to adaptively manage this
Project were sincere and satisfactory in consideration of the successful
outcomes of this Project 15 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of
the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Table : Management Response of IEERB PMU to MTR
Recommendations Recommendation Management Response of April 2015 Evaluation
Comment Because of the delayed start of the implementation of the project the
MTE recommends drafting  realistic time planning Project team to draft
realistic time-frame for project implementation in close consultations with all
the key national partners Consider  possibility for project no-cost extension
The PMU did complete this keeping in mind the critical path of the IEERB Project
was the implementation of EE demonstration buildings of Outcome  No-cost
extension was successfully obtained Because of the delayed start of the
implementation of the project the MTE recommends to prolong the project for 18
months The MTE recommends paying more attention to institutional capacity
building of the public authorities to ensure effective enforcement of this
regulatory framework The project team should work closely with national
counterparts, particularly with the Energy Efficiency Department and the
Ministry of Architecture and Construction to identify capacity building needs
and then develop  capacity building plan and follow it Agree The project should
consider including activities addressing energy management issues into the
project scope (if it is feasible), along with considering  possibility of
obtaining the EMIS developed by UNDP in Croatia and transferring it to Belarus
UNDP actions with respect to auditing its projects are governed by the
respective corporate rules and procedures It should be noted that the approved
Project Document provides budget for project financial auditing  possibility and
necessity to conduct an external mid-term project audit should be discusses
internally There was an increase in the number of study tours to allow personnel
from DEE and MoAC to observe best international practices for implementing EE
buildings The MTE recommends paying more attention in the project to energy
management Consideration could be given to transferring the highly successful
energy management information system (EMIS) developed by UNDP in Croatia to
Belarus Although there is no reason to doubt the accuracy of financial reporting
by the PMU it would be advisable to have an annual or at least bi-annual
financial audit of the project PMU were not able to implement this
recommendation due to time constraints and late completion of the demonstration
buildings There remains, however, continued interest in EMIS with
recommendation made for its use in monitoring energy consumption in buildings in
Belarus The ProDoc in its Article , “Monitoring Framework & Evaluation” refers
to the Inception Stage, which should, inter alia, address some relevant issues
as follows: “… ) Discuss financial reporting … and arrangements for annual
audit” The discussion held under the Inception Seminar’ agenda item “Suggestions
for  respective adjustment of Project’ activities based on the inception stage
results” did not concern this issue, for there was the general opinion on the
fact that the Project was not of pure NIM modality In line with this decision,
neither the 2013 AWP nor future AWPs included such an audit The MTE Report
noticed this and recommended to review the issue again 16 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings  Partnership Arrangements
The National Implementing Partner of the IEERB Project is the Department of
Energy Efficiency (DEE) under the State Committee on Standardization of Belarus
The IEERB Project was designed to bring together the appropriate partners to
promote and catalyze the interest in energy efficiency in residential buildings
in Belarus With many of these partners already identified in the IEERB ProDoc,
Project resources were utilized to define partnership arrangements with these
partners to strengthen the regulatory and legal framework for energy efficiency
in buildings, build the awareness and technical capacity of these partners, and
to collaborate with key partners to plan, design and construct pilot energy
efficient buildings under Component  In comparison with the partners identified
in Para , the PMU has effectively made partnership arrangements with: • the
Ministry of Architecture and Construction and its various agencies including:
Stroytechnorm,  state enterprise who was  key partner in the drafting of new
building norms and standards under the Technical Code for Energy Efficient
Buildings;  The Institute of Housing (NIPTIS) who was principal designer of the
entire pilot building in Mahilioŭ and designer of energy efficient equipment for
pilot buildings in Minsk and Hrodna, and involved in the formulation of various
construction norms and standards; the Ministry of Housing and Utilities and its
utility companies in Minsk, Hrodna and Mahilioŭ who were responsible for
operation and maintenance of  pilot energy efficient buildings under Component ;
• • Mahilioŭ Oblast Department of Capital Construction who was involved as
developer of the pilot building in Mahilioŭ, thus substituting the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection in this capacity after the
Ministry has removed from itself obligations to act as  developer; • Oblast
Executive Committees in Minsk, Hrodna and Mahilioŭ and their departments of
housing and communal services who elaborated and supervised implementation of
local norms and provisions for utility companies They also have oversight on
heating tariffs as discussed in Para 43; • MAPID JSC,  private construction firm
who was responsible for design and construction of the energy efficient building
in Minsk; • GrodnoGrazhdanProject RUE who was  pilot building designer in
Hrodna; • the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Natural Resources
(MoNREP) and its agency “RUE Belarusian Research Centre Ecology” who undertake
work and research related to the calculation and reporting of GHG emission
reductions from energy efficient buildings in Belarus; • entities involved in
the training of building technicians and practitioners including:  the
Construction Faculty of the Belarusian National Technical University (BNTU) in
Minsk responsible for the preparation of course materials in building energy
efficiency which has been disseminated to other relevant faculties and training
institutes throughout Belarus;  Oblast training centres in the majority of
secondary cities in Belarus (such as Hrodna and Mahilioŭ) to build the capacity
of engineers and technicians of utility companies under the MoHU to operate and
maintain energy efficient buildings throughout Belarus Overall efforts by the
PMU to forge effective partnership arrangements on the IEERB Project have been
satisfactory This includes partnership arrangements with entities with direct
responsibility for shaping intended outcomes of the Project including the
strengthening of the new construction norms 17 Terminal Evaluation June 2018
UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings and standards in Component , building
the technical capacities of all related stakeholders under Component , and the
development of  pilot energy efficient buildings under Component   Feedback from
& Activities Used for Adaptive Management Feedback for & activities was provided
primarily through PSC Meeting Minutes ( PSC meetings from April 2013 to December
2017) and PIRs (from 2014 to 2017) providing details of activities for
adaptively managing the Project This would include sections in the PIRs on
“annual project quality assurance assessments” and “critical risk management”
where recommendations on managing risks are divided into political, regulatory,
organizational, and strategic categories Strategic risks would include risks
with stakeholder engagement of an important stakeholder group such as
construction companies or building professionals The quality of PSC meeting
minutes was satisfactory with these reports providing details of structured
discussions on the progress of the Project, how to improve implementation
performance and reduce risks, and approval of ongoing work plans or changes to
these work plans The Evaluation Team notes that the discussions and adaptive
management changes proposed during these meetings were completed with 13 to 20
PSC members in attendance for the  PSC meetings The  PIRs produced by the IEERB
Project were also sufficiently detailed to provide Project progress against
objective level and outcome targets, notwithstanding the issues with the PRF
(mainly lack of SMART indicators) which are discussed in Paras 29-With the
overall outcomes of the Project being satisfactory, the feedback provided by
these PIRs to monitor progress towards meeting set PRF targets of the IEERB
Project is satisfactory  Project Finance The IEERB Project had  GEF budget of
USD 50 million that was to be fully disbursed over  -year duration, managed by
the PMU under the direction of DEE Table  reveals very little deviation between
the actual outcome expenditures and original ProDoc Outcome expenditures The
only significant deviation would be the actual annual expenditures versus the
projected annual expenditures The information notes that annual expenditures in
2014 and 2015 were only 81% and 76% of projected expenditures while 2016
expenditures were 144% of ProDoc expenditures This indicates and is confirmed by
the Evaluation that implementation of the demonstration buildings under
Component  was slow in delivery primarily due to late commencement of these
buildings in 2014 after MoNREP withdrew its co-financing support of the Project
Project co-financing was US$million which is only 55% of the ProDoc estimate of
USD 70 million Co-financing details can be found on Table  The level of co-
financing on the IEERB Project is reflective of the commitments of all
stakeholders, of which 76% came from the owners of the demonstration buildings,
% from in-kind contributions from DEE, and the remaining % from in-kind
contributions from other government agencies involved with IEERB (such as
oblasts training centres and state enterprises) Though the co-financing for
IEERB did not meeting its target, the cost effectiveness of the IEERB Project
has been satisfactory in consideration of impacts of the IEERB Project, some of
which are significant such as the preparation of the TC-EPB, capacity building
of stakeholders, and the completion of  demonstration buildings, the details of
which are provided Sections  and  18 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table : GEF Project Budget and Expenditures
for Belarus’ IEERB Project (in USD as of 31 March 2018) Budget (from Inception
Report) Total to be expended in 201823 Total Disbursed 201221 201822 IEERB
Outcomes 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 OUTCOME : Strengthened legal and regulatory
framework and mechanisms to enforce the legislation for improving the energy
efficiency of the building sector OUTCOME : Enhanced capacity of the Belarusian
specialists to implement and effectively enforce new energy efficiency standards
and construction norms with the initial focus on new residential buildings
OUTCOME : Implementation of demonstration projects for energy efficient
buildings OUTCOME : Documented, disseminated and institutionalized Project
results providing  basis for further replication Project Management Total
(Actual) Total (Cumulative Actual) ,763 396,517 ,730 405,000  128,555 200,125
51,753 ,321 11,101 288,384 12,180 310,000  64,532 130,387 75,851 ,513 197,853
,156,468 93,826 ,270,000  173,910 326,580 ,326,765 ,131,360 63,447 282,923
46,371 290,000  48,276 88,283 53,201 29,716 ,942 286,106 222,820 ,347,111 13,687
171,794 225,000 ,500,000 ,500,000 ,739 ,739 204,000 61,062 476,335 402,000
61,698 807,073 998,000 53,905 ,561,475 ,054,000 37,474 ,214,384 842,000  - -
Annual Planned Disbursement (from ProDoc)24 % 118% 81% 76% 144% - - % Expended
of Planned Disbursement ,739 478,074 ,285,147 ,846,622 ,061,006 ,347,111
,347,111 21 Commencing 31 July 2012 - the Project Document signed by the
Government of Belarus on 31 July 2012 22 Up to 31 March 2018 23 Up to terminal
date of the Project of 30 June 2018 24 From planned ProDoc disbursements 19
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
Table : Co-Financing for Belarus IEERB Project (as of 31 March 2018) UNDP own
financing (million USD) Government (million USD) Partner Agency (million USD)
Private Sector (million USD) Total (million USD) Co-financing (type/source)
Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual Planned Actual
Grants 25 400 400 400 400 Loans/Concessions 000 000 • In-kind support 000 600
300 600 300 200 • Other 62726 000 000 627 Totals 400 400 000 600 300 600 000 627
700 227 25 Includes all cash contributions 26 Cash contribution from MAPID,
GrodnoGrazhdanProject, GrodnoZhylStroi, UKS Mahilioŭ 20 Terminal Evaluation June
2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table : Breakdown of GEF
and UNDP Co-financing by ATLAS Budget Lines Atlas Budgetary Account Code ATLAS
Budget Description GEF (US$) UNDP (co-financing) (US$) International Consultants
324,900 71200 ,178 Local Consultants 342,198 71300 95,496 Contractual services –
Individuals 348,652 71400 97,286 Travel 215,171 71600 95,878 Contractual
Services – Companies 486,248 72100 30,362 Equipment 755,617 72200  Materials &
Goods 484,754 72300  Communication / Courier Charges 29,431 72400 109 Office
Supplies 12,034 72500  Hospitality / Catering  72700 ,817 Information Technology
Equipment 13,578 72800 ,041 Rental & Maintenance – Premises 784 73100 24,579
Construction Services ,215,334 73200  Rental & Maintenance of Other Equipment
,164 73400 ,823 Audio Visual & Print Prod Costs 85,133 74200 12,858
Miscellaneous ,913 74500 ,189 Training, Workshops and Conferences 178,764 75700
30,495 76125  Realized Loss ,848 76135 -114 Realized Gain -,522 TOTAL ,500,000
400,000 Table  provides IEERB Project expenditures during the -year
implementation period The breakdown shows 54% of GEF funds were expended on
supporting capital costs of the demonstration buildings (as indicated by ATLAS
budgetary lines for 72200, 72300 and 73200 which cover construction services and
the procurement and installation of energy efficient equipment in the pilot
buildings) Roughly 33% of the GEF funds were spent on Project personnel and
consultants (as indicated by ATLAS budgetary lines for 71200, 71300, 71400 and
71600); this includes services for the engineering design of the demonstration
buildings as well as international consultants The remaining 13% of the funds
for workshops, trainings and conferences, and travel costs to neighboring
regional countries Roughly % of GEF funds were for Project Management Shortfalls
in the budgets for consulting time, travel costs to other countries and
workshops were made up through UNDP co- financing  & Design at Entry and
Implementation The & design as covered in Section IV (Pgs ) in the IEERB Project
ProDoc is robust and thorough The design thoroughly covers all & activities
including: 21 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings • • monitoring responsibilities and advance; • monitoring reporting
requirements including annual Project reviews and Project implementation the
Project inception phase; reports (APRs/PIRs); independent evaluations that
includes the Midterm Evaluation as well as the Final Evaluation; • • Project
audits; and • dissemination of Project results to encourage learning and
knowledge sharing Despite the weaknesses of the PRF (as explained in Para 29),
the & design is rated as satisfactory The & plan was executed according to the
designed as detailed in Para The Evaluation Team has had access to review
Project Inception phase report, PIRs, MTR, Project audits, PSC meeting minutes,
as well as Project logs (for risk, monitoring, lessons and issues) All these
files especially the Project logs provide good insights into the management of
the IEERB Project in the identification of risk, issues and corresponding
management responses In addition, these Project logs also documented checklists
for the & plan on  semi-annual basis to ensure compliance with the original &
plan With these files having been reviewed by the Evaluation Team, & plan
implementation is rated as satisfactory Ratings according to the GEF Monitoring
and Evaluation system27 are as follows: • & design at entry - ; • & plan
implementation - ; • Overall quality of & -   Performance of Implementing and
Executing Entities The performance of the implementing partner, the Department
of Energy Efficiency, can be characterized as follows: • DEE provided an
appropriate level of guidance to the PMU with regards to the work required to
update the Technical Code for energy efficiency in buildings during the early
stages of the Project This included assistance in sourcing technical specialists
for the Technical Committee for Standardization or TCS-14 for preparing the TC-
EPB; • accelerated the approval of the TC-EPB by involving and informing policy
makers of other ministries (such as Ministry of Energy, MoNREP, Ministry of
Economy, and MoAC) of the work of the Technical Committee on updating the TC-
EPB; support to the PMU to obtain approval for the full adoption of the TC-EPB
from the Council of Ministers; • 27  = HS or Highly Satisfactory: There were no
shortcomings;  =  or Satisfactory: There were minor shortcomings,  = MS or
Moderately Satisfactory: There were moderate shortcomings;  = MU or Moderately
Unsatisfactory: There were significant shortcomings;  =  or Unsatisfactory:
There were major shortcomings;  = HU or Highly Unsatisfactory / = Unable to
assess / = Not applicable 22 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of
the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings • Overall performance is rated as satisfactory The
performance of UNDP (the Implementing Agency) can be characterized as follows: •
UNDP’ responsibility for the design of the IEERB Project should have included
the sufficient time required for the proper monitoring of energy savings from
pilot buildings From the observations of the TE team, monitoring of energy
savings from these buildings was not able to commence upon completion of these
buildings due to the normal practice of new tenants not immediately occupying
these units (due to the work required to retrofit these units to the liking of
the tenants, work that often takes more than  months) In addition, full
occupancy of the buildings would be necessary for establishing normal energy
consumption of these buildings which likely would not occur for 12 months more
after the completion of the EE building; • UNDP support for the early adaptive
management measures of the IEERB Project, much of which was required to minimize
implementation delays to the Project during its early stages in 2012 and 2013; •
Highly effective PMU engaged in facilitating several effective Project
partnerships with key stakeholders with direct impacts on the intended outcomes
of the Project; • Excellent engagement of PMU with design and construction teams
of the pilot energy efficient buildings to the extent that these buildings were
completed by December 2016 and May 2017; • UNDP efforts to link with other
similar building energy efficiency projects in the region has facilitated
knowledge building on energy efficiency in buildings regionally (mainly CIS
countries) and raised the profile of the IEERB Project in Belarus and other
countries; • UNDP assistance in providing  communications strategy
(identification of targets audiences and scoping communications modalities) to
more effectively raise the profile of energy efficiency in residential
buildings; • Overall performance of UNDP on the IEERB Project is rated as
satisfactory summary of ratings of the implementing and executing entities of
the IEERB Project are as follows: • • • Overall quality of
implementation/execution (UNDP/DEE) –  Implementing Partner (DEE) – ;
Implementing Entity (UNDP) – ;  Project Results This section provides an
overview of the overall results of the IEERB Project and assessment of the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency, country ownership, mainstreaming,
sustainability, and impact of the IEERB Project In addition, evaluation ratings
for overall results, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability are also
provided against the revised June 2013 PRF (as provided in Appendix )For Tables
, , , 10 and 11, the “status of target achieved” is color-coded according to the
following color coding scheme: Green: Completed, indicator shows successful
achievements Yellow: Indicator shows expected completion by the EOP Red:
Indicator shows poor achievement – unlikely to be completed by Project closure
28 Evaluation ratings are on  scale of  to  as defined in Footnote 23 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings  Overall
Results summary of the achievements of IEERB Project at the Project Objective
level with evaluation ratings are provided on Table  Progress towards the target
of 80 multistory residential buildings that have integrated new EE measures into
their design did not commence until substantial progress was made by 2014 in the
preparation of the “Technical Code for Energy Performance of Buildings” or TC-
EPB within Outcome , which is explained in detail in Section  To date, the State
Standardization Committee and its Principal Department of State Expertise in
Construction report that there are over 87 buildings (520,000 m2) that have been
designed to consume less than 30 kWh/m2 annually for heating (from  baseline of
60 kWh/m2 annually that is the current energy performance of most of the
buildings and corresponding to the currently valid standards until the TC-EPB is
adopted) GHG emission reduction estimates against the targets of 80 buildings
and 220,000 tonnes of CO2 (lifetime) of emission reductions were calculated: •
from energy audits of expected energy savings from 87 buildings 29 totaling
520,000 m2 developed by several companies (such as “10-UNR-Invest” JSC, Saint-
Gobain Construction Product BelRus and “Magistr” JSC) with some of energy
efficiency improvement measures that were advocated by the Project to help
improve the energy performance of buildings from class  to classes  and + (such
as the forced ventilation with exhaust air heat recuperation, solar heaters,
automatic regulation and dispatching of thermal energy consumption) These design
features were included for reducing annual SEC for HVAC systems to comply with
Amendment # to Technical Standard No - enforced since October , Detailed
calculation of the estimated 706,200 tons CO2 emission reductions using the GEF
EE Tool is provided in Appendix  The number of EE buildings constructed during
IEERB implementation are shown on Table ; • by including the expected energy
consumption of the  pilot buildings in Mahilioŭ, Minsk, and Hrodna (under
Outcome ) within the 87 completed buildings where space heating is 25, 25 and 15
kWh/m2 respectively and for hot water supply is 20, 40 and 30 kWh/m2
respectively, totaling 45, 65 and 45 kWh/m2 for these pilot buildings Baseline
values for heating and hot water supply were assumed to be  and  kWh/m2
respectively on which GHG emission reductions were calculated Assuming  30-year
lifetime of the pilot buildings,  lifetime GHG emission reductions from these
demonstration buildings was estimated to be 24,100 tonnes CO2 For these reasons
and the Project having met its objective level targets, the evaluation has
determined that the rating for objective level achievements of IEERB is highly
satisfactory While these targets are based on the assumption of submitted design
documentation of the EE buildings, the Project has not yet had an opportunity to
develop large monitoring data sets for actual specific thermal energy
consumption of these EE buildings through direct energy monitoring consumption
This is further discussed in Para GHG emission reductions estimated for the
Project are summarized on the GEF Tracking Tool as provided in Appendix  29 As
officially reported by the State Construction Expertise through the Energy
Efficiency Department 24 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Table : Project-level achievements against IEERB Project
targets Performance Indicator Evaluation Comments Rating 30 Status of Target
Achieved Project Strategy Baseline Target Project objective: To reduce the
energy consumption (imported fuel) and related GHG emissions with the focus on
new residential buildings Number of buildings designed and constructed in
accordance with the new energy efficiency standards Amount of reduced CO2
emissions compared to the projected baseline 87 buildings completed with energy
audits indicating energy consumption to be less than 60 kWh/m2 for hot water and
heating ( and + ratings) At least 10% (around 80 buildings) of all new
residential multi-storey buildings, for which the design is started during the
last year of the Project are integrating new EE measures into their design with
the target of reducing their combined, annual energy demand for space heating
and hot water below 60 kWh/m2 See Paras    “Lifetime” reduction of 220,000 tons
of CO2eq resulting from the energy saving in buildings, for which the
construction has started or which have adopted into their design new energy
efficiency elements that reduce the energy consumption for heating and hot water
in residential buildings below the current thermal standards in force 706,200
tons of CO2eq See Paras    Overall Rating – Project-Level Targets  Table :
Number of energy efficient buildings constructed during IEERB Project
implementation31 % of total residential houses       Year Class  Class + Total
2013 201432 2015 2016 2017 Total  35    55    18  32  40 18 23  87  legislation
for improving energy efficiency of building sector Outcome : Strengthened legal
and regulatory framework and mechanisms to enforce To achieve Outcome , Project
resources would be used to: • develop for adoption an endorsed methodology for
building energy performance monitoring in line with EN and other applicable
international standards (Output ); complete at least 50 completed energy audits
providing information on factual energy consumption and energy balance of
different type of existing residential buildings of different age and using
different construction techniques (Output ); • 30 Ibid 27 31 These are buildings
that comply with Amendment # to Technical Standard No - where Class +: <24
kWh/m2, Class :  kWh/m2, and Class :  kWh/m2 The design of these energy
efficient multi-storey residential buildings to the standard of Classes  and +
were  result of the capacity building efforts under Outcome  involving seminars
and workshops on technical designs in engineering solutions for energy efficient
buildings 32 Received retroactive certification to Amendment # 25 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings • complete
review and cost-efficiency analysis of different technical options to improve
building energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy sources, including an
analysis of the cost- efficiency of different heat supply and distribution
methods to serve low or close to zero-energy buildings (Output ); complete an
analysis of the possibility of using different heat supply systems typically
used in Belarus, including centralized heating systems, in particular, radiator
systems connected to district heating and water heating systems for designing
and construction of new efficient buildings with recommendations for future
development prepared (Output ); • • prepare  finalized draft (with agreement
from all stakeholders) of new national functional energy performance-based norms
and standards for newly constructed buildings, and buildings subjected to  major
renovation for primary use in residential buildings (Output ); • elaborate on
practical procedures for the establishment of  mandatory system of EE
certification of buildings that is adopted by the Government of Belarus,
including issuing of EE passports and an established system of monitoring and
compliance checking with set norms (Output ); and further develop quality
standards and  system of EE certification for the construction materials,
equipment and accessories used in the construction sector that are adopted by
all stakeholders (Output ) •  summary of the actual achievements of the Outcome
with evaluation ratings are provided on Table  The baseline of this activity
were ongoing efforts to develop the TC-EPB which resulted in slow adoption of
any proposed revisions on construction norms related to minimum energy
performance standards (MEPS) for buildings by the Government In April 2013, the
GoB adopted the State Housing Policy Concept (to 2016) stipulating newly
constructed residential buildings to be in line with improved energy performance
standards The timing of the Project was excellent in providing incremental
assistance through the formation of  technical committee with international
advisors to accelerate the development of  Technical Code to serve as  key legal
framework to enforce MEPS that improve energy efficiency of new buildings The
thrust of the development of the TC-EPB was its harmonization with EU Directive
2010/EU concerning energy performance of residential buildings The Project
engaged "RUE StroyTechNorm" (STN) who assembled the Technical Committee on
Standardization in the Field of Architecture & Construction (TCS-14) in 2014 to
lead the development of the TC-EPB; the Technical Committee consisted of 20
members (including four Project’ experts) from various entities throughout
Belarus including those working under an Energy Efficiency Committee within DEE
TCS-14 with the assistance of Project resources undertook  number of activities
to develop the TC-EPB including: •  critical analysis of methodologies and
practices established in EU and in Belarus in 2013 and This analysis revealed
high level of harmonization of these methodologies and practices between
national standards and the corresponding EU Directive 2010/EU, notwithstanding
that the national regulations were still missing important provisions for
minimum energy performance and the measurement and verification of integral
energy performance of different types of residential buildings; 26 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table :
Outcome  achievements against targets Evaluation Comments Rating33 Project
Strategy Performance Indicator Baseline Target Status of Target Achieved Revised
minimum energy performance standards adopted for new construction and reaching
status of  law by the end of the Project with  target of reducing the energy
consumption of new residential buildings for space heating and hot water
together below 60 kWh/m2 Prescriptive thermal standards adopted in 2010 defining
minimum mandatory -values for the building envelope, corresponding to the
average annual heat demand of 60 kWh/m2 for space heating of typical multi-
apartment buildings and  kWh/m2 together with sanitary hot water preparation
Status of the national laws and other regulatory documents controlling the
energy consumption of the newly constructed buildings Outcome : Strengthened
legal and regulatory framework and mechanisms to enforce the legislation for
improving the energy efficiency of the building sector The Technical Code for
“Energy Performance of Buildings” (TC-EPB) containing MEPS for new building
construction has been with the Council of Ministers since late 2016 for signing
as  law specifying energy consumption of new residential buildings for space
heating and hot water together below 60 kWh/m2 The MEPS under the TC-EPB is
mandatory As of 12 June 2018, the TC-EPB was given No28 as  Governmental Decree
pending final signature of the Prime- Minster The TC-EPB also contains an energy
performance and labelling scheme The TC-EPB is currently undergoing final legal
procedures as law (see above)  See Paras  An energy performance certification
and labelling scheme for both new and existing buildings adopted and under
implementation by the end of the Project See Para   Overall Rating – Component
33 Ibid 27 27 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings • developing of  roadmap for the upgraded TC-EPB including
recommendations to strengthen relevant legal and regulatory framework (supported
by MoAC and Gosstandart) for integration into the National Standardization Plan
of Belarus; collection and analysis of available data on different construction
techniques and materials, design arrangements of heat supply and distribution
schemes, and renewable energy systems with cost-efficiency analyses to improve
energy efficiency of various types of residential buildings The resulting report
and recommendations were used to develop the pilot buildings under Outcome ; • •
providing additional new standards for the TC-EPB including corresponding
amendments to existing standards (such as to GOST EN , STB EN 15603, STB ISO
6242--20, TKP 45- -2006, TKP -)34; • preparing methodology guidelines based on
the IPMV protocol (in line with the best international practice) and adapted to
Belarusian conditions for energy auditing, energy performance monitoring and
calculations applicable to different types of multi-storey residential
buildings35 These methodologies were used as  basis for carrying out of 55
energy audits of multi-storey residential buildings in  (see Para 75 for more
details), the experience of which was disseminated during training workshops for
70 professional energy auditors in 2013 and 2014; • developing an energy
efficiency certification system and  system of monitoring and compliance
checking applicable to residential buildings in late 2014 with the assistance of
international and national consultants; support for  round-table sessions for
relevant stakeholders where main principles and framework of the certification
system were discussed, leading to the development of  “Building Energy Passport”
that includes energy efficiency rating of building’ HVAC system The Passport was
to serve as an integral part of approved design and construction documentation
that would contain all major requirements for certifying energy performance of
building; • • drafting of the TC-EPB as  regulatory enactment that contains,
inter alia, the minimum building energy performance (MBEP) requirements, and
corresponding provisions for energy certification and compliance checking
systems and energy audit This was approved by TCS-14 and incorporated in 2015
into the State List of Technical Norms & Standards Pending Adoption in the Field
of Energy Saving for  (as amended №, №, №) and Amendment No to the State
Standardization Plan of the Republic of Belarus for ; revision of some of core
standards integral to the TC-EPB leading to its adoption and approval by
GosStandard as of 21 December 201536; • • assisting DEE since late 2016 to
obtain approval of the TC-EPB of  number of ministries as  legal act, which has
been successfully passed national conciliation procedures and forwarded to the
Council of Ministers for final adoption As of May 2018, this process was nearing
completion with possible completion within 2018, and is an excellent
accomplishment by the IEERB Project 34 This would include “Method of calculation
of specific heat consumption for heating and ventilation in residential
buildings”; "Energy performance of buildings - Assessment of overall energy
consumption and energy performance of buildings"; "Energy efficiency of
buildings - Methods for determination of energy efficiency and energy
certification buildings "; and amendments to “Thermal protection of buildings
Energy performance characteristics Rules of definition” 35 To validate the
guidelines and build capacity for project partners, IEERB Project supported an
energy audit of  multi-storey houses built by these partners 36 Such as STB ;
amendments to STB EN ; STB EN 15316--2015 (eight parts); amendments to STB EN
15217- 2014; amendments to TCP - 28 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Adoption of the TC-EPB and its standards,
however, was initially not embraced by the construction industry in Belarus in
Feasibility of the required measures was questioned along with the preliminary
cost-effectiveness analyses of different technical solutions to improve energy
efficiency of buildings Project-supported analysis in 2017 has demonstrated that
under the existing tariff regime where heating tariffs are too low, there was
and currently is  lack of incentives both for developers and households to build
and operate buildings with energy efficient heating and hot water systems
Notwithstanding the work of TCS-14 to justify the feasibility of the EE designs
of the Outcome  demonstration projects and its benchmarking against EU
experience as best practice to local developers and builders, this discussion
has only raised the importance of monitoring and reporting the energy
consumption of the demonstration buildings under Outcome  This information could
then inform revised tariff policies for heating and hot water This is further
discussed in Paras 102, 105 and In conclusion, the results of Outcome  are rated
as satisfactory with the following rationale: • The completion of the
development of MBEP standards, specifically for energy efficiency for heating
and hot water in new buildings that are now mandatory; • The development and
completion of an energy audit methodology for assessing building energy
efficiency for heating and hot water; • The completion and use of  certification
scheme for EE buildings, both of which have been included in the TC-EPB; •
Review of the TC-EPB by the Council of Ministers and the Ministry of Justice for
promulgation likely in June 2018; and Lack of incentives for the construction
industry to install costly energy efficient heating and hot water systems due to
existing heating tariffs, which prolong cost recovery periods of the investments
•  energy efficiency standards and construction norms Outcome : Enhanced expert
capacity of the Belarusian specialists to implement new To achieve Outcome ,
Project resources would be utilized to: • develop and publish different target
groups’ technical guides, handbooks and other related training materials on
energy efficiency design and construction of new buildings, materials that would
be used for introducing new construction norms and disseminated through an
internet- based energy platform and the Project’ website (Output ); • develop
new courses on integrated building design and building energy efficiency to be
included into the curricula of universities educating architects and building
engineers, and with at least 200 students having passed new courses by the end
of the Project (Output ); train at least 50 experts from different state and
municipal administrative bodies (who deal with construction policies, norms and
standards) on the most recent international developments, practices and
international experience learnt on building energy efficiency and
environmentally sustainable construction (Output ); train at least 50 architects
and construction engineers from the leading architectural- construction
institutes (Output ) on: • • 29 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government
of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings  the most recent international developments in the area of
energy efficient buildings; technical and managerial aspects; integrated energy
efficient building design principles and techniques;   practical aspects of
designing buildings when moving from prescriptive to functional construction
norms in the energy saving sphere;  possible technical solutions and principles
of cost-effective design for optimizing building energy performance; and
presentation of the available, state-of-the-art software to support integrated,
energy efficient building design and training for its use; • train at least 50
construction inspectors from Regional and District centers on methodologies for
assessing building energy performance and the correct installation of the
materials and equipment used (Output ); train least 50 mid-level supervisors of
the construction companies on correct installation of materials and equipment,
and provide other advice for private construction companies on how to integrate
elements of energy-efficient design throughout the project cycle from the design
of buildings to their construction and operation (Output ); • • deliver  -week
training seminar to 25 people including professional designers, representatives
of the state expertise and building supervision to familiarize them with the
experiences of energy-efficient building design (including visiting the
facilities), and organization of state supervision from EU countries including
the role of municipal authorities (Output ); and • deliver other trainings and
information meetings to facilitate exchange of experience and knowledge based on
co-operation with other international initiatives promoting energy efficient and
environmentally sustainable building construction (Output )  summary of the
actual achievements of Outcome  with evaluation ratings are provided on Table
The baseline scenario of the Project was only  out of more than 120 design
institutes in Belarus using  new design approach to energy efficiency for
buildings, with little to no dissemination of this new approach beyond the local
design institutes of NIPTIS, MAPID and Grodnograzhdanproekt Prior to training
being delivered (around June 2014), the Project had completed: • an analysis of
target groups along with assessment of needs in their capacity building
(following meetings with Energy Efficiency Department and round-table
discussions on  capacity building action plan for ); • 15 special technical
reports and guidelines on energy efficiency design principles for dissemination
to various training and academic institutes (as  part of Output ) This included
important issues such as cost efficiency analysis of different technical options
applicable to the development of energy efficient residential buildings and
development of designs for the pilot buildings of Outcome ; • analysis of
curricula of different relevant universities and proposals to improve the
curricula to address building energy efficiency through suggested university
courses; • drafting of recommendations for updating relevant university
curricular as approved at  round table with 60 stakeholders; and •  draft of the
proposed syllabus to the boards of universities for their adoption 30 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table :
Outcome  achievements against targets Performance Indicator Evaluation Comments
Rating37 Project Strategy Baseline Target Status of Target Achieved Integrated,
energy efficient building design approach together with buildings’ overall
energy performance based design principles adopted into the work of at least 30%
of all local design institutes as well as into the curricula of all educational
institutes in Belarus educating new architects and building construction and
HVAC engineers By the end of the Project, at least 50 experts from each key
professional group and 200 university students have taken and successfully
passed courses on energy efficient building design and construction Key public
authorities responsible for supervision and enforcement of the planned new norms
and regulations trained Non-integrated design of the buildings just complying
with the current prescriptive thermal standards in force Demonstrated capacity
of the Belarusian building sector specialists to integrate new EE approaches and
measures into the design of the buildings and to implement them in the
construction sector Outcome : Enhanced expert capacity of the Belarusian
specialists to implement new energy efficiency standards and construction norms
13% of all design institutes as of June 2017  See Paras  Lack of capacity of the
public authorities to effectively supervise and enforce implementation of the
planned new, overall energy performance based norms and standards More than 100
experts from construction companies and the engineering profession as well as
over 500 university students have taken courses on EE building design and
construction  See Para  Overall Rating – Component   37 Ibid 27 31 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings The Project
supported the training for  wide spectrum of building professionals that
commenced with the preparation of appropriate training materials in 2013 and
Project consultants prepared 250 technical reports of high quality for
introducing new principles into design and construction of energy efficient
housing as delivery of Outputs  Many of these reports have been adopted by
academic institutes such as the Construction Faculty of BNTU in Minsk
Dissemination of these materials were supplemented by presentations, lectures,
leaflets, brochures and guidelines through numerous -day training sessions in
Minsk and Hrodna, dedicated to construction policies, norms and standards,
recent international developments, integrated energy efficient building design
principles and techniques, available technical options and correct installation
of the materials and equipment used, and methodologies for assessing energy
performance By 2014, the  new courses related to best international and national
practice in the field of design and construction of energy efficient residential
buildings were presented by the Project through meetings and round-table
discussions with 14 faculties of  universities,  national universities The
outcome of these meetings was agreement for inclusion of these new courses in
their syllabi, serving as  deliverable of Output  In June 2017, the Belarusian
National Technical University (BNTU) incorporated 16 tutorials and reference
books developed by the Project into the curriculum of their Construction Faculty
that provides up to 90 hours of lectures for 540 students within  specialized
construction fields As  part of the delivery of Outputs  and ,  training
campaign from 2014 to 2016 was attended by over 30 construction companies with
more than 70 specialists and decision-makers attending these sessions Attendees
also received certificates for the completion of these training sessions from
DEE As  part of Output , more than 50 representatives of construction companies
had passed practical courses by late 2016, coupled with actual visits to become
familiar with the energy efficient engineering systems being installed in three
demonstration buildings in Mahilioŭ, Minsk and Hrodna By June 2017, there were
already 16 local design organizations38 out of 120 design institutes that are
incorporating energy efficiency improvements as developed and advocated by the
Project into the design and construction of residential buildings This is  good
indicator of the gradual adoption of energy efficiency improvements for housing
construction practices common theme for the trainings delivered by Outputs  and
was energy auditing of buildings By November 2016, detailed energy audits were
completed for 55 multi-storey residential buildings of different type and age
The collective conclusion of these audits were that multi-storey residential
buildings in Belarus have an average annual energy consumption of 170 kWh/m2 of
thermal energy for HVAC and hot water This report with its recommendations to
improve energy efficiency of the monitored buildings was distributed to 70
professionals who attended five -day training workshops on energy audits of
residential building These workshops focused on methodology guidelines for
energy audit, energy performance monitoring and calculation as applicable to
residential buildings and based on the results of actual energy audits of the 55
buildings conducted by the Project between 2014 and follow-up survey by the
Project indicated that more than 35% of trainees became involved and performed
energy audit of residential buildings in practice 38 Includes “Stroykurs” LLC,
"Head Specialized Design Bureau for  Complex of Equipment for Microclimate" LLC,
“SRC Magister" LLC, PE "Energeo" JSC, “Light Solutions” LLC, “Inspectsproject"
LLC, "MBA GARANT group" LLC 32 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government
of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings To enhance the delivery of Outputs  and , the Project
provided support and organized logistics for 58 decision-makers, designers,
builders and other relevant specialists for their participation on  study visits
to five European countries (Germany, Austria, Czech Republic, England and
France)39 and 16 international events abroad on best practice for energy
efficient residential buildings design, construction and operation as well as
legal framework, standards and policies Some of these visits and events
included: •  attendees from NIPTIS and MoAC who took part in  Annual
International Conferences on Passive Houses in Germany in 2015 and 2016; •  DEE
representatives took part in annual UNECE sessions in Geneva from 2013 to 2018;
• the first study tour for  professionals and officials in September 2013 to
Germany focusing on construction of residential buildings; two -day study tours
to the United Kingdom concurrent with EcoBuild Forums during - March 2014 and -
March 2015 for 13 professionals and officials with  focus on policies and
standards, and as well as on advanced principles in design, construction and
operation of energy efficient buildings; three -day study tours to Austria in
between 2012 and 2014 for 30 decision-makers and relevant specialists to study
design, construction and operation practices as well as with legal framework,
standards and policies in the energy efficiency and energy saving in the
residential sector • • By late 2016, the Project was also supporting as part of
the delivery of Output  attendance of DEE officials and specialists trained by
the Project to higher profile events and initiatives including: • The ENES-2016
Forum in Russian Federation for persons including decision-makers and  technical
specialist The Forum was an opportunity for the Project to share their
experiences on best practices in energy efficiency and environmentally sound
construction and operation of buildings with their foreign colleagues; the
Conferences of the Parties to the UNFCCC in Paris in December 2015 and in
Marrakech in November 2016 for one expert as  response from requests from the
MoNREP and Ministry of Foreign Affairs for participation Project experts
provided background information for the official delegation before and during
the Conferences to formulate and specify country positions; and • South-South
cooperation with the UNDP projects dedicated to improvement of energy efficiency
of residential buildings in Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan The Project
organized  series of activities in July 2016 that included visits to the pilot
project sites, as well as to house- building factories in Minsk, Mahilioŭ and
Hrodna Twelve experts from these projects and representatives of governmental
agencies of these countries took part in these activities and received
additional and detailed information about energy efficiency improvement
measures, practices and regulation exercised in Belarus • As an adaptive
management measure as mentioned in Para 43, the Project in early 2017 commenced
new series of trainings for professionals from construction companies, housing
operation entities and utilities as well as for tenants with practical courses
at the project pilot sites in Minsk, Mahilioŭ and Hrodna In May 2017, three
training sessions were held for tenants in the demonstration 39 Some of the
study tours were co-financed by host parties totalling close to US$105,This
would include IWO , Germany, Sep -, 2013; Austrian Energy Agency, Austria, Dec
-, 2013, March , 2014, Sep , 2014; Czech Trust Fund, Czech Republic, Nov , 33
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
residential buildings in Minsk, Hrodna and Mahilioŭ During the heating season of
, four -day training workshops with on-site practical exercises were conducted
for 50 specialists of municipal services responsible for operation of the pilot
residential buildings in Hrodna and Mahilioŭ An important outcome from these
activities is the improved capacity of the construction industry and the
engineering profession in Belarus to plan, design and implement energy efficient
building according to the standards set in the TC-EPB With regards to the 87 new
buildings that comply with the TC-EPB as reported by the Principal Department of
State Expertise in Construction (mentioned in Paras 62, 63 and 87), not all of
these energy efficient buildings inherited all aspects of the EE designs from
the Outcome  demonstration building designs Notwithstanding, the Project has
made  significant contribution to the capacities of building sector personnel to
be able to implement an /+ class building, an improvement from the  and  classes
These building developers are incorporating  range of improvements such as
automatic regulation and dispatching of thermal energy, and special designs for
building envelope that use heat recuperation, solar collectors, and small
compact ventilators with heat recovery None of them, however, have designed
residential building with heat pumps In conclusion, the results of Outcome  can
be rated highly satisfactory due to: • the PMU effectively engaging the
appropriate stakeholders in Belarus to advance activities of the Project to
achieve desired outcomes and objective; and catalysing interest amongst  wide
range of stakeholder on energy efficiency in buildings •  Outcome :
Implementation of demonstration projects for energy efficient buildings To
achieve Outcome , Project resources would be utilized to: • finalize design of
the demo buildings by applying integrated building design principles and
incorporating new technologies and approaches for meeting the HVAC needs of
those buildings in  most energy and cost-efficient way (Output ); • provide
oversight in the completion of construction of the demo buildings by ensuring
that construction and equipment installation are completed in accordance with
the adopted standards and guidelines (Output ); • prepare  monitoring report on
the progress of construction of three demonstration buildings, documenting
costs, experiences gained and lessons learnt from procuring, installing and
testing the new energy efficient materials, and new construction techniques and
appliances, as well as documenting the experiences and lessons learnt from
procuring, installing and testing the new energy efficient materials,
construction techniques and appliances (Output ); • prepare  monitoring report
on the energy performance of the demonstration buildings, documenting the actual
energy and financial savings and GHG emission reductions, and documenting the
actual energy and financial savings and GHG emission reduction from each
building as  whole and from each specific energy efficiency measure and
appliance tested (Output ); conduct at least 30 private showings of the new
buildings organized for architects, designers and other responsible decision-
makers, including half-day training sessions with an objective to promote the
solutions adopted for the demonstration projects and buildings (Output ) • 34
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
summary of the actual achievements of Outcome  with evaluation ratings are
provided on Table Prior to the commencement of Component , there were no energy
efficient residential buildings with comparable energy performance in Belarus
that could be monitored and used to inform policy for energy efficient
buildings, and which could be used to demonstrate to the public and relevant
building stakeholders the potential and feasibility of energy efficiency
improvement measures in residential buildings By the end of 2013, sites of the
pilot buildings with energy efficient heating and hot water systems were
finalized with NIPTIS serving as the designer of these systems for all
demonstration buildings located in: • Grodno for  10-storey house where the
general designer is RUE "Grodnograzhdanproyekt Institute" and the builder is
“GrodnoZhylStroy” JSC; • Mahilioŭ for  10-storey building40 where the general
designer is NIPTIS and the builder is "UKS Mahilioŭ"; and • Minsk for  19-floor
building where the general designer and builder is JSC MAPID During 2014, design
studies for these  demonstration buildings were completed by Project’ experts
and NIPTIS as delivery of Output  that included: • Optimization of the
architectural design of the building (including the shape, orientation, and
placing of windows) through the inclusion of energy efficient equipment and
increasing use of renewable energy resources; Improved thermal insulation of the
building envelope in accordance with the most recent norms and requirements that
are or will be adopted in EU countries with the climatic conditions similar to
Belarus and by optimizing required thermal retention values of each building
component by integrating cost and energy consumption considerations of the
entire building; • • Forced ventilation with heat recovery up to 80% from the
exhaust air for each of the buildings; • Heat recovery from wastewater to be
used for preheating of sanitary hot water for each of the buildings; • Solar
water heaters to provide thermal energy for HVAC system and sanitary hot water
for building in Mahilioŭ; • Heat pumps that utilize ground heat through
foundation piles and utilize heat from district sewage collector for building in
Hrodna; • Solar PV-panels to reduce electricity consumption of the heat pumps in
Hrodna; • Real time and remote monitoring and regulation of heat and hot water
consumption; and • Dispatcher system for energy consumption data 40 This
building was  replacement for the building MoNREP was to co-finance with “RUE
Mahilioŭ UKS” serving as the building construction owner See para 43 for details
35 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
Table 10: Outcome  achievements against targets Performance Indicator Status of
the demonstration projects Evaluation Comments Rating41 Intended Outcome
Baseline Target Status of Target Achieved / Each of the  demonstration buildings
constructed on schedule Outcome : Implementation of demonstration projects for
energy efficient buildings All  demonstration buildings were completed by May No
schedule was specified in the ProDoc See Para 86  Design documentation for the
pilot buildings was approved with space heating and hot water specific energy
consumption being less than 60 kWh/m2 For each of the  constructed demonstration
buildings, annual total external energy demand for space heating and hot water
equaled or was less than 60 kWh/m2 Energy consumption for each of the  buildings
and also other performance indicators (living comfort etc) monitored for at
least one full year See Paras   Energy consumption for each of the  pilot
buildings has been monitored already one full year However, information on
actual energy consumption is not reflective of normal energy consumption since
there is about 42% occupancy of all units in all  pilot buildings Cost of the
design and construction of the  pilot buildings has been covered through co-
financing from Project partners and from GEF financing (consisting of around 17%
of the total capital cost of each pilot building) See Paras 87 and 88  The
baseline cost for designing and construction of the  demonstration buildings is
covered in full by the Project’ co-financing resources of developers and
additional GEF financing for designing and construction of demo buildings was
not in excess of 15% of the total construction costs of each demo building See
Para 85  Overall Rating – Component   41 Ibid 27 36 Terminal Evaluation June
2017 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings The outcome of these design
studies led to the installation of the most cost-effective energy efficient
solutions based on integrated building design principles and renewable energy
technologies that minimize heat and power consumption of the buildings at least
by  minimum factor of  Design documentation for the above principals and
technologies for all  pilot buildings was completed by NIPTIS in mid-2015 and
submitted to the State Expert Appraisal Committee under MoAC in October 2015 for
approval to construct This included construction documentation for the
installation of energy efficient equipment, general provisions and instructions
for construction techniques, building operation and maintenance works of the
pilot buildings Approval for construction was received in June One issue that
did arise for these buildings was RUE “GrodnoGrazhdanProject” informing the PMU
in 2015 that they will not be able to provide further sustainable financing of
the demonstration building in Hrodna The PMU and UNDP CO have, in cooperation
with the Head of EE Department, approached the Grodno authorities to recruit
“GrodnoZhylStroi” JSC to take over this demonstration project Project resources
were used to cover the cost of additional energy efficiency measures estimated
to be around 17% of the total capital cost of these buildings Project partners
provided the necessary technical supervision during the construction of the
building envelope and installation of the energy efficient equipment by
subcontractors Technical supervision reports as  part of the delivery of Output
were generated during this period including information on necessary adjustments
to ensure proper installation of equipment that would perform to the intended
standards and guidelines in the design documentation Construction completion
dates of the demonstration buildings were 14 December 2016 for Mahilioŭ, 26
January 2017 for Minsk and 20 May 2017 for Hrodna Energy efficiency features of
each demonstration building consisted of supplementing heat supplies from
district CHP plants with heat from: • recovery of wastewater heat in each
building using heat exchangers to supplement energy for heating and hot water; •
mechanical heating and ventilation system for each residential unit with  system
to recover heat from air exhaust from each unit; • heat pumps for the
demonstration building in Hrodna that were integrated with the foundation piles
including 32 heat exchangers and thermal probes and the recovery of heat from
district sewage pipe; • PV-panels on the south façade and roof to generate grid
electricity in pilot building in Hrodna which is to be sold to the grid and
reduce electricity costs to the building tenants; solar collectors using heated
glycol that supplements heat both for HVAC system and for the hot water supply
system in the Mahilioŭ demonstration building • The resulting energy performance
of these buildings for space heating and hot water supply was to be equal or
less than 60 kWh/m2/yr according to design documents Specific thermal energy
consumption for the Mahilioŭ, Minsk and Hrodna pilot buildings was estimated as
25, 25 and 15 kWh/m2/yr respectively for space heating, and 20, 40 and 30
kWh/m2/yr, respectively for hot water supply  monitoring report on the progress
of construction of three demonstration buildings, documenting costs, experiences
gained and lessons learnt has been completed in 2018 as delivery of Output  This
report includes lessons learned from procuring, installing and testing the new
energy efficient materials, and new construction techniques and appliances, as
well as documenting 37 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings the experiences and lessons learnt from procuring,
installing and testing the new energy efficient materials, construction
techniques and appliances During 2017 and 2018, regular visits to the pilot
buildings were made by local architects, designers, builders and decision makers
as delivery of Output  However, despite the Project’ target to monitor the
energy consumption from these pilot buildings for  period of one year, the
Project, although conducting the monitoring of these pilot buildings for  period
of 12 months, has not had the opportunity to obtain continuous energy
consumption data and has not delivered Output  in full due to: • occupancy of
the pilot buildings during the evaluation mission of February 2018 being less
than 30% In May 2018, the occupancy rate reached 42% With this occupancy rate,
the inhabitants of each unit in each building have been reluctant to use the
energy efficiency features, which have been resulting in higher utility costs
(for both heating and electricity) This is due to:  the use of electricity (at
the % cost recovery tariff as shown on Figure ) for these features has  fixed
cost for operating the pumps, fans and meters all of which would have been
distributed amongst fewer households due to the low occupancy rate; and the
preference for heat from the CHPs which is only charged at  tariff equivalent to
% cost recovery rate (see Figure );  • most of the occupied units of the
demonstration buildings not having normalized energy consumptive patterns due to
the common practice when new housing units are purchased in Belarus, of new
tenants typically taking up to one year to undertake retrofits (required for
painting walls, installation of necessary kitchen appliances and washing
machines along with piping for these facilities, ducting and electrical
connections, and other adjustments) It is highly probable that normalized energy
consumptive patterns would occur in the next heating season of  when there is
stronger likelihood all units would be occupied with completed retrofits; the
recent data of monitoring nevertheless show that almost two third of families
who have already occupied the buildings consciously and properly use the system
of forced ventilation with heat recuperation installed in each flat; and the
solar heaters, the system of heat pumps and the PV-station are under normal
operation, as designed, and provide heat and electricity with certain deviations
related to low energy demand • • In conclusion, the results of Outcome  can be
rated satisfactory with the following rationale: • The Project had managed to
oversee the completion of  pilot energy efficient buildings as targeted in the
ProDoc; • Pilot building design documentation was approved on the basis of space
heating and hot water energy consumption being less than 60 kWh/m2/yr; • Due to
typical local practices of new tenants spending up to one year retrofitting  new
unit, normal energy consumption information of space heating and hot water
heating from these demonstration buildings could not be collected 38 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings  basis for
further replication Outcome : Documented, disseminated and institutionalized
project results providing  To achieve Outcome , Project resources would be
utilized to deliver the following outputs: • Developed public awareness-raising
materials and completed nation-wide awareness and information campaign
advocating the benefits of energy saving measures, including economic, social,
health, environmental and aesthetical aspects (Output ); • Agreed methodology
and sustainable institutional arrangements for annual market monitoring keeping
track on buildings constructed each year, as well as the sale of key building
materials, accessories and appliances together with their energy performance
characteristics (Output ); • Fully mandated and capacitated state agency with
responsibility to monitor the energy savings and CO2 emission reductions in
residential and other buildings, together with the agreed procedures for
compiling the respective data (Output ); • Approved national procedures for
extending energy audit practice in residential and other buildings and forming
mechanisms for using the energy audit results for elaboration of the energy
efficiency strategies for the building sector at the national level (Output ); •
Energy-efficiency aspects integrated into the regional and local plans for
territorial development being developed by the Institute of Urban and Regional
Planning (IURP) (Output ); • An International conference on energy efficiency in
residential sector held in Belarus, including  field visit to the pilot
demonstration sites; coordination with the results of other UNDP/GEF Project
“Removing the Barriers to Improving Energy Efficiency in the State Sector of
Belarus” (Output ); •  regularly updated Project website with postings on
Project information that are of interest for all stakeholders, including the
general public (with  link to an Expanded Energy Platform) (Output ); • Annual
market monitoring reports for new building construction (Output ); and • Final
Project Report consolidating the results and lessons learnt from the
implementation of the proposed Project components and future recommendations
(Output )  summary of actual achievements of Outcome  with evaluation ratings
are provided on Table To date, the Project has successfully implemented numerous
outreach and institutional activities since late 2013: • Preparation and
distribution of public awareness raising materials on energy savings in
buildings as  part of Outputs  and  This included:  The Project briefs are
updated and issued every quarter and distributed as leaflets to more than ,500
recipients;  More than 90 articles, press-releases, and reviews were prepared
for broadcasting through television broadcasts and web-based media 42  This also
included animated videos for residential households residents on energy
efficiency in residential buildings43; 42 Includes BT, regional TV channels, STV
Channel, Onlinerby, First Channel of Belarusian Radio, Belarus Today, tutby,
"Energy Efficiency" magazine, "Architecture and Construction" magazine,
"Studio", BelTA, "Komsomolskaya Pravda in Belarus", TV and Radio Company
"Mahilioŭ " 43  39 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Table 11: Outcome  achievements against targets
Performance Indicator Status of the planned public outreach activities
Evaluation Comments Rating44 Baseline Target Status of Target Achieved Project
Strategy / Planned public outreach activities successfully completed Outcome :
Documented, disseminated and institutionalized project results providing  basis
for further replication Numerous public outreach activities have been
successfully completed However, annual marketing reports for new building
construction have not yet been delivered Based on recent Government Orders in
2017 and 2018, NIPTIS has been designated as an entity responsible for  State
Programme for monitoring and energy auditing of the housing sector to be
continued until See Paras   Readiness of the entity to follow up and continue
the activities initiated by the Project / An entity to be responsible for
replication of the Project results has been designated and provided with
adequate resources to perform its work In 2014, the Government assigned RUE
“BelNITS Ecologiya” to perform as National Agency responsible for monitoring of
GHG emission reductions in all branches of economy and for respective reporting
to the UNFCCC Secretariat See Para 91-   The Institute of Urban and Regional
Planning and TCS-14 had several meetings during  to address integration of EE
buildings into urban development These discussions are still ongoing since IURP
has yet to agree with all new approaches  Project website on building energy
efficiency ( has been regularly updated and averaging 600 hits and ,000
documents per month downloaded since 2013 Number of visits and downloads from
the Project website / At least 100 hits and 10 downloaded documents per month
from the Project website See Para 90  Overall Rating – Component   44 Ibid 27 40
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings   65
communication campaigns45;  More than 250 technical reports, brochures,
reference books and guidelines posted on Interviews and news on television
broadcasts and web-based media; web-based media; • As mentioned in Para 67,
methodology guidelines for energy auditing of buildings was approved nationally
based on the IPMV protocol (in line with the best international practice) and
adapted to Belarusian conditions as  part of Output ; • 11 international
conferences and seminars on best practice in energy efficiency improvement in
residential buildings were organized and held under the auspices of the Project
and in cooperation with the Energy Efficiency Department, Ministry of
Architecture and Construction, UNDP and Austrian Energy Agency The total
audience represented more than 650 participants from eight countries This is
part of Output ; •  Project website on building energy efficiency ( has been
regularly updated since 2013 as  part of Output  This site averages 600 hits per
month, and has had more than ,000 downloads per month since 2013; With regards
to the Project’ contribution to the “readiness of the entity to follow up and
continue the activities initiated by the Project”, the IEERB Project has
undertaken the following: • To deliver Output , the Project initiated  number of
meetings to attract the Government’ attention to the monitoring issue (in
addition to the fact that the energy survey has been already included into the
Technical Code elaborated by the Project that is pending adoption) As  result,
the Order of the Deputy Minister of MoAC (as of August 18, 2017, No02--07) and
the Order of the Vice-Prime-Minister (as of February , 2018, No04/8pr) were
issued to assign responsible organizations that includes NIPTIS to prepare
related State Programme for monitoring and energy auditing of the housing sector
to continue this monitoring until 2020 under upcoming state programmes; • To
deliver Output , the Government in 2014 assigned RUE “BelNITS Ecologiya” to
perform as National Agency responsible for monitoring of GHG emission reductions
in all branches of economy and for respective reporting to the UNFCCC
Secretariat To date, their work through the support of the Project and the use
of the IPCC Expert Facility (that is used for preparation of National
Communications and the National GHG Cadaster) has been used to create and verify
the calculation protocol for GHG emission reductions generated from energy
efficient buildings based on best international practices; • For Output , the
Project in  initiated several meetings with the Institute of Urban and Regional
Planning and TCS-14 addressing integration of EE pattern into urban development
In addition, the issues of urban development with energy efficient housing were
discussed during several of the Project’ conferences and workshops starting from
These discussions are still ongoing since the Institute of Urban and Regional
Planning is reluctant to accommodate all new approaches The Project issued
reports in 2017 and 2018 on EE urban development that were submitted to DEE and
IURP for consideration:  “Proposals for urban development concepts, regional and
local development plans based on recommendations on the integration of energy
efficiency approaches into these plans”; 45 Includes Earth Day Event, UN70
Express Event, 3D-Picture Event, Inclusive Belarus Campaign with press-event in
Mahilioŭ, VII International Conference "Energy Conservation and Improving Energy
Efficiency" in the framework of the XXII Energy & Environment Forum in 2016;
“Energy efficient construction” under  Belarusian-German Energy Forum in 41
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
Amendments and additions to the technical standard TCH - "Urban detailed
planning Structure and order of development” that was sent to the Institute of
Urban and Regional Planning and TCS-; • Issuance of  relevant Project reports to
DEE in April 2018 as  part of Output  including:  “Analysis of practical
procedures (methodologies) and relevant provisions for the system of annual
monitoring of the status of energy efficient housing”;  “Institutional
mechanisms for annual monitoring of the status of energy-efficient housing”;
“Draft provisions and methodology of the system for annual monitoring of the
status of energy efficient housing”’; • For Output , the Final Project Report
consolidating the results and lessons learnt from the implementation of the
IEERB Project is being prepared for completion by 30 June In conclusion, the
results of Outcome  can be rated satisfactory with the following rationale: •
Delivery of  number of international and public awareness raising events
significantly racist the profile of energy efficiency in buildings to the
Belarusian public; • Ongoing process of institutionalizing Project results with
NIPTIS for annual market monitoring of new buildings and RUE “BelNITS Ecologiya”
for reporting GHG emission reductions from EE buildings; •  Project website that
is frequently visited and used by building practitioners in Belarus  Relevance
The IEERB Project is relevant to the development priorities of the Government of
Belarus which has been seeking efficiency improvements to specific energy
consumption within building envelopes since 1993 as described in Para In 1998,
the Government of Belarus adopted  “Law on Energy Saving”, which was replaced by
new Law in The legal framework of this Law seeks to accelerate the harmonization
of the country’ entire regulatory and legal system for energy efficiency with
relevant legislative framework and technical regulations of the European Union
Effectiveness and Efficiency The effectiveness of the IEERB Project has been
satisfactory, in consideration of resources being used to develop the TC-EPB
that has received approval from several ministries within the Government of
Belarus, engaged relevant building practitioners, professionals and policymakers
to build their knowledge base on energy efficiency in buildings, and technically
and financially supported the completion of  pilot EE buildings in  cities in
Belarus Effectiveness could have improved if the PMU had  PRF that better
described the targets and outputs of the IEERB Project The efficiency of the
IEERB Project has been rated as moderately satisfactory in consideration of
delays beyond the control of the Project, in the Project start-up between 2012
and 2013, delays in co-financing commitments including the withdrawal of MoNREP,
the late commencement and completion of demonstration EE buildings, and the
subsequent loss of opportunity for the IEERB Project to collect useful energy
consumptive information from demonstration buildings (due to lag time of tenants
in new buildings to generate normal energy consumptive patterns)
Notwithstanding, the PMU for the IEERB Project has performed well under these
challenging circumstances 42 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of
the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings  Country Ownership and Drivenness The drivenness of the
Government of Belarus to lower its carbon intensity within the residential
building sector is reflected in: • several standards and laws as described in
Para 18 to bring specific energy consumption of heating and hot water systems in
Belarus residential buildings closer to EU Directives; • actions and strong
support of the Department of Energy Efficiency at PSC meetings to direct the
IEERB PMU towards the strengthening of the TC-EPB and the capacities of building
practitioners and professionals throughout Belarus that will improve their
abilities to comply with new building MEPS; strong support from DEE at PSC
meetings to engage appropriate stakeholders to implement energy efficiency in
new buildings; • • Strong support from the Ministry of Architecture and
Construction to implement the systems for the checking of designs of new
buildings for compliance with the new TC-EPB  Mainstreaming The IEERB Project
was successfully mainstreamed with the Belarus UNDAF ()46, notably: • UNDAF Area
of Cooperation : Assistance for ensuring environmental sustainability; • Agency
Outcome : National capacity to mitigate and adapt to climate change enhanced; •
Agency Output : Energy efficiency in buildings is improved The IEERB Project is
also successfully mainstreamed with the UNDAF for Belarus ()47, notably: • UNDAF
Area of Cooperation : Environmental protection and sustainable environmental
management based on principles of green economy; • Outcome : By 2020, policies
will have been improved and measures effectively implemented to increase energy
efficiency and the production of renewable energy to protect landscape and
biological diversity, and to reduce anthropogenic burden on the environment;
Indicator : Reduction of GDP energy intensity (%) • The IEERB Project has not
made any specific efforts to mainstream gender in its activities However, there
was  gender balance of persons met during the Evaluation mission during February
2018,  positive indicator of the outcomes of the Gender Policy being implemented
by the Government of Belarus Several of the persons interviewed on the IEERB
Evaluation mission were women in senior management positions with influence on
Project results 10 Sustainability of Project Outcomes In assessing
sustainability of the IEERB Project, the evaluators asked “how likely will the
Project outcomes be sustained beyond Project termination?” Sustainability of
these objectives was 46  UNDAF--Finalpdf 47  43 Terminal Evaluation June 2018
UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings evaluated in the dimensions of
financial resources, socio-political risks, institutional framework and
governance, and environmental factors, using  simple ranking scheme: •  = Likely
(): negligible risks to sustainability; •  = Moderately Likely (ML): moderate
risks to sustainability; •  = Moderately Unlikely (MU): significant risks to
sustainability; and •  = Unlikely (): severe risks to sustainability; and • / =
unable to assess Overall rating is equivalent to the lowest sustainability
ranking score of the  dimensions Details of sustainability ratings for the
IEEIRS Project are provided on Table The overall IEERB Project sustainability
rating is Moderately Likely (ML) This is primarily due to: • new buildings
needing to comply with the TC-EPB to obtain approval for construction with
strong likelihood that the TC-EPB will be mandatory during 2018; the lack of
motivation of building developers in Belarus to invest in energy efficient hot
water and heating systems until the cross subsidization of heating tariffs is
reduced from % to 50% that will reduce payback periods from these investments to
reasonable period of time; • • heightened awareness of the benefits of energy
efficiency in buildings amongst all building stakeholders including various
Ministry personnel with oversight on building developments in Belarus as well as
public and private enterprises involved with designing and constructing
buildings This heightened awareness has led to numerous public discussions
regarding the need for reducing cross subsidization of heating tariffs;
integration of energy efficiency in buildings into the curricula of several
universities in training institutes, strengthening the capacity of building
practitioners and technicians to plan, design, implement and operate and
maintain equipment related to energy efficiency in buildings; completed pilot
energy efficiency buildings which can be used in future for demonstrating energy
savings from such measures and informing Government policies on energy
efficiency in buildings • • 11 Impacts The Project has made significant impacts
within the building sector in Belarus: • Most of the standards and regulations
of the TC-EPB are mandatory to ensure minimum energy performance of new
buildings Compliance to the TC-EPB should now be higher for the building sector
given that building developers will now be required to comply considering that
approval for construction of these buildings is contingent on compliance
remaining issue for the Government is to strengthen their building inspections
to ensure that installed equipment complies with their TC-EPB compliant
construction drawings; • Completion of pilot energy efficient residential
buildings has raised awareness amongst key building professionals of key
engineering design aspects of TC-EPB compliant buildings This in turn has
informed construction companies, both state and private entities, of  key
business direction for construction companies; • The IEERB Project has raised
the profile of energy efficiency in buildings through increasing the
availability of EE building information on several and easily accessible
platforms (such as the Project website:  44 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table 12: Assessment of Sustainability of
Outcomes Actual Outcomes (as of March 2018) Actual Outcome : Legal and
regulatory framework to support the enforcement of the Technical Code for Energy
Performance of Buildings (TC- EPB) has been strengthened Dimensions of
Sustainability  Assessment of Sustainability • Financial Resources: MoAC has
sufficient financial resources for enforcement personnel to approve new building
applications that comply with the new TC-EPB; Socio-Political Risks: Recent
trends in the rate of cross subsidization of heating tariffs is indicative of
the ongoing difficulties in raising heating tariffs to the extent that the
Government recovers the full cost of heating to the residential sector However,
official statements from the MoHU are an indication of their commitment to
elimination of these cross subsidies for both heating and electricity;
Institutional Framework and Governance: The TC-EPB will become mandatory after
its imminent 2018 approval by the Council of Ministers; Environmental Factors:
The TC-EPB was designed to reduce intensity of consumption of primary fuels for
heating and hot water in buildings, thereby reducing GHG emissions from the
building sector •  •   •   Overall Rating • Financial Resources: Financial
resources are sufficient amongst Belarusian building specialists to sustain
continued capacity building activities; Socio-Political Risks: Interest within
the building sector to invest in energy efficient heating and hot water systems
is currently low due to the 78% subsidization of the heating and hot water
tariffs Their interest would increase if the rate of subsidization was decreased
to  40 to 50% subsidization rate, an action that MoHU has been committed to
undertaking Notwithstanding that demand for sustained capacity building is high,
training is planned (but not confirmed) for  critical mass of maintenance
personnel to maintain optimal performance of energy efficient equipment related
to heating and hot water (which may involve an ESCO modality); Institutional
Framework and Governance: With the Project supporting capacity building of 58
decision-makers within various relevant ministries, there is likely sufficient
oversight capacity on energy efficiency issues in the building sector;
Environmental Factors: All public and private stakeholders involved with the
Project are aware of the environmental, social and economic benefits of energy
efficiency in the Belarusian building sector Actual Outcome : The capacity of
the Belarusian building specialists has been enhanced to enforce new energy
efficiency standards according to the TC-EPB with an initial focus on
residential buildings •  •   •   Overall Rating Financial Resources: Financial
resources are sufficient in Belarus to continue the implementation of energy
efficient buildings; Socio-Political Risks: Interest within the building sector
to invest in energy efficient heating and hot water systems is currently low due
to the 79% subsidization of the heating and hot water • Actual Outcome :
Demonstration energy efficient buildings have been completed, and will be able
to generate normal energy consumption data within 18 to 24 months •  Terminal
Evaluation 45 June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Table 12:
Assessment of Sustainability of Outcomes Actual Outcomes (as of March 2018)
Dimensions of Sustainability Assessment of Sustainability tariffs Their interest
would increase if the rate of subsidization was decreased to  50% subsidization
rate, an action that MoHU has been committed to undertaking; Institutional
Framework and Governance: The TC-EPB will become mandatory after its imminent
approval by the Council of Ministers, likely within 2018; Environmental Factors:
The implementation of energy efficient buildings will comply with the TC- EPB
that was designed to reduce intensity of consumption of primary fuels for
heating and hot water in buildings, thereby reducing GHG emissions from the
building sector •  •    Overall Rating • Financial Resources: Sufficient
financial resources are available within the Government to continue the
development and dissemination of material reporting Project results, notably the
energy savings from the pilot EE buildings; Socio-Political Risks: Government of
Belarus is committed to promote compliance to the TC-EPB However,  strengthening
of efforts is required to sustain information flows to occupants of EE buildings
on optimizing the use of their hot water, heating and fresh air ventilation
systems while minimizing their utility bills; Institutional Framework and
Governance: The TC-EPB will become mandatory after its imminent approval by the
Council of Ministers, likely within MoAC have the personnel and the legal
mandate to enforce compliance to the TC-EPB; Environmental Factors: No
environmental factors identified that would hinder continued
institutionalization of Project results Actual Outcome : Project results on
supporting legal and regulatory framework of the TC-EPB have been
institutionalized as well as the results of the energy savings from the pilot EE
buildings (to comply with the Order of July , 2017 No04/26p by the Deputy Prime
Minister that was initiated by the Project •  •   •   Overall Rating Overall
Rating of Project Sustainability: Terminal Evaluation 46 June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings  CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS AND LESSONS
The IEERB Project has provided excellent support within  period of  years to
improve the enabling environment for increased investments into EE residential
buildings in Belarus, notwithstanding the Project having  weak Project Results
Framework (PRF) which did not convey to the Evaluation Team the targets that the
Project needed to meet to achieve its overall objective With strong and stable
leadership of the IEERB Project from  highly experienced and top Belarussian
climate change expert, the IEERB PMU was able to overcome this issue and
facilitate significant achievements for energy efficiency in the building sector
in Belarus: • It has raised awareness in Belarus amongst all building
stakeholders of the benefits of energy efficiency in residential buildings; It
has provided support to the Government of Belarus in the preparation of
Technical Code on Energy Performance of Buildings (TC-EPB) that is aligned with
EU Directive 2010/EU and has been approved by  number of key technical entities
prior to its full adoption; It has also improved the capacities of building
professionals with various academic institutes through the process of preparing
the TC-EPB, disseminating knowledge products and contributing to academic
construction curriculums; It has supported the completion of  + energy efficient
residential buildings that will serve as an excellent resource for generating
information on EE buildings, and inform policy improvements for the Government
of Belarus to the TC-EPB • • • The long-term sustainability of the IEERB Project
of reducing energy consumption and GHG emission reductions on new residential
buildings, however, is difficult to assess considering that existing heating
tariff rates are too low for economic justification of the installation of
energy efficient heating equipment in buildings, and the uncertainty of when
these heating tariffs will be raised from  % to  50% recovery rate; as shown on
Table , the decrease in the number of EE buildings approved from 2016 to 2017 is
an indicator of this need for  heating tariff review and amendment There have
been several Government Decrees (most recently 2016) proposing the raising of
heating tariffs from 20% to 50% of the real cost by 2020, making EE measures
economically feasible after There is also the expected full adoption of the TC-
EPB that will make it mandatory for Belarusian building developers to implement
energy efficiency measures in their buildings notwithstanding the low heating
tariffs Looking forward in the context of sustaining the objectives of the IEERB
Project of reducing energy consumption and related GHG emissions with  focus on
new residential buildings, the IEERB Project has left  solid foundation
consisting of the TC-EPB, raised awareness, strengthened technical capacity and
demonstration EE buildings (as described in Para 103) However, the building
sector will continue to need Government support to sustain further reductions of
energy consumption and GHG emissions from the sector: • Technical capacities of
building technicians, operators and owners needs to be periodically refreshed to
ensure minimization of fossil fuel consumption for heat generation from district
CHPs The lack of attention to maintaining these fuel system over the long-term
can lead to increasing inefficiencies and trends of increased fuel consumption;
• While the IEERB Project focused on energy efficiency of new buildings, the
Government of Belarus will need to refocus its efforts in this sector on
implementing energy efficiency measures 47 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings for the existing building stock which is
more than 98% of all buildings in Belarus, if it wishes to sustain  downward
trajectory of energy consumption and GHG emissions from the building sector; •
GHG emission reduction calculations from energy efficiency of new buildings as
well as retrofitted existing buildings needs to be more robust and
institutionalized with the involvement of MoNREP While the IEERB Project has
initiated work towards its institutionalization with RUE Belarusian Research
Centre “Ecology”, continued work in this area is required to build the country’
database on actual energy consumption in buildings, instead of  database that
only contains buildings that are compliant with the TC-EPB  Corrective actions
for the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the Project Action
(to UNDP): To improve design of the future CCM projects including any follow-up
“building energy efficiency” project, the design should include: •  clear
logical framework matrix with SMART indicators and measurable targets that can
be effectively monitored by PMU staff to reflect progress towards global
benefits of energy efficiency for residential buildings or any other building
sector This should be developed with technical assistance GEF project designers
who are familiar with Theory of Change (see Figure ) that more strongly links
baselines with project outputs, direct outcomes, intermediate states and long-
term impacts; •  more detailed Project Results Framework (PRF) using the TOC
analysis, and with targets that are reflected in the project outputs The
achievement of these outputs should be linked and contribute to the intended
outcomes of the project; Figure : Generic Theory of Change Diagram36 36
Reproduced from April 2009 GEF Presentation by Todd and Risby, accessible on:
DYAhUF62MKHV6UCsQQFggnMAA&url=
_gef_eo_cairo_presentation_finalppt&usg=AOvVaw3rP1GHRIb0YW2cABRZ8D0g 48 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings • specific &
activities that can help project teams focus on specific indicators for
monitoring (in an improved PRF) that can minimize the workload of the
Implementing Partner and the PMU This should include IP and IA access to
functional database of existing and new buildings that can provide progress
reports on important and relevant metrics such as actual buildings (new and
existing) with floor area in square metres, and reports from building owners and
operators on energy consumption, all of which can be easily converted into an
SEC value for the building in kWh/m2/yr Entries of this information into the
database can easily generate reports that can provide cumulative and quantified
global benefits; • allocation of sufficient resources for capacity building of
building owners and operators to monitor energy consumption (see Action ) This
may translate into higher & budgets for  subsequent CCM project in building
energy efficiency in Belarus Action  (to UNDP): To improve implementation of
future projects similar to IEERB, the PRF (strengthened through ToC analysis and
ROtI) needs to be used as  guide for preparing project work plans With the
various targets that reflect the intended outputs of the project, project
personnel can formulate work plans by outcome that can then be more effectively
managed with output work directly contributing to desired outcomes and impacts
Actions to follow up or reinforce initial benefits from the Project Action  (to
MoHU with assistance from DEE and UNDP): Continue training workshops in oblast
training centres to ensure the availability of  critical mass of certified EE
building operational personnel This recommendation was made to monitor and
mitigate any trends of deterioration of the energy performance of EE equipment
for these buildings due to lack of knowledge of proper maintenance practices The
continuation of these training workshops can strengthen the abilities of
operational personnel to improve their operation of EE equipment in buildings
and their monitoring of energy consumption of buildings over the long-term This
would in turn maximize long-term GHG emission reductions from EE buildings
Action  (to MoHU with assistance from DEE and UNDP): Set up  program that
continually informs occupants of EE buildings on optimizing use of their EE
systems for hot water, heating and fresh air ventilation systems This
recommendation is made based on random interviews with pilot EE building
occupants who did not demonstrate full understanding on how they could minimize
their utility bills This may involve building the technical capacity of the
heads of tenant associations in each pilot EE building and other EE buildings
Action  (to MoAC with assistance from DEE and UNDP): Continue training programs
to ensure the availability of  critical mass of building design personnel to
enforce compliance to the TC-EPB Similar to Action , oblast training centers
will deliver these training programs for TC-EPB and updates to these building
designers and technicians that will provide continuous access to the latest best
international practices for the design of energy efficiency in buildings
Proposals for future directions underlining main objectives Action  (to DEE and
MoHU): Monitor progress of Decree No1037 of 2017 on the “Concept of Improvement
and Development of Housing and Utility Services until 2025” addressing
elimination of cross-subsidies and upward adjustment of low heating tariff rate
towards 50% and higher that should 49 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings provide sufficient incentives for  shorter
cost recovery period to building developers and investors for EE measures in
residential buildings Action  (to DEE and MoAC): Disseminate monitored energy
consumption data from  demo buildings to the Government policymakers and
investors in line with Deputy Prime Minister’ Order No04/26p of July , 2017,
with more emphasis on the time when the pilot buildings are fully occupied and
when the tenants have been in their units for  sufficient time during which
their energy consumption would be normalized; this could be as long as  months
when all units are occupied although the currently monitored data are being
provided for decision makers As such, the expected data from these  pilot
buildings should reflect the intended design heating and hot water SEC values in
the range of 20 to 30 kWh/m2/yr Combined with an expected raising of heating
tariffs in the order of 50%, information on heating energy consumption and its
costs to tenants should further catalyze investment interest in EE buildings
Action  (to MoNREP): Provide support to appropriate institutions to help
formalize protocols and methodologies developed by the Project for reporting GHG
emission reductions for EE buildings and retrofits that includes support to the
RUE Belarusian Research Centre “Ecology” to be continued after the EOP Support
to the RUE Belarusian Research Centre “Ecology” needs to be continued after the
EOP as  means of institutionalizing their work on protocols for calculating and
reporting GHG emission reductions from new buildings as well as retrofits for
existing buildings This work should also include  national database on actual
energy consumption of buildings of all types, and their status of compliance to
TC-EPB Action  (to DEE): Support future retrofit programs or construction of new
EE buildings (supported either by GoB or donors) through training of building
energy operators or managers using experiences gained through the Project
Support can be in the form of: • Training to ensure capacities of building
energy managers, both state personnel (with MoHU) and private individuals and
companies (ESCOs) reflects latest best practices for operating EE systems in
buildings including introduction of energy management information systems (EMIS)
building on UNDP experiences in other countries in the region; • Roundtables on
strengthened ESCO modality in Belarus for thermal system installations (if
deemed appropriate); • Upkeep of operational personnel skills that can result in
minimized use of fossil-fuel generated heat and hot water; and • Training on EE
building materials as well as targeted research and development on EE building
materials that can be domestically produced  Best and worst practices in
addressing issues relating to relevance, performance and success Best practice:
This UNDP Project has been well-managed due to the recruitment of  well-
qualified project manager with good management skills as well as strong
knowledge and technical skill in the subject matter The traits of this Project
manager included  strong understanding of the activities of the Project, good
communication skills, being responsive to all needs of the Project, and  good
understanding of Belarusian government institutions and technical issues on
energy efficiency and 50 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings climate change More importantly, the IEERB Project focused
on activities that were within the control of the Project such as: •
facilitating good progress on the preparations of ToRs (for design consultants,
software developers, etc), tender awards, and the completion of consultant work
in an efficient manner; and continuing dialogue with multiple partners to
sustain their engagement and interest in the IEERB Project • Scope for improved
practice: Many country offices including Belarus need assistance in the
preparation of ProDocs, most notably the Project Results Framework which needs
to be focused with insertion of SMART indicators that directly contribute to an
intended outcome The PRF could further be strengthened through ToC and ROtI
analyses with the assistance of personnel from Regional Centers 51 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings APPENDIX  -
MISSION TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR IEERB PROJECT TERMINAL EVALUATION TERMINAL
EVALUATION TERMS OF REFERENCE Post title: International Consultant for the Final
Evaluation of UNDP-GEF project “Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings in the Republic of Belarus” Type of contract: Individual Contract
Assignment type: International Consultant Country / Duty Station: Home Based
with one mission of at least 10 working days (not including travel and weekend
days) Expected places of travel (if applicable): Minsk, Belarus and  other
cities in the Republic of Belarus (Mahilioŭ and Hrodna) Languages required
English 1st February 2018 40 working days over   months period of 1st February
2018 – 30th June 2018 Starting date of assignment: Duration of Contract:
Duration of Assignment: 40 working days Payment arrangements: Lump-sum contract
(payments linked to satisfactory performance and delivery of results)
Administrative arrangements: UNDP will organize the logistics and travel to
Minsk, Belarus and any travel within the Republic of Belarus Evaluation method:
Desk Review and Interviews of Short-Listed Candidates 52 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings INTRODUCTION In accordance
with UNDP and GEF & policies and procedures, all full and medium-sized UNDP
support GEF financed projects are required to undergo  terminal evaluation upon
completion of implementation These terms of reference (TOR) sets out the
expectations for  Terminal Evaluation (TE) of the UNDP-GEF project: “Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings in the Republic of Belarus” (PIMS #
4290) The essentials of the Project to be evaluated are as follows: PROJECT
SUMMARY TABLE Projec  Title: Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings in the Republic of Belarus GEF Project ID: at endorsement at
completion (Million US$)   4290 (Million US$) UNDP Project ID: 00077154 GEF
financing:  IA/EA own:  Government:  Other: Country: Republic of Belarus Region:
Focal Area: Energy, Infrastructure, Transport and Technology FA Objectives,
(OP/SP): Executing Agency: UNDP Total co-financing: Total Project Cost: Other
Partners involved: ProDoc Signature (date project began): July 31, 2013 Energy
Efficiency Department; Ministry of Architecture & Construction (Operational)
Closing Date: Proposed: Dec 30, 2016 Actual: June 30, 2018 OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
The project was designed to reduce the energy consumption and related GHG
emissions with the focus on new residential buildings by introducing new
performance based building design and construction standards with related energy
certification scheme() and by ensuring their effective implementation and
enforcement By this, the energy consumption of new buildings is sought to be cut
by at least 70% compared to the existing building stock constructed before 1993
and by 40% compared to the buildings erected in accordance with the current
construction norms and thermal standards in place The project’ principal
outcomes were to support the () strengthening of the legal and regulatory
framework; (ii) training of local experts and other key stakeholders; (iii)
construction of three EE demo buildings to test and gain practical experience on
different EE solutions; and (iv) related outreach and dissemination of the
lesson learnt The TE is to cover the entire programme, both the UNDP and the GEF
components The TE will be conducted according to the guidance, rules and
procedures established by UNDP and GEF as reflected in the UNDP Evaluation
Guidance for GEF Financed Projects The objectives of the evaluation are to
assess the achievement of project results, and to draw lessons that can both
improve the sustainability of benefits from this project, and aid in the overall
enhancement of UNDP programming 53 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings EVALUATION APPROACH AND METHOD An overall
approach and method37 for conducting project terminal evaluations of UNDP
supported GEF financed projects has developed over time The evaluators are
expected to frame the evaluation effort using the criteria of relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability, and impact, as defined and explained
in the UNDP Guidance for Conducting Terminal Evaluations of UNDP-supported, GEF-
financed Projects  set of questions covering each of these criteria have been
drafted and are included with this TOR (fill in Annex ) The evaluator is
expected to amend, complete and submit this matrix as part of an evaluation
inception report, and shall include it as an annex to the final report The
inception report shall be completed and submitted prior to the evaluation
mission to the Republic of Belarus The draft and final evaluation report shall
be completed after the evaluation mission to the Republic of Belarus The
evaluator will assess the following categories of project progress Project
Strategy  Project design: • Review the problem addressed by the project and the
underlying assumptions Review the effect of any incorrect assumptions or changes
to the context to achieving the project results as outlined in the Project
Document • Review the relevance of the project strategy and assess whether it
provides the most effective route towards expected/intended results Were lessons
from other relevant projects properly incorporated into the project design? •
Review how the project addressed country priorities Review country ownership Was
the project concept in line with the national sector development priorities and
plans of the country? • Review decision-making processes: were perspectives of
those who would be affected by project decisions, those who could affect the
outcomes, and those who could contribute information or other resources to the
process, taken into account during project design processes? • Review the extent
to which relevant gender issues were raised in the project design and if there
are major areas of concern, recommend areas for improvement Results
Framework/Logframe: • Undertake  critical analysis of the project’ logframe
indicators and targets, assess how “SMART” the midterm and end-of-project
targets are (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, Time-bound), and
suggest specific amendments/revisions to the targets and indicators as necessary
• Are the project’ objectives and outcomes or components clear, practical, and
feasible within the project timeframe? • Has the project achieved its global
environmental benefits in terms of tonnes of CO2 that have been reduced (direct
and indirect GHG emissions) as defined in the project document? Examine if
progress so far has led to, or could in the future catalyse beneficial
development effects ( income generation, gender equality and women’ empowerment,
improved governance, etc) that should be included in the project results
framework and monitored on an annual basis Ensure broader development and gender
aspects of the project are being monitored effectively Develop and recommend
SMART ‘development’ indicators, including sex-disaggregated indicators and
indicators that capture development benefits • • 37 For additional information
on methods, see the Handbook on Planning, Monitoring and Evaluating for
Development Results, Chapter , pg 163 54 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings ii Progress Towards Results Progress Towards
Outcomes Analysis: • Review the logframe indicators against progress made
towards the end-of-project targets using the Progress Towards Results Matrix and
colour code the results in  “traffic light system” based on the level of
progress achieved; assign  rating on progress for each outcome; make
recommendations from the areas marked as “Not on target to be achieved” (red)
Table : Progress Towards Results Matrix (Achievement of outcomes against End-of-
project Targets) Indicator38 Baseline Level39 Level in 1st PIR (self- reported)
Project Strategy Midterm Target40 End-of- project Target Midterm Level &
Assessment 41 Achievement Rating42 Justification for Rating Objective: Indicator
: Indicator : Indicator : Indicator : Indicator : Indicator : Outcome : Outcome
: Outcome : Outcome : Indicator Assessment Key Green = Achieved Yellow = On
target to be achieved Red = Not on target to be achieved iii Project
Implementation and Adaptive Management Management Arrangements: • Review overall
effectiveness of project management as outlined in the Project Document Were
changes made and are they effective? Are responsibilities and reporting lines
clear? Is decision-making transparent and undertaken in  timely manner? Did the
project employ one or more international technical advisors and did this help to
advance the ability of the project to meet the overall project objective? •
Review the quality of execution of the Executing Agency/Implementing Partner()
and recommend areas for improvement • Review the quality of support provided by
the GEF Partner Agency (UNDP) and recommend areas for improvement 38 Populate
with data from the Logframe and scorecards 39 Populate with data from the
Project Document 40 If available 41 Colour code this column only 42 Use the
point Progress Towards Results Rating Scale: HS, , MS, MU, , HU 55 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Work
Planning: • Review any delays in project implementation, identify the causes and
examine if they were resolved • Has the work planning been carried out in
manner which is consistent with the project document and with the project
workplan or are there significant deviations? • Were work-planning processes
results-based? If not, suggest ways to re-orientate work planning to focus on
results Examine the use of the project’ results framework/ logframe as
management tool and review any changes made to it since project start • iv Mid-
Term Review • Examine the extent to which the recommendations from the mid-term
review have been taken into account by the project and the extent to which the
project has successfully carried out adaptive management in  timely manner
following the mid-term review; Examine the extent to which, if mid-term review
recommendations were not taken into account, the reasons why these
recommendations were not taken into account, discuss, and analyse the reasons
why as well as the impact that this has had on the overall success of the
project • The evaluation must provide evidence-based information that is
credible, reliable and useful The evaluator is expected to follow  participatory
and consultative approach ensuring close engagement with government
counterparts, in particular the GEF operational focal point, UNDP Country
Office, project team, UNDP GEF Regional Technical Adviser based in Istanbul and
other key stakeholders The evaluator is expected to spend 10 working days (not
including travel or weekends) in the Republic of Belarus, as part of this
assignment The international evaluator is expected to conduct  field mission to
each of the demonstration pilot projects including Minsk, Mahilioŭ and Hrodna, ,
the following project sites: () Standard one-entrance 19-storey 133- apartment
large-panel residential house with 42 thousand square meters of living area;
(ii) Standard four-entrance 10-storey 180-apartment semi-frame panel residential
house with total living area of 89 thousand square meters; (iii) Standard three-
entrance 10-storey 120-apartment residential house being constructed of brick
partition crosswalls with the outer walls made of foam concrete blocks and with
total living area of 34 thousand square meters The mission is expected to start
and end in Minsk and have the following estimated breakdown:  days in Minsk
followed by  days in Mahilioŭ (including travel) followed by  days in Hrodno
(including travel) followed by  days in Minsk meaning that the 10 days are made
up of +++ = 10 working days Weekends should not be counted as working days
meaning that working days are Monday-Friday only which means that the evaluation
mission should be for  period of  weeks This tentative breakdown can be changed
provided that the overall number of days spent in the Republic of Belarus stays
at 10 working days In the event, that it is agreed between the UNDP project
manager and the international and national evaluators it might be possible to
split the mission into  missions, provided that the total number of days remains
at 10 working days (not including travel days) Example: International Evaluator
decides to undertake  mission of  working days (not including weekends) and one
mission of  working days Interviews will be held with the following
organizations and individuals at  minimum: () Project Manager, other project
staff members and key experts; (ii) UNDP CO Programme Analysts and the UNDP
Istanbul Regional Hub Regional Technical Advisor on Climate Change Mitigation;
(iii) Energy Efficiency Department of State Standardization Committee as the
national implementing agency; (iv) Ministry of Architecture & Construction; ()
Ministry of Housing & Communal Services; (vi) RUE “Institute of Housing – NIPTIS
after  Ataev”; (vii) MAPID JSC; (viii) RUE 56 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP
– Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings “GrodnoGrazhdanProject Institute”; (ix)
GrodnoZhylStroy LLC; () Unitary Enterprise “Mahilioŭ sky UKS”; (xi) RUE
“StrojTechNorm”; (xii) chairmen of Associations of Owners of houses in Minsk and
Hrodna; (xiii) Belarus National Technical University – Construction and Energy
Faculties The evaluation team is encouraged to request additional interviews, so
the team should thereby meet with additional key stakeholders during the mission
to Republic of Belarus The evaluator will review all relevant sources of
information, such as the project document, project reports – including Annual
APR/PIR, project budget revisions, midterm review, progress reports, GEF focal
area tracking tools, project files, national strategic and legal documents, and
any other materials that the evaluators consider useful for this evidence-based
assessment  list of documents that the project team will provide to the
evaluators for review is included in Annex  of this Terms of Reference
EVALUATION CRITERIA & RATINGS An assessment of project performance will be
carried out, based against expectations set out in the Project Logical
Framework/Results Framework (see Annex ), which provides performance and impact
indicators for project implementation along with their corresponding means of
verification The evaluation will cover, at  minimum, the criteria of relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency, sustainability and impact Ratings must be provided on
the following performance criteria The completed table must be included in the
evaluation executive summary The obligatory rating scales are included in Annex
Evaluation Ratings:  Monitoring and Evaluation & design at entry & Plan
Implementation Overall quality of &  Assessment of Outcomes Relevance
Effectiveness Efficiency Overall Project Outcome Rating rating  IA& EA Execution
Quality of UNDP Implementation Quality of Execution - Executing Agency Overall
quality of Implementation / Execution rating  Sustainability Financial
resources: Socio-political: rating rating Institutional framework and
governance: Environmental : Overall likelihood of sustainability: PROJECT
FINANCE / COFINANCE The Evaluation will assess the key financial aspects of the
project, including the extent of co-financing planned and realized Project cost
and funding data will be required, including annual expenditures Variances
between planned and actual expenditures will need to be assessed and explained
Specifically, the final evaluation will: • Consider the financial management of
the project, with specific reference to the cost-effectiveness of interventions,
as they were carried out • Review the changes to fund allocations as  result of
budget revisions and assess the appropriateness and relevance of such revisions
• Review whether the project has had the appropriate financial controls,
including reporting and planning, that allow management to make informed
decisions regarding the budget and allow for timely flow of funds Provide
detailed inputs to the co-financing monitoring table to be filled out, provide
commentary on co- financing: has the co-financing been used strategically to
help the objectives of the project? Has the Project Team met with all co-
financing partners regularly in order to align financing priorities and annual
work plans? • 57 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic
of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings Results from recent financial audits, as available, should be taken
into consideration The evaluator() will receive assistance from the Country
Office (CO) and Project Team to obtain financial data in order to complete the
co- financing table below, which will be included in the terminal evaluation
report UNDP own financing (mill US$) Planned Actual Government (mill US$)
Planned Partner Agency (mill US$) Planned Actual Total (mill US$) Planned Co-
financing (type/source) Actual Actual Grants Loans/Concessions • In-kind support
• Other Totals MAINSTREAMING UNDP supported GEF financed projects are key
components in UNDP country programming, as well as regional and global
programmes The evaluation will assess the extent to which the project was
successfully mainstreamed with other UNDP priorities, including poverty
alleviation, improved governance, the prevention and recovery from natural
disasters, and gender IMPACT The evaluators will assess the extent to which the
project is achieving impacts or progressing towards the achievement of impacts
Key findings that should be brought out in the evaluations include whether the
project has demonstrated: ) verifiable improvements in ecological status, )
verifiable reductions in stress on ecological systems, and/or ) demonstrated
progress towards these impact achievements43 CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS &
LESSONS The evaluation report must include  chapter providing  set of
conclusions, recommendations and lessons learned It is suggested that the number
of recommendations does not exceed 15 in total IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS The
principal responsibility for managing this evaluation resides with the UNDP CO
in the Republic of Belarus The UNDP CO will contract the evaluators The Project
Team will be responsible for liaising with the evaluation team to set up
stakeholder interviews, arrange field visits, coordinate with the Government etc
EVALUATION TIMEFRAME The total duration of the evaluation will be 40 days, over
-month period from 1st February 2018 to 30th June 2018, according to the
following plan: 43  useful tool for gauging progress to impact is the Review of
Outcomes to Impacts (ROtI) method developed by the GEF Evaluation Office: ROTI
Handbook 2009 58 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic
of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings Activity Timing Completion Date Feb, 2018 Preparation (Inception
report, which includes an Evaluation methodology compiled and  work plan to be
prepared and submitted) Evaluation Mission (Mission to Belarus conducted,
including briefings by Project Team and UNDP CO, in-country field visits, all
necessary interviews with partners and key stakeholders, data collection, and
de-briefings for UNDP CO) Please note that these 10 days are working days and do
not include travel days or weekends Travel Days – days required for travel to
and from the Republic of Belarus Draft Evaluation Report (Drafting of the
evaluation report completed, and the draft sent for comments Circulation and
other types of feedback mechanisms for reviewing and commenting on the draft
completed, and comments received) Final Report (Finalization of the evaluation
report with due account of comments received on the draft report) Total  days 10
days March, 2018  days 18 days March 2018 Apr, 2018  days June, 2018 40 days
EVALUATION DELIVERABLES The evaluation team is expected to deliver the
following: Deliverable Content Timing No later than  weeks before the evaluation
mission End of evaluation mission Responsibilities Inception report
Clarifications on timing and method of evaluation Initial Findings based on desk
review and results of evaluation mission Full report, (per annexed template)
with annexes International evaluator submits the Inception Report to UNDP CO
Presentation International evaluator prepares, submits and presents  report on
Initial Findings to project management and UNDP CO International evaluator
drafts the full evaluation report and sends it to CO The report is reviewed by
RTA, PCU, GEF OFPs International evaluator prepares the revised Final Evaluation
Report and sends it to CO for uploading to UNDP ERC Draft Final Report Within
weeks of the evaluation mission Revised report Within  weeks of receiving UNDP
comments on draft and no later than 30th June 2018 Final Report44* TEAM
COMPOSITION The evaluation team will be composed of one international and one
national evaluators The international evaluator is designated as the team leader
and will be responsible for the entire evaluation and respective evaluation
deliverables mentioned above in line with this ToR, with inputs from the project
The national evaluator will provide assistance to the international evaluator in
line with  separate ToR focusing on  baseline and stocktaking report,
stakeholders consultation report and detailed comments into draft evaluation
report Both consultants shall have prior experience in evaluating technical
assistance projects for UNDP or other organizations or governments Experience
with UNDP and GEF financed projects is an advantage The evaluators selected
should not have 44 When submitting the final evaluation report, the evaluator is
required also to provide an 'audit trail', detailing how all received comments
have (and have not) been addressed in the final evaluation report 59 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings participated
in the project preparation and/or implementation and should not have conflict of
interest with project related activities The International Evaluator (the
Evaluation Team leader) must present the following qualifications: • Minimum
seven years of relevant professional experience; • Advanced university degree
(at least the Master level); • • Knowledge of UNDP and GEF; Previous experience
with results-based monitoring and evaluation methodologies demonstrated by an
example of evaluation of at least one other UNDP project funded by GEF in the
past seven years; Technical knowledge in the targeted focal area() such as
environment, climate change, energy, engineering, economics, law, international
relations and/or business/management demonstrated by at least  relevant
publications and/or evidences in professional experience records (,
certifications, awards, inventions, membership of professional associations and
ad-hoc panels, lecturing, training, participation in exhibitions and
professional events, presentations, etc); Experience in mid-term or final
performance evaluation of at least one international and/or regional projects
funded by multilateral agencies in the past seven years; Experience in
performance evaluation of such projects in the Europe or/and CIS region is
preferred; Familiarity with regulations in EU and CIS region in the field of
energy efficiency, demonstrated by at least one relevant publication (report,
article, invention, presentation, etc), is preferred but not required;
Familiarity with Belarusian regulations and standards in the field of energy
efficiency, demonstrated by at least one relevant publication (report, article,
invention, presentation, etc), is an asset; Excellent written and spoken English
is  must; • • • • • • • Working knowledge of written and spoken Belarusian or
Russian is an advantage; • Strong report writing skills and experience in
writing and presenting reports to  high professional level (an example of
reports and presentations that include graphs, pictures, diagrams, figures and
other illustrative tools to enhance the reporting quality shall be provided)
EVALUATOR ETHICS Evaluation consultants will be held to the highest ethical
standards and are required to sign  Code of Conduct (Annex ) upon acceptance of
the assignment UNDP evaluations are conducted in accordance with the principles
outlined in the UNEG 'Ethical Guidelines for Evaluations' 60 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings APPENDIX  - MISSION
ITINERARY (FOR FEBRUARY 2018) # Activity Stakeholder involved Place February 12,
2018 (Monday) Arrival of Roland Wong in Minsk February 13, 2018 (Tuesday)
Briefing meeting with Mr John ’Brien, RTA  UNDP Minsk February 14, 2018
(Wednesday) Briefing meeting with IEERB Project Staff including Mr Alexandre
Grenbekhov, Project Manager, Ms Natallia Labaznova, Project AFA, and Ms Maryia
Vincheuskaya, Project PR Meeting with UNDP Programme Analyst on evaluation
methodology and schedule of Terminal Evaluation process Evaluation mission
briefing with National Project Director on evaluation methodology and schedule
of Terminal Evaluation process Evaluation mission briefing with MoAC on
evaluation methodology and schedule of Terminal Evaluation process  UNDP Minsk
UNDP Minsk  DEE Minsk  MoAC Minsk February 15, 2018 (Thursday)  Meeting with RUE
“StrojTechNorm” MoAC Minsk Meeting with RUE “Institute of Housing – NIPTIS”
Visit of the project pilot site in Minsk with energy efficient engineering
systems installed by the project  MoAC Minsk Minsk February 16, 2018 (Friday)
Travel to Mahilioŭ Visit of the project pilot site in Mahilioŭ with energy
efficient engineering systems installed by the project Meeting with Mahilioŭ
Department of Capital Construction on their experiences and plans on building
more EE residential buildings Travel to Minsk Mahilioŭ  State construction
company February 19, 2018 (Monday) 61 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings # Activity Stakeholder involved Place
Meeting with Ministry of Housing & Utilities Meeting with MAPID JSC, private
developer of EE residential buildings Travel to Hrodna  MoHU Minsk 10 Private
construction company Minsk February 20, 2018 (Tuesday) Visit of the project
pilot site in Hrodna with energy efficient engineering systems installed by the
project Meeting and interview with the homeowners association chairman in Hrodna
Meeting with Oblast authorities, and GrodnoGrazhdanProject RUE, the pilot
building designer Meeting with Oblast Training Centre for Personnel of Housing &
Utilities Travel back to Minsk 11 Residents of EE residential buildings Hrodna
Design company of EE residential buildings 12 Hrodna 13 EE Building maintenance
personnel Hrodna February 21, 2018 (Wednesday) Work on report Minsk February 22,
2018 (Thursday) Meeting with Belarus National Technical University Meeting with
Inter-branch Advanced Training & Personnel Retraining Institute Meeting with RUE
Belarusian Research Centre "Ecology" 14 Academic institutes Minsk 15 Training
Centers Minsk MoNREP 16 Minsk February 23, 2018 (Friday) Meeting with Project
Stakeholders (RUE Belarusian Research Institute for Energy "BelTEI" of BelENERGO
State Company) 17 BelENERGO Minsk Minsk 18 Mission de-briefing with DEE and UNDP
DEE February 26, 2018 (Monday) Minsk 19 Mission de-briefing with UNDP UNDP
Meeting with RUE Belarus Ecology Research Center Minsk 20 MoNREP February 27,
2018 (Tuesday) Departure of Roland Wong from Minsk Total number of meetings
conducted: 20 62 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic
of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings APPENDIX  - LIST OF PERSONS INTERVIEWED This Draft is  listing of
persons contacted in Minsk, Mahilioŭ and Hrodna (unless otherwise noted) during
the Terminal Evaluation Period only The Evaluator regrets any omissions to this
list  Mr John ’Brien, UNDP Regional Technical Advisor for CCM, Istanbul Regional
Hub;  Mr Igar Tchoulba, Portfolio Manager, UNDP Belarus;  Mr Alexandre
Grebenkov, Project Manager, UNDP-IEERB, Minsk;  Ms Natallia Labaznova, Project
Administrative Officer, UNDP-IEERB, Minsk;  Ms Maryia Vincheuskaya, Officer for
Public Relations, UNDP-IEERB, Minsk;  Mr Mikhail Malashenko, Director of Energy
Efficiency Department, Minsk;  Mr Andrew Minenkov, Project National Director,
Head of Division, DEE, Minsk;  Ms Galina Pavlova, Member of PSC, Chief of the
Ministry’ Principal Department, MoAC;  Mr Gennady Troubilo, Deputy Minister,
MoHU, Minsk; Mr Andrei Romashko, Head of Department of Housing, MoHU, Minsk; Mr
Andrey Matyukhov, Deputy Head of the Department of Housing, MoHU, Minsk; Ms
Marina Tolstik, Head of Department of Public Utilities and Energy, MoHU, Minsk;
Igor Yurkevich, Head of Department for Maintenance of Housing, Organization and
Conduct of Housing Reform, MoHU, Minsk; Mr Igar Lishai, Director, RUE
“StrojTechNorm”, Minsk; Ms Olga Kudrevitch, Deputy Director, RUE
“StrojTechNorm”, Minsk ; Mr Leonid Sokolovsky, Head of TCS-14, RUE
“StrojTechNorm”, Minsk; Mr Leonid Danilevsky, Deputy Director, RUE “Institute of
Housing – NIPTIS”, Minsk; Mr Andrew Moskalev, Director, RUE “UKS”, Mahilioŭ; Mr
Dmitri Khukhriakov, Deputy Director, RUE “UKS”, Mahilioŭ; Mr Dmitri Khukhriakov,
Deputy Director, RUE “UKS”, Mahilioŭ; Mr Vitaly Shoumeiko, Chief Engineer, RUE
“UKS”, Mahilioŭ; 63 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Ms Marina Razvazhnaya, Head of Planning & Contract
Department, RUE “UKS”, Mahilioŭ; Mr Uladzimir Deshko, Deputy Oblast Governor,
Hrodna; Metchislav Goy, City Mayor, Hrodna; Mr Viatcheslav Tarasevitch, Director
General, GrodnoGrazhdanProject RUE, Hrodna; Mr Alexandr Tsybulnikov, Chief
Specialist, GrodnoGrazhdanProject RUE, Hrodna; Ms Anna Esipok, Director, Oblast
Training Centre for Personnel of Housing & Utilities, Hrodna; Ms Tatiana Kubrak,
Deputy Director, Oblast Training Centre for Personnel of Housing & Utilities,
Hrodna; Mr Gennady Boltik, Deputy Director General, MAPID JSC, Minsk; Mr Igor
Yakimenko, Chairman of Homeowners Association, Hrodna; Mr Sergey Leonovitch,
Construction Faculty Chair, Belarus National Technical University, Minsk; Ms
Kirill Dobrego, Energy Faculty Chair, Belarus National Technical University,
Minsk; Mr Yuri Primak, Construction Faculty Chair, Inter-branch Advanced
Training & Personnel Retraining Institute, Minsk; Mr Ivan Narkevitch, Head of
Department, RUE Belarusian Research Centre "Ecology", Minsk; Ms Olga
Vavilonskaya, Head of Sector, RUE Belarusian Research Centre "Ecology", Minsk;
Ms Kristina Gonchar, Researcher, RUE Belarusian Research Centre "Ecology",
Minsk; Mr Andrew Molochko, Head of General Energy Department, RUE Belarusian
Research Institute for Energy "BelTEI" of BelENERGO State Company, Minsk 64
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
APPENDIX  - LIST OF DOCUMENTS REVIEWED  UNDP Project Document for the “Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings in the Republic of Belarus” (IEERB
Project);  GEF approved project document and Request for CEO Endorsement
Project Inception Report  Mid-term Evaluation Report  Annual work plans  Annual
GEF Project Implementation Report ()  CDRs  Financial audit report for 2017  GEF
Quarterly Reports Project Steering Committee Minutes (April 2013 to December
2017) Logs (Monitoring Logs, Offline Risk Logs, Lessons Learned Logs and Offline
Issues Logs) Project Technical Reports by project experts Project’ Events
Proceedings (including agenda and presentations/publications of conferences,
workshops, trainings, etc) Selected relevant regulations in housing and
construction sectors prepared and/or indorsed by the Project Relevant printed
documentation (brochures, flyers, booklets, briefs, publications, press
releases, etc) or visual materials (photo, video) in support of the Project’
achievements and results IEERB Information & Communications Strategy ; Second
Biennial Report on the Republic of Belarus, Minsk 2015; Draft of Technical Code
for “Energy Performance of Buildings”, Resolution of the Council of Ministers
for the Republic of Belarus; Financing Climate Action in Belarus, Country Study
2016, OECD/Green Action Programme; UNDAF for Belarus for  and  Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings APPENDIX  -
GHG EMISSION REDUCTION REPORT Table -: Basic Project Information Project
Information Project Information Project Title Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings in the Republic of Belarus (IEERB) GEF ID Number 4228
Country Belarus Enter Country or Countries Region ECA GEF Agency UNDP Date of
Submission of GHG Accounting 28//61 Contact Name First Year of Project 2012 Year
of Project Close 2018 $,500,000 GEF Grant Amount ($) $15,197,000 Co-financing
Amount ($) General Parameters Default User-Specified Notes Length of Analysis
Period (Years After Project Close) 20 15 2019 First Post-project Year 2033 Last
Post-project Year Maximum Technology / Measure Lifetime (Years) 20 15 Fuels and
Emission Factors Default User-Specified Notes Grid Electricity & Loss Rate (%)
10% % Sources : IEA Grid Electricity Emissions (tCO2/MWh) / 3000 Source: Table
(Pg ) on  Fuel: Click here to select from list 0000 0000 Fuel: Click here to
select from list 0000 0000 Fuel: Click here to select from list 0000 0000 Step :
List Activity Components and Select Quantification Module Activity Component
Sector/Subsector Logframe Output Module/Intervention Type Project Objective
Residential Buildings Project Objective Building Codes 66 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Figure -: Building Code
Module Building Codes Module Project Information Project Title Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings in the Republic of Belarus (IEERB) Country
Belarus Contact Name First Year of Project 2012 Last Year of Project 2018
Results: Building Code Activity Components Cumulative Annual Total   2012 2018
2025 2035 ,296,638 218,617 ,078,022  71,868 71,868 71,868 Direct Electricity
Savings (MWh)               / /        / ,667,898 787,020 ,880,878  258,725
258,725 258,725 Direct Total Energy Savings (GJ) 424,701 71,606 353,095  23,540
23,540 23,540 Direct GHG Emission Savings (tCO2) 478,199 478,199   28,940 62,733
Direct Post-project GHG Emission Savings (tCO2) Indirect Bottom-up Emission
Savings (tCO2) Component : Project Objective -- General Inputs Market
Assumptions Default User-Specified Notes Floor Area (m2) Subject to Code Built
in Year 2012 520,000 Annual Construction Growth Rate Form year  % Project
Assumptions Default User-Specified Notes Annual Electricity Consumption (kWh/m2)
30 --- --- --- 2014 Year Building Code in Force Percent New Square Meters Built
Compliant with Code 100% Assumes 87 buildings (520,000 m2) that have received
TC-EEB approval Baseline Assumptions Default User-Specified Notes Annual
Electricity Consumption (kWh/m2) 60 --- --- --- Percent of Square Meters Built
at Code Level Without Programme % Annual Reduction in Baseline Energy
Consumption % % 67 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Figure -: Calculation of Indirect Top-Down Emission
Reductions and Overall Results User-Specified Notes Total Market Potential
(tCO2) 550,000 Assumes 10,000 tons CO2 added over the next 10 years Causality
factor 60% Indirect Top-Down Emission Reductions (tCO2) 330,000 Overall Results
All Components Cumulative Annual Total   2012 2018 2025 2035 ,296,638 237,379
,115,546  73,456 73,456 71,868 Direct Electricity Savings (MWh)        /
/  ,667,898  854,563  ,015,965    264,440  264,440  258,725 / Direct Total
Energy Savings (GJ) 77,751 365,386  24,060 24,060 23,540 424,701 Direct GHG
Emission Savings (tCO2) 478,199   28,940 62,733 478,199 Direct Post-project GHG
Emission Savings (tCO2)  31,840 Indirect Bottom-up Emission Savings (tCO2)
330,000 330,000 Indirect Top-down Emission Savings (tCO2) Building Codes
Components Cumulative  Annual Total  2012 2018 2025 2035 ,296,638 218,617
,078,022  71,868 71,868 71,868 Direct Electricity Savings (MWh)        /
/  ,667,898  787,020  ,880,878    258,725  258,725  258,725 / Direct Total
Energy Savings (GJ) 71,606 353,095  23,540 23,540 23,540 424,701 Direct GHG
Emission Savings (tCO2) 478,199   28,940 62,733 478,199 Direct Post-project GHG
Emission Savings (tCO2) Indirect Bottom-up Emission Savings (tCO2) 68 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Figure -:
Calculation of Potential GHG Emission Reductions for Period of 10 Years after
EOP for “Top-Down” Emission Reductions57 2019 36,000 2020 36,000 2021 36,000
2022 36,000 2023 36,000 2024 36,000 2025 36,000 2026 36,000 2027 36,000 2028
36,000 New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG
ERs New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG ERs
New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG ERs New Construction GHG ERs New
Construction GHG ERs Totals Grand Total 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000
36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000
36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000
36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000
36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 36,000 72,000 108,000 144,000
180,000 216,000 252,000 288,000 324,000 360,000 ,980,000 57 36,000 tonnes CO2
annually is derived from the following assumptions:  million m2 of new buildings
per year, 30 kWh/m2/yr is the SEC reductions for each building, and  grid
emissions factor for Belarus of  tonnes CO2/MWh Causality factor for top-down
indirect calculation in Tracking Tool was assumed to be  69 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings APPENDIX  - COMPLETED
TRACKING TOOL Figure -: Screenshot of Page  of Tracking Tool 70 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Figure -:
Screenshot of EE Page of Tracking Tool Ob je  tiv  : Ene rg  Effic ie ncy Ple
cify if the  ro je   ta rg  ts  ny   the fo llo wing  re   Lighting Appliances
(white goods) Equipment Cook stoves Existing building New building Industrial
processes Synergy with phase-out of ozone depleting substances Other (please
specify)         RES Yes = , No =  Yes = , No =  Yes = , No =  Yes = , No =  Yes
= , No =  Yes = , No =  Yes = , No =  Yes = , No =  : not an objective/component
: no policy/regulation/strategy in place : policy/regulation/strategy discussed
and proposed : policy/regulation/strategy proposed but not adopted :
policy/regulation/strategy adopted but not enforced : policy/regulation/strategy
enforced : not an objective/component : no facility in place : facilities
discussed and proposed : facilities proposed but not operationalized/funded :
facilities operationalized/funded but have no demand : facilities
operationalized/funded and have sufficient demand : not an objective/component :
no capacity built : information disseminated/awareness raised : training
delivered : institutional/human capacity strengthened : institutional/human
capacity utilized and sustained Policy and regulatory framework   Establishment
of financial facilities (, credit lines, risk guarantees, revolving funds)
Capacity building  MJ (Million Joule, IEA unit converter:  Fuel savings should
be converted to energy savings by using the net calorific value of the specific
fuel End-use electricity savings should be converted to energy savings by using
the conversion factor for the specific supply and distribution system These
energy savings are then totaled over the respective lifetime of the investments
Lifetime energy saved ,667,898,000 424,701 478,199 Lifetime direct GHG emissions
avoided Lifetime direct post-project GHG emissions avoided Lifetime indirect GHG
emissions avoided (bottom-up) Lifetime indirect GHG emissions avoided (top-down)
tonnes CO2eq (see Special Notes above) tonnes CO2eq (see Special Notes above)
tonnes CO2eq (see Special Notes above) tonnes CO2eq (see Special Notes above) -
,188,000 71 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings APPENDIX  - PROJECT RESULTS FRAMEWORK FOR BELARUS’ IEERB PROJECT
(AMENDED AND APPROVED IN JUNE 2013) This project will contribute to achieving
the following Country Programme Outcome as defined in CPAP or CPD: : Country’
capacity to mitigate and adapt to the climate change strengthened Country
Programme Outcome Indicators: GHG emission (tons of CO2 equivalent) into the
atmosphere Primary applicable Key Environment and Sustainable Development Key
Result Area (same as that on the cover page, circle one):  Mainstreaming
environment and energy OR  Catalyzing environmental finance OR  Promote climate
change adaptation OR  Expanding access to environmental and energy services for
the poor Applicable GEF Strategic Objective and Program: GEF’ Strategic
Programme # of GEF- on “Promoting Energy-Efficient Buildings and Appliances”
Indicator Baseline Targets End of Project Risks and Assumptions Source of
verification Project Objective46 To reduce the energy consumption (imported
fuel) and related GHG emissions with the focus on new residential buildings
Project monitoring reports and final evaluation Suggested EE measures are
adopted by the design institutes and construction companies into the design of
new buildings  At least 10% (around 80 buildings) of all new residential multi-
storey buildings, for which the design is started during the last year of the
project are integrating new EE measures into their design with the target of
reducing their combined, annual energy demand for space heating and hot water
below 60 kWh/m2 “Lifetime” reduction of 220,000 tons of CO2eq resulting from the
energy saving in buildings, for which the construction has started or which have
Number of buildings designed and constructed in accordance with the new energy
efficiency standards As applicable, post project market monitoring and
evaluations  Amount of reduced CO2 emissions compared to the projected baseline
Project monitoring reports and final evaluation See above 46 Objective (Atlas
output) monitored quarterly ERBM and annually in APR/PIR 72 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings adopted into their design
new energy efficiency elements that reduce the energy consumption for heating
and hot water in the residential buildings below the current thermal standards
in force Revised minimum energy performance standards adopted for new
construction and reaching  status of  law by the end of the project with  target
of reducing the energy consumption of new residential buildings for space
heating and hot water together below 60 kWh/m2 Outcome  Strengthened legal and
regulatory framework and mechanisms to enforce the legislation for improving the
energy efficiency of the building sector Status of the national laws and other
regulatory documents controlling the energy consumption of the newly constructed
buildings Prescriptive thermal standards adopted in 2010 defining minimum
mandatory -values for the building envelope, corresponding to the average annual
heat demand of 60 kWh/m2 for space heating of typical multi-apartment buildings
and  kWh/m2 together with sanitary hot water preparation Official government
publications and assumptions Continuing commitment of the Government of Belarus
to proceed with the suggested legislation An energy performance certification
and labelling scheme for both new and existing buildings adopted and under
implementation by the end of the project Integrated, energy efficient building
design approach together with buildings’ overall energy performance based design
principles adopted into the work of at least 30% of all local design institutes
as well as into the Outcome  Enhanced expert capacity of the Belarusian
specialists to implement new energy efficiency standards and construction norms
Demonstrated capacity of the Belarusian building sector specialists to integrate
new EE approaches and measures into the design of the Non-integrated design of
the buildings just complying with the current prescriptive thermal standards in
force Demonstrated value added of the suggested new approaches to the targeted
professional groups The curricular of the Belarussian educational institutes
training architects and building construction and HVAC engineers 73 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings  buildings
and to implement them in the construction sector Lack of capacity of the public
authorities to effectively supervise and enforce implementation of the planned
new, overall energy performance based norms and standards curricula of all
educational institutes in Belarus educating new architects and building
construction and HVAC engineers Design documents of new buildings submitted for
review of the state authorities By the end of the project, at least 50 experts
from each key professional group (see outputs ,-) and 200 university students
have taken and successfully passed courses on energy efficient building design
and construction Key public authorities responsible for supervision and
enforcement of the planned new norms and regulations trained, Each of the
demonstration buildings constructed on schedule Surveys and interviews conducted
during project implementation Outcome : Implementation of demonstration projects
for energy efficient buildings Monitoring reports of the demonstration projects
All the required agreements concluded and the design of the demo buildings
completed in schedule during the first 18 months of project implementation and
the construction completed by the end of the third year of project
implementation Status of the demonstration projects / For each of the
constructed demonstration buildings annual total external energy demand for
space heating and hot water equaled or was less than 60 kWh/m2 Energy
consumption for each of the  buildings and also other performance 74 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings indicators
(living comfort etc) monitored for at least one full year The baseline cost for
designing and construction of the  demonstration buildings is covered in full by
the Project’ co- financing resources of developers and additional GEF financing
for designing and construction of demo buildings was not in excess of 15% of the
total construction costs of each demo building Planned public outreach
activities successfully completed Outcome : Documented, disseminated and
institutionalized project results providing  basis for further replication
Status of the planned public outreach activities / Final project report Project
implementation successfully concluded Number of hits and downloads from the
project website Readiness of the entity to follow up and continue the activities
initiated by the Project An entity to be responsible for replication of the
Project results has been designated and provided with adequate resources to
perform its work Number of visits and downloads from the Project website At
least 100 hits and 10 downloaded documents per month from the Project website 75
Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
APPENDIX  - EVALUATION QUESTIONNAIRE Evaluative Criteria Questions Indicators
Sources Methodology Relevance: How does the project relate to the main
objectives of the GEF focal area, and to the environment and development
priorities at the local, regional and national levels? • Does the project’
objective fit within the • Alignment of Project activities with • Document
review • ProDoc priorities of the government? “Comprehensive Programme for the
Design, Construction and Reconstruction of Energy- Efficient Homes in the
Republic of Belarus for  and until 2020” • Does the project’ objective fit
within Belarus’ national energy conservation strategies? • Alignment of Project
activities with Law on • • Document review ProDoc Energy Saving in 1998 and its
complementary regulations, specifically dealing building energy efficiency •
Does the project’ objective fit GEF strategic • Alignment of Project activities
with GEF- • • Document review ProDoc priorities and operational principles?
Strategic Programme # Effectiveness: To what extent have the expected outcomes
and objectives of the project been achieved? • • Number of buildings designed
and constructed in accordance with the new energy efficiency standards; •
Architects and designers who were beneficiaries of Project training • Energy
design reports • Monitored energy savings • Legislative documents • PIRs • MBEPS
authors and users • Demonstration building • Document review • Stakeholder
discussions Is the project objective likely to be met? To what extent and in
what timeframe? • Amount of reduced CO2 emissions compared to the projected
baseline Supportive legislation promulgated • What are the key factors
contributing to project success or underachievement? • • Adoption of new energy
efficiency policies and • Document review • Stakeholder discussions standards by
building practitioners and construction companies; Successfully completed
demonstration buildings that comply with new MBEPS; Energy saved and GHG
emissions reduced in demonstration buildings • owners • • • Number of adaptive
management changes • • Demonstration building • Document review • Stakeholder
discussions Is adaptive management being applied to ensure effectiveness? PIRs
during project; • Number of buildings using EMIS for monitoring primary energy
usage and reducing GHG emissions in buildings designers • • Number of issues
identified in PIRs • • • Document review Is monitoring and evaluation used to
ensure effective decision-making? PIRs PSC meeting minutes 76 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Evaluative
Criteria Questions Indicators Sources Methodology • Stakeholder discussions
Efficiency: Was the project implemented efficiently, in-line with international
and national norms and standards? • • • Outputs delivered; • Outcomes achieved •
• Outputs delivered; • Outcomes achieved • • • Document review • Stakeholder
discussions • Document review • Stakeholder discussions Is the project cost-
effective? Financial disbursements; Financial reports PIRs • Are expenditures in
line with international standards and norms for development projects? • •
Financial disbursements; Financial reports PIRs Efficiency: Was the project
implemented efficiently, in-line with international and national norms and
standards? • Are management and implementation arrangements efficient in
delivering the outputs necessary to achieve outcomes? • Was the project
implementation delayed? If so, did that affect cost-effectiveness? • • • •
Document review • Stakeholder discussions • Document review • Stakeholder
discussions • Document review • Stakeholder discussions • Document review •
Stakeholder discussions PMU personnel expenditures Financial reports PIRs •
Timing of delivery of outputs • Disbursements versus outputs • • Financial
reports PIRs • What is the contribution of cash and in-kind co-financing to
project implementation? • • • Co-financing amounts and details Financial reports
PIRs • • • • To what extent is the project leveraging additional resources? Co-
financing amounts and details Financial reports PIRs Sustainability: To what
extent are there financial, institutional, social-economic, and/or environmental
risks to sustaining long-term project results? • • • Number of subscribers to
financing mechanisms of the GoB to encourage the development of energy
efficiency in buildings • • • Document review • Stakeholder discussions To what
extent are project results likely to be dependent on continued financial
support? What is the likelihood that any required financial resources will be
available to sustain the project results once the GEF assistance ends? Co-
financing amounts and details; Financial reports PIRs • • Number of building
owners familiar with new • Demonstration building • Do relevant stakeholders
have or are likely Stakeholder discussions MBEPS; owners to achieve an adequate
level of “ownership” of results, to have the interest in ensuring that project
benefits are maintained? Do relevant stakeholders have the necessary • Number of
architects and designers familiar • Architects and designers who were
beneficiaries of Project training with new MBEPS; 77 Terminal Evaluation June
2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Evaluative Criteria
Questions technical capacity to ensure that project benefits are maintained?
Indicators Sources Methodology • Number of building owners using EMIS to monitor
primary energy usage in their buildings for hot water and HVAC Public awareness
of MBEPS for buildings • • • • To what extent are the project results dependent
on socio-political factors? To what extent are the project results dependent on
issues relating to institutional frameworks and governance? Public opinion
surveys of EE in buildings • Gazetted standards • Stakeholder discussions •
Document review • Stakeholder discussions • Document review • Stakeholder
discussions • • MBEPS that are adopted; • Public official knowledge of these
standards and their enforcement tools Energy savings of buildings in compliance
with MBEPS; Public officials managing building assets • Are there any
environmental risks that can undermine the future flow of project impacts and
Global Environmental Benefits? • • Demonstration building design reports • GHG
emission reductions from demonstration • Demonstration building buildings
managers Impact: Are there indications that the project has contributed to, or
enabled progress toward, reduced environmental stress and/or improved ecological
status? • • Opinions and knowledge of public officials and • • Public opinions
on EE buildings Public opinion surveys of EE buildings Stakeholder discussions •
Demonstration building owners and users of demonstration EE buildings managers
78 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus
Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings
APPENDIX  – RESPONSES TO COMMENTS RECEIVED ON DRAFT TE REPORT To the comments
received on the , 11 and 20 of May 2018 for the Terminal Evaluation of UNDP-GEF
PIMS 4290: Belarus: Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings (IEERB
Project) The following comments were provided in track changes to the draft
Terminal Evaluation report; they are referenced by institution (“Author” column)
and track change comment number (“#” column): Para #/ Comment location Author #
Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken Alexandre
Grebenkov  Page , Executive Summary Why low incentives are referred to here as
reason for difficulties of assessing the reduction of energy consumption and GHG
emissions? The assessment should be based on the pre- project baseline and the
resulting achievements in the course of the Project  think that this conclusion
is not entirely correct Yes, the pilot buildings were put in operation in Dec
2016 – May 2017, and the experience of only one (the first) heating season does
not provide correct energy performance data On the other hand: () the monitoring
data of the first season, while being slightly worse (and this was actually
foreseen) than the expected data of any future season, show nevertheless the
results that correspond quite well with the designed data; (ii) these results
are institutionalized since the Project and its partners have to provide the
monitoring data every month in line with the Order of July , 2017 No04/26p by
the Deputy Prime Minister initiated by the Project; and (iii) there is an
assignment in that Order given to NIPTIS by the Government to continue the said
monitoring until 2020 under the upcoming state programmes With regards to the
comment of the need for Government support for “efforts to strengthen and
institutionalize GHG emission reduction calculations from energy efficiency of
new buildings as well as retrofitted existing buildings with the involvement of
MoEPNR”, why would the country want it? Can we prompt them? Agree with review
comment with changes made to the actual outcome from the intended objective in
the Executive Summary Alexandre Grebenkov  Page vi, Executive Summary The
evaluation team appreciates this updated information that has been included in
revised “actual Outcome ” description, Table  and Section  Igar Tchoulba  Page
vii, Executive Summary In the opinion of the Evaluation Team, the possession of
credible GHG emission reduction estimates from the building sector would
interest donors and funding agencies to  building energy efficiency project This
may 79 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings Para #/ Comment location Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE
response and actions taken Author # serve as  prompt to MoNREP to undertake such
data collection Agree with the reviewer’ statement Additional text was provided
to the statement in this context as well as on Para Igar Tchoulba  Page vii,
Executive Summary With regards to Action  on the “specific & activities that can
minimize the workload of the Implementing Partner and the PMU”, this is unclear
from this one sentence Is it possible to elaborate more? Igar Tchoulba  Page
vii, Executive Summary With regards to Action  on the need for “sufficient
resources on capacity building to the building owners and operators to monitor
energy consumption (see Action )”, this is not clear This clarification is noted
with changes made in this Paragraph of the executive Summary as well as Para The
reviewer is correct on this Edits have been provided for this clarification in
the Executive Summary as well as Para Igar Tchoulba  Page vii, Executive Summary
With regards to Action  to “improve implementation of the IEERB Project, the PRF
(strengthened through ToC analysis and ROtI) needs to be used as  guide for
preparing project work plans”, the project has almost finished This is rather
for future projects not for this one With regards to Actions , , and , can you
please be more specific on what type of programme? And who does what? UNDP? DEE?
MoHU? Not clear whose roles and responsibilities Who will pay? John ’Brien  Page
vii, Executive Summary Edits have been made to reflect the primary
responsibility of these programmes which is MoHU DEE and UNDP can provide
regulatory and fiscal support if resources are available The Evaluation Team
appreciates this comment and has edited Action  to mention that  shorter cost
recovery period is the incentive if tariffs are raised to  50% recovery rate DEE
Page vii, Executive Summary With regards to “Action  (to DEE): Monitor progress
of Decree on the upward adjustment of low heating tariff rate towards 50% that
should provide sufficient incentives to building developers for EE measures in
residential buildings”, the proposed measure does not presuppose any actions It
suggests rather  simple observation while the expected result is supposed to be
obtained regardless The TE experts do not provide any justification of the
figure of 50% Thus, Action  can be either deleted or subjected to necessary
editing With regards to Action , MoHU is one of the key partners of the project
This body will be responsible for implementation of the Concept mentioned
hereinafter Alexandre Grebenkov  Page vii, Executive Summary The evaluation team
appreciates this updated information that is incorporated into the Executive
Summary and Para 80 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the
Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location Author # Comment/Feedback on
draft TE report TE response and actions taken DEE 10 Page viii, Executive
Summary With regards to “Action  (to DEE): Provide support to appropriate
institutions to develop formalized protocols and methodologies for reporting GHG
emission reductions for EE buildings and retrofits that includes support to the
RUE Belarusian Research Centre “Ecology” needs to be continued after the EOP”,
DEE is not currently in  position (the task is out of its competence) and
probably will not be able (even if it is the Department' commitment to the
Project Document) to support organizations in developing formal protocols and
reporting methodologies dealing with GHG emissions from housing sector This is
direct competence of the Ministry of Environment and its RUE BRC “Ecology” as
the Ministry' entity Again, the evaluation team appreciates this updated
information Edits have been made to shift this action to MoNREP in the Executive
Summary and Para The project elaborated and handed over to the RUE all necessary
protocols and methodologies, and the RUE is using these documents while
preparing the country’ reports on GHG Cadastre, Biannual Reports and National
Communications to the UNFCCC and IPCC The protocols will be also used by the
State Standardization Committee while certifying the EE classes of buildings in
line with the Technical Code With regards to “Action  (to DEE): Support future
retrofit programs or construction of new EE buildings (supported either by GoB
or donors) through training of building energy operators or managers using
experiences gained through the Project”, the proposed measure for the trainings
is certainly worth doing Such measure is widely realized, for instance, in many
EU countries But initially in these countries the market of EE buildings was
created Thus, this measure is the “future son” or “grandson” in our current
system This will be our -10-year future energy-saving level This requires  tough
market competition without any monopoly in electricity and heat supply The text
refers to the old version of the Law on Energy Saving The text says, ,: … the
Law on Energy Saving adopted in 1998 with amendments in 2008 … This is not
correct The Law on Energy Saving of 1998 lost its force in It was neither
amended nor revised In 2015, the new Law on Energy Saving DEE 11 Page viii,
Executive Summary The Evaluation Team appreciates DEE feedback on this There is
large network of building energy efficiency initiatives throughout Europe which
the Belarusian government should be linked with (if this has not already
occurred) The tariff issue, however, will need to be resolved before any such
action will attract financing from donors DEE 12 Throughout the TE report The
Evaluation Team appreciates this information, and has made changes throughout
the document to remove any reference to  2008 amendment 81 Terminal Evaluation
June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location
Author # Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken was
adopted and entered into force (No239- of January , 2015) With regards to the
statement that “lack of guidance in the context of technical details of
insulation and energy efficient equipment, and proper methods of their
installation”, the standards and guidance for technical details with regard to
isolation of building envelopes and other construction components were already
in place before the project start The respective provisions on thermal
resistance, thermal bridges, etc adopted in 2010 correspond well to those of
many northern EU countries Please give some numbers about how many tonnes of CO2
were targeted to be reduced such as the target of 220,000 tonnes of GHG emission
reductions lifetime emissions etc … Those who operate and maintain buildings are
important stakeholders Alexandre Grebenkov 13 Para 20 Edits have been made in
Para 20 to incorporate this statement John ’Brien 14 Para 21 Requested details
have been added to Para 21 Igar Tchoulba 15 Para 24 The evaluation team strongly
agrees with this, and has made an edit in Para These details are provided in
Para Edits have been made to reference Para 42 in Para John ’Brien 16 Para 29
Please explain the reason for the delay  think it is the two tier approval
process where the Belarussian Government also need their own internal rules and
procedures to approve the ProDoc John ’Brien 17 Para 43 You need  review of the
MTR in this section and the effectiveness of which MTR was carried out following
the recommendations of the MTR The mid-term review is  main opportunity for
adaptive management in all projects  suggest to take  quick look at the MTR
recommendations and see if they were implemented Please consider to add  para on
this issue Text added to Para 43 as well as an addition of Table  which
summarizes the Project Management response See Response John ’Brien 18 Para 44
John ’Brien 19 Para 54 Please add  table on the co-financing on what was planned
and what was actually achieved  think it is not enough to conclude this without
any analysis whatsoever of how the funds have been spent by component and by
activity Please add  table  with what was planned in the prodoc (this can go
under para 53) and This has already been done in Tables  and  Table  was added
to show the nature of GEF expenditures 82 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP –
Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location Author #
Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken  table  (this
can go under par 54) with what was actually spent , component by component If
this means the target has been met then please state this John ’Brien 20 Para 62
This Para has been edited for clarification The evaluation team appreciates this
clarification, and has provided edits in Para 79 on capacity building Alexandre
Grebenkov 21 Para 63 It is important, for the sake of correctness, to understand
that not all these energy efficiency buildings inherited all and every our
design solutions The key point is that our experience, suggestions and solutions
have encouraged the said developers one way or another to jump from  and
classes to /+ classes All of them, though, are introducing the automatic
regulation and dispatching of thermal energy consumption, special designs of
building envelope, etc; some of them used heat recuperation, solar collectors;
other used their own solutions like  small compact ventilator with heat
recovery; none of them have designed residential buildings with heat pumps yet
These data are final We will not be able to update statistical data for Jan-June
2018 – such data will not be available Alexandre Grebenkov 22 Para 63 The
Evaluation team will then not change the estimates as provided in the draft
report Edits have been made as requested The Evaluation Team agrees with the
reviewer’ point The rating assessment has been upgraded to  “” John ’Brien
Alexandre Grebenkov 23 24 Para 72 Table , pg 35 Please make  brief analysis of
the quality of these reports  would put here rating “”, since formally the
buildings have been monitored already one full year, and the model for
calculation of the “actual consumption” and compare it with the designed
parameters is valid in case of occupancy rate higher than 30% to provide proper
extrapolation of the monitoring data We have just finalized and issued
monitoring report from NIPTIS pending its approval by experts and DEE John
’Brien 25 Para 83 There was adaptive management done for the pilot buildings and
one of the pilots was replaced with another one under adaptive management Can we
say  bit about this? Do you know why it is so low and can you say? Is it because
of the additional cost of the +17% Can you please explain Footnote 40 was added
as per the reviewer’ request John ’Brien 26 Para 88 The tenants often do not
occupy these units right away  surmise it is because of the lack of money to
finance the costly renovation of the units to their liking 83 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/
Comment location Author # Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and
actions taken Alexandre Grebenkov 27 Para 89 In fact, the problem of Outcome  is
not related to shortcomings in the achievement of one of its objectives,  think
During the Project, the pilot buildings have been built and monitored The design
parameters have been confirmed, and energy savings and GHG emission reduction
targets have been reached This follows from the results of calculations based on
the actual primary fuel consumption measured with due account of occupancy rate
and its extrapolation to the full occupation The actual problem is the risk of
sustainability of these good results that is linked to the current tariff policy
This policy, however and unfortunately, is out of the Project’ capacity The
Evaluation Team agrees with the reviewer’ assessment which is covered in other
Paras in the report The Evaluation Team, however, did upgrade the Outcome
assessment to “Satisfactory” Alexandre Grebenkov 28 Table , pg 39 To what extent
do public outreach activities (that were implemented through  great deal of
press-releases and briefs, dozens of communication campaigns, hundreds articles,
reports, reviews and interviews, extended media partnership network,  number of
press-conferences, exhibitions, contests, very popular website, photo albums,
animated video for the residents, video- rolls for specialists,  15-minute video
broadcasted by central TV, etc) relate to the annual market report? The
statistics for the energy efficient housing were regularly provided by project
partners (one-page tables) and collected by the Project We did not publish these
reports (although we used to include the numbers in our annual reports) for
there was no sense of doing this without proper analysis of trends in typology
and constructive technological schemes, methodical recommendations, developers,
etc, which was planned to do in The report “Analysis of Housing and Construction
Market” was completed and submitted to DEE in April The Project initiated
number of meetings to attract the Government’ attention to the monitoring issue
(in addition to the fact that the energy survey has been already included into
the Technical Code elaborated by the Project that is pending adoption) As
result, the Order of the Deputy Minister of MoAC (as of August 18, 2017, No02--
07) and the Order of the Vice-Prime-Minister (as of February , 2018, No04/8pr)
were The Evaluation Team notes that “Output : Annual market monitoring reports
for new building construction” has not yet been delivered This was reported
against the indicator “status of the planned public outreach activities” for
lack of  better indicator since such  report would serve as  medium of outreach
to the public on new building construction This also shows the weakness of the
PRF in that this output is not strongly related to any of the Outcome
indicators in the PRF As such, no edits have been made against this comment
Alexandre Grebenkov 29 Table , pg 39 This response does confirm that the Project
has been placing efforts to deliver “Output : Energy-efficiency aspects
integrated into the regional and local plans for territorial development being
developed by IURP” and “Output : Annual market 84 Terminal Evaluation June 2018
UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving
Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location Author #
Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken issued to
assign responsible organizations (including NIPTIS) and to prepare  related
State Programme for monitoring and energy auditing of the housing sector Several
relevant reports were prepared and submitted to DEE in April 2018, as scheduled
The said reports are: • monitoring reports for new building construction” The
cell color has changed to yellow The rating of the indicator has been upgraded
to “” In addition, Para 92 and 93 have been re- written to reflect the
additional information provided by the reviewer “Analysis of practical
procedures (methodologies) and relevant provisions for the system of annual
monitoring of the status of energy efficient housing”; “Institutional mechanisms
for annual monitoring of the status of energy-efficient housing”; “Draft
provisions and methodology of the system for annual monitoring of the status of
energy efficient housing” • This comment also shows the weakness of the PRF in
that these output is not strongly related to any of the Outcome  indicators in
the PRF As such, no edits have been made against this comment • In , the Project
initiated several meetings with the Institute of Urban and Regional Planning and
TCS-14 addressing integration of EE pattern into urban development In addition,
the issues of urban development with energy efficient quarters were discussed
during several Project’ conferences and workshops starting from These
discussions are still opened, since the Institute of Urban and Regional Planning
is reluctant to accommodate all new approaches Nevertheless, in , the Project
issued  couple of reports dealing with EE urban development and submitted them
to DEE and the Institute: • “Proposals for urban development concepts, regional
and local development plans based on recommendations on the integration of
energy efficiency approaches into these plans”; and • Amendments and additions
to the technical standard TCH - "Urban detailed planning Structure and order of
development” that was sent to the Institute of Urban and Regional Planning and
TCS-With regards to the statement that “the Government in 2014 assigned RUE
“BelNITS Ecologiya” to perform as National Agency responsible for monitoring of
GHG emission reductions in all branches of economy and for respective reporting
to the Alexandre Grebenkov 30 Para 92 The evaluation team notes the reviewer’
point and has removed the highlighted text 85 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP
– Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy
Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location Author #
Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken UNFCCC
Secretariat……the arrangement, however, has not yet been formalized and aligned
with the calculations for GHG emission reductions for the IEERB Project”,  think
we should avoid making such assumptions as you make here The use of IPCC
methodologies for calculating GHG emission reductions from EE buildings is what
the Project should be aiming to achieve It is entirely separate from the GEF
methodology which is only used for GEF projects The use of the term
“formalization” was to characterize the process where IPCC accepts the
methodology of calculating GHG ERs from EE buildings in Belarus’ reporting Two
questions emerge: • Is there  mechanism between IPCC and the Government on
acceptable methodologies for certain calculations? If so, is the Belarusian
standard (TKP -2011 – “Methodology for estimating GHG emissions through the
implementation of energy saving measures, non-traditional and renewable energy
sources”) accepted as this methodology? What shall we do with the fact that the
IPCC guidelines for CO2 emission calculations (that were  formal and proven
basis for the Project’ report “ methodology for calculating greenhouse gas
emissions for  system for monitoring the energy efficiency of residential
buildings Estimating the amount of expected greenhouse gas emissions from the
operation of the three pilot buildings”) do not correspond with the “universal”
(simplified) GEF methodology used in Para 63? Instead, we should be comfortable
with IPCC methodology used in the Project’ protocol for CO2 emission reduction
calculation When you say about its formalization, what way of formalization do
you mean? To formalize the IPCC guidelines? To formalize the corresponding
Belarusian standard (TKP -2011 – “Methodology for estimating GHG emissions
through the implementation of energy saving measures, non-traditional and
renewable energy sources”)? As to our formal reporting to GEF (in PIRs), we
should use the GEF’ tool • See response to Comment The information in Comment 29
with regards to IURP has been added to the edits of Output  With regards to the
statement “for Output , the Institute of Urban and Regional Planning (IURP) has
yet to develop energy- efficiency aspects integrated into the regional and local
plans for territorial development: it is important to understand (and this was
sort of mistake in ProDoc), that the IURP is not responsible either for energy
savings or integration of energy efficiency improvement decisions into
territorial development They integrate in their plans whatever is suggested by
developers or available in the market If the developers construct EE buildings,
the IURP responds accordingly while designing infrastructure Alexandre Grebenkov
31 Para 92 86 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of
Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential
Buildings Para #/ Comment location Author # Comment/Feedback on draft TE report
TE response and actions taken (, less capacity of CHPs and local boilers,
optimization of thermal energy transport, etc) and overall architecture of the
territory Try to reformulate this sentence based on my input provided for Para
With regards to the statement that the “overall sustainability rating is
equivalent to the lowest sustainability ranking score of the  dimensions”, is
this correct? Based on Para 101 and Table  below one can hardly make such
assumption Or you speak about other assessments? Alexandre Grebenkov Alexandre
Grebenkov 32 Para 93 Edits made 33 Para 101 This is GEF guidance on
sustainability ratings where the lowest score of any of the dimensions is the
sustainability rating, not an arithmetic average To the comments received on the
12 June May 2018 for the Terminal Evaluation of UNDP-GEF PIMS 4290: Belarus:
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings (IEERB Project) The
following comments were provided in track changes to the draft Terminal
Evaluation report; they are referenced by institution (“Author” column) and
track change comment number (“#” column): Para #/ Comment location Author #
Comment/Feedback on draft TE report TE response and actions taken Alexandre
Grebenkov 34 Page vi, Executive Summary, 2nd para Correct, nothing to add
Although, it is not entirely correct to link investments solely with pay-back ,
under existing tariffs and discount rate, the forced ventilation with
recuperation of exhausted air heat has negative IRR Comfort that is provided by
this system (fresh air, less diseases, exclusion of mold on/in walls,
sustainable hot water supply with no or low dependence on the centralized heat,
etc) is not easy to monetize The ProDoc stipulates 60 kWh/m2  have made
respective corrections in your previous version From where did you read about 30
kWh/m2 again? Even in the EU you will unlikely find such performance (30 kWh/m2)
among multi-storey buildings Correct Although, in the beginning of June three
other institutes adopted the reports in their education process already (Brest
National Technical University, Minsk and Mahiliou Construction Colleges) Agree
with review comment with no changes made in the report Alexandre Grebenkov 35
Table , pg 25 The evaluation team appreciates this correction Alexandre
Grebenkov 36 Para 72 No changes made in the report 87 Terminal Evaluation June
2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of
Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Para #/ Comment location
Para 92, and Comment 30 in Appendix  Author # Comment/Feedback on draft TE
report TE response and actions taken Alexandre Grebenkov 37 In general,  am fine
with your recent reduction of para Let us recall again Output  It says: “Fully
mandated and capacitated state agency with  responsibility to monitor the … CO2
emission reductions in residential and other buildings, together with the agreed
procedures and interagency agreements for compiling the required primary data” )
The fully mandated and capacitated relevant state agency has been established
This agency is used to provide monitoring of GHG emissions from all sectors in
line with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories ) The
above IPCC Guidelines prescribes three levels of GHG emission calculation
methodologies for all UNFCCC Annex  Parties: () IPCC methodology, which is
required protocol for all such Parties and for all sectors; (ii) country
specific methodology, which is  voluntary protocol for some sector() selected as
to Party’ discretion; and (iii) country specific methodology, which is
voluntary protocol for some specific sources of emissions for sector() selected
as to Party’ discretion ) IPCC is not to standardize the country specific
methodologies under levels (ii) or (iii) and is not to include such
methodologies in its Guidelines IPCC even does not care whether such
methodologies are adopted (standardized) on national level or not Instead, case-
by-case, the IPCC Expert Facility while reviewing the Party’ reporting (,
National Communication, National GHG Cadaster) examines and verifies the results
of calculations and the methodology (other than ()) on which the calculations
are based ) The project, based on its results, elaborated “Methodology for
calculation of greenhouse gas emissions from housing”, which is  country
specific methodology of level (iii) and does not contradict with generalized
IPCC methodology of level (), and the project would like this document to become
national standard Thus, the project fully responded to Output  The Evaluation
Team appreciates the clarity provided on this comment, and has provided
additional text in Para 92  88 Terminal Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government
of the Republic of Belarus Terminal Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in
Residential Buildings APPENDIX  - EVALUATION CONSULTANT AGREEMENT FORM
Evaluators:  Must present information that is complete and fair in its
assessment of strengths and weaknesses so that decisions or actions taken are
well founded  Must disclose the full set of evaluation findings along with
information on their limitations and have this accessible to all affected by the
evaluation with expressed legal rights to receive results  Should protect the
anonymity and confidentiality of individual informants They should provide
maximum notice, minimize demands on time, and respect people’ right not to
engage Evaluators must respect people’ right to provide information in
confidence, and must ensure that sensitive information cannot be traced to its
source Evaluators are not expected to evaluate individuals, and must balance an
evaluation of management functions with this general principle  Sometimes
uncover evidence of wrongdoing while conducting evaluations Such cases must be
reported discreetly to the appropriate investigative body Evaluators should
consult with other relevant oversight entities when there is any doubt about if
and how issues should be reported  Should be sensitive to beliefs, manners and
customs and act with integrity and honesty in their relations with all
stakeholders In line with the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
evaluators must be sensitive to and address issues of discrimination and gender
equality They should avoid offending the dignity and self-respect of those
persons with whom they come in contact in the course of the evaluation Knowing
that evaluation might negatively affect the interests of some stakeholders,
evaluators should conduct the evaluation and communicate its purpose and results
in  way that clearly respects the stakeholders’ dignity and self-worth  Are
responsible for their performance and their product() They are responsible for
the clear, accurate and fair written and/or oral presentation of study
imitations, findings and recommendations  Should reflect sound accounting
procedures and be prudent in using the resources of the evaluation Evaluation
Consultant Agreement Form59 Agreement to abide by the Code of Conduct for
Evaluation in the UN System Name of Consultant: __Roland
Wong_________________________________________________ Name of Consultancy
Organization (where relevant): ________________________  confirm that  have
received and understood and will abide by the United Nations Code of Conduct for
Evaluation Signed at Surrey, BC, Canada on June 16, 2018 59 89 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018 UNDP – Government of the Republic of Belarus Terminal
Evaluation of Improving Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings Evaluators:
Must present information that is complete and fair in its assessment of
strengths and weaknesses so that decisions or actions taken are well founded
Must disclose the full set of evaluation findings along with information on
their limitations and have this accessible to all affected by the evaluation
with expressed legal rights to receive results Should protect the anonymity and
confidentiality of individual informants They should provide maximum notice,
minimize demands on time, and respect people’ right not to engage Evaluators
must respect people’ right to provide information in confidence, and must ensure
that sensitive information cannot be traced to its source Evaluators are not
expected to evaluate individuals, and must balance an evaluation of management
functions with this general principle Sometimes uncover evidence of wrongdoing
while conducting evaluations Such cases must be reported discreetly to the
appropriate investigative body Evaluators should consult with other relevant
oversight entities when there is any doubt about if and how issues should be
reported Should be sensitive to beliefs, manners and customs and act with
integrity and honesty in their relations with all stakeholders In line with the
UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights, evaluators must be sensitive to and
address issues of discrimination and gender equality They should avoid offending
the dignity and self-respect of those persons with whom they come in contact in
the course of the evaluation Knowing that evaluation might negatively affect the
interests of some stakeholders, evaluators should conduct the evaluation and
communicate its purpose and results in  way that clearly respects the
stakeholders’ dignity and self-worth Are responsible for their performance and
their product() They are responsible for the clear, accurate and fair written
and/or oral presentation of study imitations, findings and recommendations
Should reflect sound accounting procedures and be prudent in using the resources
of the evaluation Evaluation Consultant Agreement Form60 Agreement to abide by
the Code of Conduct for Evaluation in the UN System Name of Consultant:
__Viktoryia Kalosha_________________________________________________ Name of
Consultancy Organization (where relevant): ________________________  confirm
that  have received and understood and will abide by the United Nations Code of
Conduct for Evaluation Signed at Minsk, Belarus on June 16, 2018 60 90 Terminal
Evaluation June 2018