    WA                        FOREWORD from the Chairman of the State Committee
for Standardization of the Republic of Belarus The Republic of Belarus
recognises the key role that modern, energy- efficient and carbon-neutral
technologies play in the successful economic development of countries Along with
the international community, Belarus is continuously modernising and introducing
innovations in the country' energy sector, including measures to develop
renewable energy and replace fossil fuels with renewable sources This work is
aimed at creating favourable living conditions for the citizens of Belarus,
increasing the competitiveness of the national economy and reducing negative
environmental impacts, as well as fulfilling domestic and international
obligations and goals The Republic of Belarus, as  member State of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), requested that IRENA conduct
Renewables Readiness Assessment This study, prepared in co-operation with the
State Committee for Standardization and representatives of government agencies
and organisations, presents the key aspects of the current state of the energy
sector It proposes significant short and medium-term measures to improve the
legislative and cross- sectoral environment to increase the development of
renewables Valentin Boleslavovich Tataritsky Chairman of the State Committee for
Standardization of the Republic of Belarus This comprehensive assessment is
based on the results of working consultations with relevant stakeholders from
government authorities and other organisations leading the renewable energy
sector in Belarus, which helped to identify opportunities and develop solutions
for increasing the use of renewables The assessment also describes the factors
hindering the development of renewable energy and measures to accelerate the
pace of development of renewables in our country The implementation of the
Renewables Readiness Assessment for Belarus will certainly help to enhance the
positive image of the Republic of Belarus in the international community It will
form the basis for the development of new areas of co-operation with other
countries and international and financial organisations in the field of
renewable energy The presentation and publication of the Renewables Readiness
Assessment will also open up new opportunities for the Republic of Belarus to
co-operate with international partners on the implementation of regional and
cross-border projects of international technical assistance, investment, and
infrastructure projects contributing to the achievement of national and global
sustainable development goals, including Goal , “Ensure access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all” On behalf of the State
Committee for Standardization of the Republic of Belarus,  express my gratitude
to the International Renewable Energy Agency for the preparation of the
Renewables Readiness Assessment for Belarus  also express my gratitude to all
international and national experts, government officials and stakeholders who
contributed to this process and shared their best practices, knowledge and
experience The proposals and recommendations collected in the assessment will
definitely have  positive effect and  direct impact on the implementation of
long-term energy strategy in Belarus, allowing us to create  sustainable and
environmentally friendly future for our country                      FOREWORD
From the IRENA Director-General As the world moves towards  low-carbon future,
the energy sector is undergoing deep transformations to rise to this challenge
Through renewable energy,  less carbon-intensive development model is now within
reach, with numerous positive spillovers for the economy and society Currently,
fossil fuels make up more than 90% of the energy mix in Belarus, with natural
gas taking the lion’ share Power generation is also predominantly fossil fuel-
based, with very limited integration of renewable sources Energy imports amount
to % of the total primary energy supply and come primarily from  single source
supplier, exposing the country to price volatility and putting its energy
security at risk Renewable energy is the response to many of these challenges
Clean, reliable, available locally and increasingly cheaper, renewable energy
would strengthen the energy security of Belarus by reducing its reliance on
fossil fuel imports It would contribute to economic growth, job creation and
improved air quality, thereby enhancing the peoples’ well-being Although still
in  nascent stage in the Belarusian energy sector, renewable energy has been
growing steadily over the past decade, accounting for % of the country’ final
energy consumption in While most of Belarus' renewable energy production comes
from biofuels, there is significant potential for biomass, solar and wind
development and integration across all end use sectors Setting ambitious
renewable energy targets, designing renewable energy auctions, adopting  grid
code to support the integration of renewables, de-risking investments, and
enhancing human and institutional capacities are among the key actions
identified by IRENA that could harness the potential of renewable energy sources
in Belarus Francesco La Camera Director-General International Renewable Energy
Agency Since 2011, nearly 40 countries in regions from Latin America and the
Caribbean to Africa, the Middle East, Asia and the Pacific have undertaken
Renewables Readiness Assessment, exchanging knowledge and fostering
international co-operation to accelerate the deployment of renewables Each
process has been country-led, with IRENA providing technical expertise and
highlighting regional and global insights, along with facilitating national
stakeholder consultations IRENA thanks the State Committee for Standardization
of the Republic of Belarus (Gosstandart) for its close co-operation and
engagement in the development of this RRA The report has also benefitted from
the valuable input of numerous other government agencies and national
stakeholders  am confident that the observations and recommendations presented
here will be valuable in addressing the challenges of the energy sector in
Belarus by highlighting the path to uptake the deployment of renewables
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Republic of Belarus is  landlocked country in eastern
Europe with  population of approximately  million people After the dissolution
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in 1991, the economy of
Belarus contracted, but it soon resumed growth due to an increase in labour
productivity, favourable trading terms – mainly with the Russian Federation and
the European Union (EU) – and further development of the manufacturing industry
and exports The Belarusian economy is highly energy intensive, and the country’
energy sector is overwhelmingly fossil-fuelled and import-dependent The country’
total primary energy supply (TPES) in 2019 was composed of 62% natural gas and
28% oil, with the remainder comprising mainly biomass, waste, coal and peat
Energy imports are mainly from the Russian Federation, and amount to about 85%
of all energy supplied in the country The largest fuel import dependency is on
natural gas, of which only % supplied is produced domestically This makes
Belarus one of the world’ most energy import-dependent countries and
dramatically compromises the country’ energy security Renewable energy is at an
early stage of development in the Belarusian energy sector The share of
renewables, although steadily increasing over the past decade, stood at just %
of the TPES in This share comprises largely biofuels and, to  lesser extent,
solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind Nonetheless, the country is well endowed with
renewable energy resource potential that presents  viable and sustainable
pathway for the development of the energy sector Biomass is the most abundant
renewable energy resource, but there is also significant wind and solar PV
potential in almost all areas of the country For solar PV and solar thermal
applications, the south and southeast of the country have the highest
irradiation levels and annual direct normal irradiance (DNI), respectively
Indeed, these regions have considerable potential for solar thermal
applications, such as space and water heating and low-enthalpy process heat in
the industry and services sectors Geothermal potential, although not extensively
studied, is deemed to be most suitable for low-enthalpy heat processes
throughout the country   Apart from renewable energy resources, Belarus does not
have significant local energy resources Thus, through the increased deployment
of renewable energy technologies, Belarus would be able to increase its domestic
energy supply, which would have  direct contribution towards the country’ gross
domestic product (GDP), economic growth and energy sector security Furthermore,
greening the energy sector would directly reduce emissions, thereby supporting
sustainable and environmentally sound development pathway for the country
Increased renewable energy deployment would also contribute to local value
creation, including employment opportunities and industrial development With
view to informing the development of  sustainable and secure energy sector in
Belarus, this Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) identifies critical actions
that could significantly increase the scale-up of renewable energy in the
country, outlined in  number of key recommendations Revising renewable energy
targets To guide the development of renewables, Belarus has set out various
renewable energy targets through multiple policy documents and plans However,
the targets are not always consistent with one another, and while some
technology-specific targets were not met by the end of 2020, the national
renewable energy target for 2025 has already been reached This mismatch creates
uncertainty about near-term continued renewable energy development and raises
questions about the targets’ ambitiousness and relationship to other development
objectives, such as energy security Current targets need to be revised,
streamlined and made consistent Renewables in Belarus comprise largely of
biofuels, followed by solar photovoltaic and wind, and increased steadily over
the past decade to reach % of the total primary energy supply in 2019       WA
Improving the quota allocation for renewables The development of renewables in
the power sector is enabled through yearly quotas that allocate the amounts of
installed capacities per renewable energy technology for the coming three-year
period However, these quotas have been subject to many revisions and reductions
that have adversely impacted investor confidence and limited the pace of the
renewable energy sector’ growth In addition, the quota allocations do not
encourage larger-scale investments To accelerate the development of renewables
and allow for larger-scale investments, especially for solar PV and wind
technologies, it is imperative that the allocated quota amounts be increased
Furthermore, the quotas should allow for biomass power development, and the
current hydropower quotas should be allocated to other renewable technologies
Finally, the quota systems should not include renewable energy prosumers, and
the quota allocation period should be extended to five years to allow investors
to gauge the development of the sector Designing renewable energy auctions
Renewable energy producers in Belarus sell their electricity to the off-taker at
feed-in tariff (FiT) that is calculated by applying different multiplier
coefficients on the electricity base tariffs However, electricity base tariffs
do not truly reflect the unit cost of production, and the multiplier
coefficients are low, leading stakeholders to deem the FiTs too low to attract
the necessary investments at scale To attract renewable energy investments, the
country should look into developing renewable energy auctions, which can allow
for market-based tariff setting of renewable power generation and have the
potential for real price discovery Furthermore, auctions can allow for well-
planned and cost-efficient renewable energy deployment, and their transparent
design and implementation can instil confidence in investors and reduce
perceived market risks Developing  law on energy and heat Belarus has no primary
act or base law on energy that holistically governs the energy sector, defining
the energy system and the roles of the different energy sector entities To
compensate, local regulations ultimately fill this gap, creating inconsistencies
among different regions  telling example of this gap is that Belarus does not
have  specific law governing its heat sector As such, there is no comprehensive
legal framework to incentivise the development of renewable energy in the
respective end-use sector and support the sector’ decarbonisation  dedicated and
comprehensive legal framework for the energy sector is needed to assign legal
enforcement mechanisms for the development of various energy sector programmes
Furthermore,  dedicated heat law could incentivise the development of renewables
in heat supply and would signal  political commitment to the decarbonisation of
the energy sector Harnessing renewable energy potentials in heating Belarus has
high biomass potential, but the calorific value of different biomass feedstocks
and fuel products needs further improvement This is key because the country
relies on outdated resource assessment standards that do not take into account
different technological advancements for thermal extraction and processing of
feedstocks into more calorie-dense fuel products Furthermore, the unit price of
biomass is based on mass or volume of the fuel, rather than per unit calorific
value Therefore, standardising the quality of biomass feedstocks and ensuring
trading prices are based on quality standards are necessary in ensuring the
technical and economic viability of biomass                       for heating
Moreover, the increased use of renewable energy sources in heating should be
based on the integration of modern, technically and economically feasible
energy- efficient technologies, harnessing the country’ biomass, low-enthalpy
geothermal and solar thermal resources, as well as energy-efficient heat pumps
Developing an energy sector master plan with higher shares of renewables The
development of the energy sector in Belarus is guided by  number of cross-sector
state programmes However, it is necessary to integrate these cross-sector
strategies into  master plan for an integrated development of the energy sector
The development of such  plan would facilitate sector-wide policy assessments,
including environmental impacts and the infrastructural and financial needs of
fulfilling wider development objectives Furthermore,  master plan would allow
for  more co-ordinated and holistic development approach to various renewable
targets, quota allocations and auction rounds Adopting  grid code for renewables
The Belarus power system is in  relatively early stage of managing variable
renewable power injection on the grid To avoid any disturbances on the grid,
renewable power producers are not given priority dispatch, but instead have to
feed in power generated according to dispatch control centre schedules In
addition,  lack of technical standards for integration and uncertainty about
technical requirements to connect to and feed into the grid introduce
transmission or grid risks and significantly increase the cost of financing for
renewables  well-formulated national renewable energy grid code outlining
procedural and technical requirements for variable renewable power producers
feeding into the central grid will help to alleviate investment risk and allow
for  level playing field for all power producers while also maintaining power
system stability Improving variable renewable power generation forecasting
Variable renewable power forecasting is an essential and cost-effective tool for
managing power system operations, balancing power supply and maintaining grid
stability in power grids to which variable renewable power generators are
connected Currently in Belarus, wind and solar PV forecasting is not optimally
integrated into daily scheduling and dispatch operations for power system
balancing, and renewable energy generators are obliged to participate in the
day-ahead scheduling Short-term (zero to six hour) forecasting is crucial in
predicting renewable energy production, and when intra-day adjustments of
forecasted renewable energy production are not accounted for, power production
uncertainty is created This leads to unnecessary power curtailments for which
renewable power producers are not compensated and which adds to power market
risk for investors To alleviate this investment risk and facilitate the
increased integration of renewable power plants, short-term forecasting must be
integrated into generation scheduling and dispatch operations Improving de-
risking mechanisms for renewable energy investments Financing for renewable
energy projects in Belarus is very low, and there is an overall shortage of both
debt and equity financing In particular, the local financial sector is
inexperienced in green financing Most investments have been facilitated through
international capital Furthermore, local financing comes at  very high cost, and
commercial lending entails high interest rates and high collateral requirements
due to numerous perceived risks Clear financial sector policies for green
financing should be       WA                        developed with the national
development bank, which should also include small-scale financing Furthermore,
establishing  dedicated renewable energy fund could be an effective way of
providing public loans and de-risking mechanisms for renewable energy
investments Currency risk also adversely impacts the cost of international debt
and equity financing  significant amount of foreign financing in Belarus comes
from Europe, so fixed prices in power purchase agreements (PPAs) should be at
least partially indexed to the euro to increase the bankability of renewable
energy investments To alleviate off-taker risk, clear mitigation clauses should
be included in  standardised PPA along with government- backed guarantees and
letters of support To mitigate the risk associated with permitting procedures,
information on grid connection points should be made publicly available, and
permitting procedures should be streamlined and consistent in each
administrative region of the country Standardising power purchase agreements
PPAs for different renewable energy technologies in Belarus are not
standardised, and the clauses within the contract are individually negotiated
between the off-taker and the developer Furthermore, PPAs are only signed once
the renewable power plant has been built and commissioned, which introduces
significant risk for the developers, may jeopardise the bankability of their
project and weakens their negotiating position The lack of  PPA in the
development phase of the renewable power project also adversely impacts the
developer’ ability to obtain debt financing for the project in the first place
Standardised PPAs for different renewable energy technologies need to be
developed, applied in all regions of the country and concluded with the
developers after successful bidding Throughout the duration of the PPA contract,
guaranteed fixed price for the sale of electricity needs to be applied, and
clauses that clearly define non-compensable and compensable power curtailments
need to be included Building human and institutional capacities for renewable
energy development Developing an energy sector with an increased share of
renewables requires competencies beyond those of the conventional fossil fuel-
based system These competencies are needed both at the institutional and the
individual level Within the public sector, planning and facilitating renewable
energy deployment through incentive schemes are the two priority areas that
require capacity strengthening These include improvements in statistical data
collection pertaining to electricity generated by renewable energy prosumers and
capacity building in renewable energy auction design The private sector’
capacity to ensure due diligence in the preparation of renewable energy project
documentation also needs to be strengthened Furthermore, practical skills at
academic institutions and on-the-job training need to be enhanced to ensure
qualified workforce for the development of  renewable energy sector Within the
financial sector, there is  continued need for development partners to support
local financial institutions with technical assistance in project appraisals,
the creation of  local renewable energy financing impetus and the facilitation
of experience sharing in renewable energy financing The capacity of local
institutions to innovate in the area of renewable energy technology should be
enhanced through comprehensive co-operation of national scientific organisations
with industrial and energy enterprises, international organisations, development
partners and foreign researchers                        INTRODUCTION  RENEWABLES
READINESS ASSESSMENT The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is  tool
developed by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to
comprehensively evaluate the conditions for accelerated renewable energy
deployment in  country It is  country-led, multi-stakeholder consultative
process that allows for the identification of existing challenges for renewable
energy deployment and recommends short to medium-term actions to guide decision
makers and other stakeholders in addressing these challenges The RRA for Belarus
was initiated by the State Committee for Standardisation of the Republic of
Belarus (Gosstandart) in technical cooperation with IRENA It has greatly
benefitted from stakeholders’ inputs Stakeholders in the RRA process included
officials from ministries, utilities, power project developers, development
partners, financial institutions, civil society and academia As  first step of
the RRA process,  background report on the energy sector in Belarus was
developed that provided an overview and preliminary analysis of the energy
sector context in Belarus Thereafter, various interviews were held with
institutional energy sector stakeholders in the country, supplemented with  set
of detailed questionnaires aimed at further assessing the energy sector and
determining the main barriers for renewable energy deployment Based on desktop
research, bilateral interviews and the questionnaires, an issue paper was
developed highlighting some of the challenges for renewable energy deployment in
the country On this basis,  multi-stakeholder consultative workshop was
organised by IRENA and Gosstandart on -10 February Over 35 representatives from
governmental institutions, the private sector, development partners, civil
society and academia attended The workshop facilitated further discussions among
stakeholders on the challenges in renewable energy deployment and allowed for
the identification of recommended actions in overcoming these challenges The
outcomes of the consultation workshop, along with insights gained from bilateral
consultations and the supporting documentation that was developed, constituted
the basis for this RRA report The RRA, with its recommended short to medium-term
actions, was validated on 20 April 2021 at  virtual multi-stakeholder validation
workshop attended by over 35 representatives from the energy sector in Belarus
WA                         COUNTRY OVERVIEW The Republic of Belarus is
landlocked country located in Eastern Europe bordered by the Russian Federation,
Ukraine, Poland, Lithuania and Latvia Its capital city is Minsk, located in the
centre-west of the country Belarus covers an area of 207 600 square kilometres
(km2), spanning about 650 km from east to west and 560 km from north to south
The topography of Belarus is mainly flat and low- lying More than half of the
country’ surface area is below 200  of altitude, with the highest point of
elevation at 346  above sea level at Dzyarzhynskaya Hara in the vicinity of
Minsk (Encyclopedia Britannica, 2020) Over 90% of the country is covered by
natural vegetation, and about 40% of it is forested The north of the country is
predominantly characterised by gently sloping hills with many lakes, while the
south is predominantly low-lying and mainly marshland The largest and most
significant river is the Dnieper, flowing through the east of the country, but
other notable rivers include the Dvinar, Neman and Pripyat Belarus has
temperate continental climate, with warm summers and cold, humid winters Average
temperatures in winter range from - degrees Celsius (°) in the southwest to -°
in the northeast, while average temperatures in summer range between 17° in the
north to ° in the south (Belarusby, 2020) Average annual precipitation ranges
between 550 millimetres (mm) and 700 mm, with the highest precipitation seen in
June and July (89 mm) Snow falls from November to March and is heaviest in
January with an average of 24 snow days (Weather Atlas, 2020) Figure  Map of
Belarus 28° 31° 25° Latvia Russian Federation Polatsk Dvinar River Berezina
River 55° 55° Lithuania Vitsyebsk Orša Maladziečna Barysaŭ Lowland Minsk
Mahilioŭ Lida Hills Mountains Hrodna Dnieper River City Belarus Neman River
River Baranavičy Babrujsk Salihorsk Poland Ptsich HomieÍ Pripyat River 52° 52°
Pinsk Brest Mazyr Ukraine 200 km  100 25° 28° 31° Source: IRENA Global Atlas;
Map data: Shuttle Radar Topography Mission global coverage data (2021); ArcWorld
(2021); United Nations administrative boundaries (2021) This map is provided for
illustration purposes only Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply
the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any
region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning
the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries       WA
Figure  Energy intensity of GDP of Belarus compared to EU,  20 18 16 14
/ 12 10 08    06 04 02  2011 2010 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Belarus EU Source: Adapted from EUROSTAT (2020), BELSTAT (2020e) Note: toe =
tonne of oil equivalent       WA                        The corporate tax rate
stands at 18% and at 25% for banks, insurance companies and foreign exchange
companies  flat tax rate of 13% is imposed on personal incomes, and the standard
rate of value added tax (VAT) is 20% on most supplied products, services and
imports, rising to 25% for telecommunications (Deloitte, 2021) According to the
World Banks’ Ease of Doing Business ranking, Belarus is ranked 49th globally
(out of 190) and 11th (out of 24) in the European and Central Asian region
(World Bank, 2020a) The highest ranking category is “getting electricity”, for
which Belarus ranks third in the European and Central Asian region This is due
to minimal administrative procedures for electricity connection, the costs for
each procedure, and the reliability of electricity supply and transparent
communication on tariffs and tariff changes There are only three administrative
procedures for obtaining an electricity connection, which take approximately 105
calendar days to complete The cost for electricity connection is % of the
average monthly income per capita, which is considered relatively low in
comparison to the region (World Bank, 2020a) Moreover, the reliability of
electricity supply is high, with  system average interruption duration index5 of
, owing to the country’ automated tools for monitoring outages and restoring
services efficiently Effective tariffs are readily available online and
customers are notified of tariff changes well ahead of billing cycles Financial
sector The financial sector in Belarus is dominated by banks, of which
commercial banks represent approximately 85% of the total financial assets
(valued at about three-quarters of the national GDP) The Belarus Development
Bank represents % of total financial assets, while leasing, microcredit and
insurance companies account for roughly % The banking sector comprises 27 banks,
of which 19 have some degree of foreign capital Nonetheless, the sector is
dominated by state-owned banks, which account for about 65% of the banking
sector’ assets Five of the largest banks account for close to three- quarters of
the capital At the end of 2017, the loan-to-deposit ratio stood at 140%,
rendering banks relatively non-liquid Thus, intermediation levels were low, and
domestic credit to the private sector amounted to % of GDP in Non-performing
loans stood at 13% Performing loans were largely household borrower loans which,
as  result, are rated as least risk The banking sector is highly dollarised,
with the share of foreign currency deposits at 70% (EIB, 2018) As such, it is
subject to risks in exchange rate depreciation Nonetheless, most of the state-
owned enterprises, with their significant contribution of deposits to the
banking sector and critical role in the economy, are unhedged from currency risk
Table  Ease of doing business ranking for Belarus Dealing with construction
permits Ease of doing business Starting  business Getting electricity Getting
credit Global ranking 49 30 48 20 104 Ranking in Europe and Central Asia 11  10
22 Source: World Bank (2020a)  The system average interruption duration index,
also known as SAIDI, is an indicator of electrical supply reliability and
reflects the number of hours of interruption incurred by an average customer in
year                       Concessional financing by international financial
institutions (IFIs) has been the largest proponent of green financing in
Belarus, although the IFIs’ involvement has slowed down recently Although IFI
financing is provided with more favourable terms, for public project financing,
IFIs perceive municipalities and state-owned enterprises to have rather low
creditworthiness and therefore almost always require  sovereign loan guarantee
Such guarantees need to be approved by Parliament before lending Given that the
state is wary of the level of debt, such financing instruments are not always
readily taken up  bond market is also present in Belarus Foreign bonds, , bonds
issued by foreign entities in local currency, can only be accessed by the state
and are otherwise not possible in Belarus Local bonds make up only about 10% of
the total bond market and are mainly issued by the administrative regions Bond
revenues that are tax exempt exist, but their interest rates are high and their
tenures are short, which ultimately impedes their utilisation (EuropAid, 2020)
Regional co-operation Belarus participates in several regional unions and
bilateral agreements It is  member of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) along with 11 neighbouring countries The CIS member states have agreed to
form  common economic space for the free movement of goods, services, workforce
and capital, and to harmonise monetary policies on tax, pricing, customs and
external relations (CIS, 2020) Through the CIS, Belarus committed to
implementing various bilateral and international treaties concerning regional
energy sector relations and power system operations In advancing the agreements
under the CIS, since 2015, Belarus has been  member of the Eurasian Economic
Union (EAEU), along with Armenia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and the Russian
Federation The EAEU members agreed to “develop long-term mutually beneficial
cooperation in the energy sector, conduct coordinated energy policies and
gradually create common energy markets with  view to ensuring energy security”
(EnC, 2018) The member states are working towards conceptualising the creation
of  common electricity market based on agreed principles, including  stepwise
transformation and unbundling of vertically integrated state-owned power
companies,  common electricity market model and  synchronous operation of member
states’ power systems Belarus also participates in the Armenia-Belarus-
Kazakhstan-Kyrgyzstan-Russian Federation Common Economic Space (CES) The CES’
objectives are to facilitate the free movement of goods, services, capital and
workforce among its member countries Belarus also participates in the European
Commission’ Eastern Partnership (EaP) programme, which aims to strengthen
relations between the EU’ member states and its eastern neighbouring countries,
namely Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine (European
Commission, 2020) Under the EaP, four main priority areas for co-operation are
established, including economy, governance, connectivity (power connectivity,
energy efficiency, climate change) and society Belarus is also  part of the
EU4Energy Programme, which aims to strengthen energy statistics, energy policy
design and regulatory frameworks and facilitate access to information among the
partner countries of the programme  The CIS includes the following member
states: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic,
Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan
WA                         ENERGY SECTOR CONTEXT  ENERGY BALANCE Total primary
energy supply The energy mix of Belarus is overwhelmingly fossil-fuel based In
2019, Belarus’ TPES amounted to 26 607 ktoe, of which the largest share was
natural gas at 62% of TPES, followed by oil at 28%, and biofuel and waste at %
The total share of renewables in the TPES was % (BELSTAT, 2020e) Figure  Total
primary energy supply by fuel, 2019 Coal and peat 798 ktoe % Electricity 141
ktoe % TOTAL TPES 26 607 ktoe Biofuels and waste  596 ktoe  % Oil  450 ktoe 28%
Natural gas 16 469 ktoe 62% Source: BELSTAT (2020e) Energy exports and imports
Belarus is highly dependent on energy imports, mainly from the Russian
Federation, and is one of the world’ leading energy import-dependent countries
The country’ energy sufficiency, or the ratio of energy produced nationally
compared to TPES, is valued at only % The bulk of the energy supply is covered
by energy imports, which amount to % of the TPES (BELSTAT, 2020c) Figure
compares domestic energy production and supply of energy by fuel The largest
fuel import dependency is natural gas Only % of natural gas supplied is produced
locally, which makes Belarus one of the countries most dependent on natural gas
imports in the world Crude oil is imported in similar quantities, but is refined
and exported in significant amounts to Ukraine 24     WA
Figure 10 shows final energy consumption by sector The industrial sector is the
largest energy consumer, consuming  third of total final energy, followed by the
residential sector (27%), the transport sector (23%), services (10%), and
agriculture, forestry and fishing, and the building sector (BELSTAT, 2020e)
Figure 11 shows the breakdown of each sector’ final energy consumption by
carrier or fuel The industrial sector largely consumes heat (% of the sector’
energy consumption), followed by electricity (%) and natural gas (17%) The
residential sector’ energy consumption is largely composed of heat (%), followed
by natural gas (%) and electricity (%), while the transport sector is the
largest consumer of fossil fuel such as motor gasoline and diesel (% of the
sector’ energy consumption) Figure 10 Final energy consumption by sector, 2019
Agriculture, forestry and ﬁshing  110 ktoe % Services  850 ktoe 10% TOTAL TPES
18 504 ktoe Industry  105 ktoe 33% Construction 185 ktoe % Transport  255 ktoe
23% Residential  995 ktoe 27% Source: BELSTAT (2020e) Figure 11 Final energy
consumption in sectors by carrier/fuel, 2019 Construction Agriculture, forestry
and ﬁshing Services Transport Residential Industry   000  000  000  000  000
000 (ktoe) Electricity Heat Natural gas Coal/peat Firewood Liqueﬁed gas/Reﬁnery
gas Diesel/Gasoline Source: BELSTAT (2020e)                        HEAT BALANCE
Belarus has  vast district heating network serving about 70% of the population
(Euroheat & Power, 2017) Heat is largely produced by combined heat and power
(CHP) plants fuelled by natural gas, while renewables account for % of the total
heat production The renewable share in heat production is almost entirely based
on biomass, and negligible amounts (02%) of geothermal and solar thermal heat
production In 2019, the total heat production amounted to 59 269 tera calorie
(Tcal) Heat distribution losses accounted for % of production, which rendered
final heat consumption 54 971 Tcal (BELSTAT, 2020i) Figure 15 Heat production by
type of plant, 2019 60 000 50 000 40 000 30 000 )     ( 20 000 Geothermal and
Solar energy, 12 Tcal 10 000  -10 000 Main actvity power plants Main actvity CHP
plants Autoproducer CHP plants Main actvity heat plants Autoproducer heat plants
Geothermal and solar energy Distribution losses Final Consumption Source:
BELSTAT (2020i)  POWER INFRASTRUCTURE At the end of 2019, installed power
generation capacities in Belarus amounted to 10 297 megawatts (MW), of which MW
were renewable energy power plants Solar PV was the largest renewable energy
installed capacity (MW), followed by wind (MW) and hydropower (MW) Over 86% of
installed capacities were owned by BelEnergo, while the rest were owned
privately or by local districts BelEnergo’ power plants included 42 thermal
power plants, 25 hydroelectric power plants and  wind power plant In November
2020, Belarus commissioned its first 11 GW nuclear power plant       WA
BelTransGas is fully owned by Russia’ Gazprom and is tasked with the operation
of the natural gas transit pipelines in Belarus, and thereby the transportation
of natural gas from the Russian Federation to neighbouring countries/regions
such as Ukraine, Poland, Lithuania and Kaliningrad, as well as to Germany
through the Yamal-Europe transmission pipeline BelTopGas Fuel and Gasification
State-Owned Production Association (BelTopGas SPA) is the state-owned supplier
of gas to Minsk and the six regions of Belarus It incorporates seven regional
supply companies and is answerable to the Ministry of Energy It is tasked with
providing  reliable and uninterrupted supply of natural and liquefied gas to
consumers, operating the gas distribution network, and building gas retail and
sales infrastructure It is also responsible for peat extraction and processing
as well as the production of fuel briquettes for local consumers and export
(Beltopgas, 2020) The National Statistical Committee of the Republic of Belarus
(BELSTAT) is tasked with administering national data services by collecting,
processing and publishing national statistics As part of energy statistics,
BELSTAT prepares energy balances, which it collects and prepares in co-operation
with relevant stakeholders, such as the Ministry Energy and energy enterprises
The Department of Energy Efficiency at the State Committee for Standardisation
of the Republic of Belarus (Gosstandart) is tasked with the drafting and
implementation of energy efficiency and renewable energy policies Furthermore,
it sets out standards, norms and requirements for achieving energy efficiency
through monitoring compliance of energy-saving products and services, technical
and economic compliance of energy generating equipment, and rational use of
energy and fuel resources in the country It also develops financial measures for
encouraging energy efficiency The Ministry of Economy is responsible for
regulation and manages analysis and forecasts pertaining to social and economic
development in Belarus It is tasked with the development and implementation of
economic reforms and policies This includes nurturing entrepreneurship and
investments, and privatisation of state-owned enterprises (Ministry of Economy,
2020a) IPPs are also numerous and have been increasing their presence in the
energy landscape of Belarus IPPs are predominantly renewable energy power
producers who sell their electricity to the off-taker, BelEnergo, at feed-in
tariff (FiT) prices In addition, legal entities produce renewable power for
self-consumption These account for about 50% of the renewable energy production
in Belarus  ENERGY SECTOR POLICY AND LEGISLATION Belarus’ energy policy strives
for  reliable, affordable and sustainable energy sector with greater energy
security through the reduction of energy imports As such, the sector aims to
reduce over-reliance on imported oil and gas and promote renewable energy and
energy efficiency while also commissioning its first nuclear power plant
Developing local energy resources, reducing energy intensity through energy
efficiency measures and diversifying away from natural gas in the energy mix
have been embraced as critical in achieving the overall sector goals While there
is no comprehensive law on energy, nor specific laws on heat and electricity,
several normative legal acts govern the energy sector instead, as outlined below
Resolution of the Council of Ministers On Approval of Electricity Supply Rules
No 1394, dated 17 October 2011 with the latest amendment on 25 May 2020, governs
procedures for connections to the state electricity grid by legal entities,
individual entrepreneurs and citizens It obliges the regional electricity
companies (Oblenergos – see Chapter , Section ) to offer energy suppliers access
to the grid and defines the technical conditions for connection The resolution
sets out the responsibilities of each entity and obliges renewable energy
producers to relay real-time information on power production to the Oblenergos
It also sets out the procedure for concluding  power supply contract with energy
producers Law On Energy Savings 2015 specifies the use and implementation of
energy-efficient technologies, as well as the requirements for energy-efficient
equipment The law also makes provisions for the creation of energy efficiency
policies Resolution of the Council of Ministers On Issues in the Field of Heat
Supply No 609, 11 September 2019, approved the heat supply regulations
concerning end user relations with suppliers, payment procedures and the
connection of individual heat consumption systems to the heat network (Council
of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus, 2019) The energy sector is further
governed by the Law on Gas Supply (2003) and the Law on Nuclear Energy (2008)
Also relevant to the energy sector are the Law on Industrial Safety and the Law
on Environmental Protection Currently, there is no specific legislation
governing the electricity sector or an electricity market in Belarus In 2019,
Belarus signed the amended Treaty on EAEU for the formation of  common EAEU
electricity market However, given that Belarus does not have  law on electricity
markets that includes rules governing wholesale and retail of electricity in
market framework, there is currently no basis for energy companies to
participate in the EAEU’ common energy market There are, however, plans to
develop  law on electricity markets that would restructure the power sector and
set out separate activities for competitive and non-competitive market segments,
and govern the relations between electricity providers and end users The
Ministry of Energy has drafted such  law, which has been submitted to the
Council of Ministers, but not yet passed on to Parliament The draft law also
aims to harmonise national legislation with the EAEU Treaty and strives for
satisfying domestic electricity demand before trading across borders Specific
renewable energy legislation is further outlined in Chapter , Section  The main
policy document for the development of the energy sector in Belarus is the third
edition of the Concept of Energy Security of the Republic of Belarus, approved
by the Council of Ministers by Resolution No 1084 in 2015 and effective as of It
lays out the long-term policy guidelines for the development of the energy
sector until 2035 and includes the following key objectives (Council of
Ministers of the Republic of Belarus, 2015): • decreasing dependence on energy
imports by increasing energy sufficiency8 to 20% in 2030 (14% in 2015; % in
2019) • diversifying energy resources through  greater participation of
renewable energy and nuclear power in the energy mix • diversifying energy
suppliers by reducing the share of the major energy supplier in total energy
imports to 70% in 2035 (90% in 2015)  The ratio of energy produced nationally
compared to energy consumed       WA                        • ensuring
reliability of energy supply • increasing energy efficiency in end use through
modernisation of the energy system • increasing economic and energy efficiency
in energy generation and distribution through enabling legal frameworks and
upgrading of grid infrastructure • ensuring end user affordability of energy
while phasing out subsidies for electricity and heat • developing international
co-operation with leading energy organisations and expanding energy exports to
EU countries • developing  dedicated law on electricity • creating  wholesale
electricity market • providing  scientific evidence base for the development of
the energy sector including technological advances, energy resource assessments,
environmental safeguarding, and demand and supply side management  summary of
the key targets for the development of the energy sector until 2035 are
highlighted in the table below In April 2016, the State Programme for Energy
Saving  reinstated some of the targets above, set forth further targets for the
deployment of renewable energy by 2020 and identified monitoring measures in
tracking the progress of those targets on an annual basis It defined financial
resources and various challenges in achieving the planned targets; however, it
lacked concrete implementable measures to achieve the same Solar PV and wind
capacity targets were not reached by the end of The key targets set out in the
programme included (EnC, 2018): • renewable energy share in the TPES to reach at
least % by 2020 • domestically sourced primary energy to account for at least
16% of TPES by 2020 • energy intensity of GDP to be reduced by at least % by
2020 compared to 2015 levels • operationalisation of 135 power plants using
renewable resources by 2020 • total hydropower capacity of 80 MW by 2020 Table
Key targets for energy sector development by 2035 Key targets 2010 2015 2020
2025 2030 2035 Domestic production as share of gross energy consumption (%) 14
14 16 17 18 20 Renewable energy share of TPES (%)       Dominant import supplier
(%) 96 90 85 80 75 70 Gas share of gross energy consumption (%) 64 60 57 55 52
50 Gas share in heat and electricity generation (%) 91 90 70 60 50 <50 Energy
intensity of GDP (ktoe/BYR9) 426 378 370 353 317 268 Source: Council of
Ministers of the Republic of Belarus (2015)  At BYR value in • total solar PV
capacity by of 250 MW by 2020 and additions of solar PV distributed systems •
total wind power capacity of 200 MW by 2020 • increased production and use of
biomass, including increased use of biofuels in the transport sector (without
targets) • increased uptake of solar water heaters, such as for drying products
in agriculture, and water heating in the residential sector (without targets) In
February 2021,  new State Programme for Energy Saving  was adopted that set out
new renewable energy target by 2025, namely an % share of renewable energy
production in the TPES in The programme also aims to reduce the energy intensity
of the GDP by 2026 by at least % compared to its 2020 level It also puts forward
increased energy efficiency strategies and specific projects for the development
of biomass and electric heat pumps in heat supply Furthermore, the document lays
out the financial resources for the programme and defines the risks and risk
mitigating mechanisms for the execution of the programme The main risks are
related to adequate funding for the programme, timely adjustment of the
consolidated targets and indicators in the Concept of Energy Security, and
timely registration of planned changes in legislation Specifically for the power
sector, the Comprehensive Plan for the Development of the Electric Power
Industry until 2025 was approved by the Decree of the Council of Ministers by
Resolution No 169 in 2016, and lays out specific implementation activities and
timelines for the development of the electricity sector until It includes the
following key elements: • phase out electricity tariffs subsidy by 2020 •
unbundle the electricity sector by 2025 • create  wholesale and retail
electricity market • commission  nuclear power plant (NPP) of  400 MW by 2020 •
integrate the NPP grid by installing 985 MW of electric boilers with BelEnergo •
reduce the share of natural gas in heat and electricity supply to 60% by 2025 •
increase reserve power capacity by an additional 800 MW expand charging
infrastructure for -vehicles  The Sectoral Programme of Electricity System
Development for  foresaw the restructuring of the power sector, and the
unbundling of vertically integrated BelEnergo into separate generation,
transmission, distribution and sales entities – activities that to date have not
been achieved In addition, the programme aimed to develop legislation for
electricity regulation by setting out the operational relations between the
state and power sector entities, limiting the degree of state involvement in
regulating energy tariffs, and drawing up the foundations for  wholesale and
retail energy market (IEA, 2020a)       WA                        Although not
state programme initiated by the Council of Ministers, the Programme for the
Development of Charging Infrastructure and Electric Transport  supplements the
Presidential Decree on Stimulating the Use of Electric Vehicles The decree
passed an incentive that all electric vehicle permits will be issued with waived
fees and that the state enterprise Belorusneft will be the state operator for
the creation and development of  charging network for electric vehicles The
programme foresees the introduction of up to 30 000 electric vehicles by 2025
(EMEurope, 2019) The government of Belarus also put in place various policies on
mitigating the effects of climate change and the reduction of GHG emissions In
2005, Belarus ratified the Kyoto Protocol whereby the country committed to the
reduction of GHG emissions by % compared to 1990 levels within the  period, and
12% reduction for the period 2013-The target of 12% was later revised to % at
the Doha Conference of Parties in December Consequently,  State Programme of
Measures to Mitigate the Effects of Climate Change for  was enacted that aimed
to reduce GHG emissions by % in 2020 compared to 1990 levels This amounts to
approximately 11 million tonnes of carbon dioxide-equivalent (MtCO2-eq) In 2016,
Belarus submitted its intended nationally determined contribution (INDC)
following the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) in Paris, pledging to
reduce its GHG emissions by at least 28% in 2030 compared to its 1990 levels
(excluding LULUCF) The achievement of this target is not dependent on carbon
market mechanisms or development funds The INDC is in line with the National
Sustainable Development Strategy of the Republic of Belarus The measures to
achieve this reduction include increasing energy efficiency, reforestation (to
41% of forest cover in 2030), restoration of peat lands (to at least 60 000
hectares [ha] by 2030), conservation of natural ecosystems (with protected areas
covering % by 2030), and improved legal and regulatory approaches (UNFCCC, 2016)
However, the INDC does not feature potential renewable energy contributions An
updated NDC is currently being drafted and is to be finalised by the end of
ENERGY PRICES Consumer energy pricing in Belarus is based on  complex system of
cross-subsidisation whose tariff-setting procedure is based on Law No 255- “On
Pricing”, and the Resolution of Council of Ministers No The tariff-setting
methodology is based on  “base price” tariff that should represent the real cost
of the unit energy production, transport, repair services, depreciation of
funds, salaries and social contributions, taxes, and normative profits The
Ministry of Anti-Monopoly Regulation and Trade sets the base tariff based on
information provided by BelEnergo (for heat and electricity cost estimates) and
BelTopGas (for natural gas and liquid petroleum gas [LPG] cost estimates)
However, it is argued that the base price does not truly reflect cost recovery
For certain groups of end- users, energy tariffs are set below the base tariff,
and the shortfall is cross-subsidised from higher-tariff end users For natural
gas, the import price is agreed upon between BelTransGas and the Ministry of
Energy Tariffs for gas consumption by residential consumers are cross-subsidised
by higher base tariffs for industrial consumers, although some industrial
consumers, such as glass, chemical and fertiliser manufacturers, are also
subsidised Residential consumer tariffs are differentiated by period of year (,
during the heating season, tariffs are lower), total consumption volumes and
whether the household uses gas boilers and meters                       Heat
tariffs are differentiated by type of consumer, , residential, industry, public
institutions and by region According to  World Bank study, residential heat
tariffs are between 10% and 21%10 of the actual unit production cost (World
Bank, 2014) Electricity tariffs are set according to the consumer group and are
further differentiated by time of consumption (, peak and off-peak hours) For
industrial consumers with  connection capacity of up to 750 kVA (including
electrified public transport, pubic institutions and public lighting)  flat rate
tariff is applied, while industrial consumers with  connection capacity above
750 kVA have  monthly fee on top of the flat-rate tariff For residential
consumers, the tariff is differentiated by time of consumption and by
electricity use (, households with electric stoves have  lower tariff than
households using gas stoves) Organisations such as health clinics and other
public institutions and religious institutions have  residential tariff applied
(OECD, 2018) Table  Consumer tariffs by energy type, 2020 Energy type Category
Price (USD)* Residential 074 Electricity / kWh Industry 095 Residential 0075
Heat / Mcal Industry 048 Residential 004 Natural gas / m3 Industry 02 Gasoline /
litre at fuel stations ** Diesel / litre at fuel stations ** Methane gas / m3 at
fuel stations 29 Propane gas / m3 at fuel stations 36 Source: Adapted from
tarifyby (2020) * prices are approximated/averaged due to numerous
differentiations of price tariff for electricity and heat supply ** depending on
type and quality Note: m3 = cubic metre; Mcal = megacalories 10 Depending on the
size, condition and fuel used in the district heating system       WA
RENEWABLE ENERGY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT  RESOURCE POTENTIAL Renewable energy is in
nascent stage in the Belarusian energy sector The share of primary energy supply
from renewables has been steadily increasing over the past decade and in 2019
stood at % This share largely comprises biofuels and, to  lesser extent, solar
PV and wind Nonetheless, the country is well endowed with renewable energy
resource potential that presents  viable and sustainable pathway for the
development of the energy sector Biomass Biomass is the most abundant renewable
energy resource in the country Much biomass potential lies in wood resources,
including residues, given the vast expanses of forests11 covering approximately
40% of the country’ surface area Waste wood resources that can be used for
bioenergy production are estimated at  billion cubic meters (bcm) with an annual
growth of 03 bcm (IEA, 2016) According to the National Programme on Local and
Renewable Energy Development for , solid biomass potential is valued at  million
tonnes of oil equivalent (Mtoe)/year, while  further  Mtoe/year is estimated
from agricultural waste (crop residues and straw) Currently, solid biomass is
utilised for heat production in heat and cogeneration power plants and boilers,
and  MW is installed for power production (Ministry of Economy, 2018) Figure 19
Forest residue resources in Belarus Latvia Russian Federation Lithuania Cubic
metres of forest residues  100 000 -  800 000 900 000 -  100 000 700 000 - 900
000 400 000 - 700 000 100 000 - 400 000 Unknown Poland  50 100 km Ukraine
Source: IEA (2016) This map is provided for illustration purposes only
Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the expression of any
opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region, country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of
frontiers or boundaries 11 Large forest covers are predisposed to radioactive
contamination dating from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, which renders some
quantities of forest residues potentially contaminated and not applicable for
onward processing or use                       The potential for biogas
production is significant in Belarus, owing to the large quantities of manure
available from cattle and poultry farming, residues from crop farming, waste
from the food industry, municipal waste and sewage from treatment facilities
Resource assessment studies for biogas potential from these waste sources have
not been extensively undertaken; however, several approximations have been made
Namely, these potentials include  Mtoe/year of biogas production from animal
manure and  Mtoe/year from municipal solid waste In 2019, the installed capacity
of biogas power plants was MW (Ministry of Economy, 2018) Table  Technical
potential of biogas generation from animal waste Cattle Pigs Poultry TOTAL
Manure output (Mt/year)   Biogas potential (bcm/year)  26   Source:
Greenworldorg (2020) Biofuel production in the form of bioethanol and biodiesel
is deemed significant, albeit understudied The potential for biofuel production
is due to the significant agricultural activities, sugar production, and starch
and cellulose industries in Belarus Hydropower Given Belarus’ relatively flat
topography, the country’ potential for large hydropower development is
insignificant, although the potential for small-scale hydropower (<10 MW)
production is feasible in the northern and central regions of the country The
potential hydropower capacity of all bodies of water in Belarus is estimated at
850 MW, of which the technical potential is estimated at 520 MW and economic
potential is estimated at 250 MW (UNIDO and ICSHP, 2013) Historically, Belarus
had  large number of very small-scale hydropower plants for electricity
production in rural areas and for productive uses, such as sawmills and
flourmills With the expansion of the centralised grid, most of these plants
became obsolete and were decommissioned Currently, the installed hydropower
capacity is MW, of which MW is owned by BelEnergo (BelEnergo, 2020b) 41     WA
Wind Average annual wind speeds are above  / (at 100  hub height) in almost all
areas of the country (see Figure 20) In the north, northwest and around Minsk,
average annual wind speeds can reach up to  /, signalling high-quality resource
potential for wind power development in the country In 2019, the installed wind
power capacity was MW, of which  MW were owned by BelEnergo (BelEnergo, 2020b)
Solar The annual global horizontal irradiation (GHI) in Belarus is between  000
kWh/m2 and  170 kWh/m2, with the highest irradiation in the south and southeast
of the country, indicating significant potential for solar PV development (see
Figure 21) In the high- potential areas, solar PV generation yield can reach
over  100 kWh/kWp annually In the rest of the country it can reach well above
020 kWh/kWp (see Figure 22) For solar thermal applications, the regions with the
highest potential are Brest and Gomel in the south and southeast of the country,
which receive on average 60 clear days per year and  direct normal irradiance
(DNI) of more than  050 kWh/m2 (see Figure 23) In general, the country has
potential for solar thermal applications, such as for space and water heating
and low-enthalpy process heat in the industry and services sectors (IEA, 2016)
Figure 20 Annual wind speed map at 100  hub height 28° 31° 25° Latvia Russian
Federation 55° 55° Lithuania Wind speed at 100m Annual average / <=  -   -
Belarus  -   -  Poland  -  >  52° 52° Ukraine 200 km  100 25° 28° 31° Source:
IRENA: Global Atlas; Map data: Technical University of Denmark (2021); United
Nations administrative boundaries (2021) This map is provided for illustration
purposes only Boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply the expression
of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries 42     WA                        Figure
23 Direct Normal Irradiance in Belarus 28° 31° 25° Latvia Russian Federation 55°
55° Lithuania Direct Normal Irradiation Annual average kWh/m2 <= 940 940 - 960
940 - 980 980 -  000 Belarus  000 -  020  020 -  040 Poland  040 -  060 >  060
52° 52° Ukraine 200 km  100 25° 28° 31° Source: IRENA: Global Atlas; Map data:
World Bank, ESMAP (2021); United Nations administrative boundaries (2021) This
map is provided for illustration purposes only Boundaries and names shown on
this map do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA
concerning the status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries
Geothermal The potential for geothermal is inadequately assessed to date, with
studies carried out on only  few regions In 2018, the first geothermal atlas of
Belarus was published, consisting of around 50 detailed maps of the Pripyat
Trough showing the most promising geothermal wells at depths between 100  and
km The atlas includes geothermal gradients, heat flow density and geothermal
resources Although some estimates show that temperatures of 150° to 180° are
available within the crystalline basement of up to  km depths, they are not
economically feasible for exploitation As such, Belarus’ geothermal resources
are not deemed significant enough for power generation (Dubanevich and Zui,
2019) In general, geothermal potential is deemed to be most suitable for low-
enthalpy heat processes throughout the country The most promising sites are in
the Pripyat Trough in the south of the country and in the Brest region (IEA,
2016) Given the potential for the integration of low-enthalpy geothermal
resources into Belarus’ district energy systems, in February 2021, IRENA,
together with the State Committee for Standardisation of the Republic of Belarus
and with technical input from Aalborg University in Denmark, organised  workshop
titled “Integrating low-temperature renewable energy sources in district heating
and cooling systems” The objective of the workshop was to equip district heating
stakeholders in Belarus (including policy makers at the national, regional and
local levels; urban planners; and district heating operators/utilities) with
various options and tools for integrating low-temperature renewable energy
sources in district heating networks                       As of 2019, Belarus
had just under 300 geothermal heat pump installations of under 13 MW of
installed capacity, which are mainly used for space heating and hot water supply
in cottages and hospitals The largest geothermal installation (two heat pumps
with  collective output of  010 KW) is located at  greenhouse complex in the
Brest region, where the water temperature reaches 24° and flows at about 42 m3
per hour (Dubanevich and Zui, 2019)  RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY AND REGULATION As
discussed in Chapter , Section  ( Energy sector policy and legislation), the
energy sector aims to reduce its over-reliance on imported oil and gas and
promote renewable energy and energy efficiency while also commissioning the
country’ first nuclear power plant (NPP) Developing local energy resources,
reducing energy intensity through energy efficiency measures and diversifying
away from natural gas in the energy mix have been embraced as critical in
achieving the overall sector goals As such, the deployment of renewables is
central in fulfilling the energy sector’ development goals According to the
newly adopted State Programme on Energy Saving , the renewable energy target by
2025 is an % renewable energy share in the TPES, which differs from the %
renewable energy share of the TPES by 2025 as set out in the Concept for Energy
Security Several legal acts governing the deployment of renewables in Belarus
are discussed below In 2010, Belarus passed its first law On Renewable Energy
Sources No 204- The key elements in the law are outlined below • regulation of
the promotion of the use of renewable energy sources and installations and the
manufacturing and procurement of renewable energy equipment • provision for
private investors to build and operate renewable energy generation plants •
guarantee for non-discriminative connection to the grid for renewable energy
suppliers • provision for favourable pricing of renewable energy supply to
encourage the use of and investment in renewables • provision for tax
concessions in accordance with legislation for renewable energy investments •
obligation of the Oblenergos to purchase electricity from renewable energy
generation • exemption of customs duties for imported equipment related to the
generation, transmission, consumption, storage and conversion of electricity
from renewable energy sources The State Programme on Energy Saving  sets out
renewable energy target by 2025 of % renewable energy share in the total primary
energy supply       WA                        In 2015, the Resolution of the
Council of Ministers On the Establishment, Distribution, Release and Withdrawal
of Quotas for the Creation of Installations for the Use of Renewable Energy
Sources No 662 was passed The resolution set out the regulation for setting of
annual capacity quotas for various renewable energy Soon thereafter, in 2017,
the Resolution of the Council of Ministers No 305 revised the procedure for
determining and allocating energy generation quotas The resolution redefined the
composition of the committee for the determination and allocation of quotas for
renewable energy generation It further stipulates that if, during the tender
bidding process, more than one bidder submits the same bid, the committee is
authorised to invite the bidders for negotiation The allocated quotas have been
revised several times The current approved quotas for the period  are presented
in Table  Table  Quota allocations,  Approved quotas and investment agreements
(MW) RE technology 2021 2022 2023 Biogas 47  - Wind Solar PV  109 23 Hydro - 76
12 Biomass  - Geothermal and waste - - - Total 37 35 Source: Ministry of Energy
(2020a) In 2019, the Presidential Decree On Renewable Energy Sources No 357 was
passed that supersedes various aspects of the aforementioned Law on Renewable
Energy Sources Specifically, the decree stipulates that only renewable energy
generation suppliers that use new equipment are permitted to partake in tenders
under the quota allocations and that the FiTs at which they sell their
electricity to the off-taker are set for  ten-year period The off-taker is the
Oblenergo in the region where the renewable energy plant is located The FiT is
calculated by the application of  multiplying coefficient to the market
electricity price The market price is calculated as follows: market price = base
price * (31 + 69 /Ca), whereby  is the exchange rate of BYR against the USD at
the time of payment and Ca is the exchange rate at the time when the base price
was approved This is used to adjust the rates of inflation and index the tariff
to the USD The FiT coefficient is dependent on the type of renewable energy,
installed capacity and/or lifespan of the installation, as shown in Table
Table  Overview of coefficients for FiT calculation Technology Coefficient Wind
power Irrespective of capacity with an operating life of: < years  > years 01
Hydro power up to 300 kW  301 kW –  MW 25 > MW  Biomass, incl wood fuel up to
300 kW  301 kW –  MW 25 > MW  Biogas up to 300 kW  301 kW –  MW 15 > MW  Solar
PV up to 300 kW  301 kW –  MW 25 > MW  Geothermal up to 300 kW  301 kW –  MW 15
> MW  Source: Roedl and Partner (2020) The presidential decree also obligates
renewable energy generators to produce only according to schedules set by the
dispatch control centre to offset potential instability on the grid system
According to the tax code of the Republic of Belarus, renewable energy
equipment, components and spare parts for renewable energy generation are
exempted from VAT upon import and may further be exempted from custom duties
Land tax is also waived for renewable energy facilities and plants Furthermore,
to promote electric mobility uptake, VAT for electric vehicle imports is waived
If the vehicles are purchased inland, the buyer is eligible for  VAT rebate
Further incentives for electric car owners include free public parking and free
public road usage tax (Exportby, 2020) 47     WA
RENEWABLE ENERGY FINANCE AND CO-OPERATION Credit provided by Belarusian banks
for the distribution of energy, gas, steam and warm water amounted to % of total
credit disbursed in 2016, and their involvement remains limited Commercial bank
lending in Belarus, in local currency, is done at relatively high interest rates
of 023% (in 2019), and loan tenures are rather short (Trading Economics, 2020)
Local green financing is almost negligible, so most investments are supported by
IFIs or through credit lines provided by international development partners to
the local banking sector IFIs – such as the World Bank, European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the Nordic Environment Finance
Corporation (NEFCO) and the Eurasian Development Bank (EDB) – have been active
in Belarus by offering concessional loans at attractive interest rates, partial
grant schemes and technical assistance for local banks However, for public
projects, IFIs almost always require  sovereign loan guarantee because they
perceive public institutions, such as municipalities and state-owned
enterprises, to have low credit-worthiness Table  highlights some of the
available financing opportunities for the renewable energy sector The Republic
of Belarus co-operates with various international organisations for the
development of the energy sector The EBRD co-operates with Belarus on the
development of renewable energy and energy efficiency through programmes such as
the Finance and Technology Transfer Centre for Climate Change, known as FINTECC
The programme offers investment, policy and technical support to  number of
countries, including Belarus Furthermore, EBRD has supported Belarus with over
USD 500 million in funding for the implementation of energy efficiency
investment projects In renewable energy, the bank provided  senior loan of USD
million (of the USD million total project cost) for the development of three
biogas power plants with  total installed capacity of 15 MW Table  IFI financing
opportunities for renewable energy investments Financing Organisation Details
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) Equity, loans and loan
guarantees for 15 years for renewable energy developers Loan of USD 50 million
for private and public entities investing in renewables EBRD’ Belarusian
Sustainable Energy Finance Facility (BelSEFF) Project requirements are positive
net-present value over 10 years using % discount rate in hard currency cash flow
Eurasian Development Bank (EDB) Loans (USD  million) for renewable power
generation projects Medium to long-term loans and loan guarantees Equity and
shares subscription to facilitate mobilising equity base for private investors
Nordic Environment Finance Corporation EUR  million credit-line to Belarus
People’ Bank for electric vehicle and charging station loans International
Finance Corporation (IFC) Concessional loans to small and medium-sized
businesses (SMEs) in the green energy sector Source: Ministry of Economy (2020),
UNDP (2015)                       The plant will be fully owned by the
Lithuanian-based Modus Group, which will sell the generated electricity to the
regional subsidiaries of the state-owned utility company BelEnergo (EBRD, 2020a)
EBRD is also assisting BelEnergo’ subsidiary MinskEnergo in developing
electricity infrastructure that will connect to the Minsk Free Economic Zone
(FEZ Minsk) Specifically, the bank is providing  sovereign loan of EUR million
(euros) (USD million) for the construction of  110 kV low voltage substation in
the town of Fanipol (EBRD, 2020b) Furthermore, the cities of Minsk and Pinsk are
both members of EBRD’ Green Cities Initiative supporting the preparation of the
Green City Action Plan The plan identifies investment needs and provides
technical support to city administrators and local stakeholders in sectors
including waste and water management, urban transportation, energy, and green
buildings (EBRD, 2020c) Through its BelSEFF, EBRD supports projects in energy
efficiency and small-scale renewable energy by working with local financial
institutions to on-lend the funds to small and medium- sized businesses,
corporate and residential borrowers, and renewable energy project developers
BelSEFF has financed energy-efficient heating technologies in the Minsk region
and  78 MW solar PV plant in the Mogilev region (EBRD SEFF, 2020) The World
Bank, through its lending arm, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, supports Belarus on the Sustainable Energy Scale-Up Project () with
total project cost of USD 25 million The borrower is the State Committee for
Standardisation and the implementing agencies are the Energy Efficiency
Department and Belinvestenergosberezhenie (authorised agency for the
implementation of energy conservation projects financed by loans from the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development) The project aims to scale
up the efficient use of energy in space heating of multi-apartment buildings and
in woody biomass utilisation for heating in selected localities The components
of the project include (World Bank, 2020b): • renewable wood biomass heating to
support fuel switching to renewable biomass and efficiency improvement of
heating systems through biomass heating investments • thermal renovation of
multi-apartment buildings to support thermal renovation by piloting  partially
payable grant scheme selected by the government and the bank • technical
assistance to the thermal renovation pilot and the thermal renovation programme,
as well as for overall project implementation support Furthermore, the World
Bank committed USD 90 million to support the Belarus Biomass District Heating
Project between 2014 and The project’ objectives are to expand the efficient
utilisation of biomass in heat and electricity supply in selected towns of
Belarus (World Bank, 2020c) Through the IFC, the World Bank further invested USD
850 million for private sector development and provides concessional loans to
SMEs in the energy sector It also provides investment advice to the government
to support the inflow of foreign capital and increased private sector engagement
Specifically, between 2019 and 2022, the IFC has committed to working on
capacity building activities for promoting investment with MART, supporting SMEs
through the development of conducive regulatory frameworks with the Ministry of
Economy and improved access to finance with the National Bank of Belarus, and
enhancing accreditation systems in Belarus with Gosstandart (Ministry of
Economy, 2020b)       WA                        The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and Global Environment Facility, in co-operation with the
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection of Belarus, launched
the Removing Barriers to Wind Power Development in Belarus project in The
objectives of this project, budgeted at USD 345 million, are to assist in the
development of the wind power sector and enable investment for the construction
of five wind farms with  total installed capacity of MW The project has carried
out two year wind speed measurements and detailed feasibility studies It also
assisted in obtaining various permits that saw the commissioning of  MW of wind
power in the small town of Novogrudok as well as other planned wind power plants
in the rest of the country (UNDP, 2019) Belarus has also been working closely
with the United Nations to develop the next United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework for  (UNSDG, 2020) The draft National
Sustainability Strategy 2035 was also developed with expert support of the
United Nations entities in Belarus The EDB, as the regional financial
institution established to promote economic growth in its member states by
extending trade, economic and investment ties among them, has supported Belarus
by financing the construction of  75 MW hydropower plant at Polotsk on the
western Dvina River The plant was commissioned in 2017 and is operated by
BelEnergo’ subsidiary Vitebskenergo The total project costs were USD 97 million
(EDB, 2019) NEFCO is an IFI established in 1990 through an intergovernmental
treaty between sovereign states, the Nordic countries of Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and Sweden NEFCO exclusively finances small and medium-size
environmental and climate- related projects As an example, NEFCO along with
Swedfund provided  EUR  million (USD 44 million) loan for  landfill gas-to-
electricity project in Vitebsk that is privately owned by Vireo Energy (NEFCO,
2019) NEFCO further supports the Belarusian People’ Bank with  EUR  million (USD
million) credit line for electric vehicle loans and loans for charging stations
(EMEurope, 2019)       WA                         INCREASED ENERGY SECURITY The
Belarusian energy sector is heavily based on fossil fuels and highly dependent
on energy imports The current energy demand is insufficiently met by locally
available resources and, as  result, the energy sector relies to  great extent
on imports of oil and gas With energy imports amounting to % of the TPES,
Belarus is one of the world’ most energy import- dependent countries The highest
fuel import dependency is on natural gas, of which only % of demand is produced
domestically Furthermore, most of the energy imports are from  single source
supplier, which additionally jeopardises the country’ energy security Belarus
imports most of its energy from the Russian Federation Traditionally, such
imports of natural gas and oil from the Russian Federation have benefitted from
favourable import prices that are only  fraction of the prices charged to other
European countries Nevertheless, because of Belarus’ overreliance on energy
imports, high energy insecurity and extreme vulnerability to price changes, any
increases in import prices have always been met with strong opposition Figure 25
shows the strong fluctuations in import prices of fossil fuels between 2012 and
Belarus has set forth various targets to increase its energy sector security
These have been outlined in the main energy policy document on the Concept of
Energy Security up to 2035 and include increasing the share of domestic energy
production in gross energy consumption, decreasing dependence on energy imports,
diversifying energy resources, diversifying import energy suppliers and reducing
the share of the major energy supplier in total energy imports Accelerating the
deployment of renewable energy is therefore critical in meeting these targets
Renewable energy resources, although currently untapped, are abundantly
available in Belarus and present  way for the energy system to reduce its import
dependence, alleviate vulnerability of energy import prices and promote domestic
energy production, thereby improving the country’ energy sector security This in
turn would lead to an economically sustainable and environmentally sound energy
sector Figure 25 Import prices of fossil fuels,  180  400 160  200
140     000  120        800 100       80 600       60 400       40 200 20   2012
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Crude oil Petroleum products Natural gas
Source: Adapted from BELSTAT (2020c)                        CONTRIBUTION TO
ECONOMIC GROWTH Belarus relies heavily on energy imports to meet its national
energy demand In 2019, gross energy imports amounted to USD  billion while the
net energy import balance was USD  billion (BELSTAT, 2020c) In relative terms,
the net energy import balance equates to approximately % of the country’ GDP,
contributing significantly to the country’ trade deficit Also, given this high
reliance on energy imports and the fact that the primary energy supply is not
predominately domestically sourced, the energy sector is not  significant direct
contributor to the country’ GDP In fact, the supply12 of electricity, gas, steam
and hot water contributes to only % of the national GDP (BYR 95 billion, USD
billion) (BELSTAT, 2020d) Therefore, the exploitation of local energy sources is
crucial to enable the country to reduce its trade deficit and its expenditures
on energy imports In this regard, renewable energy deployment presents one of
the most viable options, given the country’ abundant and diverse renewable
energy resource potential Moreover, apart from renewable energy resources,
Belarus does not have other significant energy resources By boosting the
deployment of renewable energy technologies, Belarus would be able to increase
its domestic energy supply, which would have  direct contribution towards the
country’ GDP while also advancing towards sustainable and environmentally sound
economic growth in the country To facilitate the technical and economic
viability of renewable energy deployment across all economic sectors, energy
efficiency measures must also be enforced In consequence this will contribute to
the country’ national development targets of reducing the energy intensity13 of
the economy  REDUCTION OF GHG EMISSIONS In Belarus, energy utilisation alone is
responsible for about two-thirds of the country’ current greenhouse gas
emissions, which is similar to the global average To achieve the GHG emission
goals set out in the Paris Agreement, the transformation of the energy system is
of vital importance At the same time, economic growth and energy security need
to be maintained while achieving these goals For the first time in decades, in
2014 and for the next three-year period, energy-related global GHG emissions
stabilised despite continued economic growth (IEA, 2020b) due to the decreasing
dependence of economic growth on GHG-emitting energy sources and  decrease in
the energy intensity of the global economy This was facilitated by the increased
deployment of renewable energy technologies and increased energy efficiency
measures In Belarus, GHG emission stabilisation has been observed since This is
attributed mainly to the restructuring of the economy over the past few decades
and the fact that energy efficiency measures have steadily been introduced
across all economic sectors 12 Supply refers to all domestically produced
electricity, gas, steam and hot water, and domestically provided services such
as distribution, transmission and sale of the same 13 The energy intensity of
the economy is the ratio between gross inland energy consumption and GDP It is
measure of the energy efficiency of an economy The more energy intense an
economy is, the more energy it takes to produce the same unit of GDP and the
less the net value added of the service or good that is contributing to the GDP
WA                        Under  business-as-usual scenario,14 Belarus’ energy
demand is projected to increase some 42% by 2050 from its 2018 level However,
realising the need to reduce the energy intensity of its economy, the country
has committed to continually enforcing energy efficiency measures In fact, with
ambitious renewable energy and energy efficiency targets, the energy demand of
Belarus could potentially fall well below its 2018 levels by 205015 (Simon et
al, 2019) This means that any further deployment of renewable energy will be
able to directly displace current fossil fuel utilisation and directly
contribute towards GHG abatement  LOCAL VALUE CHAIN CREATION The development of
the renewable energy sector presents opportunities for developing domestic
industries, creating jobs along the value chain, generating income and
harnessing wider socio-economic benefits To maximise these benefits and
contribute to local value chain creation through renewables,  country needs to
leverage its existing economic activities, or develop new ones, and build on its
local supply chains Local industrial development in Belarus can be enhanced by
leveraging local materials and industries These include glass, steel, concrete
and aluminium for solar PV development, as well as concrete, steel, polymers and
fibreglass for wind project development Furthermore, renewable energy
development can boost economic activities along the various renewable energy
value chain segments, which include project planning, procurement of raw
materials and components, component manufacturing, transport, installation, grid
connection, commissioning, operation and maintenance, and decommissioning
According to IRENA’ analysis, the development of  typical 50 MW solar PV plant
requires approximately 230 000 person days along the value chain (IRENA, 2017a)
Figure 26 shows the distribution of human resources required along the value
chain Although various segments of the value chain, such as manufacturing, are
concentrated in only  few countries, much of the value chain – such as transport
and construction – can immediately be facilitated by the domestic workforce of
existing industries within the country Installation and grid connection segments
involve the most labour-intensive activities, such as site preparation and civil
works, which can also easily be sourced locally and have the potential to create
local employment opportunities, especially for low- to medium-skilled workers
(IRENA, 2017b) Furthermore, by building  certified and skilled workforce in
other value chain segments – such as installation, operation and maintenance –
over 70% of the value chain requirements can be sourced locally, creating
significant socio-economic benefits 14 Reflecting  continuation of current
energy demand trends 15 According to  scenario, Energy []evolution, designed to
achieve  set of environmental policy targets resulting in an optimistic and
feasible pathway towards  decarbonised energy system       WA
CHALLENGES AND RECOMMENDATIONS  POLICY AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS Scaling up the
deployment of renewables requires ambitious supporting policies and conducive
regulatory frameworks Although Belarus has over the years put in place various
frameworks and incentives for the development of renewables, they are still in
an early stage, and the pace of their deployment has not taken advantage of the
abundance of their resource potential Some of the policy and regulatory reasons
for this slow uptake have included unambitious and incoherent renewable energy
targets Furthermore, the deployment of renewables in power generation has been
facilitated through yearly quota allocations that have been prone to revisions,
reductions and low pricing of FiTs, which have consequently deterred investments
To allow for  more conducive environment for renewable energy deployment,
recommended actions include increasing the ambitiousness of renewable energy
targets, improving the quota allocations and their pricing methodology, as well
as introducing renewable energy auctions for pricing that is more market-based,
especially for large-scale investments Action : Revising renewable energy
targets Renewable energy targets can be drivers for multiple interconnected
policy objectives that lead to the development of the country’ energy sector and
its further development Targets facilitate transparency in policy development,
provide signals for investors regarding investment opportunities in the short-
and long-term, and indicate any data or methodology discrepancies that need
improvement as the sector develops They also provide an indication of the
government’ commitment to energy security, environmental sustainability and
overall socio-economic development For the development of renewables in Belarus,
various renewable energy targets have been set through multiple policy
frameworks These frameworks have sometimes lacked coherence or have been
misaligned, and some have only been partially achieved As discussed in Chapter ,
Section , the State Programme for Energy Saving to 2020 set various technology-
specific renewable energy targets that were not met by the end of On the other
hand, however, the overall renewable energy target by 2020 (, % renewable energy
production of TPES) was achieved, as set out in the main policy document of the
Concept of Energy Security of the Republic of Belarus In fact, even the
renewable energy target for 2025 laid out in the same document was achieved in
2020 (, % renewable energy production of TPES)                       The fact
that the target was achieved five years in advance presents uncertainty about
the impetus for continued renewable energy development in the near-term It also
brings into question the ambitiousness of the targets and their relation to
other development objectives, given that  14% renewable energy share of the TPES
was set as an acceptable level of energy security Although current targets as
laid out in the Concept of Energy Security have encouraged the development of
renewables thus far, it is recommended that these targets now be revised,
streamlined and increased in ambition and coherence These actions will allow the
energy sector to transition from its current early stage of renewable energy
development and to continue to build momentum while working towards overall
development objectives As  first step, it is suggested that the current
renewable energy target set out in the Concept of Energy Security be revised and
aligned with the target set in the most recently adopted State Programme for
Energy Saving  (, % share of renewable energy production of the TPES by 2025),
which would incentivise the continued development of renewables in the near-term
Furthermore, renewable energy targets in end uses, such as electricity, heat and
transport, need to be clearly defined and should be consistent with all energy
sector development objectives, such as increased energy security and gas share
reduction In this case, it is necessary to harmonise targets with indicators
adopted by the Republic of Belarus within the framework of the Paris Agreement
on climate and with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Target
setting needs to be founded on metrics and clearly articulated objectives, while
also taking into consideration political, institutional and economic aspects
They can be set in absolute terms (,  specific quantity of energy to be supplied
or capacity to be installed) or relative to  moving baseline (, generation
output as  share of final energy supply in percentage terms) Absolute targets
for technology-specific installed capacities may have the advantage of easier
monitoring, but they do run the risk of counting idle or under-performing
capacities towards the capacity target when in reality they do not actually
contribute significantly towards energy supply It is therefore recommended that
both absolute and relative targets be combined to allow for monitoring of
renewable energy development in terms of output and capacity This can better
facilitate the implementation of such targets and relate them to specific policy
measures such as quota allocations, FiTs and auctions Furthermore, technology-
specific targets should not be considered to be  cap on installed capacities and
should be regularly reviewed and revised in case one renewable energy technology
proves more economically viable than another Targets also need to be enacted by
law, with clear compliance and enforcement mechanisms This reduces the market
risk for investors and clearly signals the country’ commitment to renewable
energy development (IRENA, 2015) Renewable energy targets can facilitate
transparency in policy development, provide signals for investors regarding
investment opportunities in the short- and long-term       WA
Action : Improving the quota allocation for renewables The development of
renewables in the Belarusian power sector is enabled through yearly quotas that
allocate the amounts of installed capacities per renewable energy technology The
quotas are allocated for the coming three-year period, but they have been
subject to many revisions,  circumstance that has adversely impacted investor
confidence In 2015, the Resolution of the Council of Ministers on the
Establishment, Distribution, Release and Withdrawal of Quotas for the Creation
of Installations for the Use of Renewable Energy Sources No 662 was passed,
which regulates the setting of quotas for various renewable generation
capacities (Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus, 2018) In 2017,
however,  revised Resolution of the Council of Ministers No 305 was passed that
revised the procedure for determining and allocating energy generation quotas,
ultimately decreasing the quota amounts to slow the initial influx of variable
renewable power This limits the pace of the renewable energy sector’ growth For
example, in the period , applications received amounted to 770 MW of installed
power capacity, whereas the allocated quotas for the same period were seven
times less (42 MW) (Simon et al, 2019) Moreover, the quotas allocated to
investors for the current three-year period  have been revised downward twice
and have amount to only MW out of the total MW allocated for the same period
This amounts to approximately  third of the quota allocation and is considered
by stakeholders to be unambitious The revision annulled the previously allocated
quotas for geothermal and waste-to-energy for the three-year period and reduced
the total 2023 quota for all technologies from the previous allocation of 16 MW
to MW In addition, the quota allocations do not encourage larger-scale
investments, which tend to be cheaper For example, the allocated solar PV quota
for 2021 is only  MW, whereas the quotas for both solar PV and wind in 2023 are
set to  MW each, and no quotas have been allocated for biomass in The
methodology for quota allocations has been described by national energy
stakeholders as being insufficiently transparent, not facilitating wider
stakeholder engagement, and allowing various revisions without justification
Furthermore, the FiT incentives (, the multiplier coefficients applied to the
base price determining the FiT price for renewable energy technology) allocated
under the quota system are not attractive for investors This is apparent in the
number of previously concluded investment agreements that have been terminated,
especially in the construction of biomass/biogas power plants To address these
challenges and accelerate the development of renewables, it is imperative that
the allocated quota amounts be increased and that the multiplier coefficients be
appropriately determined for each technology to ensure economic viability for
investors, especially for solar PV, biomass and wind technologies Through the
RRA stakeholder consultation process, stakeholders have asserted that given the
country’ limited hydropower resources, quotas should not be allocated to
hydropower but should instead focus on solar PV, biomass and wind power
development In addition, recommendations were made that renewable energy
prosumers16 should not be included in the quota system because their power
production would have limited consequences for the power grid Furthermore, some
stakeholders in Belarus believe that the quota allocation period should also be
extended from the current three years to five years to allow investors to gauge
the development of the sector 16 Energy prosumers are both producers and
consumers of energy                       In these efforts to improve quota
allocations, extensive energy stakeholder engagement (including representation
from the Renewable Energy Association) is crucial to ensure transparency in the
process Multi-stakeholder engagement during the revision stages would allow for
more varied and objective consideration in setting the optimal quota allocations
per technology Such considerations should include, among others, investor
readiness, which calls for increased quota allocations, as well as technical
bottlenecks, which call for more controlled increments Action : Designing
renewable energy auctions Renewable energy producers in Belarus sell their
electricity to the off-taker, the respective regional subsidiary of the state-
owned BelEnergo, at  FiT set out by MART As discussed in Chapter , Section , the
FiTs per technology are calculated by applying different multiplier coefficients
on the electricity base tariffs Given that FiT calculations are based on
electricity tariffs that do not truly reflect the unit cost of production, and
further compounded by the fact that the multiplier coefficients are low,
stakeholders report that the FiTs in turn are too low to attract the necessary
investments at scale More specifically, the FiTs are considered particularly low
for wind and solar PV technologies, whose multiplier coefficients are on par
with otherwise cheaper technologies, such as hydropower Furthermore, the
methodology for setting the multiplier coefficients lacks transparency, and it
is unclear why some multiplier coefficients are differentiated by lifetime of
the project, as is the case for wind, while others are differentiated by
capacity size To attract renewable energy investments, especially at  larger
scale, it is recommended that the country look into developing renewable energy
auctions that can allow for market-based tariff setting of renewable power
generation and the potential for real price discovery Auctions are one of the
most successful policy support mechanisms for the development of renewables
globally, specifically for utility-scale renewable energy plants They allow for
well-planned and cost-efficient renewable energy deployment, and their
transparent design and implementation can instil confidence in investors and
reduce the perceived market risks  key strength of auctions is their ability to
determine the real market tariff for renewable power generation in  structured,
transparent and competitive process, while considering the development and
maturity of national markets and the development of local supply chains
Furthermore, auctions can facilitate contractual agreements between the power
producer and the off-taker that clearly lay out the commitments and liabilities
of the two parties, and in turn offer more regulatory certainty Nevertheless,
the eventual success of auctions relies on eliminating any potential for bidder
collusion and ensuring fair competition while offering terms that can attract
critical number of bidders                        RENEWABLES IN END USES Heat
accounts for the largest share (30%) of final energy consumption in Belarus, and
given that it is overwhelmingly fossil-fuelled, its decarbonisation is
imperative for ensuring  sustainable and energy-secure development future for
Belarus Currently, the heat sector does not have  dedicated law governing its
development, decarbonisation and subsidisation This has subsequently led to the
slow uptake of renewables in heating and an over-subsidisation of the otherwise
fossil-fuelled sector Although the country plans for more integration of biomass
in heating, sustainable biomass resource potentials are insufficiently assessed,
and the methodologies for the estimation of their energy content are outdated
Furthermore, alternative renewable energy technologies – such as geothermal and
solar thermal, which would allow for  more diversified and decarbonised heat
supply – are insufficiently accounted for in planning, despite their potential
It is therefore recommended that  law governing the broader energy sector, and
heat supply specifically, be developed that would make provisions for
decarbonisation and appropriately allocated subsidies that are more conducive to
renewables Finally, the development of heat supply in Belarus should be
diversified and based on the integration of modern, technically and economically
feasible energy- efficient technologies harnessing the country’ renewable energy
potential Action : Developing  law on energy and heat As discussed in Chapter ,
Section , Belarus has enacted several laws and legal acts governing the country’
energy sector Nevertheless, there is no primary act or base law on energy that
holistically governs the energy sector, defining the energy system and the roles
of the different energy sector entities, including suppliers, consumers and
prosumers and their operational obligations, reporting and deliverables, and the
appointment of monitoring and enforcement agencies To compensate for the lack of
state-wide law on energy, local regulations ultimately fill this gap and tend to
leave room for inconsistency among different regions  telling example is that
Belarus does not have  specific law governing this end use sector As such, there
is no comprehensive legal framework to incentivise the development of renewable
energy in heating and support its decarbonisation Heat accounts for the largest
share (30%) of final energy consumption in Belarus, but only % of heat
production comes from renewable energy sources – mainly biomass Furthermore,
there are no specific renewable energy targets for the heating supply except for
targets to reduce the gas share in the heat supply, as defined in the Concept
for Energy Security (see Chapter , Section ) and technology-specific targets for
the development of biomass and heat pumps for heating, as defined in the State
Programme on Energy Saving Solar thermal and geothermal technologies remain
unexploited despite the country’ potential to harness such renewable energy
sources for heating and hot water supply and thereby effectively reduce the
sector’ overreliance on imported natural gas The increased uptake of renewables
in heating is further hindered by  lack of cost- competitiveness compared to
alternatives, such as relatively low-cost natural gas, and the high degree of
subsidisation of end user heat tariffs, which is  measure to address energy
poverty According to energy stakeholders in the country, the methodology for
setting consumer tariffs lacks full transparency and the base price for heat
production does not reflect the true cost of heat production       WA
The state spends up to an estimated USD 800 million annually to subsidise heat
supply Residential heat tariffs alone are estimated to be between 10% and 21%17
of the actual production cost (World Bank, 2014) Given the high degree of
subsidisation, it is increasingly difficult for renewable energy investments to
compete There is  need to shift these subsidies to more sustainable sources of
energy to reduce the long-term cost of support while supporting the energy
transition  dedicated and comprehensive legal framework for the energy sector
would be  starting point in addressing this challenge and assigning legal
enforcement mechanisms for the development of various energy sector programmes
Furthermore,  dedicated heat law and accompanying bylaws could incentivise the
development of renewables (including geothermal, solar thermal and modern
biomass) in heat supply and would signal the political commitment to the
decarbonisation of the sector Policies to phase out fossil fuels, eliminate
distortions and incentivise energy transition solutions are described in detail
in the joint IRENA, IEA and REN21 report Renewable energy policies in  time of
transition: Heating and cooling (IRENA, IEA and REN21, 2020) and in IRENA’ World
energy transition outlook (IRENA, 2021) Action : Harnessing renewable energy
potentials in heating Belarus places great importance on the development of
biomass for heating It is endowed with great biomass potential, both from
agricultural waste and vast expanses of forest cover, which can be used to
increase the share of renewables in the heat supply – both for space and water
heating However, despite the high potential, securing good quality and
continuous biomass feedstock supply from sustainable sources is crucial to
ensuring the technical viability and sustainability of projects The country’
biomass supply is characterised by seasonal fluctuations in supply availability,
which largely depends on the type of feedstock and can be offset with feedstock
storage facilities and combinations with other feedstocks that offer seasonal
complementarity Biomass resource assessments in Belarus have been undertaken to
various degrees However, assessments of the calorific value of different
feedstocks and fuel products need further improvement, especially because the
country relies on resource assessment standards that are outdated and do not
take into account different technological advancements for thermal extraction
and processing of feedstocks into more calorie-dense fuel products Furthermore,
standardisation and costs accompanying logistical supply chains of feedstocks
and fuels also require consideration Biomass feedstocks must be available in
reasonable quantities within an acceptable distance to make any investments
economically viable because transportation costs factor significantly into the
final unit price of the fuel Currently, the unit price of biomass is based on
mass or volume of the fuel, rather than per unit calorific value This introduces
discrepancies, especially as different qualities, chemical and physical
characteristics of feedstock arise For example, feedstocks that have low energy
density and high moisture content present challenges for storage and
transportation and may not be technically viable unless pretreated through
drying and densification, which in turn affects its economics Therefore,
standardising the quality of biomass feedstocks and ensuring trading prices
based on such quality standards, such as per unit energy density, is necessary
to ensure the technical and economic viability of biomass for heating
Furthermore, innovative technologies for biomass and waste-to-energy require
development, demonstration and evaluation of economic efficiency, especially for
district heat supply 17 Depending on the size, condition and fuel used in the
district heating system                       The development of bioenergy also
needs to be sustainable Relevant aspects of sustainability include biodiversity
and ecosystem benefits (including flood mitigation, water and soil quality) and
impacts (on biodiversity and land and water use), as well as social issues such
as food security, impacts on gender and job creation Belarus already has vast
areas of disturbed peatland forests (UNDP, 2018), and further damage must be
avoided It is important to recognise the significant risks related to negative
impacts, both on the climate and in terms of wider sustainability, and to
introduce measures to mitigate them Such measures, and broader policies to
support the deployment of bioenergy, are presented in IRENA’ report Recycle:
Bioenergy (IRENA, 2020) Geothermal energy is another option for decarbonising
heat supply The resource assessment of the potential of geothermal energy has
only been carried out in  small number of sites, mainly in the south of the
country Further resource assessments need to be undertaken to more concretely
estimate the enthalpy of geothermal potential in Belarus and how it can most
efficiently be tapped and integrated into heat networks Furthermore, the most
appropriate technology application for harnessing geothermal energy in district
and individual heating systems requires greater research The increased use of
renewable energy sources in heating should be based on the integration of
modern, technically and economically feasible energy-efficient technologies
harnessing the country’ biomass, low-enthalpy geothermal and solar thermal
resources, as well as energy-efficient heat pumps To advance renewable energy
use in the heat supply, the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus should be
supported in its efforts to fully develop and implement resource assessments and
demonstrate the technical and economic feasibility of pilot projects  PLANNING
AND INTEGRATION OF RENEWABLES The integration of renewables can present various
challenges for an energy system which, if not appropriately accounted for, can
deter their wider development Adequate planning is required to align different
cross-sector development objectives, and in Belarus, the implementation of
holistic master plan for the energy sector with  higher share of renewables is
imperative Specifically in the power sector, renewable integration at  larger
scale is hampered by the lack of adequate grid codes that provide technical
guidelines for the connection and operation of renewable power generation
facilities and  lack of short-term variable renewable generation forecasting,
which has resulted in power system operations that are non-conducive to wider
renewable energy deployment To address these challenges and facilitate the wider
integration of renewables, it is recommended that an energy sector master plan
with higher shares of renewables be developed, along with grid codes and
improved variable renewable energy forecasting in power system operations The
implementation of  holistic master plan in Belarus is imperative to achieve
higher share of renewables in the energy sector                        RENEWABLE
ENERGY FINANCING Financing levels for renewable energy projects in Belarus is
very low, and there is an overall shortage of both debt and equity financing In
particular, the local financial sector has an inadequate track record in green
financing, and most investments have been facilitated through international
capital Furthermore, local financing is very costly, and commercial lending
incurs high interest rates and demands high collateral requirements due to
numerous perceived risks Such risks include the non-standardisation of PPAs in
Belarus and the fact that contracts are negotiated on  case-by-case basis and
signed only after commissioning of power plants This ultimately introduces
significant risks for investors and jeopardises their ability to secure
financing for projects in the first place These and other risks can be
alleviated through various policy and financial de-risking mechanisms, including
the standardisation of PPAs, as discussed in the recommended action points below
Action : Improving de-risking mechanisms for renewable energy investments The
financial sector risk presents  challenge for equity financing of renewable
energy investments in Belarus and significantly contributes to the high cost of
equity financing This is largely due to  lack of financial sector policy for
investing in renewable energy infrastructure and  general non-prioritisation of
green financing in the sector It is further compounded by  lack of local
financing products, including those from the national development bank, in
supporting renewable energy developers to access various funding opportunities
Small-scale investors, such as individual residential units, also lack
appropriate financing mechanisms It is therefore recommended that clear
financial sector policies for green financing be developed with the national
development bank creating  dedicated green financing portfolio and taking the
lead in local green financing efforts These should also include small-scale
financing, such as the inclusion of rooftop solar PV, heat pumps and electric
vehicles under housing and vehicle loans with the appropriate tailoring of loan
tenures Other financial sector policies could also encourage green financing
through obliging financial institutions to report on their green financing
portfolios as part of corporate social responsibility measures Furthermore,
dedicated renewable energy fund could be an effective way of providing public
loans and de-risking mechanisms for renewable energy investments Such  fund can
be sustained by taxes on GHG emissions, waste water pollution and natural
resource exploitation, for example Currency risk also adversely impacts the cost
of international debt and equity financing The Belarusian ruble is prone to
considerable fluctuations and has depreciated in the recent past compared to
hard currencies such as the euro or the US dollar Currently, FiTs are dependent
on the base price of electricity, which in turn is correlated to the price of
imported fossil fuels As such, according to legislation, the local currency FiTs
are partially indexed to the US dollar However, this indexation has decreased in
recent years, and there is much uncertainty about how the newly added nuclear
energy production will impact the indexation because the base tariff for
electricity will have less influence from imported fossil fuel prices Moreover,
there is currently no indexation of local currency FiTs with the euro, which
adversely affects financing from European countries To increase the bankability
of renewable energy investments, it is recommended that fixed prices in PPAs (as
recommended in Action ) should be at least partially indexed to the euro to
decrease currency risks, and this indexation should be enforced in legislation
WA                        PPAs for different renewable energy technologies in
Belarus are not standardised The clauses within the contract are individually
negotiated between the off-taker, Oblenergo, and the developer Furthermore, PPAs
are only signed once the renewable power plant has been built and commissioned,
which introduces  significant risk for the developers, may jeopardise the
bankability of their project and weakens their negotiating position Moreover,
not having  PPA in the development phase of the renewable power project
adversely impacts the ability of the developer to obtain debt financing for the
project in the first place Currently, the prices that are set out in the PPAs
are not fixed On the contrary, the FiT prices are susceptible to annual changes
depending on the changes in the base tariff for electricity production, which is
largely based on the costs of the natural gas imports (see Chapter , Section  on
FiT-setting methodology) Therefore, fluctuations in natural gas prices
indirectly cause fluctuations in the FiT, which can significantly impact the
economic viability of the project and increase the power market risk for
investors  further challenge affecting the economic viability of renewable
energy projects is the dispatch scheduling, which can lead to unnecessary power
curtailments for the IPPs and for which they are currently not compensated As
the country looks towards attracting more renewable energy investments,
standardised PPAs for different renewable energy technologies need to be
developed and applied in all regions of the country PPAs should be concluded
with the developers after successful bidding, and well before the commissioning
of the power plants to facilitate financing Throughout the duration of the
contract,  guaranteed fixed price for the sale of electricity needs to be
applied to alleviate the power market risk Fixed prices can be set through
eventual auction bidding rounds as recommended in Chapter , Section , Action
Furthermore, the contracts should include clauses that clearly define non-
compensable and compensable power curtailments For example,  non- compensable
curtailment may occur in the event that power cannot be dispatched due to grid
maintenance, in which case the IPP would not be compensated for the deemed18
energy generated On the other hand, compensable curtailment may occur in the
event that the off-taker cannot accept power due to balancing issues, in which
case the IPP would be compensated for the deemed generation The compensable
curtailment – the so-called “take-or-pay” mechanism – is essential in creating
certainty of the project revenue stream for the developer, especially in cases
of power curtailments that are beyond the control of the power producer There
could also be  limit to non- compensable power curtailments, and/or the PPA may
makes provisions for extensions of the duration of the agreement to allow for
recovery of missed energy production Further clauses that need to be included in
the standardised PPAs should obligate power producers to maintain minimum
thresholds of guaranteed availability in the case of wind power (usually set at
95% of mechanical availability) and minimum thresholds of committed power
generation in the case of solar PV (usually set at 85% of committed energy
supply) 18 Deemed generation is the electricity that  power plant was capable of
generating but had to curtail due to power system conditions beyond the control
of the power plant 70                     IRENA and Terawatt Initiative’ Open
Solar Contracts platform provides support for streamlining project development
and finance processes by offering simple and universally applicable legal
agreements that decrease transaction costs, shorten project development
timelines and facilitate balanced risk allocation, making contracting much
faster and less costly With the support of several top-tier law firms, the
contracts are publicly available on the Open Solar Contract website and include:
Power Purchase Agreement, Implementation Agreement, Operation and Maintenance
Agreement, Supply Agreement, Installation Agreement and Finance Facility Term
Sheet These contracts are fine-tuned for small and medium-sized, grid-connected
solar PV projects Going forward,  similar process will be initiated for wind
projects Upon request, IRENA provides training on the use of the Open Solar
Contracts and how to tailor them to the needs of project proponents IRENA’
project facilitation through the Climate Investment Platform The Climate
Investment Platform (CIP) is  global initiative supported by IRENA, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and Sustainable Energy for All (SEforAll)
in co-operation with the Green Climate Fund (GCF) The CIP’ objective is to step
up climate action and translate ambitious national climate targets into concrete
investments on the ground While initially focused on energy transition, the
ultimate goal of the initiative is to accelerate investments in renewable energy
and enable the success of the NDCs The platform offers an avenue to strengthen
existing collaboration and presents an opportunity to consider new ways for more
effectively bringing together stakeholders to catalyse action, all within
existing institutional structures and in line with the respective mandates of
the partner organisations In this context, investment forums,  key element of
IRENA’ strategy to facilitate investments in renewable energy, offer an
effective organising framework for the implementation of the CIP through  sub-
regional approach In operationalising the CIP, IRENA intends to work with
multilateral, bilateral and local financial institutions; private companies and
investors; and development partners who are prepared to provide financial and
technical resources and support the realisation of projects  INSTITUTIONAL
CAPACITIES AND SKILLS Developing an energy sector with an increased share of
renewables requires competencies beyond the conventional fossil fuel-based
system that currently exists These competencies are both at the institutional
level in enabling an overall systematised deployment of renewables and at the
individual level in building  qualified workforce at all stages of the value
chain to adequately support renewable energy deployment In Belarus, there is
need to strengthen both human and institutional capacities for renewable energy
deployment across all sectors, including within the public sector on renewable
energy target setting and reporting, in the private sector on due diligence of
project preparations, in the financial sector on green financing, and in
academia in nurturing technological research and innovation       WA
Action 11: Building human and institutional capacities for renewable energy
development Within the public sector, planning and facilitating renewable energy
deployment through incentive schemes are the two priority areas that require
capacity strengthening In planning for renewable energy investments,  holistic
statistical basis is required Energy sector statistics in Belarus are regularly
updated, publicly reported and comprehensive However, reporting on renewable
energy generation needs to be improved Currently, electricity generated by
renewable energy prosumers, such as solar PV installations for self-consumption
in the residential sector, is largely unaccounted for in official statistics
This skews reporting on the achievement of energy targets and does not enable
holistic understanding of the degree of uptake, the efficiency and operational
experience of installed systems, and potential for further deployment This in
turn offsets appropriate planning and the need for developing various policy
incentives such as the development of  prosumer strategy and appropriate
incentives Forming  working group is necessary to design  methodology for the
assimilation of renewable energy production by decentralised and stand-alone
systems, which would capacitate BELSTAT and other public institutions in
collecting and utilising such data for further energy sector planning and policy
development Furthermore, renewable energy auction design is another policy
mechanism that requires capacity-building efforts in public institutions and
among policy makers Within the private sector, insufficient due diligence in
preparation of renewable energy project documentation also hinders project
financing This can be mainly attributed to the lack of local skills in project
development and engineering design For example, there tends to be  lack of high-
quality energy audits; design estimates on technical, financial and economic
viability; long-term operational projections; and estimated return of investment
All of this hinders potential investors and financiers in assessing the economic
viability of proposed projects Usually, international experts are relied upon to
carry out various feasibility studies Inadequate competences are also reported
in the various segments of the value chain of developing renewable energy
projects, including procurement and manufacturing, installation (especially for
PV and wind), operation, and maintenance  local workforce in such areas is not
readily available, evidenced by the fact that most larger projects have been
implemented by Russian and other European companies As such, practical skills at
academic institutions and on-the-job training need to be enhanced to ensure
qualified workforce for the development of  renewable energy sector in Belarus
The practical skills of the workforce can be developed by adjusting the
curriculum for the relevant higher education institutions to include more
practical training on renewable energy technologies and by facilitating
individual training programmes for the construction, installation and operation
of renewable energy technologies Figure 27 shows an example of human resource
requirements for the operation and maintenance of onshore wind projects
Electricity generated by renewable energy prosumers needs to be accounted for in
official statistics