Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/BLR/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  According to World Bank data
(2019), the Republic of Belarus is an upper-middle-income country The population
of Belarus amounts to ,413,446 people (2019) Ranked 50th out of 189 countries on
the Human Development Index, 2019, it is in the ‘very high human development’
category Belarus is committed to the principles of ‘leaving no one behind’ and
eliminating the inequalities and discrimination faced by vulnerable groups The
country ranks 27th in the Gender Inequality Index, The proportion of women in
the National Assembly of the Republic of Belarus increased from per cent in 2014
to per cent in Having scored 77 out of  possible 100 points in the Global
Sustainable Development Goals Index, 2019, Belarus was ranked 23rd and rated
above average for the Eastern Europe and Central Asia region  Belarus is
positioned to respond to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) through its public
health capacities with laboratories, testing, and isolation of cases
Nevertheless, the economic and social effects of global crises linked to the
pandemic will add to vulnerabilities of the national economy and, if systemic
measures are not taken to support at-risk sectors and population groups, could
reduce longer-term growth perspectives  Belarus pursues sound macroeconomic
policies Along with maintaining an export- oriented economic strategy, the
Government has set export diversification as  priority In 2018, the share of
exports of high-tech goods increased to  per cent, while the share of exports of
information and communication services exceeded 20 per cent Government efforts
also include improving the business climate by increasing investment protection
guarantees, simplifying administrative procedures, and improving the legal
framework However, economic risks to sustainable development remain, due to low
levels of labour productivity, business investment, and research and development
expenditure as  percentage of gross domestic product In addition, demographic
risks associated with low birth rates, high differences in the life expectancy
of men and women, the outflow of youth from the country, and the gender pay gap
persist in Belarus  The national vision for sustainable development is premised
on the National Strategy for Sustainable Development for the period until 2035,
which should be adopted in The document prioritizes sustainable development of
the family institution and qualitative growth of human capital, employment, and
decent incomes for the population, digital transformation of the economy, and
widespread innovations, creation of  developed business environment and
sustainable infrastructure, ensuring environmental safety, and shifting towards
sustainable production and consumption models (circular economy)  Belarus plays
an active role in the development of integration processes Belarus is an active
member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Union State of Russia and Belarus, Eurasian Economic
Union Starting in January 2020,  representative of Belarus assumed the office of
the General Secretary of the Collective Security Treaty Organization In 2020,
Belarus took over the presidency in the bodies of the Eurasian Economic Union,
and the Council of the Eurasian Economic Commission In addition, in 2021 the
country will chair the Supreme State Council of the Union State and will co-
chair the CIS UNDP sees the leading role of Belarus as an opportunity to
accelerate joint progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals in
the region  In 2019, UNDP returned to its role and mandate of  professional
development agency and thought-leader on issues of sustainable human development
The understanding of UNDP as  strategic, equal partner and integrator in
promoting sustainable development comes to the fore of cooperation This has been
big step, based on the value offer, expertise, knowledge, professionalism, and
values of the UNDP UNDP also plays  responsive role as  support platform of the
United Nations development system, providing an integrator   DP/DCP/BLR/
function in support of country efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development   unique architecture for managing the process of
nationalizing and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals has been
established in Belarus, allowing it to be considered as  platform for sharing
best practices in achieving the Goals In 2017,  Mainstreaming, Acceleration and
Policy Support mission identified four accelerator platforms for Goals
achievement in Belarus: green transition for inclusive and sustainable growth;
future generation orientation; digital transformation and social innovation; and
gender equitable society These accelerators serve as guidelines for the country
programme, 2021- Through its country programme, , UNDP contributed to the
implementation of national priorities, in particular to reducing inequalities,
introducing international best practices and expertise, and developing
intersectoral coordination and cooperation An independent evaluation of the
country programme during  highlighted the UNDP contribution to promotion of
Belarus as  reliable, competent partner in the international arena, including in
terms of its accession to the World Trade Organization UNDP promoted country
priorities in sustainable natural resource management, biodiversity and
landscape conservation, and helped prevent soil degradation and preserve
endangered species of wild animals and plants UNDP supported local development,
leading to the growth of entrepreneurship and the number of small and medium-
sized enterprises in Belarus  The lessons learned emphasized that UNDP work may
be further strengthened and expanded in supporting sustainable socio-economic
development at the regional and local levels, developing private sector and
public-private partnerships, and using new financing mechanisms and tools Other
strategic areas include advancing cooperation in technology, innovation,
research and development, and national capacity-building UNDP has taken an
active part in developing the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, 2021-Under the framework, UNDP will contribute directly to four
outcomes closely corresponding to the UNDP Strategic Plan, areas of knowledge
and comparative advantages The outcomes are: economic development driven by
inclusive green growth and stimulating entrepreneurship; implementing essential
climate change mitigation and adaptation measures; laying the foundations of
digital ecosystem; and promoting equal economic and social opportunities for men
and women UNDP adds value through its demonstrated experience in project
implementation, building national capacities, results-based management, and
breadth of thematic expertise UNDP has extensive experience in working with
international partners to attract development financing UNDP software and
administrative tools, such as clearly established standard operating procedures,
policy and knowledge networks, and response mechanisms, enable it to respond
flexibly and quickly to government requests while ensuring transparency,
efficiency and effectiveness UNDP is represented in all regions of Belarus
through  network of regional coordinators UNDP brings international expertise
and best international practices to the country in such areas as nationalization
of the Sustainable Development Goals, mediation, local tourism development,
regional economic development, illicit trafficking of weapons, wetlands
restoration, and biodiversity conservation UNDP also brings innovative solutions
and experimental approaches, using the global network of UNDP Accelerator Labs
II Programme priorities and partnerships This country programme is based on the
results of UNDP and United Nations national strategic consultations with key
stakeholders and UNDP partners from the Government, the National Assembly, civil
society organizations, academia and the private sector The main goal of the
programme is to support the effective development of Belarus as  country with
strong economy, developed human capital, and  high quality of life, through the
widespread adoption of digital and green technology, support to the development
of private   DP/DCP/BLR/ initiative, and promotion of regional and local
development, including in areas affected by the Chernobyl catastrophe By
synchronizing the processes of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework and country programme development with national planning
cycle, UNDP ensures both full alignment of the programme with the national
priorities and Sustainable Development Goals and financial sustainability of
programme the implementation, in cooperation with national public and private
stakeholders and international partners Through this country programme UNDP will
deliver its policy and programme support to the Government based on emerging
needs, including response to the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath Support
will be four-pronged, comprising preparation, response, recovery, and lessons
learned Its global procurement networks, dedicated expertise and economies of
scale allow UNDP to build resilient health systems and provide procurement
services of health products and essential medicines To address the socio-
economic impact of COVID- 19 in both the short and longer term, UNDP will
deliver policy and programme interventions focused on employment and livelihoods
of vulnerable groups, access to social services and social protection, disaster
risk reduction, and financing strategies To ensure inclusive and integrated
responses, UNDP will support national and subnational capacities for planning,
coordination and implementation, partnerships and communications Volunteers can
boost community engagement and digital solutions deployed in many spheres,
building on the excellent information technology and technological potential in
Belarus This programme provides for the possibility of co-financing for
development by using international technical assistance, private sector
resources and cofinancing of projects While keeping the focus on stronger
partnerships with traditional donors (including the Global Environment Facility,
the European Union, Germany, Japan, Poland, the Russian Federation, South Korea,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America),
further development of emerging partnerships with China, South-South cooperation
and the private sector is considered  promising direction In addition to co-
financing of international technical assistance projects, the document provides
for approbating the opportunity of UNDP to provide development support services
to national partners UNDP can provide services in such areas as development of
entrepreneurship, promotion of innovation and investment, climate action,
regional development, and strengthening the capacity of national partners
Implementation of the country programme will follow the principle of ‘leaving no
one behind’ by targeting vulnerable groups: low-income persons, the unemployed
and those laid off or prospectively fired due to structural reforms, people of
retirement age, those living in rural areas – especially women and population
living on territories affected by the Chernobyl catastrophe – people with
disabilities, those living with HIV, persons released from detention, and people
whose health or livelihoods may be affected by pandemics In collaboration with
other United Nations organizations, UNDP will continue to provide integrated
support to Belarus in nationalizing and localizing the Sustainable Development
Goals UNDP will provide expert and technical support in developing regional
development strategies, testing new mechanisms for financing the Goals,
improving the national indicator platform for the Sustainable Development Goals,
and supporting the functioning of the national architecture for achieving them
UNDP will continue to provide expert support to the Government of Belarus in
strategic areas such as socio-economic impact assessment, building resilience to
pandemic and shocks, climate, social protection for vulnerable groups, and
inclusive national planning   DP/DCP/BLR/ Priority area  Economic development
based on the principles of green and inclusive growth (related Sustainable
Development Goals targets: ; ; 2a; ; ; ; ; ; ; and ) This area is aligned with
national priorities in environmental security, transition to rational models of
production and consumption, productive employment and decent incomes Activities
will contribute to the achievement of outcome  of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-UNDP will facilitate the transition to
low-carbon green economy and improvement of corporate environmental
responsibility, which will entail adopting comprehensive programmes and
mechanisms to increase the efficiency of resource use, including through
innovative eco-technology UNDP will support the digital transformation of the
economy and widespread innovations, which will have  significant impact on the
integrated development of the country and the rational distribution of
productive forces Through existing mechanisms, UNDP will provide expert and
other support for the rapid development of the services sector until 2025, with
an emphasis on high-value-added services (scientific, professional and other)
Based on its gained experience in implementing projects on green economy and
local development, UNDP will support national efforts to develop  green,
circular economy , which, in its turn, will facilitate economic growth through
more efficient use of available resources, waste processing, and production of
goods from secondary resources In close cooperation with the Ministry of
Economy, state institutions, local authorities and the private sector, UNDP will
support entrepreneurship and private sector development, innovation and public-
private partnerships, including social sectors, and effective regional and local
development, taking into account location-specific social and economic
conditions and the needs of the population, including vulnerable groups Special
attention will be paid to the development of lagging regions by fostering
sustainable and innovative local development capacities and improving the
quality of life and self-realization of citizens in both urban and rural areas
UNDP will continue to support activities aimed at overcoming the consequences of
the Chernobyl catastrophe UNDP stands ready to provide expert support and best
international practices to the Government and interested national parties in
developing social and environmental standards to improve the quality of public
property management in accordance with the national interests This will allow
the economy to adapt quickly to technological changes in the context of
globalization, accelerate the process of innovative development, and contribute
to the development of human capital and private initiative UNDP will provide
support in the field of trade development in the context of the accession of
Belarus to the World Trade Organization Priority area  Implementation of climate
change mitigation and adaptation measures (related Goals targets: ; ; ; 2a; ; ;
; ; ; ; ; ; ; and ) This area is aligned with the national priority in
environmental security and transition to rational models of production and
consumption and contributes to the achievement of outcome  of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021- In close partnership with
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, UNDP will
support country efforts to tackle climate change, focusing on mitigation
measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions On the adaptation side, UNDP will
work with climate dependent sectors, including agriculture, forestry, and water
management,   DP/DCP/BLR/ to enhance their resilience and preparedness to the
climate change-related challenges Through its Climate Promise Initiative, UNDP
will assist Belarus in preparing the second nationally determined contributions,
making the national commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions given the
increase in its absorption even more ambitious, so as to reach the previously
announced overall target of 35 per cent emissions reduction by Building on the
results of the projects implemented, UNDP will promote the energy efficiency of
the Belarusian economy, in particular in the ‘Buildings’ and ‘Industry’ sectors
In cooperation with the Energy Efficiency Department of the State Committee for
Standardization of the Republic of Belarus, UNDP will explore opportunities to
support the establishment of  sustainable and effective energy services market
in Belarus UNDP will support national efforts to expand the use of renewable
energy sources, including technologies for the use of renewable energy to cover
the energy demand The use of electric vehicles will be promoted, along with
charging network for sustainable transport UNDP will enhance the national
systems for managing chemicals and waste, including hazardous waste containing
persistent organic pollutants, to minimize the impact on the environment and
human health Actions to support the conservation and sustainable use of
biological and landscape diversity, land degradation prevention will be expanded
They will include economic instruments and measures to ensure the restoration
and sustainable use of ground and surface waters, land resources, fresh-water
eco-systems and ecotourism development UNDP will assist in scaling up activities
aimed at reducing the risk of natural and man-made disasters and improving
emergency preparedness, including transboundary wildfire risks, based on the
requirements of the relevant environmental conventions UNDP will support Belarus
in fulfilling its obligations under the key environmental international
agreements, among which are the Paris Agreement, the Stockholm Convention on
Persistent Organic Pollutants, the United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity, United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and the Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance UNDP will help raise
environmental and climate awareness by increasing environmental education,
involving the public in environmental monitoring and improving environmental
management at the local level Priority area  Development of an effective digital
ecosystem (related Goals targets: ; ; ; ; ; ; and ) The area is aligned with the
national priorities in digital transformation of the economy and large-scale
spread of innovations, developed business environment and sustainable
infrastructure The programme activities will contribute to the achievement of
outcome  of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
2021-In order to support Government efforts towards digital transformation, UNDP
will support the formation of  full-fledged digital ecosystem, including
implementation of activities consolidating efforts of the State, society and
business within the framework of the organizational and technological platform
‘Smart industry of Belarus’, innovation and industrial clusters Based on
existing practices, UNDP will promote the development of innovative
entrepreneurship by establishing innovation infrastructure in regions and
expanding the range of services, ensuring full implementation of the innovation
cycle; and increase the efficiency of commercializing the results of
intellectual activity, including invention and engineering, and promoting youth
engagement UNDP will promote the development of tools to provide support
(financial, consulting) to innovative and high-tech start-ups in the early
stages of development, leading to the development of new tools (venture
financing) UNDP will support research in the field of   DP/DCP/BLR/ cluster
development and conceptual and methodological support of  cluster policy, as
well as regional innovation ecosystems UNDP will support the development of
innovative entrepreneurship by increasing research efficiency and
commercialization, developing required skills in the field of access to
information, and personal data and privacy protection, as well as  wide scope of
digital knowledge and skills In developing measures to increase digital
literacy, special attention will be paid to creating accessible distance
learning systems for vulnerable groups, including older people, people with
disabilities, people in prison, released workers, women on maternity leave, and
rural residents Together with national partners, UNDP will support the
development of an electronic public service system and infrastructure to provide
electronic services to individuals and companies through the digitalization of
public administration in key sectors such as the judicial system and rulemaking,
justice, health care, environmental protection, citizenship, migration, road
safety, the tax system, transport corridors, customs and border management
Building on the experience and best practices of the project on green urban
development, UNDP will support the development of  national urban development
policy and concepts of ‘smart cities’ and ‘smart districts’ based on the
principles of green urban planning and the interests of all groups of the
population Based on needs and regional characteristics, UNDP will assist in
developing an investment platform supporting existing enterprises and
development of new bankable projects in selected Chernobyl-affected areas Aimed
at narrowing the development gap between the capital and the regions, the
platform will accelerate local innovation, and points of resilience and growth
UNDP will also launch an ‘accelerator lab’ to serve as  space for innovation,
experimentation, and piloting solutions to development challenges and
opportunities Priority area  Fuller participation of vulnerable groups in socio-
economic life (related Goals targets: ; ; ; 5b; 5c; ; ; ; and 18) This area is
aligned with the national priorities in productive employment and decent
incomes, sustainable development of the family institution and quality growth of
human capital The envisaged activities will contribute to the achievement of
outcome  of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
2021-UNDP will support the development and implementation of measures to reduce
inequality and discrimination against men and women and strengthen the role of
women in non-traditional sectors, expand their economic opportunities and
promote their participation in public- and private-sector decision-making UNDP
will assist national partners in improving the collection, monitoring, analysis
and use of sex- and age-disaggregated data, including on vulnerable groups, in
line with the human rights-based approach to data and the principles of gender
equality The approach implies data analysis focusing on the most disadvantaged
and marginalized groups and on existing inequalities among the population To
strengthen women’ role in and contribution to the economy, with equal
opportunities and wages, UNDP will help develop measures and solutions to
incorporate  gender perspective into national entrepreneurship programmes, with
focus on supporting women’ entrepreneurship To ensure the inclusiveness of
education and its labour-market orientation, UNDP will facilitate the
development and implementation of career guidance and counselling programmes for
vulnerable groups, with  focus on the needs of children, adolescents and youth
with disabilities   DP/DCP/BLR/ Another area UNDP intends to develop together
with national partners is volunteering One billion volunteers contribute to
their communities globally – yet volunteering remains  largely untapped resource
with  huge potential to achieve people-centric and socially inclusive
sustainable development In line with the Plan of Action to Integrate
Volunteering into the 2030 Agenda and the national draft law on volunteering,
that will be developed in 2021, volunteers can contribute to achieving the
programme priorities at all levels III Programme and risk management This
country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level
Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels with
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the Programme and Operations
Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework The programme will be
nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all of the programme to enable responses to force majeure
The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks Cost
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will
be charged to the concerned projects Programme and risk management arrangements
of this country programme correspond fully to the UNDP Programme and Operations
Policies and Procedures, Financial Regulations and Rules, and decisions of the
Executive Board The country programme will be implemented in coordination with
the Ministry of Economy of the Republic of Belarus The key programme management
principles will include joint monitoring This programme is developed at
challenging time as Belarus and the world are experiencing the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic Accordingly, it provides for  UNDP policy and programme offer
and project annual workplans as instruments allowing UNDP the flexibility to
respond to the emerging needs and priorities of the situation Implementation of
the programme is associated with  range of external economic, environmental,
health and social factors in addition to internal risks The impact of the global
pandemic, prospects of slow economic growth, implications of the tax manoeuvre,
various levels of regional economic development, aftermaths of the Chernobyl
catastrophe, and low adaptability of the social protection system to the
accelerating process of population ageing will determine the importance of
addressing external risks UNDP will work on strengthening relationships with the
national counterparts, identifying growth points of regional development, and
increasing the flexibility and targeting of social services to mitigate external
risks To address external and internal risks,  separate risk register has been
developed by UNDP listing current external, operational, programme and
communication risks, with risk owners and mitigation strategies identified UNDP
reviews and updates the register on  regular basis IV Monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation of the country programme is aligned with the
monitoring, reporting and evaluation of United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework UNDP, together with other United Nations organizations,
will contribute to   DP/DCP/BLR/ annual reviews and joint evaluations of the
framework to validate progress in relation to envisaged short- and long-term
outcomes Monitoring, reporting and evaluation of the country programme will be
based on the use of national data in collaboration with the National Statistical
Committee and using the national platform for reporting indicators of the
Sustainable Development Goals This will be supplemented by the use of socio-
environmental standards, beneficiary feedback, frequency of reviews, and local
monitoring Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out at both project and
programme outcome levels to track the effectiveness and sustainability of
programme results The evaluation indicators are consistent with the national
indicators for the Sustainable Development Goals and are based on national
statistics and annual country reports on the Goals The observance of the
principle of gender equality will be controlled by monitoring the share of
expenses for the implementation of related activities UNDP will continue to
promote the collection, management, monitoring, analysis and use of relevant,
reliable and disaggregated data, including on vulnerable groups, in line with
the fundamental principles of the Sustainable Development Agenda and the human
rights- based approach to data UNDP will work with the National Statistical
Committee, government agencies, academia, research institutions, and civil
society, to strengthen their capacities in monitoring and evaluating the
national development programmes As an innovative tool, UNDP plans to hold annual
meetings with national partners to present key performance results, exchange
updates on country programme implementation and discuss future cooperation plans
It will strengthen mutual accountability, transparency, alignment, and dialogue
between UNDP and national partners   DP/DCP/BLR/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Belarus () National priority or goal: Environmental security;
transition to rational models of production and consumption (circular economy);
productive employment and decent incomes United Nations Sustainable Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF) (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP # By 2025, all people,
including adolescents, young men and women, men and women aged 65 and older,
other vulnerable groups, benefit from green and inclusive economic development,
realized through comprehensive regulatory frameworks, promotion of business
activities, private sector partnerships, and increased participatory decision-
making Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  – Advance poverty eradication in
all its forms and dimensions Estimated cost by outcome UNSDCF outcome
indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and frequency of data collection,
and responsibilities Major partners / partnerships and frameworks Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines and targets) ($
thousands) National Statistical Committee (Belstat) Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG) national indicator:  Annual growth rate of real gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita (%) Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection (MNREP) Regular: $400 Output  Measures for the development of green,
circular, low-carbon economy, considering the interests of vulnerable groups,
developed and introduced Other: $19,660 National platform for reporting
indicators of SDGs (NRP) Ministry of Economy (MOE) Indicative indicator  SDG
national indicator:  Sustainable consumption and production (SCP) national
action plans are in place or SCP mainstreamed as  priority or  target into
national policies Baseline (2019): Ministry of Economy Target (2025): Ministry
of Emergency Situations (MES) Frequency: annual Source: National reporting
platform (NRP) Energy Efficiency Department of the State Committee for
Standardization (EEDSCS) Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  SDG national
indicator:  Unemployment rate, by sex and persons with disabilities (%) Data
source, frequency: NRP, annual Ministry of Industry (MOI) Output  Financial and
non-financial mechanisms enabling effective regional development, including in
Chernobyl-affected areas and ensuring inclusion of vulnerable groups, introduced
Baseline (2019): ; male – ; female – ; persons with disabilities aged  – 16
Ministry of Agriculture and Food (MAF) Ministry of Forestry (MOF) Target (2025):
Indicative indicator  SDG national indicator:  Proportion of population living
below the national poverty line, by sex (%) Source: NRP State Committee on
Science and Technology (SCST) Baseline (2019): ; male – ; female –  National
Academy of Science (NAS) Target (2025):  Data source, frequency: NRP, annual
Academic and educational institutions 10  DP/DCP/BLR/ Indicative indicator  SDG
national indicator:  Proportion of people living below 50% of median income, by
sex and persons with disabilities (%) Local authorities Private sector Non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) Baseline (2019): ; male – ; female – ; persons
with disabilities –  Target (2025):  Data source, frequency: NRP, annual Output
Entrepreneurship, competition, innovation, decent jobs, and income
diversification promoted, focusing on vulnerable groups and considering COVID-19
impact Indicative indicator  Percentage of workforce employed in small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), sole proprietorships Baseline (2018): Target
(2025): Data source, frequency: Belstat, annual Indicative indicator  Share of
SME gross value added in GDP (%) Baseline (2018): Target (2025): 30 Data source,
frequency: Belstat, annual National priority or goal: Environmental security;
transition to rational models of production and consumption (circular economy)
UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #  significant contribution to
climate action is made by 2025 through the introduction of key measures of
climate change adaptation and mitigation Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome
– Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises Environmental Performance Index
ranking of Belarus Belstat MNREP Regular: $400 Output  Climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures and solutions developed and introduced NRP EEDSCS Other:
$19,462 Baseline (2018): 44 Indicative indicator  Annual emissions of carbon
dioxide (million tons CO2 equivalent) MNREP MOE Target (2025): 30 MES MES
Baseline (2018): 92 EEDSCS 11  DP/DCP/BLR/ MOI Target (2025): 110 Source:
Environmental Performance Index Frequency: annual Data source, frequency: MNREP,
annually MAF MOF Pollutants discharged into the atmosphere (tons per square
kilometre) Output  Solutions for promoting energy efficiency, development of the
market for energy services, and expansion of the use of renewable energy sources
developed and promoted Ministry of Education Ministry of Energy Baseline (2018):
State Customs Committee (SCC) Target (2025):  Indicative indicator  SDG national
indicator:  Energy intensity of GDP (kilograms of coal equivalent per million
roubles) (in 2005 prices) Source: Belstat NAS Baseline (2018): Academic and
educational institutions Target (2025): 353 Local authorities Data source,
frequency: NRP, annual Private sector Indicative indicator  SDG national
indicator:  Ratio of the volume of production of primary energy from renewable
energy sources to the volume of gross fuel and energy consumption (%) NGOs
Baseline (2018):  Target (2025):  Data source, frequency: NRP, annual Output
Measures enhancing biodiversity conservation, control of invasive species of
animals and plants, sustainable water resources and land management implemented
Indicative indicator  Number of functioning river basin coordination mechanisms
that include neighbouring countries Baseline (2019):  Target (2025):  Data
source, frequency: Project and official government reports; annual Indicative
indicator  Hectares of valuable forest, wetland and freshwater ecosystems under
sustainable management Baseline (2019): 67,885 Target (2025): 82,885 12
DP/DCP/BLR/ Data source, frequency: Project and official government reports;
annual Output  National emergency preparedness for major hazards strengthened,
in line with regional factors and international environmental conventions
Indicative indicator  Number of events/safety trainings held to strengthen the
system of national emergency preparedness Baseline (2020):  Target (2025):20
Data source, frequency: official government reports; annual National priority or
goal: Digital transformation of the economy and large-scale spread of
innovations; developed business environment and sustainable infrastructure
UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP # By 2025, foundations of an
efficient digital ecosystem are formed, including, as part of smart sustainable
cities, enabling interaction of the state, society, and business, with equal
participation of women and men, adolescents, youth, and representatives of
vulnerable groups Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  – Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Share of administrative
procedures and government services provided electronically Belstat Ministry of
Communications and Informatization (MCI) Regular: $400 Output   system and
infrastructure for electronic public services for individuals and businesses
based on digitalization of public administration enhanced NRP Other: $,300
National Centre of Electronic Services (NCES) Baseline (2018): 25% Ministry of
Justice Indicative indicator  The proportion of administrative procedures
carried out in relation to legal entities and individual entrepreneurs in
electronic form, of the total number of administrative procedures carried out in
relation to legal entities and individual entrepreneurs National Centre of Legal
Information Target (2025): 75% Frequency: annual Source: NCES MOE SDG national
indicator:  Ministry of Architecture and Construction Baseline (2018): %
Proportion of individuals using the Internet (%), by sex and place of residence
Target (2025): 30% State Border Committee Data source, frequency: Belstat,
annual SCC Baseline (2019): ; men – ; women – 83; cities and urban settlements –
; rural settlements – Indicative indicator  Number of new digital
systems/solutions developed to enhance public administration in key sectors SCST
NCES Baseline (2019):  Target (2025): 83 13  DP/DCP/BLR/ Source: NRP Target
(2025): 10 Academic and educational institutions Data source, frequency: Project
reports; annual Local authorities Output  Development of  national urban policy
that integrates fully the ‘smart city’ (‘smart district’) concepts and piloting
solutions supported Private sector NGOs Indicative indicator  SDG national
indicator:  Proportion of population that has convenient access to public
transport, by sex and place of residence (%) Baseline (2019): ; men – ; women –
: cities and urban settlements – ; rural settlements – Target (2025): 90 Data
source, frequency: NRP; annual Indicative indicator  Number of concepts of the
development of ‘smart cities’ developed at the national level Baseline (2019):
Target (2025): 11 Data source, frequency: MCI; annual Output  Development of
additional education in the field of ICT and other skills in demand on the
labour market enhanced with  focus on employability of vulnerable groups
Indicative indicator  Number of people engaged in non-formal education and
trainings in business administration, information and communication technologies
Baseline (2019):  Target (2025): 600 Data source, frequency: Project reports;
annual Output   system of -participation to improve public engagement in the
life of the society and decision making developed and promoted Indicative
indicator : Proportion of the population using the Internet to interact with
government, including for obtaining information, in the total population aged
-72 years (%) 14  DP/DCP/BLR/ Baseline (2018): Target (2025): 20 Data source,
frequency: Belstat; annual National priority or goal: Resilient development of
the family institution, quality growth of human capital; productive employment
and decent incomes UNSDCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP # By 2025,
improvements in data collection, gender equality policies, and child and
elements of gender budgeting have created conditions for men and women of all
ages, including those aged 65 years and older, as well as girls and boys, to
better realize their rights and improve the quality of their lives, including
through increased opportunities for employment and better protection from
gender-based and domestic violence Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  –
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development SDG national
indicator:  Proportion of seats held by women in () national parliaments and ()
local governments (%) Ministry of Labour and Social Protection Regular: $368
Output  National system of collection, monitoring, analysis, and use of
disaggregated data strengthened in accordance with the human rights-based
approach, gender equality and ‘leaving no one behind’ principles • Belstat • NRP
Other: $,620 MOE Ministry of Health Baseline (2018): () national parliaments –
55; () local governments – • MOH Indicative indicator  SDG national indicator:
The number of global indicators formed to monitor the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals (units) Ministry of Finance National Statistical
Committee of the Republic of Belarus Target (2025): () 40; () 50 Frequency:
annual Baseline (2018): 74 Source: NRP Target (2025): 93 Academic and
educational institutions Data source, frequency: NRP, annual The Global Gender
Gap Index ranking of Belarus Local authorities Output  Measures and solutions to
reduce discriminatory practices, narrow the wage gap, and introduce gender
aspects into state medium-term programmes developed Private sector Baseline
(2019): 29 NGOs Target (2025): 20 Source: World Bank Indicative indicator  SDG
national indicator:  Ratio of average wages of women and men (%) Baseline
(2019): Target (2025): 80 Data source, frequency: NRP, annual Indicative
indicator  SDG national indicator:  Proportion of women in managerial positions
(%) 15  DP/DCP/BLR/ Baseline (2019): Target (2025): 47 Data source, frequency:
NRP, annually Output  Measures to strengthen the healthcare system, especially
at the primary care level, for the response to COVID-19 and prevention and
control of NCDs, HIV and infectious diseases, developed and introduced
Indicative indicator  SDG national indicator:  Number of new HIV infections per
,000 uninfected population, by sex and age Baseline (2018): 25; male – 33;
female – 17; -14 years – 004; 15 years and older – 30 Target (2025):  Data
source, frequency: NRP, annual 16