Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/HND/ UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework   Honduras is  lower-middle-income
country with widespread poverty and one of the highest inequality rates of the
continent (Gini Coefficient: 52) Approximately 19 per cent of the population
live in multidimensional poverty and another per cent are vulnerable to
multidimensional poverty  Honduras is extremely vulnerable to climate change2
and presents widespread food insecurity and  weak social protection system
Fifty-eight per cent of Honduran households suffer some level of food insecurity
In female-headed households, this rises to 60 per cent, of which 12 per cent –
more than 80,000 households – suffer from severe food insecurity3 Honduras is
experiencing biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation, which exacerbate
existing inequalities and create  vicious circle  Under-employment affects 48
per cent of the employed population, particularly women and youth Eighty-one per
cent of employed men and 77 per cent of employed women in Honduras lack social
security protection In rural areas and the poorest quintile, those figures
exceed 90 per cent The unemployment rate among women is almost double that of
men ( per cent versus  per cent) In rural areas, the female activity rate is
significantly lower than in urban areas (34 per cent versus 47 per cent) The
activity rate among women aged 25 or younger (34 per cent) is the lowest of all
age groups, and even lower for women with children under three years old
Regionally, Honduras is the country with the largest share of its labour force
excluded from social protection programmes  Despite significant progress,
Honduras presents one of the highest homicide rates globally (per 100,000 people
in 20205 compared to per 100,000 in 2012 and per 100,000 in 2016) The high
levels of violence against women6 and gender inequality are based in deep-rooted
cultural patterns In 2019, for every man who suffered  sex crime, there were
seven female victims of the same type of crime According to the National
Information Centre for the Social Sector, in 2019, the ratio of women to men for
domestic violence crimes was  to  Honduras reduced its homicide impunity rate
from 96 per cent in 2010 to 86 per cent in Nevertheless, impunity for femicides
reaches 90 per cent  Honduran society is fragmented and polarized, and distrust
towards national institutions and the democratic system abounds The justice
system faces serious challenges in addressing impunity and guaranteeing
universal access10 The credibility of electoral processes is questioned by some
sectors of the population, triggering social and political instability
Institutional capacities at the national and local levels are limited, and
transparency and accountability need strengthening11 Citizens face challenges to
the full enjoyment of their rights, especially groups confronted with exclusion
and discrimination, such as women, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities,
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex community, and
people with disabilities12  Honduras has been affected by the crises caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and tropical storms Eta and Iota The impact
at the socioeconomic level has exacerbated existing challenges, especially among
vulnerable and excluded populations,  UNDP, 2020  United Nations Office for
Disaster Risk Reduction, 2018  Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE), 2019
Regional human development report, 2021  Infosegura   femicides per 100,000 in
2019 (Violence Observatory)  Alianza por la Paz  la Justicia, 2019  Centro de
Derechos de Mujeres, 2020  Latinobarómetro 2018 10 Rule of Law Index score of 40
in World Justice Project 11 United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework for Honduras,  12 Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), 2020 /13 DP/DCP/HND/ and women in particular (increased
domestic violence and unemployment) The once-stable macroeconomic outlook has
been weakened There is an opportunity to rebuild by addressing the structural
vulnerabilities exposed by these crises  The strategic vision of the Government
is reflected in its Visión de País , the Plan de Nación , and the Plan
Estratégico de Gobierno 2018-In 2019, the government showcased its commitment to
sustainable development by adopting the Agenda Nacional para los Objetivos de
Desarrollo Sostenible  The comparative advantage of UNDP in Honduras rests on
its mandate, experience, and expertise in sensitive areas encompassing citizen
security, climate change, gender, poverty eradication, and democratic governance
(the rule of law, transparency, and accountability), where its credibility,
neutrality, independence, trust, convening power, and proximity to the
authorities are key These advantages enable UNDP to address complex
developmental challenges such as poverty reduction and social inequalities by
integrating solutions, improving knowledge management, implementing public
policies, strengthening the social protection system, supporting digital
transformation (the -government agenda) and fostering innovation (including
through new financial instruments and innovative partnerships) to strengthen
public administration The experience, presence, capacities and expertise of UNDP
in building resilience to crises and shocks contributed substantially to early
recovery and reconstruction efforts following the 2020 crises Those comparative
advantages are related to  robust in-situ operational capacity, multidimensional
approach, integrative role within the United Nations system, resource
mobilization capacities, and data generation and analysis UNDP is recognized for
its central role in advocacy and promoting an enabling environment for
development, particularly in pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals  The
independent country programme evaluation, 2020, underlines that UNDP is
“perceived as  credible provider of development services by both national and
international stakeholders”, “strongly positioned and involved in highly
strategic areas of development in Honduras”, “adapting its work to remain
relevant to the country evolving development context”, and highlights that “UNDP
mobilized  higher than expected amount of resources as  result of its good
positioning in key sectors of interest” During the concluding programme, UNDP
played  crucial role in supporting electoral processes It also supported the
National Registry of Persons to deliver  transparent, credible citizen’ database
and further digital transformation According to the evaluation, the national
human development report,  process fostered dialogue, deepened the analysis of
structural challenges and generated proposals for the future UNDP contributed to
the de-escalation of violence by facilitating inter-party dialogue and
supporting capacities related to citizen security To achieve the transformation
needed requires generating partnerships with the private sector, civil society
organizations, international donors and international financial institutions,
academia and others to build consensus and develop long-term strategic proposals
and road maps UNDP played an essential role in improving the legal and
institutional framework on environmental policy related to climate change and
the restoration, conservation, and sustainable use of natural ecosystems
According to the evaluation, UNDP has increased income and generated temporary
employment opportunities through social and economic inclusion and sustainable
management practices However, the evaluation considered UNDP contributions to
disaster risk management “limited” UNDP has developed South-South cooperation
with Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, and Uruguay in
democratic governance, citizen security, and climate change adaptation Areas for
improvement identified by the evaluation include mainstreaming gender and
expanding South-South cooperation initiatives Recommendations include
reinforcing /13 DP/DCP/HND/ engagement with non-state actors, adopting
-governance and -services solutions, and strengthening monitoring and evaluation
systems They also include developing  multidimensional comprehensive gender
strategy, covering different sectors and actions UNDP will contribute within the
wider integrative and collective approach of the United Nations system in
Honduras to achieve the Cooperation Framework results and the Sustainable
Development Goals UNDP will participate through inter-agency outcomes and
outputs in joint strategies, reinforced coordination mechanisms, and joint
approaches, sharing expertise and capacities in the field II Programme
priorities and partnerships The overall vision of UNDP, as stated in the
Cooperation Framework, is  sustainable and inclusive Honduras –  prosperous and
cohesive society with equality, resilience, justice, and peace, where human
rights are respected UNDP will support government efforts to achieve the Goals
based on the UNDP Strategic Plan and aligned with the strategic framework of the
Government The multidimensional solutions identified are aimed to generate
catalytic effect on the transformation of Honduras and pave the way for
structural reforms Solutions will be implemented through technical assistance,
provision of services, capacity-building, knowledge management, data generation
and analysis, partnership development, and support for intersectoral
coordination, advocacy, dialogue, and South-South cooperation The four outcomes
in this programme are interlinked and mutually reinforcing UNDP will lead risk-
informed recovery and reconstruction to promote long-term resilience for
sustained, gender-inclusive development It will address the root causes of
migration and harness migration dynamics UNDP will scale up successful results
by disseminating best practices and forging alliances The guiding principle will
be to leave no one behind, particularly women, with an intersectional approach
(prioritizing vulnerable groups such as youth, indigenous and Afrodescendent
communities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
community, and people with disabilities) promoting gender equality and women’
empowerment, human rights, resilience, sustainability, and accountability UNDP
will emphasize implementation at the local level, placing communities at the
centre of development UNDP will organize an annual event to discuss the progress
of the programme with government counterparts and other stakeholders The UNDP
programme contributes directly to the outcomes, outputs, and indicators of the
Cooperation Framework and adopts its theory of change The programme emanates
from the priorities of the country programme, , which were considered
appropriate by the independent country programme evaluation UNDP has  unique
value proposition within the United Nations system in these areas: building on
its experience, credibility and convening power under the rule of law; taking
advantage of its comparative advantage to address complex developmental
challenges and its experience in digital transformation for institutional
development; leveraging its experience and presence to build resilience and
sustainability; and using the lessons learned from ongoing programmes to
continue reducing violence UNDP will engage in geographically focused
coordination mechanisms at the local level, enabled by the Cooperation Framework
implementation strategy It has been informed by consultations with  wide range
of stakeholders, including through the national human development report and
Cooperation Framework processes Strengthening the rule of law The UNDP theory of
change is: if the justice system: () increases its efficiency and effectiveness
by improving access to justice, knowledge management, and interinstitutional
coordination, () strengthens the efficiency, transparency, and credibility of
the electoral process through capacity-building of electoral institutions, and
() promotes  values-based /13 DP/DCP/HND/ culture, transparency and
accountability, and public participation and dialogue, particularly to address
the underrepresentation of women in the public and political sphere; then, the
rule of law in Honduras will be strengthened, and institutions will better
respond to citizens’ needs in  fair and just environment, earning their trust
Strengthened trust will, in turn, improve the implementation of public policies
under the other outcomes UNDP will support improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of the justice system by strengthening capacities and coordination
between its institutions, particularly the Supreme Court, the Public Prosecutor’
Office, and the Ministry of Security UNDP will improve data analysis and
statistical capacities, and will adopt  people-centred approach to justice with
the participation of civil society  central area of intervention will be access
to justice through reform of the justice management model UNDP will support an
efficient, transparent, and credible electoral process and strengthen the
capacities of electoral institutions – namely, the National Electoral Council,
the Supreme Electoral Tribunal and the Clean Policy Unit – throughout the
electoral cycle UNDP will contribute to the implementation of electoral reforms
UNDP will promote transparency and accountability based on best practices in the
region, encouraging public participation and dialogue It will foster the
inclusion and full participation of women, youth, indigenous and Afrodescendent
communities, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
community, and people with disabilities in the political and public spheres at
local and national levels  strengthened rule of law will reduce violence and
conflict (outcome ) UNDP objectives are to: () expand alliances with political
parties, academia, civil society (Association for  Fairer Society, Caritas),
municipalities, and organizations representing these groups (such as
Cattrachas); () support initiatives and mechanisms related to transparency,
access to information, and the fight against corruption; () promote  values-
based culture with an emphasis on ethics, integrity, and transparency; and ()
support the implementation of policy proposals generated by the national Human
Development Report process and its initiatives, monitoring them through an
existing multi-actor committee Other organizations such as OHCHR and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will complement UNDP action in this area under
common framework provided by the joint work plans An efficient and effective
public administration The UNDP theory of change is: if public institutions, at
the national and local levels, improve knowledge management, planning, strategic
foresight, capacity for dialogue, digital to address complex developmental
challenges such as poverty eradication and inequality, fostering the involvement
of women, through public policies and strategies; then, the State will have
more efficient and effective people-centred administration transformation,
development finance, and capacity UNDP will support transforming public
institutions, at the national and local levels, into  modern, professional and
efficient administration to address complex challenges such as poverty and
inequality The Secretariat of General Coordination of the Government
(responsible for National Agenda 2030), the National Information Centre for the
Social Sector and the National Institute of Statistics will be the main
counterparts at the national level, while the Association of Municipalities of
Honduras will be the entry point for local interventions Building the lessons
learned through the independent country programme evaluation, UNDP will increase
its focus on medium-and long-term capacity development and support initiatives
to expand integrated social protection policies, harnessing the momentum created
by the COVID-19 crisis UNDP will strengthen social protection institutions with
capacity-building, improved instruments and improved regulatory frameworks, in
collaboration with OHCHR, the United Nations Children’ Fund, UNFPA and the World
Food Programme Leveraging the integrative and convening role of UNDP, the
National Agenda 2030 will be positioned as  shared strategic framework for /13
DP/DCP/HND/ development and poverty reduction UNDP will engage with the National
Congress to strengthen institutional capacities and will follow the relevant
legislative process UNDP will develop national and local capacities in knowledge
management and the generation, use and analysis of data and statistics to
identify socioeconomic inequalities, facilitate evidence-based decision-making,
and inform public policies and plans UNDP will leverage and disseminate
information created at the municipal level through the national human
development report Leveraging its international corporative resources, UNDP will
identify and support institutions and organizations in developing strategic
multisectoral and interdisciplinary foresight capacities to exploit emerging
opportunities against the backdrop of  globalized context of increasing
uncertainty UNDP will support development for sustainable development and fiscal
policies favouring progressive taxation, in partnership with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and other financial institutions financing mechanisms
innovative through finance Digitization and innovation will be mainstreamed
throughout the programme and used as  tool for knowledge management, expanding
access to public services and structural transformation In coordination with the
International Telecommunication Union, which provides the overall conceptual
framework and coordination to the digital cooperation agenda of the Cooperation
Framework, UNDP will continue reinforcing the digital and technological
capacities of the State, including support to the -government agenda UNDP will
partner with international financial institutions (Inter-American Development
Bank, Central American Bank for Economic Integration) to bridge the digital gap
and develop infrastructure for inequality-reducing digital transformation
sustainable and resilient development path The UNDP theory of change is: if
national counterparts () attain sustainable practices and incentives under
nature-based, risk-informed and gender-responsive approach by strengthening key
productive value chains and promoting sustainable and inclusive businesses; ()
support biodiversity policy and strategic frameworks, forest conservation
initiatives, and climate change governance; () develop environmental services
payment schemes; () advance towards the attainment of nationally determined
contributions; € develop climate change adaptation plans; () provide sustainable
livelihoods for the most vulnerable populations and involve women as critical
agents of development; () strengthen climate risk prevention and management
systems; and () support post-disaster recovery efforts; then, the sustainability
of the development path of Honduras will be enhanced, allowing citizens to enjoy
environmental, economic, and social rights; and the resilience of the population
will be strengthened UNDP will support the transition towards  sustainable and
inclusive economy based on sustainable practices UNDP envisages strengthening
value chains (such as coffee, cacao, livestock, palm oil, and basic grains) by
applying sustainable landscape approaches that promote biodiversity and
connectivity among protected areas and biological corridors, integrating
sustainable practices and standards and promoting sustainable production
certification schemes UNDP will focus on reducing pollution and improving waste
management Building resilience in the most vulnerable communities will be
supported through improving livelihoods, boosting the productive sector
sustainably, ensuring access to water, preventing pollution, facilitating market
access, and developing inclusive climate funding opportunities Environmentally
friendly economic activities, linked to the blue- and-green economy, will be
fostered Indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, often living in areas of
high ecological value, will be supported The outcome will contribute to
preventing conflict regarding access to natural resources Women will be
prioritized as beneficiaries in information- gathering UNDP will establish
partnerships with the private sector and strengthen sustainable and inclusive
businesses by supporting micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises,
entrepreneurs, and producers’ and women’ associations These enterprises will /13
DP/DCP/HND/ be supported in their digital transformation Forging alliances and
advocacy with key partners will help innovative legislative frameworks to
stimulate sustainable practices UNDP will support the efforts of municipalities
to improve risk-informed and gender- responsive planning and implementation
tools for adaptation to climate change Payment schemes for environmental
services will be supported and water resource management interventions
implemented The biodiversity policy and strategic framework will be supported,
including in coastal and marine areas UNDP will implement reforestation,
restoration, and forest conservation initiatives, such as strengthening
protected area management plans UNDP will support () the achievement of
nationally determined contributions through capacity-building of key actors,
such as national institutions, municipalities, and the private sector; ()
improvements in monitoring, reporting, and verification mechanisms for
greenhouse gas emissions; and () promotion of social inclusion and vulnerable
minorities in nationally determined contribution processes UNDP will support the
development and strengthening of legal and institutional frameworks for disaster
risk reduction and management and improve early warning systems based on  risk-
informed, gender-responsive approach The Permanent Committee on Contingencies
will be the main partner addressing climate risk prevention and management
Addressing comprehensive management of systemic and complex risks, post-crisis
preparedness, assessment, planning, and recovery implementation will be promoted
considering the effects of COVID-19, Eta and Iota, and other potential hazards,
such as hurricanes, other climate-related threats, environmental degradation,
biodiversity loss, and conflict Prevention and mitigation will be promoted at
the national and subnational levels to reduce vulnerability and encourage risk-
sensitive land use and planning mechanisms UNDP will work with the Food and
Agriculture Organization, the World Food Programme, and other United Nations
entities to develop joint actions and programmes Beyond the institutional
national and local counterparts, UNDP will foster alliances with international
financial institutions (the Inter-American Development Bank, the Central
American Bank for Economic Integration, and the European Investment Bank), and
the international community (including the European Union), through integrated
responses South-South cooperation with Colombia will allow the sharing of best
practices on coffee and cacao value chains Environmental programmes will
activate South-South cooperation with Guatemala around shared natural resources
such as the Montague River Violence and conflict The UNDP theory of change is:
if national counterparts prevent violence and conflict, address root causes
through an integrated and multidimensional approach, improve knowledge
management related to citizens’ security, enhance prevention approaches in
public policies, promote  culture of peace, enable spaces for dialogue at the
local level, and prioritize the groups most at risk; then, violence and conflict
will diminish in Honduras, and its population will enjoy  more peaceful society
Lessons learned from the current programme show that the high levels of violence
and conflict in the country should be addressed through prevention, and based on
holistic analysis of the determinants of violence UNDP will expand the capacity
of institutions to use citizen security information management for decision-
making, including inter- institutional coordination National security
institutions (such as the Ministry of Security and the Public Prosecutor’
Office), municipalities, civil society organizations, and the private sector
will be strengthened and public policies supported UNDP will enable spaces for
dialogue on violence and conflict, especially at the local level Efforts will
prioritize tackling gender-based violence UNDP will contribute to the medium- to
long-term change of social norms and behaviours by promoting  culture of peace,
changing social norms and /13 DP/DCP/HND/ behaviours inherent in  patriarchal
society13 UNDP will reinforce dialogue and civil society participation at the
local level around its citizen security interventions UNDP will address violence
through an integrated toolbox addressing root causes in areas such as the rule
of law, governance, poverty, and climate change Women, youth, indigenous,
Afrodescendent, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
communities will be prioritized South-South cooperation is envisaged with
Guatemala and El Salvador on issues such as violence prevention approaches and
municipal-level violence profiling UNDP will work with OHCHR on the human rights
angle; the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
intersection of violence and migration and mobility; and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women on violence against
women The Violence Observatory of the University Institute on Democracy, Peace,
and Security will be the main partner from academia Donors such as the United
States Agency for International Development and the Spanish Agency for
International Development Cooperation will engage with UNDP on citizen security
III Programme and risk management This country programme outlines UNDP
contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of managers at
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes
are prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and
Internal Control Framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure The Harmonized Approach
to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with other United Nations
entities to manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned
projects The risk management and mitigation strategy identified several risks
potentially affecting programme implementation The general elections scheduled
for November 2021 – if considered unfair by the population – could undermine the
gains obtained through support of the electoral process, triggering further
socio-political instability and conflict Mitigation measures include continuous
support to electoral institutions and  solid communication strategy The COVID-19
crisis exacerbated challenges, including poverty, inequalities, and social
exclusion  new crisis related to climate, health or other issues may arise,
pressuring the fiscal space to finance social and developmental policies and
adding further instability to existing vulnerabilities and layers of fragility
Such risks will be addressed by strengthening risk prevention and management
systems, implementing early warning systems, building resilience and reducing
the population’ vulnerability, and adopting  nexus between humanitarianism,
development, and peace High levels of violence, corruption, impunity, and
mistrust towards institutions could flare up, causing social and political
instability and hampering development efforts towards achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development Moreover, the limited implementation capacity of the
public administration could undermine the implementation of this programme To
mitigate those risks, UNDP will promote and support integrated and progressive
policy recommendations developed through the national human development report
process, strengthen the judiciary, promote the reduction of violence and
conflict, and develop medium- to long-term institutional capacities at national
and local levels, including digital transformation 13 The Spotlight Initiative
will be key to approaching social norms and promoting non-violent masculinity
/13 DP/DCP/HND/ UNDP will address potential social and environmental risks and
effects through its Social and Environmental Standards and Accountability
Mechanism When necessary,  project-level grievance redress mechanism will be
accessible to address stakeholder concerns through dialogue, joint fact-finding,
negotiation, and problem solving Potential risks related to gender inequality
and discrimination against women and girls will be addressed through the
implementation of the gender strategy UNDP will develop flexible approaches and
continuously assess the evolving context, jointly with the United Nations
system, to combat potential risks and changes Unforeseen events affecting
individual projects will be assessed by the management committee before approval
and will be tracked by the project implementation team UNDP maintains  business
continuity plan to assure essential functions in case of crisis To support
programme implementation, UNDP will develop  resource mobilization action plan
to diversify funding sources and innovative service-oriented management models
UNDP will regularly review and assess the efficiency and performance of this
programme including with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation The programme integrates Cooperation Framework governance and
implementation structures, including results groups, where the United Nations
system ensures accountability and inter-agency coordination The National
Steering Committee will provide guidance, oversight, and monitoring of
Cooperation Framework implementation implementation, IV Monitoring and
evaluation UNDP will strengthen institutional capacities in knowledge management
– particularly the National Institute of Statistics and the Secretariat of
General Coordination of the Government – at the national and local levels,
supporting the generation, dissemination, and use of reliable, transparent, and
disaggregated data UNDP will continue monitoring the 2030 National Agenda,
supporting the National Voluntary Reviews and performing analyses and
evaluations to identify gaps in measuring goals and achievement UNDP will use
innovative mechanisms, tools, and approaches to support national monitoring and
evaluation capabilities jointly with other United Nations entities The
monitoring and evaluation system will follow the progress of this programme
towards the intended transformative changes and national priorities, including
the gender marker, informed by gender analysis UNDP will disaggregate data
according to relevant criteria such as gender, exclusion or vulnerability
factors, age and territory Indicators, which rely primarily on country-level
data, are captured from the Cooperation Framework and the UNDP Strategic Plan
Data collection will be captured through an annual report and shared with
stakeholders Potential data gaps will be addressed jointly with other United
Nations partners through alternative sources and capacity-building Monitoring
and evaluations will inform decision-making, promote learning among
stakeholders, and ensure the accountability of UNDP activity in Honduras and its
contribution to development results UNDP integrates the United Nations Inter-
agency Monitoring and Evaluation Group, which monitors the Cooperation Framework
and the progress of Honduras towards achieving the 2030 Agenda /13 DP/DCP/HND/
Annex Results and resources framework for Honduras () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:
Visión de País, goal  Plan Estratégico de Gobierno (PEG), sectors ,  Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) , 16, 17 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME  The Honduran
State implements policies, strategies and programmes that strengthen the rule of
law, transparency, accountability, fight against corruption and impunity, with
greater participation of civil society and the private sector RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Structural transformation Data source and frequency of
data collection, and responsibilities Estimated cost by outcome ($ thousands)
Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(), baselines, targets() Indicative
country programme outputs Major partners/Partnerships frameworks  Percentage of
trust towards institutions (electoral institutions and judiciary) Baseline
(2018):18%, 25% Target: 24%, 30% Latinobarómetro, annual Regular $730 Public
Prosecutor’ Office Supreme Court Ministry of Security National Electoral Council
(CNE) Supreme Electoral Tribunal Clean Policy Unit Human Rights Ministry (SEDH)
Ministry of Transparency Institute Public Information Access National
Commissioner for Human Rights National Penitentiary Institute Municipalities
Civil society organizations (CSOs) Private sector Political parties Indigenous
communities Women, youth and disabled organizations Academia United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) European Union Canada  Justice
system strengthened its capacities to improve management efficiency and
efficacy, with an emphasis on access to justice and citizen participation
Number of justice system institutions supported at the technical level to
improve efficiency, efficacy and citizens’ access to services Baseline:  Target:
Source: projects, annual Other $32,000  Democracy Index score Baseline (2020):36
Target: 64 Economist Intelligence Unit, annual  Rule of Law Index score Baseline
(2020):40 Target: 43 World Justice Project (WJP), annual  Score in the “Criminal
Justice factor” under the Rule of Law Index Baseline (2019): 26 Target: 30
Source: WJP, annual  Proportion of seats held by women in the national
parliament and local governments (Integrated Results and Resources Framework –
IRRF outcome) Parliament/local governments: Baseline (2019): %, % Target: 40%,
55% National Agenda 2030, annual  Strengthened democratic system in Honduras, at
the national and local level, with particular attention to transparency and
social accountability and promoting gender equality and  values-based culture
Number of public institutions, civil society organizations, and private sector
organizations that reinforced their capacities to promote citizen participation,
transparency and accountability, and the promotion and dissemination of gender
equality and  values- based culture Baseline:  Target: 15 Source: UNDP, annual
Extent to which the CNE has strengthened its capacity to conduct inclusive and
credible elections (IRRF-) Baseline (2021): limited capacity Target:
Significantly improved capacity Source: CNE, UNDP, annual 10 DP/DCP/HND/
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL Visión de País, goal PEG sector  SDGs , , , , , , 10,
16, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME  The State is established as an effective and
efficient public administration, adapted to the needs of the population,
applying  territorial approach, with  gender and human rights focus RELATED
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Leaving no one behind  Public institutions
quality index Baseline (2018): 20 Target: 50 National Agenda 2030, annual
Strengthened institutional capacities at national and local levels in knowledge
management, planning, and development foresight (with  multinational and rights
approach), and promoting innovation and digital transformation Regular $,000
Secretariat of General Coordination of the Government (SCGG) Economic
Development Secretariat SEDH Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion
(SEDIS) Ministry of Labour and Social Security Social Sector National
Information Centre (CENISS) Dirección Gobierno Digital, National Institute of
Statistics (INE) National Youth Institute (INJ) National Women’ Institute (INAM)
Permanent Contingency Commission (COPECO) Association of Municipalities (AMHON)
Municipalities Private sector Women, producers and indigenous organizations CSOs
Academia International financial institutions (IFIs: IMF, World Bank, Inter-
American Development Bank, Central American Bank for Economic Integration –
CABEI) USAID European Union  Percentage of compliance with legal frameworks for
promoting and monitoring equality and non- discrimination on the basis of gender
Baseline (2015): 80% Target: 90% Other $102,000  Number of instruments or tools
developed and disseminated about knowledge management, planning, and development
foresight Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP, annual  Multidimensional Poverty
Index Baseline (2018):281 Target: 264 SCGG  Score in the -government ranking
Baseline (2020): 4486 Target: 5156 Source: United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, annual Ministry of Finance, annual  Percentage of total
government spending on social protection Baseline: % Target: %  Strengthened
institutional capacities at national and local levels for the development and
implementation of integrated public policies addressing poverty reduction,
inequalities, social protection and care in the framework of the 2030 Agenda
Number of institutions (at national and local levels), with strengthened
capacities to develop and implement integrated public policies addressing
poverty reduction, inequalities, social protection or care Baseline:  Target:
Source: UNDP, annual  Existence of development plans and budgets that integrate
the 2030 Agenda across the institutions (IRRF ) Baseline: Partial Target: Full
Source: National Agenda 2030, SCGG, UNDP assessment 11 DP/DCP/HND/ NATIONAL
PRIORITY OR GOAL: Visión de País, goals ,  PEG sectors ,  SDGs , , , , , , 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME  The Honduran State
implements policies, strategies and programmes that strengthen the
sustainability and resilience of its development RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Outcome  Building resilience Regular $247 Ministry of Energy Ministry of
Environment Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock SEDIS Forest Conservation
Institute (ICF) COPECO Honduran Coffee Institute Presidential Office for Climate
Change Green Climate Fund AMHON Municipalities Private sector Commercial banks
Community organizations Women, producers and indigenous organizations CSOs, NGOs
Academia IFIs (CABEI, European Investment Bank) European Union USAID  Percentage
of the fulfilment of reports requested by each ratified international agreement
concerning the rational environmental management of products containing
chemicals Baseline (2021): 60 Target: 75 National Agenda 2030, annual  The
Honduran population, the public administration, and the private sector have
strengthened capacities to promote  sustainable economy and resilience to
climate change, providing sustainable livelihoods to groups in situations of
vulnerability, women, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities Other $10,500
Number of initiatives launched for the promotion of  sustainable economy, with
gender focus Baseline:  Target:  Source: UNDP, annual COPECO/INE, annual  Number
of municipalities classified as “high” or “very high” risk in the municipal risk
system (INFORM) Baseline (2020): 161 Target: 150  Number of people whose
capacities have been strengthened through climate adaptation initiatives with
UNDP support (by gender, indigenous and Afrodescendent communities, and youth)
Baseline:  Target: 24,000 (women: 13,000, indigenous: ,200, youth: ,200),
Source: UNDP, annual  The Honduran population, public institutions and private
sector benefit from sustainable practices and strengthened governance mechanisms
for the conservation and sustainability of biodiversity and the optimization of
ecosystem assets and services  Number of organizations benefiting from
sustainable practices and governance mechanisms supported for the conservation
and sustainability of biodiversity and the optimization of ecosystem assets and
services Baseline:  Target:  ( woman-led) Source: UNDP, annual  Hectares of
protected area under improved management (IRRF ) Baseline:100,000 Target:
200,000 Source: ICF, annual  Metric tons of chemicals reduced or disposed of
(IRRF ) Baseline: 111 Mt Target: 171 Mt Source: MiAmbiente+, annual 12
DP/DCP/HND/  Climate disaster risk integrated systems and governance
strengthened to reduce risks and vulnerabilities, improve early warning systems
and allow early recovery from crises and post- disaster  Number of people with
strengthened capacities on disaster preparedness and response (by gender)
Baseline:  Target: ,000, (800 men and ,200 women) Source: UNDP, annual  Extent
to which data-informed development and investment plans incorporate integrated
solutions to reduce disaster risks and enable climate change adaptation and
mitigation Baseline: Partial Target: Full Source: COPECO, MiAmbiente+, UNDP,
annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Visión de País, goal  PEG sector  SDGs , 10,
16, COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME  The State and population reduce the violence
and conflict that affects them, with particular attention to violence against
women and youth RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  Building resilience
Percentage of women aged  years who experienced violence from an intimate
partner (IRRF outcome ) Baseline (2018): 39% Target: 15% National Agenda 2030,
annual  Public policies, institutions, civil society, and private sector
strengthened in knowledge management, prevention of violence, and promotion of
culture of peace, particularly groups in vulnerable situations, such as women
Ministry of Security SCGG National Information Centre for the Social Sector
Ministry of Education Public Prosecutor’ Office SEDH, INJ, INAM, Supreme Court
Instituto Nacional para la Atención  Menores Infractores, INE Municipalities,
community organizations, CSOs, women, youth, indigenous and disabled
organizations, academia USAID Spanish Agency for International Development
Cooperation Regular $250 Other $,800  Number of organizations with strengthened
capacities in prevention of violence and promotion of  culture of peace
Baseline:  Target: 16 Source: UNDP, annual  Homicide rate per 100,000 population
(IRRF ) by gender Baseline (2019): 36 (91% men, % women) Target: 59, (91% men, %
women) private sector, Violence Observatory, annual  Extent to which the
frameworks in place to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence
are efficient (IRRF ) Baseline: Low Target: Medium Source: INAM, University
Institute on Democracy, Peace, and Security, SCGG, UNDP, annual  Femicide rate
per 100,000 population Baseline (2019):  Target:  13