Table of Contents:  Programme rationale: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management:
Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………………………………: Page:
DP/DCP/GNQ/  Programme rationale  Equatorial Guinea is an upper-middle-income
country with  per-capita gross national income of approximately $10,890 in 2015,
which declined by  per cent due to the oil price shock of The country graduated
from the least developed countries group in 2017, based on the income-only
criterion The country ranks 135th out of 188 countries in the Human Development
Index, with an indicator of 592, which is below the average (631) for countries
in the medium human development range While poverty rates decreased from per
cent in 2006 to per cent in 2011, rural-urban inequalities remain high, with the
two major cities offering the mainstay for most Equato-Guineans The population
and housing census, 2015, indicates that per cent of the ,225,337 people live in
the mainland and per cent reside in the insular region Seventy per cent live in
urban areas and 30 per cent in rural areas Youth (below age 25) represent 60 per
cent of the population; in the  age group, per cent are unemployed The rate is
higher for women (per cent) than men (per cent) The labour force survey, 2015,
estimates that there are 20,000 entrants into the labour market each year,
presenting risks of increased levels of vulnerability and inequality unless
skills gaps are addressed and decent jobs created  Equatorial Guinea ranks 173rd
out of 190 countries in the Doing Business Index, and its business environment
is dominated by  few large companies, primarily in the oil sector, with limited
in-country value addition and employment generation, and weak linkages to
emerging small and medium enterprises Oil and gas account for more than 85 per
cent of the gross domestic product, more than 85 per cent of fiscal revenues,
and more than 94 per cent of exports Equatorial Guinea is the third-largest
crude oil producer in sub-Saharan Africa, and oil revenues have allowed the
country to make significant investments in infrastructure, particularly in
roads, ports and airports, public buildings, and housing However, its status as
an upper-middle-income country reflects the paradox of having the highest per
capita gross national income in sub-Saharan Africa7 and at the same time, high
levels of poverty (per cent) Women represent two-thirds of those earning less
than two dollars per day  Government efforts to modernize the administration
have been remarkable in recent years However, persistent weakenesses at central
and local levels contribute to deficits in governance, including limited access
to public services, weak planning systems, lack of budget discipline and weak
contract and law enforcement mechanisms The Ibrahim Index of African Governance,
2016, ranked Equatorial Guinea 46th out of 54 countries in Africa, with  score
of (out of 100) in overall governance, primarily due to declining scores in
safety, rule of law, participation, and human rights In 2016, the Transparency
International Corruption Perception Index ranked the country 136th out of 175
countries, with  rating of 19 out of The country is  signatory to many regional
and international human rights conventions and treaties, but falls short in
national-level ratification, implementation and monitoring In the Universal
Periodic Review, the country has yet to address the 200 recommendations made in
2014 and during 2016 midterm reporting10  Gender inequality remains  challenge,
despite government efforts11 Only two of the 25 newly appointed cabinet
ministers are women; only three of the 28 vice-ministers are  International
Monetary Fund (IMF) country report No 16, November National MDG report,
Integrated labour force survey, 2015; National Statistics Institute, 2016
UNDP/African Development Bank (AfDB) African Economic Outlook; IMF, World Bank;
Government of Equatorial Guinea  National Plan for Economic and Social
Development evaluation reports, African Economic Outlook 2016  Per capita gross
national income declined from $25,000 in 2000 to $10,890 in National Statistics
Institute, 2016  National MDG report, African Development Bank, 2013 10  11
Decree 16, February 2018  DP/DCP/GNQ/ women Although women head both the senate
and the parliament, women’ representation in the legislative branch is low (14
per cent, and 27 per cent in both upper and lower houses) High rates of sexual
and gender-based violence are recorded, with 63 per cent of 15-year-old girls
experiencing physical violence and 32 per cent of women reporting having been
victims of sexual violence HIV prevalence rates in the  age group are  per cent,
the highest in the sub region; and women carry the heaviest burden, with  per
cent, compared to  per cent for men Prevalence rates are higher on the mainland,
at  per cent, against  per cent in the insular region On the mainland, 10 per
cent of women are HIV positive, against  per cent of men The most recent
comprehensive national data sources are the demographic health survey, 2011, and
the general population census, Weaknesses in evidence-based policy formulation
and service delivery are due to outdated and lack of disaggregated data  For
small country, 90 per cent of whose surface is water, Equatorial Guinea has
unique concentration of biodiversity, terrestrial and marine ecosystems that
provide  safety net of resources and ecosystem services to local communities
However, the country faces risks associated with climate change, loss and
degradation of forests and ecosystems, and endangered fauna Weak monitoring and
law enforcement, and unsustainable logging operations, contribute to the
depletion of the forest cover, while hunting, poaching, and damage to farm-based
livelihoods near protected areas threaten species such as elephants, primates,
and turtles with extinction Notwithstanding investments in institutional
capacity for conservation, only  small number of protected areas are operational
and effective, and the environmental heritage remains vulnerable due to weak
concession practice, exploitation, poor planning, limited surveillance and law
enforcement Mainstreaming biodiversity, climate change, and resilience-building
into national and sectoral plans and practices is in its infancy, requiring more
investment in capacity support, implementation and strengthening of governance
systems The new country programme builds on the past cooperation and leverages
the global partnership that UNDP enjoys with the Global Environment Facility
(GEF), the Green Climate Fund, and related international funds and mechanisms,
including South-South and triangular cooperation  The programme builds on the
final evaluation and evidence of the previous country programme, highlighting
UNDP comparative advantages : () partnership and policy support in the context
of the Millennium Development Goals: UNDP (and the United Nations system) will
continue to play  role in upstream policy support towards integrating the
Sustainable Development Goals into national policies and strategies beyond the
National Plan for Economic and Social Development, 2020; () sustainable
environment projects: UNDP will scale up its cooperation with the GEF and
include the Green Climate Fund and other mechanisms in supporting sustainable
environmental management; () statistical capacity development, including
production and analysis of data, undertaking socio-economic surveys: UNDP has
forged  strong partnership with the National Statistics Institute, and, with the
United Nations system, continues to focus on building national capacities to
produce Sustainable Development Goals-related statistics; () central and local
administration institutional capacity strengthening: UNDP will build on its
access and ability to work with key ministries in development planning, trade,
and commerce, labour and social security, local administration, social affairs,
and gender equality; () awareness-raising on human rights, gender and women’
empowerment, and improving transparency and accountability: with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNDP will
continue to support the universal periodic review process; () expand information
and communications technology for development: UNDP will work with the
International Labour Organization (ILO) and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), building on the knowledge of
information and communications technology centres adapted to skills training,
primarily for youth and women; and () support to the national HIV/AIDS response:
UNDP is  partner of choice to the Government (and the United Nations system)
UNDP will continue to play  role in procurement and capacity- building to combat
HIV/AIDS  DP/DCP/GNQ/  The Assessment of Development Results, 2017, concluded
that UNDP presence in Equatorial Guinea is justified given its human development
indicator, which reflects the need to tackle poverty, inequality, and
institutional weakness However, its upper-middle-income country status, resource
constraints, limited official development assistance (ODA), and the absence of
donor and other funding sources, render the UNDP programme and operations less
flexible12 Despite its diminishing share in United Nations Development
Assistance funding, the United Nations system remains the most important
development partner in the country13 The new programme focuses on key strategic
interventions, balancing coverage between the insular part of the country and
the mainland and broadening partnerships beyond government to include non-state
actors and greater participation of civil society organizations  The journey
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals contains complex,
interrelated challenges requiring integrated responses from government and civil
society The National Plan for Economic and Social Development offers  solid
foundation for the country’ development path It seeks to leverage high-quality
investments in infrastructure necessary for structural transformation, and fast-
track economic diversification, progress on human development and achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals Significant progress was made towards the
Millennium Development Goals, but the integrated nature of the Sustainable
Development Goals will require greater coordination between government, the
private sector, civil society organizations, and development partners The newly
established National Statistics Institute will play  central role in rolling out
the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, providing data and
evidence for policymaking This will require institutional capacity support to
fill the data gap, and  focus on mainstreaming and implementing international
commitments in the upcoming National Plan  Continued efforts are needed to
achieve national goals of economic diversification, governance, human capital,
and quality of life, while ensuring environmental sustainability The theory of
change calls for strategic focus on accelerating structural transformation for
sustainable development and eradicating poverty in all its dimensions Under the
new programme, UNDP interventions will: () provide national institutions with
the capacities to develop evidenced-based, integrated policies that promote
sustainable development and the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals, while addressing inequalities, with an emphasis on the most vulnerable;
() target skills development and promotion of opportunities for decent jobs and
self-employment, particularly for women and youth, and pursue the promotion of
human rights, including gender equality and women’ empowerment; () address the
challenges of climate change, biodiversity and sustainable management of
protected areas, build resilience, and protect the environment and livelihoods
of local communities Only by adopting  holistic approach can UNDP contribute to
inclusive sustainable development and strengthen effective, accountable
governance II Programme priorities and partnerships Based on the lessons from
the previous programme,14 and consistent with its Strategic Plan, UNDP will
employ  two-pillar approach focusing on inclusive sustainable development, and
strengthening governance and accountability The strategic objectives are
contributing to structural transformation, poverty eradication, effective
governance, gender equality, and sustainable environment Within the national
development setting, UNDP will respond to government priorities with the
following signature solutions: () keeping people out of poverty; ()
strengthening effective, inclusive and accountable governance; and () promoting
nature-based solutions for  sustainable planet UNDP is well positioned to 12
Equatorial Guinea receives about 01% of ODA (MDG report, 2015) 13 Equatorial
Guinea finances about 70% of the current United Nations Development Assistance
Framework () 14 Final evaluation of the country programme, , Assessment of
Development Results, 2017, for Equatorial Guinea, under ‘Programme rationale’
DP/DCP/GNQ/ deliver programmatic support for national development priorities and
institutional-level capacity development, mobilize technical expertise and
financial resources, using the national implementation modality Its partnership
with government and ability to dialogue with national authorities at all levels
will be expanded to include civil society and community- based organizations
Investments will strengthen the capacities of national actors, systems, and
institutions through targeted policy interventions The programme focuses on
eight results-based, gender-sensitive interventions in an upstream portfolio
approach, as opposed to over 17 wide-ranging outcomes in the previous
programme15 UNDP will leverage its role and global know-how as an integrator
across policy, programmatic and organizational silos and will assist the
Government in convening across line ministries and development partners,
supporting development coordination mechanisms, formulating national development
policies and strategies, and aligning them with the Sustainable Development
Goals Potential partners include resident and non-resident United Nations
agencies, funds, and programmes, AfDB, the World Bank, the French Development
Agency and the United States of America UNDP will continue to act as service
provider to the Government and the United Nations system, playing  central role
in partnerships and resource mobilization for United Nations operations across
the country16 UNDP will work with government ministries (finance, economy and
planning, commerce, industry and energy, social affairs and gender equality,
agriculture, forestry and environment, labour and social security, fisheries and
water resources, health and social wellbeing, interior and local governments,
ombudsman, and the parliament) to ensure coordination, effective policy advice,
and efficient service delivery Pillar  Inclusive and sustainable development
UNDP will support the Government in delivering integrated policy solutions and
services that promote economic diversification and accelerate inclusive growth,
decent employment, and gender and income equality The programme will support
economic diversification, productive capacity-building, and the development of
trade and industrial policies, as part of implementation of the Enhanced
Integrated Framework;17 and promote investments in technology and innovation,
particularly in labour-intensive sectors, to create decent jobs and improve
livelihoods for the most vulnerable people, especially youth and women Given the
geographic location of the country and its vast abundance of water resources,
interventions promoting ‘green’ jobs and  ‘blue’ economy will be emphasized To
deliver integrated policy solutions, UNDP will continue supporting the
Government in mainstreaming the Sustainable Development Goals in the national
planning and policy framework, promoting greater coordination across the
Government and other stakeholders to increase policy coherence and the capacity
of the national statistical system for data collection, analysis, and reporting
on the Goals In partnership with ILO, UNESCO, the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), UNFPA, the private sector and potential donors, UNDP will
support the economic empowerment of youth, promoting education and access to
decent employment Investments will support skills development, particularly for
young women, through national scholarship schemes and technical vocational and
educational training, to close the skills gap  job intermediation system will
address information asymmetries in the labour market and promote access to
employment for women and youth The programme will use data from the National
Statistics Institute to develop targeted strategies for each group – women’ 15
Assessment of Development Results, 16 The past United Nations Development
Assistance Framework and the country programme, , were 70 per cent co- funded by
the Government 17   DP/DCP/GNQ/ economic empowerment measures, and youth market-
based training schemes, for example Tailored capacity support to small and
medium-sized enterprises, including access to finance, technology, and
innovation, will promote self-employment and entrepreneurship and expand
employment opportunities for women and youth The promotion of inclusive business
will help small and medium-sized enterprises access larger value chains,
generate employment, and acquire new technologies Upstream policy support, in
collaboration with ILO, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
the United States of America, and the World Bank, will strengthen government
capacity to engage in trade and regional integration issues, widening economic
opportunities for youth and women Revisions of legal and regulatory frameworks
will be required to promote inclusive growth, providing small and medium-sized
enterprises with access to finance and improving the business environment UNDP
will collaborate with ILO, the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), and other
United Nations organizations, to develop and roll out the national social
protection system to address exclusion, build resilience to crises, while
expanding people’ opportunities The social protection system will provide cash
transfers and support services for the full life-cycle of the most vulnerable
people18 The social protection strategy will inform the scope of the social
protection scheme and the establishment of  governance framework that ensures
coordination across ministries In the fight against HIV/AIDS, the programme will
use UNDP networks and capacities, including the Global Fund mechanism, to
deliver high-quality support to government, together with UNAIDS, to: () ensure
that people living with HIV receive treatment through its reliable procurement
systems; () remove punitive laws, policies, practices, stigma and discrimination
that block effective responses to AIDS; () meet the HIV needs of women and girls
and stop sexual and gender- based violence; and () promote awareness campaigns
on the pandemic19 Leveraging its long-standing role as an implementing agency
for GEF, the programme will: () invest in strengthening institutional capacity
for the governance of biodiversity and the national protected areas system,
including developing and implementing plans for biodiversity conservation and
sustainable natural resources management; () promote integration of biodiversity
concerns into national, subnational, and sector development policies and plans;
() promote sustainable management of forest areas outside protected areas, with
focus on logging concessions; and () working with key ministries, invest in
identifying and implementing sustainable financing strategies for biodiversity
and ecosystems conservation This will include leveraging partnerships with GEF,
the Green Climate Fund, and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Degradation (REDD) plus; Drexel University, Bioko Biodiversity Protection
Programme, the United States, and the French Development Agency; as well as
engaging the private sector in environmental sustainability initiatives The few
(large) corporations in the hydrocarbon sector offer an opportunity to the
programme through their corporate social responsibility plans UNDP is working
with Noble Energy, Marathon Oil, and the Ministry of Mines and Industry to scale
up this work UNDP will continue to engage local communities, particularly women
and youth, in biodiversity conservation and sustainable management of natural
resources, building resilience to environmental degradation and climate change
Support will include climate change adaption and mitigation measures and
promotion of renewable energies UNDP investments will contribute to
sensitization, education and awareness raising, targeting 18 UNDP supporting the
National Statistics Institute in collaboration with the World Bank and UNICEF to
produce the multidimensional poverty index 19 The Government fully finances
national efforts against HIV/AIDS, and UNDP is its partner of choice in anti-
retroviral procurement  DP/DCP/GNQ/ communities and government authorities; and
strengthen the capacity of communities to develop and implement plans and adopt
sustainable practices for the use of natural resources, ecotourism, income
generation, and biodiversity conservation activities The approach will combine
employment and livelihoods strategies in line with the national employment
policy, and community development strategies outlined in the National Plan for
Economic and Social Development The programme will scale up biodiversity
conservation investments based on community livelihood priorities and will
strengthen the resilience of local communities to environmental degradation and
climate change Partnerships will be developed with the National Institute for
Forestry Conservation and the National Institute for Environmental Coordination,
the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Equatorial Guinea, the
National University of Equatorial Guinea, national non-governmental
organizations, the Network of Women of Central Africa, the Biodiversity
Protection Programme, GEF, the Green Climate Fund, and the Central African
Forestry Commission To ensure environmental sustainability and national
ownership, and scale up those efforts by promoting greater community
involvement, UNDP will leverage its experience with environmental finance from
vertical funds, such as GEF, to support efforts to eradicate poverty, reduce
inequality and promote sustainable development This pillar will contribute to
keeping people out of poverty (Sustainable Development Goal ); good health and
well- being for all (Goal ), gender equality (Goal ); promoting decent work and
economic growth (Goal ); making cities and human settlements safe, resilient and
sustainable (Goal 11); and protecting and promoting sustainable use of
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably managing forests, and halting biodiversity
loss (Goal 15) Pillar  Strengthen effective, accountable, and inclusive
governance Aligned to national priorities, the programme will contribute to the
following transformational changes: () increased capacity of state institutions
to formulate, implement and monitor policies and laws on human rights, rule of
law, local development and inclusive growth; () regulatory frameworks at
national and local levels to deliver high-quality public services; and ()
effective gender equality UNDP will invest in building responsive, accountable
institutions to deliver equitable public services at the central and local
levels to nurture public trust and confidence Support will include technical
advisory services and building the capacities of civil society organizations,
women’ groups and youth associations, working with government, the private
sector and local communities to develop tools and best practices while building
and transferring skills and capacities among actors Capacity to mainstream
gender into the national, sectoral and subnational plans and budgets and their
implementation will be developed to ensure that the strategic needs of
vulnerable youth and women are taken into consideration The programme will
contribute to strengthening national systems and regulatory frameworks to
promote and protect human rights, increase civic engagement, and improve the
accountability and transparency of public institutions It will support: ()
capacity- building of national stakeholders to implement and monitor
international human rights commitments and other treaty reporting obligations,
and support the empowerment of civil society in human rights advocacy,
specialized national institutions, and grassroots initiatives, promoting the
rights of women and the most vulnerable; () strengthening civil society capacity
to engage in policy dialogue and advocacy to ensure effective citizen voice and
calls for accountability over the use of public resources at national and local
government levels; and () supporting the decentralization policy through
capacity-building of local authorities and administration to accomplish their
mandate and role in providing inclusive community services These interventions
will contribute to ending poverty in all its forms, everywhere (Sustainable
Development Goal ); furthering gender equality (Goal ); reducing inequalities
(Goal 10); and promoting peace, justice and strong institutions (Goal 16)
DP/DCP/GNQ/ The programme will enhance the institutional capacity of parliament
and the executive branch to increase women’ political participation, including
the appointment of women to decision-making and high-level positions within the
administration, with the support of the UNDP Gender in Public Administration
initiative Efforts will be made in engendering the national budget to ensure
that public investments are gender-responsive and benefit men and women equally
The UNDP Gender and Economic Policy Management initiative will enhance the
parliamentary and judiciary systems through institutional capacity-building to
accelerate the ratification, enforcement and dissemination of the national
legislation, which is harmonized with international gender-sensitive laws,
complying with international human rights law and the constitution UNDP will
mobilize the private sector, civil society and non-governmental organizations,
the Government, bilateral partners and multilateral organizations, through its
global network, including its specialized and regional bureaus and South-South
partnerships, to improve accountability and transparency by strengthening the
justice system and expanding knowledge concerning protection of human rights
UNDP will focus collaboration with OHCHR and other partners on advocacy for
compliance with international human rights conventions and greater gender
equality, and with UN-Women and other organizations on initiatives to reduce
gender-based violence and foster  robust, professional, and sustainable media
sector III Programme and risk management The country programme document is the
primary basis of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned at the country level Accountability of managers at the
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to execution of country
programmes are prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies and
procedures and the internal control framework National implementation, with
operational support from UNDP, is the preferred modality Direct implementation
will be used on an ad hoc basis, in agreement with the Government The Harmonized
Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with other United
Nations organizations to improve efficiency and manage financial risks Direct
project costs will be implemented in accordance with Executive Board decision
2013/ Building on experience with the previous programme, UNDP has identified
resource mobilization measures to diversify sources of financing that will
complement and reinforce the use of ex ante strategies (risk-reduction and risk-
mitigation) These include monitoring the foreign exchange risks linked to
government cost-sharing contributions in local currency In support of the
differentiated physical presence modality, the host Government will expand its
financial support to the base structure of the office with an increase in
government contributions towards local office costs The size of the UNDP
presence will be directly tied to government support levels for both local
office costs and government cost-sharing With limited bilateral and multilateral
partners, mobilizing resources beyond government cost-sharing will be critical
for programme sustainability This calls for  broader, more creative approach to
partnerships and support to the Government to harness available and innovative
financing options, including climate financing and working with the private
sector UNDP will scale up existing partnerships based on the strength of results
and links built with the Government and development partners This includes
expanding the funding pipeline through collaborative agreements with partners
and government Long- standing coordination mechanisms with the United Nations
country team and other partners will be strengthened to achieve synergies on
collective climate change programmes Under the leadership of the Resident
Coordinator, and within the framework of the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework steering committee, UNDP will continue its central role in
partnership building and resource mobilization in support of joint United
Nations system programmes Ongoing partnerships will be strengthened,
particularly in areas supporting the  DP/DCP/GNQ/ transition to  ‘green-and-
blue’ economy, with significant potential to be pursued for South- South and
triangular cooperation IV Monitoring and evaluation To promote national
ownership and establish synergies for reporting results, performance indicators
have been derived from the monitoring and evaluation frameworks of the National
Plan for Economic and Social Development, the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, the Strategic Plan (integrated results and resources
framework) and Sustainable Development Goals indicators, with special attention
to gender and women’ empowerment to gender and women’ empowerment will be
tracked using the UNDP gender marker UNDP will support the development of
national capacities, including implementing partners and other stakeholders, in
data collection, management, analysis, dissemination and utilization, to improve
planning and monitoring and evaluation for decision-making towards the
Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will support the development of
accountability mechanisms in the public sector and civil society organizations
to help them become flexible change agents, responsive to community needs issues
Country programme contributions UNDP will support the National Statistics
Institute in ensuring availability of timely and reliable disaggregated data
High-level consultations and dialogue will be organized at least once  year to
review programme effectiveness and efficiency At the project level, programme
monitoring will be undertaken on  quarterly basis, and at country programme
outcome levels, at least once annually UNDP will develop  monitoring and
evaluation framework that draws to the extent possible on the National Plan for
Economic and Social Development and its sectoral plans and strategies, using
national information and statistics To ensure effective implementation of the
monitoring and evaluation plan, at least  per cent of the country programme
budget will be allocated to these activities This will enable UNDP to set up and
manage  cost-shared monitoring and evaluation function, supporting the baseline,
monitoring and evaluations, including impact evaluation of all results
DP/DCP/GNQ/ Annex Results and resources framework for Equatorial Guinea ()
National priority or goal: Strengthen human capital and improve the quality of
life United Nations Development Assistance Framework – UNDAF (or equivalent)
outcome involving UNDP Outcome  By 2023, young people, women and persons with
disabilities have better and equitable access to decent employment opportunities
Related Strategic Plan outcome:  Advance poverty eradication in all its forms
and dimensions Indicative country programme outputs (indicators, baselines,
targets) Major partners/ partnerships frameworks UNDAF outcome indicators (Ind),
baselines, target() Data source, frequency of data collection, and
responsibilities Indicative resources by outcome (in $ thousands)  MLPESS
reports, World Bank data reports, ILO reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
MLPESS Ind Rate of agricultural employment Baseline: (2016):% Target: 36 %
Output Ministry of Finance, Economy and Planning and other central government
ministries have the capacity to develop and implement evidence-based policies
promoting inclusive, diversified and sustainable economic development Ministry
of Finance, the Economy and Planning (MFEP) Regular: 258 Other: 28,950 Ministry
of Labour, Promotion of Employment and Social Security (MLPESS) Ind: Rate of
industrial employment Baseline () (2016):% Target (): 36 % Ind Number of
policies, plans, strategies and programmes that promote inclusive and
sustainable economic development implemented  (2017) :    Data source (DS): MFEP
reports; MCPSME, MINDE, United Nations reports Frequency: Annual Ministry of
Education, University Teaching and Sports (MEUTS) Ministry of Commerce and
Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises (MCPSME) Ministry of Culture, Tourism
and Artisan Promotion (MCTA) Indicator1 Number of comprehensive surveys with
disaggregated data undertaken by the National Statistics Institute (INEGE)
(2017):  :  DS INEGE statistics yearbook Frequency: Biannual Ministry of
Industry and Energy (MINDE); Ministry of social affairs and gender equality
(MSAGE) Ministry of Health and Social Well-being (MOH) Ind Number of ‘green and
blue’ jobs created for men and women  (2017):   (2023): ,000 (cumulative) DS:
MLPESS reports data reports Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) 10 DP/DCP/GNQ/
Frequency: Annual INEGE World Bank ILO Ind Unemployment, youth total (% of total
labour force )  (2017): % : %  MLPESS reports, data reports, ILO reports
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MLPESS; World Bank; ILO MLPESS Output Women
and youth have improved technical and financial capacities for entrepreneurship
and to match labour market needs MEUTS MCPSME Ind Unemployment, female (% of
female labour force)  (2017):  % : % Ind Percentage of women and youth granted
credit to create or develop their business : % : 30 % DS: National Plan for
Economic and Social Development (PNDES) reports Frequency: Annual MSAGE OPM
World Bank; ILO Technical vocational and educational training centres Ind
Percentage of women and youth participants in educational or vocational
trainings who found  job within  months  (2017): To be determined : 30% DS:
MLPESS reports Frequency: Annual Ind Proportion of population covered by social
protection floors/systems, by sex, children, unemployed persons, older persons,
persons with disabilities, pregnant women, new-borns, work-injury victims, the
poor and the vulnerable:  (2017): 30% INSESO coverage : 100%  Government, United
Nations reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MSAGE Output  Government
institutions have improved technical capacity to establish an inclusive social
protection system MLPESS MSAGE MOH Ind Extent to which policy measures and
institutional capacities are in place to increase access to social protection
schemes, disaggregated by target groups: () sex, () age, () urban poor () rural
population  (2017):  :  OPM National Social Security Institute (INSESO) UNFPA
UNAIDS 11 DP/DCP/GNQ/ DS: Government and United Nations reports Frequency:
Annual UNICEF Ind Percentage of female- headed households that have received
cash transfers through the national social protection system  (2017): % : 30 %
DS: Government and United Nations reports Frequency: Annual Indicator  Number of
people who access HIV and related services, disaggregated by sex and type of
service: () Behavioral change communication () Number of males reached (ii)
Number of females reached  (2017): 345 (male and female)  (2023): 998 DS:
Government and United Nations reports Frequency: Annual () Anti-retroviral
treatment () Number of males reached (ii) Number of females reached  (2017):
18,900  (2023): 32,400 DS: MOH Frequency: Annual National priority or goal:
Towards  sustainable environment UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP:
Outcome  By 2023, the population of Equatorial Guinea uses its naturel resources
(marine, forest and water resources) in  sustainable manner Related Strategic
Plan outcome:  Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Ind: Hectares of land sustainably managed through protected area management,
biodiversity and ecosystem conservation  MALFE national reports Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: UNDP, MALFE Output The Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, Forestry and the Environment (MALFE) has strengthened capacities for
the MALFE Regular: ,119 Other: ,950 12 DP/DCP/GNQ/  (2017): 367,500 ha : 470,158
ha effective and sustainable protection of biodiversity and the management of
protected areas Ministry of Fisheries and water resources (MFW) GEF Ind Number
of protected areas with operational management plans implemented  (2017):  :
DS: Projects reports, MALFE Frequency: Annual GCF FAO French Development Agency
(AFD) Ind Natural resources managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access
and benefit- sharing regime: () Area of existing protected area under improved
management (hectares); () Area under sustainable forest management (hectares)
(2017): () 367,500 ha; () 367,500 ha : () 470,158 ha; () 470,158 ha Non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) DS: Project reports, MALFE Frequency: Annual
Ind Level of funding from private sector to finance sustainable environmental
initiatives  (2017): To be determined : $,000,000 DS: MALFE reports Frequency:
Annual Output  Local communities, particularly women and youth, adopt
sustainable practices for natural resources management and adaptation to climate
change MALFE Ind CO2 emissions (kt)  (2014): ,kt : ,781 kt  MINDE Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: MINDE MFW MINDE Ind Number of communities adopting
sustainable practices for natural resources management and adaptation to climate
change GEF GCF 13 DP/DCP/GNQ/  (2017):  : 10 DS: MALFE, MINDE, UNDP/GEF project
progress reports Frequency: Annual FAO AFD NGOs Ind Proportion of households
benefiting from clean, affordable and sustainable energy: () women- headed; ()
in rural areas; () in urban and peri-urban areas  (2017):  : () % () % () % DS:
GEF project progress reports Frequency: Annual National priority or goal: High-
quality governance at the service of citizens UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome
involving UNDP:  By 2023, State institutions have efficient public management
based on standards, procedures, programmes and reliable data on public and
economic policies based on evidence, which strengthens the participation of
civil society organizations (CSOs) in the process of strengthening the effective
functioning of State institutions Related strategic plan outcome: Outcome
Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development Ind: Public
management index rank  (2016): 50 : 40  Ibrahim Index of African Governance
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim Foundation Output  Enhanced
institutional capacity for access to high-quality basic services at local levels
in mainland and insular regions MFEP Regular: 28 Ministry of Interior and Local
Administration Other: 12,250 MSAGE Ind Proportion of people accessing basic
services, disaggregated by target groups: () poor, () women, () youth  (2017):
To be determined : 60 % DS: MSAGE reports, INEGE statistics yearbook Frequency:
Annual INEGE Agencia Nacional Guinea Ecuatorial 2020 (ANGE2020) CSOs Private
sector organizations (PSOs) Ind Number of local governments with local
development plans  (2017):  :  DS: Reports on local governments, PNDL project
reports Frequency: Annual 14 DP/DCP/GNQ/ Ind: Corruption Perception Index rank
(2017): 171 : 161  Corruption Perception Index report Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Transparency International Output  MOJ and national human rights
institutions have strengthened technical capacities to expand access to justice
and combat discrimination, focusing on women and other marginalized groups
Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Department for the Promotion of Human Rights (DPHR)
MSAGE Ind Number of people who have access to justice, disaggregated by sex and
marginalized groups: () Formal justice systems, () Informal justice systems
(2018): To be determined : () 60,000 () 120,000 DS: MSAGE, MOJ reports
Frequency: Annual ANGE2020 CSOs PSOs Ind Number of Universal Periodic Review
recommendations implemented  (2012): 26 : 100 Source: DPHR Frequency: Annual Ind
Number of laws related to human rights that have been ratified  (2017): : 12 DS:
MOJ, DPHR Frequency: Annual Output Parliament and the executive have enhanced
technical capacities to lead measures that advance gender equality and women’
empowerment MFPE Ind Gender Equality Index rank  (2016): 42 : 32  Ibrahim Index
of African Governance Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim Foundation
DPHR MSAGE Ind Number of measures in place that set and monitor progress towards
numeric targets for women’ leadership in () public sector () not-for-profit
sector :  : 10 ANGE2020 CSOs PSOs 15 DP/DCP/GNQ/ DS: MSAGE Frequency: Annual Ind
Number of legal, policy and institutional reforms adopted to remove structural
barriers to women’ empowerment, including sexual and gender-based violence :  :
DS: MOJ, DPHR Frequency: Annual 16