 DP/DCP/GAB/ United Nations Executive Board of the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Office for
Project Services Distr: General 30 November 2022 Original: English First regular
session 2023 30 January– February 2023, New York Item  of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters Country programme document for Gabon ()
Contents Chapter Page  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework ……………  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………  IV Monitoring and
evaluation…………………………………………………………………………  Annex Results and resources framework
for Gabon ()………………………………………… 10 22-27329X () 071222 *2227329* DP/DCP/GAB/  UNDP
within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  Gabon
is an upper-middle-income country with  gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
at constant prices of $,760 in 2021 (against $15,188 in 1976) Its population of
million is characterized by high urbanization (90 per cent) and the predominance
of youth (36 per cent under age 15 years and 34 per cent aged 15 to With  forest
covering 88 per cent of the territory, Gabon is one of few countries with high
forest cover and low deforestation It plays  global role in climate regulation
with net sequestration of nearly 100 million tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) per
year  The implementation of the Emerging Strategic Plan of Gabon ), adopted with
the aim of moving away from oil dependence, began to slow in Most macroeconomic
indicators declined between 2010 and 2021: real GDP growth fell from  to  per
cent; budget revenues fell from 28 to 18 per cent of GDP; public debt soared
from 26 to 63 per cent of GDP; and the balance of payments went from  surplus of
14 per cent to  deficit of - per cent of GDP  The poverty rate declined from 42
per cent in 2005 to per cent in 20174, but has stagnated since then Despite the
large decline in GDP per capita over the last three decades, the Human
Development Index value is still high (706) Overall, Gabon has made progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals, especially in the areas of education,
health, safe drinking water and access to electricity However, this performance
masks spatial inequalities between urban and rural areas Women, youth and local
communities living in forest areas are the most affected Gender inequality is
high with  Gender Development Index value of 916 (670 for women, against 731 for
men) The unemployment rate is approaching 30 per cent, up from per cent in 20177
and almost  per cent in Half of the unemployed are young people aged 15 to This
situation is exacerbated by the negative impacts of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic  Despite progress in the fight against corruption and public
financial management, governance needs to be more inclusive and effective Other
challenges include the lack of an enabling ecosystem for green economy
development and the low capacity to implement sound public policies The
capacities of civil society organizations (CSOs) need to be strengthened to
better exercise citizen control of public policies  Gabon is at  crossroads in
terms of accelerating its transition from an oil-based economy to  green economy
To that end, the Government adopted its Transformation Acceleration Plan  to
develop new growth engines (wood processing, sustainable agriculture,
ecotourism, etc) and to renew the social compact (decent jobs, universal access
to social services, etc) Gabon has reiterated its commitm ent to preserve its
natural resources as global goods It intends to monetize these ecosystem
services to invest in conservation of natural resources, green economy and
reduction of regional disparities This commitment also addresses climate change
adaptation by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, making its economic
infrastructure and urban development resilient to climate change  Building on
the promises of the African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the United Nations country team (UNCT) has adopted the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)  to
accompany Gabon in addressing its multifaceted challenges By 2027, it aims to
contribute to  significant reduction of poverty and of social and gender
inequalities, and to the preservation of ecosystems to ensure the country'
sustainable development  The UNSDCF has three  World Bank: 2022:   Republic of
Gabon, National Climate Council, Third National Communication, February
International Monetary Fund 2022:   Republic of Gabon: Poverty Survey, General
Directorate of Statistics, UNDP 2021:   UNDP 2021:   Republic of Gabon; National
Survey of Employment and Unemployment, Department of Employment /14  DP/DCP/GAB/
strategic priorities: () promotion of good governance; () transition to  green
and blue economy; and () equal opportunities and inclusion Building on the
challenges identified in the Common Country Analysis (lack of economic
opportunities and jobs, feminization of poverty, regional disparities), the
UNSDCF will target the most vulnerable populations, mainly women, youth, persons
with disabilities and local communities in rural areas  UNDP is well positioned
to contribute to its implementation based on its comparative advantages and
existing partnerships with the Government, development partners and the UNCT The
preparation of the UNSDCF, including the Common Country Analysis, benefited from
the analytical work undertaken by UNDP, , the impact of COVID-19 on progress
towards the Sustainable Development Goals, the socioeconomic response to
COVID-19, development finance assessment and review of governance  The final
evaluation of the previous country programme () highlighted its relevance and
alignment with national priorities despite the difficult implementation of local
development plans This evaluation recommended focusing future interventions
economic, local and environmental governance Building on these findings, the new
country programme  will strengthen the focus on integrated and nature-based
solutions to accelerate progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals in
Gabon  The UNDP comparative advantages also derive from its being  provider of
six integrated signature solutions (poverty and inequalities, governance,
resilience, environm ent, energy, gender equality), facilitating the co-creation
of joint programmes with key stakeholders to accelerate implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals In Gabon, UNDP has  strong footprint on
environmental protection issues and related themes (green value chains and jobs,
sustainable finance, etc) in which current joint projects will be strengthened
to better contribute to the transition to the green and blue economy UNDP is
recognized as  trusted adviser on good governance, the first pillar of the
UNSDCF The country office will build on its track record in supporting four
signature solutions and one enabler of the UNDP Strategic Plan, , as described
below Environment UNDP supported Gabon in the preparation of its third report on
its nationally determined contribution under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and is  trusted partner of the
implementation of the letter of intent between the Government of Gabon and
Central African Forest Initiative (CAFI) It has led initiatives to build the
capacity of institutions responsible for forest conservation and land- use
optimization, interventions that will be critical to  successful transition to
green and blue economy, the main pillar of the UNSDCF Governance UNDP has played
major role in this area by helping to build capacity in development management,
anti-corruption and human rights protection Its expertise and ability to bring
together multiple actors are seen as assets for the UNSDCF Poverty and
inequality In collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), UNDP has been testing  pilot operation in two localities
aimed at strengthening the capacities of vulnerable groups th rough
entrepreneurship, training (productivity, conservation and transformation of
agricultural products), networking and access to finance and digital solutions
Gender equality As part of the above-mentioned solutions initiated in this pilot
project, UNDP has developed, with other United Nations agencies, interventions
increasing women’ participation and contribution This has yielded interesting
lessons in several areas (cash transfers to women entrepreneurs affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic; targeting microenterprises run by women; capacity-building;
innovation challenges and digital solutions led by women entrepreneurs intended
to strengthen green value chains, etc) Other interventions focused on advocacy
for gender-responsive budgeting Financing for development Under the previous
country programme, UNDP played  key role in strengthening the partnership with
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) to develop the integrated national /14  DP/DCP/GAB/ financing
framework UNDP supported several studies (green taxation, green private
investment, green public finance, etc) and developed national capacities in
those areas This experience will facilitate the co-creation of   ecosystem
conducive for financing the transition to  green economy in Gabon The current
collaboration with United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) on digital
finance and financing of microenterprises provides  strong base for achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, especially for women and youth-owned
businesses UNDP can also tap into expertise from its Global Policy Network and
Accelerator Labs in other countries to develop innovative solutions, including
digital solutions, linkin  structural transformation, climate adaptation and
sustainable livelihoods II Programme priorities and partnerships The design of
the country programme benefited from consultations with all stakeholders
(Government, CSOs, private sector, development partners, etc) during the
formulation of the UNSDCF, from which its vision and interventions are derived
The country programme is aligned with national priorities It is consistent with
the UNDP renewed strategic offer in Africa and the Climate Promise UNDP adopts
an integrated approach that acknowledges the nexus between green structural
transformation, prosperity, conservation of natural resources and adaptation to
climate change, with good governance as  prerequisite In line with the
Government’ priorities, UNDP will contribute to the UNSDCF by facilitating
transformational change towards  green economy and conservation of natural
resources to create decent jobs and improve living conditions for the
population, especially women and youth To that end, the theory of change
suggests that this vision will be realized by allowing all stakeholders to be
involved in the formulation and implementation of nature- based solutions This
process will require that national and decentralized institutions effectively
implement  green structural transformation consistent with the country’
environmental commitments (conservation of natural resources, adaptation to
climate change, disaster risk reduction) Special attention will be paid to the
promotion of an ecosystem conducive to green private investment and decent green
jobs Above all, the prerequisite of this approach will be  more inclusive and
accountable system of governance: strong ownership and adhesion by national and
local institutions, enforcement of transparency and anti-corruption standards,
timely implementation of structural reforms and empowerment and participation of
populations, especially women and youth, and civil society UNDP will realize
this theory of change by leveraging its support to mobilize actors
(institutions, CSOs, private sector) in favour of structural transformation
consistent with the Gabonese nationally determined contributions and “green
integrated national financing framework” UNDP will continue to advocate for the
commitment of all (Government, communities, civil society, private sector) to
the conservation of natural resources, green economy and resilience and
adaptation to climate change It will strengthen its capacity to mobilize
resources for the implementation of the country programme and provide innovative
analysis and solutions to deliver results in these areas UNDP will leverage its
support across the UNCT to deliver four signature solutions crucial to the
successful implementation of the UNSDCF: () Governance The expertise and ability
of UNDP to bring together actors (public institutions, private sector, CSOs,
development partners, etc) will be an asset in setting up platforms and co-
creating integrated solutions for   inclusive and accountable governance system,
including effective governance of the integrated national financing framework
and the financing policies across different areas (green economy, conservation
of natural resources, nationally determined contributions) UNDP will continue to
advocate for transparency, anti-corruption and participation, including through
the promotion of digitization to facilitate access to data and promote the
deployment of control mechanisms led by communities and civil society; /14
DP/DCP/GAB/ () Environment Based on its comparative advantage and leveraging the
strengths and financing capacities of several partners, including national
institutions, UNDP has the mandate to facilitate development of nature-based-
solutions and risk-informed policies aimed at conserving natural resources while
accelerating the transition to  green economy As  provider of integrated
solutions, UNDP will use the protection of the environment as  lever to
implement the link between growth, conservation of nature and climate change
mitigation and adaptation UNDP will partner with the Government to update its
adaptation strategy and prioritize low-carbon investments, specifically in urban
areas; () Poverty and inequality UNDP will scale up the results achieved by its
pilot rapid financing facility project by expanding green value chains to
achieve food security and conservation of natural resources while reducing
dependency on food imports This will create opportunities for “left behind”
populations, especially women and youth, by enhancing their knowledge and
capacities, providing innovative and green solutions (climate information,
digital solutions, social protection for inclusive growth, etc) and developing
climate-resilient livelihoods; () Gender equality UNDP will work with all
partners, including United Nations agencies and the Government, to further
promote gender-sensitive policies and budgeting, to accelerate women’ economic
participation and promote women’ leadership in decision-making in the public and
private spheres Efforts will focus on potential risks related to gender
inequality such as unequal pay and gender-based violence, with mitigation
measures to be defined accordingly Building on these signature solutions and
learning from its current work on development finance, the programme will focus
on an enabling governance framework for the development of nature-based
solutions This approach will make inclusion, community participation, especially
women and youth, the markers of all interventions UNDP will facilitate the
setting-up of platforms (delivery unit within the national coordination council
of the Transformation Acceleration Plan, development financing coordination
mechanism, etc,) structural reforms/investments aligned with the Sustainable
Development Goals in collaboration with other United Nations agencies,
development partners, the private sector, CSOs, universities and research
centres This partnership framework will rely on South-South and triangular
cooperation to take advantage of best practices developed elsewhere and make the
African Continental Free Trade Area  driver for development to better coordinate
and implement Inclusive governance and institutional accountability To make the
green economy (sustainable agriculture, agroforestry, second- and third- level
wood processing, ecotourism, development of non-timber value chain) and the
conservation of natural resources levers of development, UNDP will respond to
national priorities to accelerate structural transformation by strengthening the
capacities of the national coordination council of the Transformation Action
Plan, located in the Prime Minister' office, and the Ministry in charge of the
economy Leveraging the respective strengths of the World Bank, African
Development Bank, IMF and others development partners, UNDP will focus on
building the necessary tools for designing, coordinating and implementing public
policies and statistical systems, as well as analysing risks to prevent shocks
and potential hazards To place this process in  sustainable development
perspective, UNDP, in collaboration with UNEP, will continue to advocate for the
development of synergies between the structura  transformation strategy and the
nationally determined contribution to place climate governance in the overall
governance architecture Digitization will be an instrument to modernize
development management, strengthen monitoring and evaluation and facilitate
access to quality statistical data UNDP will collaborate with development
partners (European Union, IMF, United Nations agencies, CSOs, etc) to make
governance systems more inclusive and accountable UNDP will leverage
collaboration between the public and private sectors and civil society by
strengthening the governance mechanism of the integrated national financing
framework and /14  DP/DCP/GAB/ the capacity of the Ministry in charge of the
economy to promote  just and inclusive transition to  green economy The fight
against corruption will be consolidated to improve confidence in public
institutions and efficiency in the management of public resources In
collaboration with CSOs and communities, digitalization will be promoted to
strengthen the inclusion of non-State actors and make citizen control more
effective and reliable Emphasis will be placed on local governance to reduce
geographical disparities in social services and economic opportunities by
creating jobs in the green economy and conservation of natural resources UNDP
will work with decentralized institutions in the management of integrated local
development plans and conduct  pilot experiment on the Gabon Local Development
Fund This pilot operation will be carried out in Ogooué or Nyanga provinces, in
synergy with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the ministers in charge
of decentralization and environment, before being scaled up according to
partnership opportunities Drawing on lessons from its past, UNDP will support
robust financing strategy of the transition to  green and low-carbon economy by
emphasizing new financing instruments For example, in the case of carbon
finance, UNDP will support national efforts to access carbon finance, especially
its readiness to participate in international transactions under Article  of the
Paris Agreement and capacities to develop attractive and bankable green projects
The same will apply to the creation of other instruments (blended finance, green
or blue bonds, debt-for-nature swaps, etc) in collaboration with the UNDP
Finance Service Hub and UNEP Under the leadership of the Ministry in charge of
budget, green taxation will be promoted along with the rationalization of tax
expenditures and the prioritization of public investments in favour of economic
activities approaching carbon neutrality These efforts will be combined with the
removal of bottlenecks hindering increased domestic resource mobilization,
access to climate finance and limiting the implementation of environmental
protection projects Regarding biodiversity protection, the country office, in
partnership with the UNDP Biodiversity Financing Initiative, the Government of
France and the European Union, will build the capacity of the General
Directorate for Environment and Nature Protection to analyse the policy and
institutional environment, review public expenditures and formulate  financing
strategy for biodiversity protection , under the wider integrated national
financing strategy UNDP will strengthen its partnership with CAFI to integrate
the climate dimension into the overall governance framework It will forge new
partnerships with vertical funds and the private sector to strengthen access to
sustainable finance and facilitate the development of nature-based solutions
intended to better link green growth, conservation of natural resources and
adaptation to climate change Joint initiatives will be undertaken with the
United Nations Children’ Fund in public finance (social, green and climate
budgeting and monitoring tools) and national evaluation policy with the use of
digital solutions The same will apply to collaboration with the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) in gender-
responsive budgeting, and the United Nations Population Fund on data to better
understand the nexus between demographic dynamics, employability and the
transition to  green economy in  country where 90 per cent of the population
live in urban areas Inclusive sustainable development and resilience To
consolidate the country’ commitments under the Paris Agreement and UNFCCC, UNDP
will support national policy development and strengthen the capacities of key
actors including the National Climate Council, the National Agency of National
Parks and the Agricultural Development Agency In partnership with the European
Union, CAFI, international CSOs, FAO and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), UNDP will focus on testing and
scaling-up solutions in line with the United Nations Collaborative Programme on
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing
Countries (REDD+) This will: () increase the potential for carbon sequestration
through increasing the size of protected areas, the sustainable /14  DP/DCP/GAB/
management and efficient use of ecosystems and biodiversity and the
strengthening of forest and biodiversity monitoring at the national level; and
() reduce future emissions from the agricultural sector by optimizing land use
while increasing food self-sufficiency In collaboration with UNESCO, CAFI and
the GEF, UNDP support will integrate urban “greening” (urban parks, tree
nurseries, botanical gardens, education and raising awareness of urban
populations on nature-based-solutions) and “mini solutions” of compensation
and/or “low-carbon” urban development (waste management, energy, transport,
watershed protection and ecosystem services in peri-urban areas) Integrated
land-use planning approaches will also be promoted by strengthening data
collection and monitoring and evaluation systems at national and local levels
This conservation of natural resources requires alternative solutions that will
support local communities to preserve sustainable livelihoods that are
threatened by climate change In collaboration with the GEF and FAO, UNDP will
strengthen the capacities of decentralized institutions, local communities and
civil society in the provinces of Lower Ogooue and Lower Nyanga with the
creation and sustainable management of community forests, biodiversity
protection, the development of community businesses (sustainable agriculture,
fisheries, access to low-carbon energy) and alternative value chains linking
economic activities and ecotourism Special emphasis will be placed on women and
youth -led initiatives in vulnerable areas affected by climate changes The
transition to  green economy requires an inclusive ecosystem conducive to
private investment In conjunction with partners (, the World Bank/International
Finance Corporation, African Development Bank, European Union, private sector
organizations), UNDP will facilitate the improvement of the business
environment, develop public-private partnerships, promote sustainable finance
and develop skills and employability in the green economy Emphasis will be
placed on  productive alliance between the private sector and local communities
for their participation in green value chains supported by inclusive digital
solutions As conservation of natural resources and the green economy are
important sources of job creation, UNDP will develop partnerships with key
players (private sector, financial sector, business incubators, European Union,
International Labour Organization) and capitalize on government initiatives to
prioritize youth economic empowerment by testing and scaling-up local solutions
under the Youth-Connekt programme (advocacy, improvement of youth skills and
entrepreneurship, especially in the green economy) To accompany this dynamic,
local and indigenous communities, especially women and youth, will have the
capacity to participate in the definition, decision -making and implementation
of nature-based solutions to ensure the conservation of natural resources,
strengthen the quality of ecosystem services and fight climate change In the
provinces of Lower Ogooue and Lower Nyanga, there will be special focus on
community participation through the definition and implementation of integrated
solutions for local  evelopment, including the creation of new value chains
(apiculture, fisheries and exploitation of non- timber forest products) To
facilitate the implementation of these initiatives, UNDP will strengthen its
partnership with the CAFI, the GEF and FAO It will also forge new partnerships
with the Green Climate Fund, South-South and triangular cooperation, the private
sector and UNCDF III Programme and risk management This country programme
document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headqua rter levels with respect to
country programmes are prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and internal control framework The programme will be
nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct
execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force /14
DP/DCP/GAB/ majeure The harmonized approach to ca sh transfers will be used in
coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks
Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness
will be charged to the concerned projects strategic committee chaired by the
Minister in charge of the economy will provide overall guidance and directions
to the country programme with the participation of sectoral ministries and other
actors involved in its execution cycle to strengthen capacities of implementing
partners and promote programmatic sustainability To maximize the impact and
effectiveness of programmatic interventions and forge  systemic approach to
solutions, the "portfolio" approach will be progressively introduced to ensure
programmatic coherence, avoid siloed approaches and integrate  learning process
To accommodate the anticipated portfolio growth, the country office will adapt
its structure to be fit for purpose and more agile and efficient The office will
monitor financial risks arising from the major increase of the portfolio It will
apply the UNDP social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism
to manage risks One implementation risk is the continued adhesion of national
and local institutions and communities to programmatic outputs and outcomes
Other risks relate to possible delays in the institutional reforms essential for
economic transformation and coherence with the climate action plan; and the lack
of an enabling environment for mobilizing th  private sector in nature-based
solutions and adaptation initiatives The difficult international environment,
including the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, could lead donors to
reorient their priorities and decrease the resources allocated for basic social
services and implementing the principle of leaving no one behind To ensure full
participation and adhesion of national and local institutions, the country
office will reinforce an inclusive process in programme design and
implementation Regular meetings and consultations will assess the level of
engagement of these stakeholders An inclusive communication strategy will help
stakeholders to identify themselves in UNDP programmes and results To ensure
that delays in implementing institutional reforms are not hindering the economic
transformation, the country office will strengthen advocacy and provide
technical assistance to ensure that necessary policies are effectively developed
and approved at the various decision-making levels To mobilize the private
sector, the country office is counting on the high investment return of climate
finance and the growing importance of environmental, social and governance
issues to raise the interests of key players in the sector The country office
partnership strategy will identify key private sector companies and other donors
and strengthen partnerships through involvement in programme governance bodies
and development of joint projects IV Monitoring and evaluation In the context of
the periodic review and analysis of the country programme, the outputs of which
are derived from the UNSDCF, UNDP will rely primarily on the national
statistical information system to produce, update and disseminate the data
needed to mon itor the outcome indicators In collaboration with other United
Nations agencies, UNDP will promote new solutions in the areas of data
collection and management, including natural capital accounting and green
budgeting The implementation of the country programme and progress towards the
expected results will be regularly monitored through coordination meetings,
semi-annual and annual reviews and  midterm evaluation directly linked to the
UNSDCF institutional review process UNDP will use indicator data, progress
reports, information from field visits and other analysis conducted to inform
the regular reviews and inform decision-making The data, information and
knowledge generated through these reviews and evaluations will inform the
monitoring and evaluation system of the UNSDCF In the context of results-based
management, UNDP /14  DP/DCP/GAB/ will organize regular field meetings with
beneficiaries and other stakeholders to solicit their feedback and maximize the
use of digital solutions to collect data and inform appropriate decision-making
processes Based on the UNDP evaluation policy, an evaluation plan has been
prepared and includes country programme, outcome, project and thematic
evaluations  Evaluations will be carried out in accordance with UNDP rules and
regulations These exercises will aim to improve the quality of programme
execution through learning and adaptation, with adjustments made when necessary
to the theory of change and the results and resources framework after  midterm
review UNDP will allocate at least 15 per cent of the budget to invest in gender
equality and women' empowerment It will use its gender marker to track
programmatic contributions and results in these areas /14  DP/DCP/GAB/ Annex
Results and resources framework for Gabon () NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS:
Improving governance and transparency in the public sector, strengthening
financing instruments for sustainable development, economic transformation
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP  : By 2027, the
legal and institutional framework is strengthened, and institutions are more
accountable, transparent and efficient, to ensure orthodox and inclusive
governance and sustainable and equitable development in line with national and
international commitments made by the country (All 17 SDGs) RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME : Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green,
inclusive, and digital transitions COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, and
baselines targets) MAJOR PARTNERS / PARNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS ESTIMATED COST BY
OUTCOME ($) Indicator : Corruption Perception Index Baseline: 31 Target: 35 Data
Source: Transparency International Frequency: annual Responsibility: UNDP Output
: Public institutions – Prime Minister’ Office, Ministry of Economy - have
strengthened capacity to manage, monitor and evaluate economic and green
structural transformation, consistent with nationally determined contributions
and to diversify their financing National Climate Council, Prime Minister’
office, Ministries in charge of Economy; Environment; Budget; Anti-corruption;
Interior; Decentralization; Digital Economy; Justice; Youth Regular: $768M
Other: $49M Indicator : Number of multi-stakeholder (government, private sector,
civil society) collaborative/digital platforms established that: () are aligned
to national priorities with the SDGs and financing framework; () ensure
alignment between structural transformation reforms/investment and action plan;
() ensure monitoring and evaluation in accordance with national policy Indicator
: Mo Ibrahim Governance Index Baseline: Target: 50 Data Source: Mo Ibrahim
Foundation Frequency: annual Responsibility: UNDP National Agency of National
Parks Baseline (2022):  Target:  Source: Ministries in charge of economy; anti-
corruption; environment Frequency: Annual National Assembly Indicator
Proportion of women in management positions in public administration Data
Source: Activity report of the Observatory of Women' Rights Statistical Yearbook
(General Directorate of Statistics) General Census of Population and Housing
Frequency: annual Responsibility: UN-Women City Halls, Departmental Councils,
Civil society organizations Resident Coordinator’ office, UNICEF, UNESCO
Baseline: % Target: 50% Indicator : Volume of resources mobilized by the
Government through new sustainable and innovative green finance instruments
Baseline (2022):  Target: $500 million Source: Ministry of Economy / Gabonese
Strategic Investment Fund Frequency: Annual Private Sector: banks, Gabonese
Strategic Investment Fund Indicator : Proportion of national budget allocated to
the green economy and natural resource conservation through implementation of
the integrated national financing framework Baseline (2022): 45% Target: 15%
Source: Ministry of Budget Frequency: Annual 10  DP/DCP/GAB/ Output : Civil
society and the population, particularly women and young people, at the national
and local levels participate effectively in public decision- making and
effective citizen control with the help of digital tools Indicator : Number of
policies and strategies to protect and promote: () inclusive spaces, mechanisms
and capacities for public dialogue; () access to reliable information on issues
of public concern (Strategic Plan indicator ) Baseline (2022):  Target: () ; ()
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption Frequency: Annual Indicator : Percentage of
women and youth elected in parliament Baseline (2018): women: %; youth: %
Target: women: 25%; youth: 15% Source: National Assembly, Frequency: five-yearly
Indicator : Number of partnerships with women-led civil society organizations
and other bodies and networks to advance women’ leadership and participation and
gender equality Baseline (2022):  Target:  Source: Ministry of Health and Social
Affairs Frequency: Annual Output : Legal and institutional systems to fight
corruption and promote transparency in natural resource management are in place
to deliver solutions and accelerate SDG achievements Indicator : Number of
digital solutions developed to fight corruption Baseline (2022):  Target:
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of
public and private sector structures, including in natural resource management,
effectively implementing anti-corruption measures Baseline (2022):  Target: 10
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption Frequency: Annual Output : The legal,
institutional and operational framework for decentralization is finalized,
implemented and financed in part through sustainable finance, to accelerate
local development and the achievement of the SDGs at the local level Indicator :
Number of municipalities that () develop, ()implement and () finance local
development, including through sustainable finance to advance the achievement of
SDGs at the local level 11  DP/DCP/GAB/ Baseline (2022):  Target: () 10 ()  ()
Source: Gabonese Strategic Investment Fund Frequency: Annual Indicator :
Proportion of national budget allocated to Provinces for localization of the
SDGs Baseline (2022): Target:% Source: Ministry of Budget Frequency: Annual
Indicator : Number of local development policies on green economy and natural
resource conservation, developed with civil society and local communities
Baseline (2022):  Target: 10 Source: Ministry of Interior Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Rethinking the social model, promoting equality and
inclusion, fighting poverty and inequality COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT)
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP # : By 2027, populations, especially youth and women,
participate in the sustainable management of natural resources and benefit from
the fruits of  controlled transition to  green and blue economy in an
environment more resilient to climate ch ange (SDGs , , , , , 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 17) RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME : Resilience built to respond to
systemic uncertainty and risk Indicator  : CO2 emission and Absorption (metric
tons per capita) Data source (indicators , , ): Directorate of Equal
Opportunities and Gender, General Directorate of Prospective, General
Directorate of Local Authorities, National Agency of National Parks  Frequency
(indicators , , ): Annual Responsibility (indicators , , ): Ministries in charge
of Economy; Anti-corruption; Interior, General Directorate of Environment Output
: Institutions at the national and local levels and local communities, including
youth and women, define, decide on and implement nature-based solutions to
manage and conserve natural resources National Climate Council, Prime Minister’
office, Ministries in charge of: Economy; Environment; Budget; Digital Economy;
Small and Medium Enterprises; Agriculture Regular: 0M Other: $21M Baseline: tbc
Target: tbc Indicator : Number of implementing legislations to ensure the
participation of local communities, including  strong representation of women
and youth, in the transparent and sustainable management of natural resources
Indicator  : Area of forest managed sustainably/under independent certification
Baseline (2022): Target: Source : Direction Générale Environnement et Protection
de la Nature Frequency: Annual Civil society organizations Baseline: % Target:
100% UNDP Climate Forest Unit, FAO, UNESCO, United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime, Resident Coordinator’ office Indicator  : Number of sites of importance
for terrestrial biodiversity that are in protected areas Indicator : Level of
implementation of an effective mechanism for natural capital accounting system
Baseline (2022): Target: Rating scale: -Not implemented, -Work started, -Work in
progress, -Work almost complete, -In place and functioning Source: Ministry of
Budget Frequency: Annual Private sector including business incubators Data
source (indicators  and ): Directorate of SMEs, General Directorate of
Foresight, National Agency of National Parks, General Directorate of
Environment, Baseline: tbc Target: tbc Indicator : Unemployment rate by gender,
age and disability status 12  DP/DCP/GAB/ Baseline: -%; -%, Youth-% Target: tbc
National Office of Employment, National Agency of Investment Promotion,
Frequency (indicators  and ): Annual Responsibility (indicators  and ):
Ministries in charge of Economy; Small and Medium Enterprises; Environment
Output : Institutions at the national and local levels, local communities,
including youth and women, and civil society develop innovative and integrated
solutions to pursue sustainable livelihoods adapted to climate change Indicator
: Labour force participation rate for persons aged 15+, by gender (and
race/ethnicity where available) Baseline: tbc Target: tbc Indicator : Number of
women and men from vulnerable areas directly benefiting from initiatives
(including employment) for the protection and sustainable management of natural
resources (forest, biodiversity) (based on Strategic Plan indicator ) Baseline
(2022):  Target: Men:,000 Women:,500 Source: National Agency of National Parks
Frequency: Annual Indicator : Surface of newly developed protected areas (in
hectares) Baseline (2022):  Target: 600,000 ha Source: National Agency of
National Parks Frequency: Annual Indicator : To what extent the country has
early warning and preparedness measures in place to manage impact of disasters,
pandemics and other shocks (Strategic Plan indicator ) Baseline (2022):  Target:
Rating scale: -Not in place, -Work started, -Work in progress, -Work almost
complete, -In place Source: General Directorate for Risks and Natural Disasters
Frequency: Annual Output : Enabling ecosystem in place for private investments
and job creation in green economy, particularly for women and youth Indicator :
Level of implementation of  legal framework conducive to green private
investment, especially for women- and youth-led MSMEs Baseline (2022):  Target:
Rating scale: -no legal framework;-Legal framework being developed; - Legal
framework in place;-Legal framework implemented Source: National Agency of
Investment Promotion Frequency: Every  years Indicator : Number of jobs created
for youth and women in the green economy Baseline (2022):  Target: Women : ,500
Men : ,500 13  DP/DCP/GAB/ Women >35: ,000 Source: National Office for
Employment Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of () businesses and
()communities engaged in sustainable food systems and circular economy including
through new technologies Baseline (2022):  Target: :30; : 50 Source: General
Directorate for Agriculture Frequency: Annual 14