Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/GHA/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF)  Ghana is  lower-middle
income country with  population estimate of million people in 2021, which is
five-fold increase since independence in 1957, with females (per cent)
outnumbering males (per cent) by almost half  million Youth and people living
with disabilities constitute 38 per cent and  per cent of the population,
respectively The country’ Human Development Index (HDI) value for 2019 was 611,
which places it in the medium human development category, with  ranking of 138
out of 189 countries The Gender Inequality Index value of 538 also places the
country at 138 out of 189 countries In 2020, per cent of Ghana’ population was
categorized as multi-dimensionally poor, posing  threat to national progress to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) In general, high rates of rural
poverty and spatial inequality have driven rapid rural-urban and north-south
migration without  corresponding increase in decent urban employment
opportunities and basic services, with youth and women most affected  The United
Nations Common Country Assessment (CCA) notes considerable progress was made in
advancing national development priorities and the SDGs in the last few decades
However, in the report it is noted that despite strong gross domestic product
(GDP) growth figures over the last decade, Ghana’ economy has yet to show
significant structural transformation and related progress on the income ladder
The economy remains heavily dependent on the agricultural sector in spite of the
growing prominence of the services sector in contributing to GDP and the
absorption of labour Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic had  severe impact on
economic activities, slowing economic growth from  per cent in 2019 to  per cent
in The pandemic particularly affected the micro and small enterprise (MSME)
sector that generates up to 70 per cent of the national GDP Although Ghana’
economy is recovering from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic it now faces new
challenges brought on by the Russia-Ukraine crisis by way of global oil price
shocks, fuel-pump prices, and food cost increases  The CCA also indicates that
poverty, livelihoods, gender, and geography continue to determine the level of
climate change vulnerabilities in Ghana People living under the poverty line are
assumed to have reduced capacity to adapt to climate change The report notes
that despite the upward democratic governance trajectory, national capacity gaps
in public service delivery, contested rule of law and human rights aspects, and
limited participation of citizens (especially women, youth and other
marginalized groups) have contributed to  weakening of social contracts and
created  deficit of trust in key institutions In addition, Ghana’ peace dividend
is coming under stress as new conflict drivers and internal and sub-regional
threats to stability emerge  Ghana’ vision for fulfilling its development
potential, addressing identified challenges, consolidating its status as
middle-income country and supporting Ghana Beyond Aid are defined in several
major policy documents and national strategies At the centre of different
policies and strategies is the Coordinated Programme of Economic and Social
Development Policies (CPESDP) 2017- 2024 that sets out the government vision for
creating an optimistic, self- confident, and prosperous nation CPESDP calls for
this to be done through the creative use of the country’ human and natural
resources, and operating within  democratic, open and fair society where mutual
trust and economic opportunities exist for all CPESDP also seeks to modernize
and transform agriculture, promote industrial diversification, and accelerate
youth employment with deliberate national strategies to localize and achieve the
SDGs, leaving no one behind  NDPC/GoG (2019), “Ghana: VNR Report on the
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,”  UN Ghana
(2021), United Nations Common Country Analysis for The Republic of Ghana  UN
Ghana (2021), “Economic Transformation Analysis,” CCA Thematic Brief,  UNDP
Ghana Briefing Note Impact of Russia-Ukraine War on Ghana  The World Bank
(2020), Ghana Country Environmental Analysis /16  DP/DCP/GHA/  The UNSDCF
articulates government expectations of the UN development system (UNDS) in
delivering strategic priorities of the Government of Ghana It centralizes the
economic transformation agenda and commitment to leave no one behind, with
special attention on the country’ youth and SDG achievement Considering lessons
learned from the UN Sustainable Development Partnership (UNSDP)  Evaluation, the
new UNSDCF () development process adopted  co-creation approach that involved
participatory consultations and inputs from all stakeholders to facilitate
implementation The UNDP Country Programme is anchored in the UNSDCF and takes
inspiration from the Ghana Coordinated Programme for Economic and Social
Development (CPESD) vision document and Ghana Beyond Aid strategy document
Together, these form the centerpiece towards fulfilling the economic and social
transformation agenda in Ghana The overarching vision of these two documents
rests on the goals of  wealthy, inclusive, sustainable, empowered, and resilient
Ghana where the people are self- reliant and in charge of the country’ destiny
Complimentary to the policy vision are commitments to implementing the SDGs,
African Union Agenda 2063, and Paris Agreement on Climate Change (COP21) These
policy commitments are being implemented through the post- COVID-19 blueprint
for economic recovery, Ghana CARES programme, and the medium-term development
framework ()  The Ghana country programme also takes inspiration from the UNDP
Strategic Plan (2022- 2025) with the focus on three directions of change
(structural transformation, leaving no one behind, and building resilience), as
well as the six signature solutions and UNDP Strategic offer for Africa () It
also takes advantage of lessons learned from evaluations, including the
Independent Country Programme Evaluation (ICPE) and the UNSDP  Evaluation The
two pillars of the CPD are aligned with the Medium-Term National Development
Policy Framework (), in particular goals to build  prosperous country; safeguard
the natural environment and constructed environment; maintain  stable, united,
and safe country, and build resilience to withstand threats to different risks
and shocks, including COVID-Programme priority areas are also aligned to the 19
policy actions of the Updated Nationally Determined Contribution and have the
potential to maximize synergies between adaptation and economic diversification,
which will result in mitigation co-benefits  UNDP comparative advantage draws
comes from its strategic positioning as  long-term and trusted government
partner during previous programming cycles, and as  result of ongoing activities
at national and sub-national levels in advancing progress towards the
achievement of the SDGs As evidenced in the ICPE, UNDP has  successful track
record of supporting development progress and in delivering on partner
priorities in line with the UNSDCF in the areas of women and youth empowerment,
peace and social cohesion, climate financing, digitalization and learning Moving
forward, UNDP will contribute to UNSDCF objectives by playing  strategic role in
bringing together partnerships from government, civil society organizations
(CSOs), development partners and private sector for accelerating the
implementation of the SDGs As  partner of choice for institutional capacity
strengthening, UNDP will continue to leverage the expertise of its innovation
hubs and the Accelerator Lab to foster innovation and creativity that helps
strengthen institutions and systems and foster inclusive development  UNDP will
emphasize collaboration across  revitalized UN system and continue drawing on
complementary strengths and capabilities to deliver stronger and collective
results for the people of Ghana This will be achieved by applying integrated
approaches aimed at transformative change II Programme priorities and
partnerships  The overarching theory of change can be summarized as follows: IF
government and peoples’ capacities for sustainable, resilient and inclusive
growth and structural transformation are enhanced, IF policies, strategies and
institutional frameworks to boost accountable, inclusive,  Updated Nationally
Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement (2020 - 2030) /16  DP/DCP/GHA/
responsive governance and social cohesion are strengthened, and IF gender
equality is mainstreamed, and women, youth, other marginalized groups are
empowered; THEN all people will enjoy an inclusive and transformed economy that
creates jobs, and THEN people will benefit from transparent, accountable,
inclusive institutions and greater environmental stewardship, leading to
enhanced socioeconomic development, and  peaceful and socially-cohesive Ghana
The UNDP Ghana country programme takes its priorities from the UNSDCF vision
that is inspired by  cohesive, innovative, responsive, and agile UNDS, and aims
to promote and support SDG implementation for an inclusive and resilient Ghana
UNDP will provide investment expertise, including catalytic financial
structuring, de-risking, and capital deployment to drive resource mobilization
for climate financing and achieving SDG impact UNDP will apply  holistic
development approach based on its track record as published in the ICPE and
various evaluations and surveys Aside from its own reports, UNDP will also
leverage data from analytical reports by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) and World Bank country environmental analysis reports to inform
programme design focused on natural resource management and the restoration of
degraded landscapes The country programme will ensure the use of  human rights-
based approach across programme activities, including the principle of ‘leave no
one behind’ to ensure all human rights (economic, social and environmental) are
upheld Against the backdrop of rising to lower middle income country status,
UNDP Ghana will continue to focus on making effective use of  tight resource
envelope to advance equitable and transformative development in Ghana, including
the consolidation of governance reforms Main areas of work will include
sustainable development and inclusive growth, and strengthened institutional
capacities for good governance, human rights, peace, and security Programme
implementation will employ  portfolio approach to arrive at strategic solutions
for complex challenges The goal is to break “siloed” ways of working by
clustering around two programming areas: () resilience and linking economic and
environment resilience through skills, financing and technology access for
MSMEs, and (ii) inclusion in reaching marginalized groups, including them as
partners and agents of change, expanding opportunities for youth and women, and
increasing citizen engagement and participation to prevent conflict, sustain
peace and ensure social cohesion Sustainable, resilient and inclusive growth and
structural transformation Based on the recommendations of the ICPE and the
principle of ‘leave no one behind’, UNDP will support the Government of Ghana to
reinforce  youth and women led MSME sector that flourishes in  green, inclusive,
and equitable manner This will be achieved primarily through partnerships with
the private sector in building the capacities of institutions to deliver
improved services to support MSMEs to innovate and leverage additional financing
for increased productivity and opportunities for decent jobs, particularly youth
This will help position enterprises to take advantage of the large African Free
Trade market It also holds great potential for achieving the SDGs ,,10, and 17
in particular Findings from recent evaluations suggest deepening of engagement
with key development actors in climate action UNDP, in close collaboration with
the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation, will lead
coordination and resource mobilization efforts for climate action Concurrently,
the Forestry Commission, Ghana Cocoa Board, Metropolitan, Municipal, and
District Assemblies (MMDAs), and Community Based Organizations (CBOs) will
collaborate on interventions for restoring degraded landscapes and promoting
sustainable environmental production with  specific emphasis on agroforestry As
the private sector continues to provide targeted finance and technology aimed at
driving climate action and environmental sustainability, SMEs and start-ups will
lead in onboarding and adopting digital technology that serves people and the
planet Drawing from its global expertise and local networking capacities, UNDP
will facilitate access to innovative tools, approaches and technologies
developed and tested around the world to help communities (particularly in the
north or highly degraded rural areas) adapt to climate change, reduce
vulnerability to disasters, promote environmental conservation, support the
private /16  DP/DCP/GHA/ sector to make production more environmentally
sustainable, and enhance private sector involvement in inclusive markets and the
delivery of green products and services The latter includes  focus on youth-led
innovative business models UNDP will continue to coordinate support with the
government by retaining core strategic partnerships with MMDAs, national
ministries, departments and agencies, commissions and development authorities,
while exploring government cost-sharing engagements Additionally, UNDP will
strengthen collaboration with other UN agencies in the context of Delivering as
One (DaO) and leverage its existing partnerships with bilateral and multilateral
donors especially the top five development partners from the last CPD cycle:
Green Climate Fund (GCF), Adaptation Fund, the governments of Japan and Germany,
and the Global Environment Facility (GEF) New partnerships with CSOs (for
advocacy, accountability, and expertise), academia (quality data innovative
solutions and for knowledge production and gathering, dissemination), and
private sector (for incubation of innovative and alternative sources of
resources, and to create green jobs) will be explored, nurtured and managed
African Union, regional actors, Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), tech hubs, parliament, youth organizations will also be engaged in
programme partnerships identification of The UNDP resource mobilization strategy
will include scaling up access to vertical funds such as GCF, Adaptation Fund,
GEF, and Montreal Protocol and retaining private funding towards the attainment
of the SDGs UNDP will continue to partner with the government on the
implementation of the Integrated National Financing Framework (INFF) relating to
SDG financing strategies at subnational and national levels to complement the
Country Financing Roadmap for the SDGs,  country-led initiative to formulate an
action plan to unlock greater financing for SDGs achievement Accountable,
inclusive, and responsive governance and social cohesion Noting the UNDP track
records in institutional capacity strengthening and multi-stakeholder
engagement, UNDP will align efforts with national priorities and support state
and non-state institutions in enhancing their capabilities through the
exploration of innovative approaches To accelerate the implementation of the
SDGs, UNDP will support impactful policymaking, strategic innovation,
digitalization, inclusive data collection and use, and promote easy access to
information through one-stop shops/dashboards UNDP will support and provide
technical assistance to the National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) to
support routine data collection, surveys and compilation of national human
development reports and multi- dimensional poverty indices Jointly with the
United Nations country team (UNCT) and other Development Partner (DPs), UNDP
will focus on data and analytics to strengthen national statistical systems for
planning, financing and reporting with attention on inclusion of vulnerable
groups such as women and youth in national data sets, and to ensure timely
production of data for SDG reporting Building on past success in facilitating
constitutional reform and supporting the conduct of free, fair and transparent
elections, UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Justice and Attorney General’
Department and Parliament to support ongoing constitutional, electoral and legal
reforms that promote inclusive and transparent governance processes In
collaboration with civil society, the Electoral Commission, and National
Commission for Civic Education, UNDP will enhance aspects of voter education,
citizen participation in electoral processes at national and local levels, and
the expansion and uptake of globally accepted digital technologies and
innovations to improve transparency and effective management of general and
local elections critical role, UNDP will enhance the enabling environment for
economic governance, including natural resource management, to contribute to
social cohesion and delivery of people- centered economic dividends In line with
SDGs , , and 16, UNDP will provide tools, methodologies, and capacities to
support partnerships between UN agencies and the government  World Economic
Forum (2021), Country Financing Roadmap for the SDGs: Ghana /16  DP/DCP/GHA/ to
strengthen the efficient and transparent mobilization of revenue UNDP will also
collaborate with national audit institutions, and other UN agencies to promote
more transparency, accountability and cost-effectiveness in public financial
management and control of illicit financing flows UNDP will also enhance
partnerships with CSOs to support advocacy towards the more equitable and
inclusive participation of women and youth in decision-making processes and
management of economic and natural resource governance ecosystems Leveraging its
trusted partner role in line with ICPE recommendations, UNDP will support
effective collaboration amongst local authorities, civil society, and
communities at large, as well as development partners to establish dialogue
spaces for deepening democratic discourse, promoting inclusive participation,
increasing women and youth leadership, and demanding accountability In addition
to strengthen social contract and responsiveness, UNDP will monitor and
transform service delivery by contributing to policy dialogues with national and
local government on citizen rights and accountability as per SDG financing
dialogues Furthermore, UNDP will advocate for policy options on inclusive and
sustainable economic growth and SDG implementation through coordinated platforms
In line with SDG , UNDP will explore  joint intervention with UN Women in
partnership with the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection
(MoGCSP), governments of Canada and Norway, national political parties,
parliament, and other actors to strengthen women groups and CSOs, and address
the inadequate numbers of women in political and governance processes and
mainstream gender equality and empowerment of women and youth, focusing on
vulnerable groups (women, children, people in late adulthood, people with
disabilities, and people living with HIV) UNDP, in partnership with the
Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) and other UN
agencies, will adopt  human rights-based approach that works with right- holders
and duty-bearers and draws on the principle of fulfilling economic, and social
rights to strengthen the protection of the human rights of all segments of
society, particularly women and people living with disabilities Contributing to
SDG , leveraging UNDP global and regional assets, and in partnership with Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), World Health Organization (WHO),
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and Government of
Japan, UNDP will work with the Ghana AIDS Commission (GAC) and Ghana Health
Service to enhance health systems and improve equitable access and rights of
vulnerable groups to health services, especially those related to HIV/AIDS, non-
communicable and infectious diseases (NCDs) To address challenges related to
increasing transnational organized crimes and political instability in
neighbouring countries that has caused an increased number of displaced people
and illegal immigrants, UNDP will continue to build upon its trusted leadership
role in peacebuilding and keeping to expand its reach to regional peace
councils, civil society, CBOs, and other peace actors In collaboration with the
governments of Japan, Germany, and Sweden, UNDP will strengthen efforts to
prevent and mediate ongoing and emerging conflicts that may involve violent
extremism, political vigilantism, and herdsmen-farmer conflicts, and to combat
terrorism and crime in the country and sub-region This will be accomplished by
working in collaboration with relevant UN agencies and other partners on
programmatic interventions that strengthen the functionality of peace
architecture and introduce measures to promote social cohesion at the regional
level UNDP will also support the creation of an enabling environment to promote
the inclusion of women and youth in peacebuilding processes, capacity building,
dialogue, meaningful participation and direct support to young peacebuilders as
implementers of peacebuilding initiatives in fulfilment of SDG 16, and UN
security council resolutions 1325, 2250, 2419, and See  /16  DP/DCP/GHA/ III
Programme and risk management This country programme document (CPD) outlines
UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of managers at
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is
prescribed in the organization’ Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures
and Internal Control Framework The programme will be nationally executed If
necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for part or
all of the programme to enable response to force majeure Harmonized Approach to
Cash Transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other UN agencies to
manage financial risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to concerned projects In addition,
UNDP will leverage the expertise of regional service centers and headquarters
for needed advisory services Programme accountability will focus on development
results, use of programme resources as well as the sustainability of development
investments Development financing challenges in Ghana’ lower middle-income
country environment shifted funding from aid to trade and investments with
potential risk to resource mobilization efforts to meet projected revenue
Challenges may be multiplied by the Ukraine-Russia conflict and deviation of
development finance from other regions, including Africa, all of which may
impact the implementation of planned activities To address potential shortfalls
in aid flows and seize emerging opportunities, UNDP will explore new types of
financing, partnerships and collaborations, along with support analytical work
on expanding fiscal spaces, including innovative sources of financing from
private sector and non-traditional donors UNDP will use its convening power to
galvanize partnerships with bilateral and multilateral institutions While the
size of the programme is expected to increase significantly in the new cycle,
UNDP will adopt measures from conducting private sector to human rights due
diligence to avoid operational and reputational risks Over time, measures will
be modified to ensure UNDP adapts to new challenges Political risks and possible
flare-ups of latent and emerging conflicts can negatively impact the
implementation of planned projects in affected communities UNDP will manage this
risk by continuously scanning the operating environment, strengthening
collaboration with national authorities, and strengthening early warning and
response mechanisms The programme will be agile enough to be adapted to evolving
contexts, UNDS reforms, and the new UNDP Strategic Plan Potential health threats
arising from poor sanitation management, regional and national health epidemics,
climate-related disasters, and negative environmental impacts related to
unregulated mining will be addressed through proactive collaboration with
national authorities, regional entities to enhance the policy environment,
promote adherence to national environmental laws and, where possible, strengthen
the resilience of institutions and local communities Ongoing recovery efforts
related to COVID-19 and pandemic-specific socioeconomic implications will be
bolstered by sustained collaboration with the government, UNCT, and development
partners at policy and programme levels UNDP will also enforce quality assurance
principles, apply its Social and Environmental Standards, undertake regular
monitoring, and use the biannual review mechanism to assess programme risks and
put in place mitigation actions IV Monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and
evaluation will be guided by relevant UNDP policies and procedures, and
indicators in the CPD results framework, which are drawn from the Partnership
Framework and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022- /16  DP/DCP/GHA/ In line with ICPE
recommendations for the country office to strengthen its monitoring and
evaluation systems to provide evidence-based data on the progress of results
against targets and generate information on outcomes as well as output level
changes directly related to UNDP contributions, the country office will develop
and implement  comprehensive monitoring and evaluation plan for the new country
programme UNDP will implement the project quality assurance system and develop
capacities for gender-sensitive monitoring and evaluation In addition, the
country office will organize periodic review meetings with partners to assess
progress UNDP will also leverage the monitoring and evaluation capacities of
Ghana’ well-renowned research and academic institutions, and the Ghana
Statistical Service (GSS) to conduct surveys and contribute to evaluations,
policy briefs and reports  share of the programme budget will be allocated for
these activities  gender marker will be applied to outputs and used to track CPD
budgets and expenditures to improve planning and resources allocation regarding
gender equality At the UNSDCF outcome level, monitoring and evaluation will be
undertaken via inter-agency results groups, as well as through mid-term and
final evaluations of the UNSDCF and CPD The Evaluation Plan in the annex of this
CPD is formulated with  view to enhance transparency, learning, accountability
for results within CPD priority areas and to generate lessons for improved
programming This plan complies with Section II of the UNDP evaluation policy and
will be periodically reviewed to address changes made during the CPD
implementation cycle The evaluation plan will be reviewed and updated
periodically Evaluations will be selected, planned and conducted to measure
progress and results for learning and accountability purposes Findings and
recommendations from all evaluations will be used to enhance project, portfolio
and programme design and implementation and will inform decisions to make needed
adjustments during the implementation phase as well as ensure accountability to
stakeholders In addition, evaluations will be used to strengthen the quality of
partnership for resource mobilization to expand the scope of key interventions
for increased impact /16  DP/DCP/GHA/ Annex Results and resources framework for
Ghana () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Building  green, inclusive, and prosperous
country that creates opportunities for all COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT)
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #: By 2025, people in Ghana particularly, women, youth,
persons with disabilities and those furthest behind will enjoy an inclusive and
transformed economy that creates decent jobs and sustainable livelihoods
reducing inequality RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation
accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions ESTIMATED
COST BY OUTCOME (US dollars) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(),
BASELINES, TARGET() DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators,
baselines targets) MAJOR PARTNERS/ PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS Regular: 500,000
Other: ,000,000 Indicator: Proportion of men women and children of all ages
living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definitions (SDG
indicator ) Data Source: Multi-dimensional child index in Ghana and Multi-
dimensional Poverty Index, Ghana National Development Planning Commission
(NDPC), Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Trade and Industry (MoTI), Ghana
Statistical Service (GSS), Ghana Enterprise Agency (GEA), Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO), International Fund for Agricultural Development, United
Nations Capital Development Fund Output : Enabling environment improved for
enhanced productivity of youth and women led MSMEs Indicator : Number of
enabling, inclusive and gender responsive strategies and digital solutions
developed and implemented to increase productivity of MSMEs Baseline:  (2021)
Target: 50 (2027) Data Source: MoTI/MoF reports and Ghana Budget Statement
Frequency: Annual Frequency: Every four years Baseline: Overall: % (2020) Male
heads of households: % (2020) Female heads of households: % (2020) Target:
Overall: % (2025) Male heads of households: % (2025) Female heads of households:
% (2025) Responsible: GSS Indicator : Number of institutions with strengthened
capacities to provide adequate business regulatory and/or development services
to MSMEs Baseline:  Target: 20 Data Source: UNDP Project Reports, National
Development Planning Committee, GEA, Ministry of Trade and Industries reports
Frequency: Annual Indicator: Unemployment rate, by sex, age and persons with
disabilities (SDG indicator ) Data Source: to be determined (TBD) Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD Frequency: TBD Indicator: Output : Institutional capacities to
promote innovative public and private  DP/DCP/GHA/ Reduction in national
emissions of carbon dioxide compared to the “business as usual” scenario
Responsibility: TBD financing/investment for sustainable economic
diversification enhanced Data Source: Ghana’ Communications and Biennial Update
reports to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
Indicator : Number of institutions with enhanced capacity to promote innovative
public and private financing/investment Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2027) Data
Source: MoF report Frequency: Annual Regular: 615,000 Other: ,000,000 Baseline:
69 MtCO2e9 (2019) Target: 79 MtCO2e (2025) Indicator: Proportion of land
degraded over total land area Frequency: Biennial Responsibility: The Ministry
of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation (MESTI) and Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) Baseline: ,963,900 ha (2020) Target: ,706,950 (2025)
National Youth Authority (NYA); Ministry of Youth and Sports, MoF, GEA, the
National Entrepreneurship and Innovation Programme, MoTI, United Nations
Children’ Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), and
UNIDO Data Source: Annual Progress Reports of the Ghana Forestry Commission
(FC), Ghana’ Communications and Biennial Update Reports to UNFCCC Output :
Degraded landscapes (reserves and off-reserves) restored through public and
private partnerships for people and planet Regular: 600,000 Others: 22,000,000
Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR), Forestry Commission, environment
Protection Agency, MESTI, MMDAs, research institutions, CSOs, traditional
authorities, Ghana Cocoa Board, State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, European
Union, FAO, other development partners Frequency: Annual/biennial Indicator :
Number of hectares of degraded land or forests under improved management
(through Modified Taungya System (MTS), Community Resource Management Areas
(CREMAs) that contributes to CO2 emission reductions Baseline: 124,096 ha (2021)
Target: 730,000 ha (2027) Data Source: FC Frequency: Annual Responsibility: FC
Indicator : Tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent ( CO2eq) reduced or avoided
(including increased removals)  Unit of measurement refers to metric tons of
carbon dioxide equivalent 10 DP/DCP/GHA/ Baseline:  tCO2e (2021) Target:
million tCO2e (2027) Data Source: FC, Ghana’ Communications and Biennial Update
reports to UNFCCC Frequency: Annual MLNR, FC, EPA, MESTI, MMDAs, research
institutions, CSOs, and traditional authorities Regular: 600,000 Others:
12,000,000 Output : Communities enabled to adopt systems for integrating climate
change and environmental considerations into management of natural resources (,
forest and land) and livelihood activities Indicator : Number of Community
Resource Management Areas (CREMA) or similar landscape management structures
established and operationalized Baseline: 49 Target: 60 Data Source: Forestry
Commission Reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of males and females
benefitting from the adoption of diversified, climate resilient livelihood
options Baseline: Females: ,600 (2021) Males: ,400 (2021) Target: Female: 15,600
(2027) Male: ,200 (2027) Data Source: Forestry Commission reports Frequency:
Annual Indicator : Number of districts with development plans integrating
climate change and environmental considerations 11 DP/DCP/GHA/ Baseline: 10
(2021) Target: 50 (2025) Data Source: NDPC reports Frequency: Annual Regular:
600,000 Others: 12,000,000 MESTI, Association of Ghana Industries, Ghana
Recycling Initiative by Private Enterprises, Ministry of Local Government and
Rural Development, Ministry of Sanitation and Water Resources, Accra
Metropolitan Assembly, MMDAs, Private Enterprise Federation, UNICEF, UNIDO,
research institutions, CSOs, development partners, Netherlands Embassy in Ghana,
Canadian Embassy, Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, EPA Output: : Risk-informed and
Evidence-based plans/policies and innovative solutions developed and financed at
national and subnational levels for gender-responsive climate action, green and
circular economy in line with international conventions Indicator1: Number of
innovative finance instruments developed and implemented for climate smart
agriculture, just energy transition and disaster risk reduction Baseline:
(2021) Target:  (2027) Data Source: National Communication to the UNFCCC and
Biennial Transparency Report Frequency: Annual Indicator1: Number of
partnerships with state and non-state actors for environmental services
established and implemented Baseline: 14 (2021) Target: 30 (2027) Data Source:
MESTI reports Frequency: Annual Indicator : Extent to which gender sensitive
policy measures (governance, financing mechanisms and institutional capacities)
are developed and implemented for climate action, green and circular economy
Baseline:  (very partially) Target:  (partially) Data Source: MESTI reports
Frequency: annual 12 DP/DCP/GHA/ NATIONAL GOAL:  democratic political system
that maintains  stable, united and safe country, is issue based, people-centred,
result-oriented and accountable to the public COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #:
By 2025, people in Ghana will benefit from transparent, accountable, inclusive
governance institutions and systems including quality integrated digital
services delivering  peaceful, cohesive and just society STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:
Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital
transition Indicator: Level of citizen trust in institutions Output : Democratic
institutions and processes strengthened for an inclusive and open public sphere
with expanded public engagement Data Source: Afrobarometer Survey Report
Ministry of Local Governance (MoLC), Inter-ministerial committee on local
government, MMDAs, Public Service Commission, NDPC, MoGSP, Children and Social
Protection, NYA, Ministry of Interior, Electoral Commission, CSOs, development
partners, Netherlands Embassy in Ghana, Canadian Embassy, GIZ, United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) National Peace Council (NPC), National Commission on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, CSOs, National Security Fusion Center,
International Organization for Migration (IOM), UNFPA, United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), UNICEF, Regular: 500,000 Others: ,500,000 Frequency:
Biennial Baseline: (2020) Parliament – % EC – % Local Government Council – % The
Police – 39% Ghana Armed Forces – % Courts – % Target: (2025) Parliament – 60%
EC – % Local Government Council – % The Police – 55% Ghana Armed Forces – 75%
Courts – 50% Indicator : Number of strategies implemented at the national and
sub-national levels to promote inclusive spaces for advancing leadership and
participation of women, and youth in public life Baseline:  (2021) Target: 10
(2027) Data Source: MoGCSP Reports Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Ghana
Centre for Democratic Development (CDD) Indicator : Number of mechanisms
instituted to strengthen public sector agility and effectiveness for improved
service delivery Baseline: (2022) Target:  (2027) Data Source: MMDA Reports
Frequency: Annual Indicator: Proportion of population that feel safe walking
alone around the area they live (SDG Indicator ) Output : Communities and
infrastructures for peace enabled to adopt systems for resilience and, early
action and prevention Regular: 404,000 Others: ,000,000 Data Source: Ghana
Living Standard Survey Indicator : Extent to which early action measures are
adopted to manage current and emerging conflicts Baseline: Level : Partially
Target: Level : Moderately Data Source: NPC Reports Frequency: Annual Frequency:
Every four years Baseline: % (2019) -feels very safe % (2019) -feels moderately
safe Target: % (2025) - feels very safe 42% (2025) feels moderately safe
Responsibility: GSS Indicator : Number of gender- responsive community and
cross-border initiatives and action 13 DP/DCP/GHA/ Indicator: Extent to which
Ghana’ national human rights institutions are in compliance with Paris
Principles (SDG indicator ) plans in place for enhancing resilience and conflict
prevention Baseline: National  (2021); Sub-national  (2021) Target: National
(2027); Sub-national 10 (2027) Data Source: NPC/GNACSA Reports Frequency: Annual
development partners, and Netherlands Embassy in Ghana Data Source: Annual
Progress Reports Scale:  – Not Compliant  – Partly Compliant  – Mostly Compliant
– Fully Compliant Baseline: (2022) Target: (2025) Indicator : Number of women
and youth organizations, movements and networks at sub- national level with
strengthened capacity for conflict prevention, resilience and national interest
Baseline: Women: , Youth:  (2021) Target: Women: , Youth:  (2027) Data Sources:
NPC Reports Frequency: Annual Output : Local governance systems strengthened for
increased socioeconomic opportunity, inclusive and gender sensitive basic
service delivery, transparency and accountability Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ),
Amnesty International Ghana Regular: 500,000 Others: 10,000,000 MoLC,
ministerial committee on local government, MMDAs, local government service,
academia, CSO’, private sector, and UNICEF Indicators : Number of new measures
implemented to enhance the agility and responsiveness of local governance
institutions for improved service delivery and accountability Baseline:  (2021)
Target: 20 (2027) Data Source: Local Government Service Reports Frequency:
Annual Indicator : Number of women and youth focused CSOs with enhanced capacity
to participate in governance processes at the local level Baseline (2021):  CSO
(),  CSOs () Target (2027):  CSO (),  CSOs () Data Source: GSS Reports
Frequency: Annual Output : Economic governance capabilities, including on
natural resource management strengthened, to contribute to social cohesion and
delivery of the economic dividends of democratic governance Regular: 300,000
Others: ,500,000 Commission of Human Rights and Administrative Justice, Judicial
Service, Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MMDAs), National Youth Authority,
MoGCSP, UN Women, International Indicator : Number of initiatives implemented at
national and sub-national level to enhance the 14 DP/DCP/GHA/ Labour
Organization (ILO), UNFPA, UNAIDS, National AIDS Control program, Ghana AIDS
Commission, Inter- Ministerial Coordination Committee on Implementation of
Universal Periodic Review (UPR), Ministry of Health, Ghana Health Service (GHS),
non-state actors, and Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources enabling
environment for economic and natural resource governance Baseline: National:
(2021) Sub-national:  (2021) Target: National:  (2027) Sub-national:  (2027)
Data Source: NDPC reports and MMDA composite budgets Frequency: Annual Indicator
: Number of women and youth and their networks engaged in the economic and
natural resource governance ecosystem Baseline (2021):  Networks Target (2027):
Networks Data Source: NDPC Reports Frequency: Annual Output : Policies and
strategies developed and implemented for equitable health services for all of
society, particularly the vulnerable Indicator : The number of digital solutions
introduced to accelerate equitable health service delivery to the vulnerable and
marginalized Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2027) Data Source GHS and NDPC Report
Frequency: Annual Indicator : Number of health institutions with strengthened
capacity to provide non-discriminatory services to all Baseline:  (2021) Target:
(2027) Data Source: GHS Report Frequency: Annual Output : National capacities
for planning, budgeting and data systems for SDGs 15 DP/DCP/GHA/ implementation,
including indicator tracking and reporting, strengthened Indicator : Number of
strategies implemented to generate data for SDG implementation and reporting
Baseline:  (2021 Target: 10 (2027) Data Source: Voluntary National Review Report
Frequency: Biennial 16