     GHANA RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT                              :
November 2015 Please adjust the spine base on the   thickness of the inside
pages    Copyright © IRENA 2015 Unless otherwise stated, this publication and
material featured herein are the property of the International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA Material in this
publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or
stored, provided that all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears
notation that it is subject to copyright (© IRENA, 2015) Material contained in
this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third party
copyright and separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in
relation to any commercial use About IRENA The International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries in
their transition to  sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal
platform for international cooperation,  centre of excellence, and  repository
of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy
IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of
renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and
wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy
security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity Acknowledgements IRENA
prepared this report in close collaboration with Lawrence Agbemabiese
(University of Delaware, USA) Edward Awafo and Abeeku Brew Hammond (KNUST,
Ghana), and Ishmael Edjekumhene (KITE, Ghana) The report benefited from review
and consultations with the Ministry of Power as well as the Energy Commission of
Ghana IRENA wishes to thank the following experts for their insights and
constructive guidance during the peer review process: David Ato Quansah (KNUST,
Ghana), Joseph Essandoh (Energy Commission, Ghana), Monica Maduekwe (ECREEE),
Seth Mafo (Ministry of Power, Ghana), Yacob Mulugetta (University of London,
UK), Kwabena Otu-Danquah (Energy Commission, Ghana), Bah Saho (ECREEE) and
Wisdom Togobo-Ahiataku (Ministry of Power, Ghana) Authors: Gauri Singh (IRENA),
Safiatou Alzouma Nouhou (IRENA) and Mohamed Youba Sokona (IRENA) Disclaimer This
publication and the material featured herein are provided “as is”, for
informational purposes All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to
verify the reliability of the material featured in this publication Neither
IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other, third-party content
providers or licensors provides any warranty, including as to the accuracy,
completeness, or fitness for  particular purpose or use of such material, or
regarding the non-infringement of third-party rights, and they accept no
responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication and the
material featured therein The information contained herein does not necessarily
represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an endorsement of any
project, product or service provider The designations employed and the
presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on
the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory,
city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers
or boundaries GHANA RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT II FOREWORD from the
Minister of Power Ghana is endowed with renewable energy resources that can be
utilised to contribute to sustainable economic growth of the country It has been
recognised that these resources can contribute to achieving the Sustainable
Energy for All agenda by ensuring access to modern energy services for the
majority of rural communities It has been established that small-scale renewable
energy systems can provide affordable and cleaner energy for cooking and heating
and for empowering enterprises for increased production, create employment and
increase rural income and thereby reduce poverty In an effort to increase
sustainable energy access to her population, particularly in the rural areas,
the Government of the Ghana developed the Sustainable Energy for All Action
Plan, which is anchored on the Renewable Energy Act passed by the Parliament of
Ghana in 2011, whose objective is to provide for the development, management,
utilisation, sustainability and adequate supply of renewable energy for
generation of heat and power and for related matter In implementing the SE4ALL
Action Plan and the Renewable Energy Act, Ghana received the support of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the ECOWAS Centre for
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) to increase the uptake of
renewables through the Renewables Energy Readiness Assessment (RRA) The RRA is
process that assesses the potentials and opportunities for renewable energy
development and identifies barriers and constraints that hinders its development
and therefore identifies possible solutions and concrete actions over  short-
term to increase the uptake of renewable energy to contribute to sustainable
energy access The RRA process therefore identifies components in the renewable
energy sector agenda that impedes its development and identify potential
opportunities in the form of investment potentials in the sector Realising our
national development plans will depend on the continuation of this support and
the identification of increased resources for investment, Ghana is actively
looking at opportunities in the renewable energy sector and ways of maximising
investment Ghana is therefore grateful to the International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) and the ECREEE for being selected as  participating country for
the Renewable Readiness Assessment (RRA) Process The actions identified in the
RRA process will help strengthen our investment framework, create  renewable
energy friendly institutional and regulatory framework, support techno-economic
assessments of renewable energy systems, and develop  biofuel framework, all of
which will go  long way in assisting in the implementation of the Draft
Renewable Energy Strategy for Ghana As  founding member, Ghana fully supports
the mandate of IRENA to promote the deployment of renewable energy worldwide We
also fully endorse the RRA process, which creates  solid foundation for
enhancing the contribution of renewable energy to social and economic
development in Ghana and Africa It is my ardent hope that the RRA Report for
Ghana will receive  wider international reception and consequently provide
medium for increasing investment in renewable energy development in the country
with the support of all our development partners Hon Dr Kwabena Donkor Minister
of Power III IV FOREWORD from the IRENA Director-General The Africa High-level
Consultative Forum held by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in
July 2011 highlighted the opportunity presented to African Countries by
renewable energy and the need for technical support to countries and regions to
identify their readiness to scale up IRENA’ Renewables Readiness Assessment
(RRA) process, initiated as part of the forum’ outcome, involves  holistic
evaluation of  country’ social, economic and environmental conditions, in order
to identify the actions needed to overcome barriers to deployment of renewables
This is  country-led process, with IRENA primarily providing technical support
and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders
Since 2011, more than 20 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America and
the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific have undertaken the RRA process, which
generates knowledge of best practices and supports international co-operation
around the accelerated deployment of renewable energy technologies Ghana,
strong and consistent supporter of IRENA’ mission, is one of those countries The
country has one of West Africa’ highest rates of access to electricity,
estimated at around 72% — with over 87% in urban areas and  little under 50% in
rural areas — and also exports power to neighbours However, local demand is
growing at about 10% annually, necessitating further growth in energy generation
Ghana is well endowed with renewable energy resource potential, particularly
biomass, solar and wind, and to  lesser extent small and mini-hydropower In
combination with energy efficiency measures, renewable energy development would
greatly bolster Ghana’ energy security as well as filling the remaining gaps in
electricity access The Renewable Energy Law adopted in 2011 provides for the
establishment of two crucial policy instruments: the feed-in-tariff (FiT), which
creates pricing incentives for renewable power generation; and the Renewable
Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO), incumbent on every electrical distribution
utility or bulk customer The law prompted the establishment of  national
renewable energy development fund, while the government has channelled levies on
energy consumption to finance power sector upgrades To attract private
investment in Ghana’ energy transition, renewable energy technologies have been
made exempt from import duty IRENA wishes to thank Minister Kwabena Donkor and
his team at the Ministry of Power for their commitment to this study We are
grateful for their positive engagement and valuable input, which has given us
additional insights for further RRAs in Africa and beyond  sincerely hope that
the findings and recommendations from the RRA consultations will enhance Ghana’
pursuit of accelerated renewable energy deployment IRENA stands ready to provide
continuing support for the country to implement the actions identified and
further the pursuit of  cleaner and more prosperous energy future Adnan  Amin
Director-General, IRENA  VI TABLE OF CONTENTS LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF TABLES
ABBREVIATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY VIII IX  XI  INTRODUCTION   Country Overview
Energy and Development Nexus in Ghana  The Renewables Readiness Assessment
Process in Ghana    II ENERGY CONTEXT   Regional Context  Energy Supply and
Demand in Ghana  Electricity System  Renewable Energy Resource and Potential
13 III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY 19  Key Energy Stakeholders and
Institutions  Policy and Regulatory Framework  Financing and Investment 19 21 22
IV EMERGING ISSUES IN THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY 25  On-grid Electricity
Decentralised Renewable Energy Applications  Modern Cooking/Heating with Biomass
Opportunities and Constraints Affecting Renewable 25 28 32 Energy Expansion 35
REFERENCES 37 ANNEX 38 VII LIST OF FIGURES Figure  Sector Growth Rates in Ghana,
2009 - 2013  Figure  Access to fuels in 2010  Figure  Schematic of WAGP
Pipelines  Figure  Total Primary Energy Supply  Figure  Trends in Petroleum
Imports (between 2000 and 2011)  Figure  Ghana Electricity Sector Institutional
Structure 10 Figure  National Interconnected Transmission System of Ghana 12
Figure  Global Solar Irradiation in Ghana 16 Figure  Annual Mean Wind Profile
for Mankoadze and Anloga 18 Figure 10 2013 Electricity Tariffs Compared with
Long Run Marginal Cost of Solar PV 26 Figure 11 Procedures for Entry into the
Electricity Market with Renewables 28 Figure 12 Map of Recommended Off-grid
Communities Showing Solar Radiation Levels 29 Figure 13 ARB APEX BANK GHANA
Project Financing Plan 30 Figure 14 Locations of DTI Solar Dryer Tests in 31
Figure 15 Average Time Saved per Day per Stove-Associated Activity 33 Figure 16
Alternative Activities for Participants Using Improved Cookstoves 33 VIII LIST
OF TABLES Table  GDP Growth Rates in Ghana  Table  Ghana RRA Service Resource
Pairs  Table  ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy Targets  Table  Electricity
Generation by Plant 11 Table  Renewable Energy Priority Projects 13 Table
Modern Energy from Biomass Resources 14 Table  Identified Mini Hydropower Sites
in Ghana 15 Table  Potential Small and Medium Hydro Sites 15 Table  Gross Wind
Resource Potential of Ghana 18 Table 10 Key Institutions in Ghana’ Energy Sector
20 Table 11 Ghana Feed-in Tariffs 22 Table 12 Small-scale Solar PV Systems in
Ghana 28 Table 13 Charcoal Savings for Four Toyola Stove Sizes 32 IX
ABBREVIATIONS ECG Electricity Company of Ghana ECOWAS Economic Community of West
African States ECREEE ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
EREP ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy FiT Feed-in Tariff GDP gross domestic
product GEDAP Ghana Energy Access and Development Project GHS Ghana cedi GRIDCo
Ghana Grid Company GW gigawatt GWh gigawatt-hours ha hectares IPP independent
power producer IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency km kilometre KNUST
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology kV kilovolt kWh kilowatt-hour
kWp kilowatt-peak LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas / metres per second m3 cubic
metres MoEP Ministry of Energy and Petroleum Ministry of Power MoP MW megawatts
NEDCo Northern Electricity Distribution Company NGOs Non-governmental
organisations PPA power purchase agreement PURC Public Utilities Regulatory
Commission PV photovoltaic RPO Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation RRA
Renewables Readiness Assessment SNEP Strategic National Energy Plan USD United
States Dollar VRA Volta River Authority WAGP West Africa Gas Pipeline  Watt
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Formerly known as the Gold Coast, Ghana is on the West Coast
of Africa In 2014, the population stood at 27 million, with  relatively high
rate growth rate of % per annum Its gross domestic product (GDP) has been
increasing by about % per year on average, peaking at 15% in 2011 due to the
start of crude oil production Biomass, consisting mainly of wood fuel like
firewood and charcoal and to  lesser extent crop residues, accounts for half the
Total Primary Energy Supply Oil is the second most widely used source of energy
in Ghana, accounting for 40% of primary energy supply, followed by hydropower
and natural gas accounting for % and % respectively Large hydropower and oil-
fired plants provide most of the electricity (64% and 36% respectively) The
Ghanaian power industry is unbundled and consists of state-owned utilities The
generation utilities are the Volta River Authority (VRA) and Bui Power Authority
The Ghana Grid Company (GRIDCo), the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) and the
Northern Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCo) are responsible for
transmission and distribution along with independent power producers (IPPs) like
Sunon Asogli and CENIT Energy Access to electricity is around 72% with over 87%
for urban areas and just under 50% for rural areas In 2012, total generated
electricity in Ghana stood at 12,870 gigawatt-hours (GWh) with demand at ,000
GWh This means the country is  net power exporter to neighbouring countries
Togo, Benin and Burkina Faso However, domestic demand is growing annually by
about 10% and is expected to reach around 24,000 GWh by This will require an
increase in generation capacity to more than  gigawatts (GW) by Furthermore,
recent constraints in the supply of natural gas caused by damage to the West
Africa Gas Pipeline (WAGP) have severely curtailed the capacity of thermal power
plants to meet peak demand This amounts to around ,745 megawatts (MW) This has
forced the utilities to practise periodic load shedding since August Ghana
enjoys excellent renewable energy resources, particularly biomass, solar, wind
and, to  limited extent, small ( MW - 30 MW, according to Economic Community of
West African States — ECOWAS) and mini (100 kilowatt (kW) -  MW) hydropower When
combined with aggressive measures to promote energy efficiency, renewable energy
development can contribute substantially to expanding energy access while
reducing the latent energy crises stalking the country Although, Ghana abounds
in renewable energy resources, the bulk of this potential largely remained
untapped In 2011,  Renewable Energy Law (Act 882) was adopted to provide fiscal
incentives and regulatory framework to encourage private sector investment The
provisions of the Renewable Energy Law includes: Feed-in Tariffs (FiT),
Renewable Energy Purchase Obligations (RPO), Net Metering (distributed
generation), Off-grid Electrification for Isolated Communities, Promotion of
Clean Cookstoves, Research and Development, Renewable Energy Fund (RE Fund), and
the establishment of  Renewable Energy Authority (REA) This report presents the
output of the Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process in Ghana It
highlights  number of bottlenecks impeding the widespread deployment of
renewable energy systems in Ghana, and identifies  range of critical actions in
key areas, which when implemented, could have  significant impact on the scaling
up of renewable energy in the short- to medium-term The report also identifies
stakeholders who are required or expected to play various roles towards the
implementation of the recommended action and the period of time within which,
the actions are realistically expected to be implemented XI The keys findings
from the RRA process are as presented as follows: distribution operators to
connect  renewable energy generator within their area However the proportion of
renewable energy in the electricity mix of bulk consumers has yet to be defined
It is important that this be developed in the context of the target for the
entire renewable energy sector Target setting The National Energy Policy
objective of using 10% of total energy renewable energy production by 2020 was
translated into the generation master plan as 10% of the electricity mix This
focused exclusively on grid-connected applications, essentially % dispatchable
and % variable renewable energy power Investor interest in developing variable
renewable energy power has increased at  time when thermal power generation is
expensive and backup capacity almost nil The time has therefore come for the
government to assess the grid conditions to accommodate variable renewable
energy This will further help establish technology-specific targets and related
definite capacity additions, thereby increasing market confidence and
competition This should drive down costs for The Renewable Energy Law also
provides for the establishment of  renewable energy fund to offer financial
incentives, capital subsidies, production subsidies and equity participation for
renewable energy power generation However, the provision of payment guaranteed
to IPPs, which will affect the commercial viability of renewable energy
projects, remains  concern due to the fact that the distribution companies ECG
and NEDCo are saddled with debt and are unable to meet their payment obligations
to present suppliers, and cannot credibly form an offtake agreement for
renewable energy is important that appropriate structures are put in place to
resolve such challenges, focusing on capacity building for relevant public,
private and civil society organisations investment Therefore, it Grid
integration of variable renewable energy Ghana has developed  comprehensive grid
code, revised most recently in This establishes requirements, procedures,
practices and the standards governing the development, operation, maintenance
and use of the high voltage transmission system in Ghana In its present form,
this grid code lacks two prerequisites that would further enable the integration
of utility-scale variable renewable energy in the grid These are generation
forecasting and priority dispatch The grid code needs to be revised and include
specific conditions accommodating renewable energy generators to provide
accurate data This also has some implications for the system operator, which
would have to adapt by developing the necessary capacities and procedures in its
daily operation The grid code should, in addition, provide priority dispatch for
renewable power The local currency (Ghana cedi, GHS) fall could have
implications for the development of renewable energy projects, as investments
are most likely to be denominated in foreign currency, while revenues are
expected in cedi Designing effective currency risk mitigation instruments, would
help increase investor confidence in financing renewable energy projects
Streamlining the renewable energy IPPs procedure for entering the electricity
market To enter the electricity market,  renewable energy IPP has to interact
with  number of regulatory agencies in the power sector, once detailed
feasibility studies have been completed These include the Energy Commission and
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC), the Environmental Protection
Agency, Ministry of Power (MoP), the Ministry of Finance and the Ghana
Investment Promotion Agency These provide various licences, approvals,
clearances and incentives linked to the development of the renewable energy
project (see figure 11) This complex and lengthy procedure can lead to
significant administrative and transaction costs, and may discourage potential
investors and project developers from entering the market Thus there is  need to
set up  one-stop shop, to reduce complexity and assist IPPs working through the
bureaucracy Given the fact that the RPO imposed on distribution utilities in the
Renewable Energy Law opens the door for consumers to sell renewable electricity
to the grid, net metering solar photovoltaic (PV) electricity is an option that
can be further explored However, the government needs to engage in developing
standards and codes for grid-connected rooftop solar PV as well as supporting
capacity building efforts for local financial institutions Financial support
mechanisms and payment guarantees to IPPs The Renewable Energy Law provides the
basis for developing grid-connected renewable energy This is because it
establishes supportive instruments like FiTs and RPOs for distribution utilities
and bulk consumers, and requires all transmission or Designing clear policy for
off-grid mini-grids The country’ objective of increasing rural access to
electricity would be facilitated by creating  level playing field for local
private sector involvement XII The support announced through the renewable
energy fund (REF) should be clearly defined, with reliable operating schemes
designed for the small-scale decentralised renewable energy mini- grids
Competencies and responsibilities, as well as political direction and
relationships between different stakeholders, should be clearly defined on the
basis of local political frameworks and infrastructure This would provide
sustainable, functional socio-economic background for mini- grids in Ghana range
of generation technologies and more complex management systems Utilities may
also perceive the management of mini-grids as expensive, so these may be better
run by small- and medium-sized enterprises and energy savings companies
Facilitating end users access to technologies and improving cookstove awareness
and acceptability Reviewing electricity tariffs for off-grid systems would help
to attract local private operators This could be accompanied by end-user access
facilitation options include targeted subsidies and deferred payment schemes
that could be pre-financed directly by the service providers or through
microfinance institution  sound business model should be developed for both
stand-alone systems and mini-grids, and needs to increase the viability and
sustainability of decentralised renewable energy projects, as well as access to
electricity services in rural Ghana It could Increasing political support for
promoting sustainable use of biomass energy The government should continue to
create and support policy initiatives aimed at accelerating the development and
promotion of sustainable biomass energy for households This is needed alongside
present policies and goals focused on tackling deforestation effects caused
partly by traditional cookstove use Getting the REF up and running would help,
as would other finance support mechanisms These include group lending approaches
and sustainable credit programmes for low-income operators and farmers
Additionally researchers should be supported in designing,  solar dryers that
could be manufactured locally High interest rates on loans have prevented
supply- side investors from expanding their businesses and increasing production
There is  need to further encourage those entrepreneurs who are prepared to
invest, by supporting them through building capacity, grants programmes and
providing access to working capital Matching government programmes are required
to cultivate fast-growing energy wood plots, improve charcoal production
technologies and skills, and improve cookstove production in Ghana shows that
Previous experience communities often prefer grid connectivity as it has the
potential for higher-wattage appliances They may consider solar power to be
inferior and even discontinue off-grid systems to put political pressure on
governments This is particularly true where the grid has been extended to
neighbouring communities Most farmers in Ghana have limited knowledge of labour-
saving technologies or post- harvest management, especially for perishable
produce There is  need to run awareness-raising campaigns and create
communications strategies to educate operators and farmers about the new
business opportunities and off-grid renewable energy benefits Supporting private
sector involvement The relatively small size of the off-grid market means it is
not very attractive to foreign investors Consequently the sector would probably
be left to local private operators with the support of donors and development
partners Local private operators often face technical and financial constraints
These include lack of technical expertise to develop insufficient working
bankable proposals and capital due to difficulties in accessing loans Other
constraints include high interest rates, attributable to the perception of high
risk and  lack of financial institution expertise in evaluating off-grid
renewable energy proposals There is  need to build the capacity of local private
operators and financial institutions to develop and appraise bankable
decentralised renewable energy project proposals Existing cookstove technologies
also needs to be improved, with new and proven technologies introduced through
innovations that not only increase efficiency, but also reduce emissions This
will decrease exposure to household air pollution and very likely to have an
impact on health of such households, while continuing to support the local
production of cookstoves If consumers are to adopt improved cookstoves in the
long term, the government should embark on critical mass education to increase
product market penetration and acceptability The development and operation of
certain renewable energy technologies in mini-grids requires expertise to assess
the local conditions, and when installing and maintaining systems This is
particularly the case for hybrid systems, because they use  greater XIII Bui
hydropower plant Photo: Ministry of Power XIV  INTRODUCTION  Country Overview
Previously known as the Gold Coast, Ghana is located on the West coast of Africa
It covers  total land area of 239,000 square kilometres (km2) and is divided
into ten administrative regions Ghana’ population in 2014 was 27 million (Ghana
Statistical Service, ), increasing each year at the relatively high rate of %
This compares to % for other lower-middle income countries, but is in line with
the % average for sub-Saharan Africa (United Nations Development Programme,
2011) The country is endowed with diverse and rich natural resources, including
gold, timber, cocoa, diamonds, bauxite and manganese In , Ghana’ gross domestic
product (GDP) growth averaged around % This has risen to % since crude oil
production began in It peaked in 2011 to 15%, as summarised in table  Table :
GDP Growth Rates in Ghana Economic aggregate 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 GDP
current (million USD) 25,773 32,816 39,517 40,436 44,154 Per capita GDP (USD)
,100 ,328 ,606 ,563 ,688 Growth Rates % GDP at current market prices GDP at
constant 2006 prices     Source: Ghana Statistical Service, 2013 The service
sector is the backbone of the economy, accounting for about 51% of the country’
GDP in 2013, followed by industry with 28% and agriculture with 21% The
evolution of GDP share for each economic sector in 2009–2013 is presented in
figure  Figure : Sector Growth Rates in Ghana, 2009 - 2013 Source: Government of
Ghana, 2013   Energy and Development Nexus in Ghana Authorities in Ghana use two
different definitions when it comes to energy access The Ghana Statistical
Service measures access to electricity in terms of the total number of people
living in homes connected to the distribution grid Using the Ghana Statistical
Service definition, electricity accounted for % of household lighting fuels in
Access to modern fuels has not kept up with electricity access As illustrated in
figure , household access to Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) stood at % in 2010,
while the rest of households relied mostly on firewood, charcoal and
agricultural residues The situation is far worse in rural communities where
close to 90% of households depend on either firewood or charcoal for cooking
Energy use is linked directly to economic growth and living standard and
consequently energy is essential for development Equally, energy supply can have
an impact both environmentally and financially, with unrestrained energy
consumption having an adverse effect Although the benefits of increased energy
to national development are not in doubt, Ghana and many of its neighbours in
sub- Saharan Africa continue to lag behind in terms of energy access Figure :
Access to Fuels in 2010 Data from Ghana Statistical Service (2012)
administration, trade and hospitality were other dominant sub-sectors Energy
demand in the service sector is in the form of electricity and petroleum fuels
Electricity consumed by the service sector increased by about 11% This
correlates with the sector’ electricity consumption Per capita consumption of
electricity was 357 kilowatt-hour (kWh) in This is on the high side compared to
about 180 kWh per capita in sub-Saharan Africa, excluding South Africa
(Bazilian, et al, 2012) However, it is far less than the world average of ,500
kWh In 2012, electricity and petroleum product consumption grew by % and around
% respectively GDP growth was at % This suggests GDP growth was somehow
correlated with electricity, but still lagged behind petroleum product
consumption growth As shown in figure , industry overtook the agricultural
sector in 2011 due to oil exploitation and grew by % in The mining and
industrial growth, led the quarrying sector with manufacturing remaining low at
% Industrial electricity consumption outpaced industrial GDP growth It rose by
over 15% The service sector recorded  growth of % in 2012 led by transportation
and storage Public  By contrast, the Ministry of Energy calculates access to
electricity in terms of the total population of communities connected to the
grid, regardless of whether homes in that community are connected or not Going
by this method, 72% of Ghana’ population in 2010 were living in communities that
had access to electricity This report utilises the Ghana Statistical Service
definition of energy access as this takes affordability into account, thereby
providing  more accurate assessment of access than is possible using the
Ministry of Energy’ definition  from ,900 gigawatt-hours (GWh) in 2011 to ,513
GWh in Table : Ghana RRA Service-Resource Pairs Mini-grid Electricity — Hybrid
Sources (Solar Photovoltaic (PV) + Wind or Fossil)  Agriculture in Ghana is
labour-intensive Over 90% of agricultural output comes from subsistence farmers
cultivating less than two hectares (ha) of land Diesel for ploughing is the main
form of energy used in agriculture, although, there are no records of exactly
how much fuel is used On-grid Electricity — Proven Renewable Energy Sources
(Wind or Small Hydro or Solar PV)  Crop-drying/Agro Process Heat — Solar Thermal
In dry periods, water flow to hydroelectric dams is reduced Combined with the
low electricity generation reserve capacity and difficulties acquiring fuel for
thermal generation, this often leads to power cuts or load shedding Low rainfall
in 2003 and 2007 and long-term maintenance on the West Africa Gas Pipeline
(WAGP) in 2013 caused disruption to the power supply This not only affected
households, but commerce and industrial activity The Volta Aluminium Company is
the best known case in point Once  flourishing bauxite processing company, it
has had to shut down some of its production due to inadequate electricity supply
and rising power costs This has meant job and income losses for many families
whose livelihood depends on the company and on related downstream industries
This illustrates the strong correlation between economic development and energy
supply in Ghana, especially electricity The country’ GDP growth rate of % will
only be sustained over the coming years if the energy supply is maintained This
warrants an examination of all forms of available and indigenous energy
resources that could play  crucial role in meeting the country’ energy needs
Cooking/Heating — Modern Biomass  Off-grid Electricity — Solar PV sector and
civil society to be part of the Ghana RRA team They were briefed on the RRA
process Several workshops were conducted throughout the RRA, involving
identifying renewable energy service-resource pairs, selecting prioritisation
criteria and filling in  set of templates for each service-resource pair  final
RRA workshop on  August 2013 completed the service-resource pairs and identified
specific action needed to get the renewable energy sub-sectors going The
service-resource pairs are listed in table  This report is divided into four
sections The first section contains the introduction covering country background
and the RRA process in Ghana The second is an overview of the regional energy
setting It puts Ghana’ national energy sector in context, as well as describing
the challenges it faces, and provides an overview of renewable energy potential
and use It also provides  detailed discussion of the electricity sector The
third section identifies institutions playing  role in Ghana’ energy sector It
also defines key energy policies and regulatory frameworks as well as finance
and investment conditions in Ghana The fourth section discusses the RRA findings
on emerging concerns and enabling conditions for scaling up the service-resource
pairs, presenting the recommended actions and details of the opportunities and
constraints The Annex contains the detailed recommended actions necessary to
scale up renewable energy in Ghana  The Renewables Readiness Assessment Process
in Ghana The Ministry of Energy and Petroleum (MoEP) and the Energy Commission
led the Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) process in Ghana in partnership
with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Centre for Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) and the International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) The MoEP and Energy Commission invited experts from key
governmental institutions, the private  Solar PV for  school in island community
Photo: Ministry of Power  II ENERGY CONTEXT  Regional Context Energy in Ghana
mirrors its broader regional setting, defined here in terms of ECOWAS As
described in later sections of this report, regional trends in energy markets,
as well as policy and regulatory developments, significantly affect prospects
for renewable energy development in Ghana The ECOWAS region has very low energy
consumption This is explained by insufficient access to modernised forms of
energy, including electricity and modern cooking fuels These are key to building
economic activity and reducing poverty Electricity access in 2010 exceeded 20%
in only 10 out of the 15 ECOWAS countries, namely Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Ivory Coast, the Gambia, Ghana, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo Ghana’
high electricity access rate was probably due to the successful implementation
of its National Electricity Scheme The average electricity access rate in the
region was around 40% in 2011, but for many countries stood at less than 20%
(ECOWAS, 2012) The lack of electricity access is most apparent in rural areas,
where it fails to reach over 95% of the population Lower rural energy access in
most ECOWAS countries is partly due to low incomes and the underdeveloped
electricity supply infrastructure The majority of the ECOWAS member countries
predominantly use biomass energy, which contributes more than 80% of the final
energy consumption, as access to modern fuels, such as LPG and kerosene, is
limited (ECOWAS, 2012) Most of the population is in rural and peri-urban areas,
and are dependent on traditional biomass for cooking and heating, with its
related health concerns and environmental consequences If sub-Saharan African
countries, especially those in the ECOWAS region, are to reach the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015, at least half the rural and peri- urban population
must gain access to modernised energy services This access plays  key role in
economic and social development To support such development, ECOWAS member
countries have made some investments in the energy sector to improve their
population’ access to modernised energy services However, these countries still
face common problems and concerns such as: ()  low rate of access to modern
energy services; (ii)  difference between urban and rural access to modern
energy services; (iii) an inadequate institutional and regulatory framework
offering incentives for new energy service providers and investor protection;
(iv)  substantial dependence on oil products for power generation and rural
lighting () barriers to the development of local and renewable energy sources;
(vi)  lack of strong political support and will to improve energy efficiency and
lack of national access targets for energy services ECOWAS has taken the
initiative in promoting sustainable energy technologies and harmonising national
energy legislation to increase energy supply autonomy and massively improve
access to modern energy services This is  policy response to rising energy
security concerns, continued lack of energy access and the need to mitigate
climate change In order to achieve these goals, various policy initiatives and
programmes have been developed in the ECOWAS region They are outlined as
follows: In 2006 ECOWAS published  white paper concerning the regional policy on
access to energy services for populations in rural and peri-urban areas It
expects an increased access to energy services and at least 20% of new
investments in  locally electricity generation originating from available
renewable resources The white paper calls for 100% access to electricity by
2015, to meet the basic needs in urban and peri-urban areas and 36% basic needs
access for rural households ECOWAS also hopes to achieve 100% access to modern
fuel by 2015, with 50%-70% provided through LPG and the rest through improved
wood fuel cookstoves Gas Company’ Itoki natural gas export terminal in Nigeria
It then continues offshore to Takoradi in Ghana via  beachhead in Lagos Gas
delivery laterals from the main Lagos — Takoradi line provide connections to
Cotonou in Benin, Lome in Togo and Tema in Ghana The WAGP was commissioned in
2008 and has  maximum capacity of 474 million standard cubic feet (MMscf) per
day The WAGP Company owns and operates the WAGP This multinational is owned by
Chevron West African Gas Pipeline (%), Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation
(25%), Shell Overseas Holdings (18%), Takoradi Power Company (%), Société
Togolaise de Gaz (%) and Société BenGaz (%) Nigeria, whose natural gas reserves
are estimated at trillion cubic feet, supplies gas to the WAGP (West African Gas
Pipeline Authority 2011) The West African Power Pool has issued  revised master
plan aiming to create  regional electricity market by 2020-ECOWAS countries have
been classified in the plan as follows:  potential self-sufficiency due to large
coal-fired thermal power plants, after 2020 — Senegal, Ivory Coast, Ghana,
Nigeria, Togo/Benin and Niger; The ECOWAS Regional Electricity Regulatory
Authority was created in Its aim is to ensure the regulation of cross-border
exchanges in electricity and provide substantial support for member state
national electricity regulators ii expected to remain dependent on power imports
from neighbouring countries up until at least 2020 — the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger; and In 2008, the ECOWAS Regional Centre for
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) was established by the ECOWAS
energy ministers They were supported by the Governments of Austria and Spain and
had technical assistance from the United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation ECREEE was founded in 2010 in Praia, Cape Verde, and is expected to
further galvanise efforts previously initiated in several ECOWAS member states
These were aiming to mainstream renewable energy into their national energy
policies The creation of ECREEE greatly facilitated the subsequent development
of an ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy (EREP) This was adopted by member countries
in November 2012 with several objectives These include improving energy supply
safety and sustainability and reducing imported fossil fuel dependency and
exposure to volatile hydrocarbons Its other objectives include promoting rural
and urban energy access, creating  favourable environment for private sector
investment and using renewable energy to drive the industrial, social and
economic development (EREP, 2012) Table  displays the EREP targets iii potential
power exporters after 2018 usually by developing hydropower — Ivory Coast,
Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia The bulk of electricity supply capacity
additions are expected to come from large hydropower and natural gas The master
plan envisages adding 16,000 km of transmission lines and 10,000 megawatts (MW)
of installed capacity Of this, ,000 MW will be derived from hydropower sources
by The plan also adds 10% renewable energy (excluding large hydropower) into the
regional electricity fuel mix  330 kilovolt (kV) Ghana-Togo interconnection
project is expected to be commissioned in December 2014 (ECOWAS, 2013) After
ECOWAS proposed  natural gas pipeline across West Africa in 1982, Benin, Ghana,
Nigeria and Togo heads of state signed the WAGP treaty in The pipeline was to
transport natural gas for power plants and industries using heat, from Nigeria
to Benin, Togo and Ghana As illustrated in figure , the 678 km pipeline connects
with the existing Escravos-Lagos pipeline at the Nigeria  Figure : Schematic of
WAGP pipelines BENIN NIGERIA TOGO Onshore Pipeline 56km  30’ GHANA Cotonou + Stn
Lome + Stn Lagos Beach Comp Station Existing ELP Pipeline Tema + Stn Takoradi +
Stn Main line 569km  20’ Source: WAGPCo, 2014 Table : ECOWAS Renewable Energy
Policy Targets 2010 2020 2030 EREP renewable energy options (MW)  ,425 ,606
Total renewable energy penetration (incl medium and large hydro) 32% 35% 48%
EREP renewable Energy options (GWh)  ,350 29,229 Total renewable energy
production (incl medium hydro) 26% 23% 31% Off-grid (mini-grids and stand-alone)
share of rural population served form renewable energy (%) 22% 25% Biofuels (%)
% 15% Improved cookstoves (percentage of population) 60% 100% Efficient charcoal
production 60% 100% Solar water heating and industrial water preheating
technologies • Residential sector & district health centres, maternities, school
25% 50% kitchen and boarding schools • Agro-food industries • Hotels for hot
sanitary water 10% 10% 25% 25% Source: ECREEE, 2012 In co-operation with ECREEE
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, IRENA has created  modelling tool
for West African countries called the ECOWAS Renewable Energy Planning Model
This is for power sector planning that meets various system requirements
including reliability It also accounts for the optimal economic configurations —
including both investment and operation costs — of the system to meet daily
and/or seasonally fluctuating demand Using this tool, IRENA developed
transition scenario for the renewable power sector in ECOWAS countries This
shows that the share of renewable technologies in the region could increase from
22% of electricity generation at present to as much as 52% in 2030 (IRENA, 2013)
This is in line with the EREP targets outlined above is positioning itself as
major player Ghana in regional electricity market by strengthening and extending
transmission interconnections to neighbouring countries Apart from the existing
supplies to Togo and Benin, it plans the ECOWAS  haulage, road and water
passenger transport, and rail, but also in electricity generation, farming,
fishing and industry According to the 2010 Population and Housing Census, % of
Ghanaians use kerosene as their main source of lighting LPG is used as  cooking
fuel in more than 18% of households Other fuels (electricity, kerosene, etc) are
used for cooking by less than % of households in Ghana (Energy Commission, 2014)
to export power to Burkina Faso and Mali in 2014 and 2016 respectively (GRIDCo,
2011) To this end,  new 330 kV interconnection between the Volta region in Ghana
and Lome in Togo was planned for new 225 kV interconnection with Burkina Faso
from Bolgatanga is expected to be commissioned in 2014 (ibid) It is expected
that by 2015, the transmission systems upgrade would enable transmissible power
capacity of about 191 MW to Burkina Faso The Ghana Grid Company (GRIDCo) is also
planning  new 225 kV interconnection from Bolgatanga to Mali via Burkina Faso in
By 2020,  new 225 kV interconnection with the grid in Ivory Coast will be
established through Prestea in the Western Region of Ghana  generation master
plan has been prepared in keeping with Ghana’ long- term strategy of meeting
domestic needs while increasing energy exports This would increase generation
capacity from ,680 MW in 2012 to ,500 MW by The first phase of capacity
additions means converting single cycle into combined cycle plants and therefore
increasing their capacities by about  third Natural forests supply the bulk of
wood fuel consumed in Ghana - up to 90% The remainder comes from wood waste,
like sawmill residue and plantations (Government of Ghana, 2012) and accounted
for 38% of total final energy consumed in Charcoal has been steadily growing in
importance compared to firewood Since 2009, Charcoal’ share of total biomass
supply has increased by 26% while firewood production has increased by an almost
negligible amount of % Trends in biomass consumption mirror this pattern
Charcoal consumption increased by 18% in  compared to  % growth in firewood
consumption over the same period (Energy Commission, 2014) Total national
petroleum product consumption has doubled over the 12-year period Hydropower and
natural gas accounted for % and % primary energy supply respectively  Energy
Supply and Demand in Ghana Biomass consisting mainly of wood fuel, like
firewood, charcoal and to  lesser extent crop residues, accounts for half the
Total Primary Energy Supply Oil is the second most widely used form of energy in
Ghana, accounting for 40% of primary energy supply, while hydro and natural gas
account for % and % respectively (see figure ) The main petroleum products are
gas oil (diesel), petrol, kerosene and LPG, with gas oil being the most widely
consumed The main use of gas oil is transport, namely dry and wet cargo The Tema
Oil Refinery is unable to meet daily national demand for petroleum products of
60,000 barrels per day Imports compensate for the supply shortfall, as shown in
figure  Rising oil product imports had  direct impact on the country’ petroleum
import bill This has been growing consistently from USD 56 billion in 2003 to
USD 44 billion in Petroleum import costs Figure : Total Primary Energy Supply
250 200 150 PJ PJ 100 50  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 Oil Bioenergy Hydro
Natural gas 2000 2005 2010 2012 Based on: IRENA data from the International
Energy Agency and the Energy Commission of Ghana  Figure : Trends in Petroleum
Imports (between 2000 and 2011) Source: National Petroleum Authority, are
susceptible to the international crude oil price and the high demand for
petroleum products in all sectors of the Ghanaian economy Although this
represented about % of Ghana’ GDP in 2012, it put  great deal of strain on
Ghana’ foreign exchange reserves, as it accounted for around 19% of total
merchandise imports of USD billion and 63% of gross international reserves in
growing at about 10% per annum According to the Ghanaian Strategic National
Energy Plan (SNEP), electricity demand is due to grow from less than ,000 GWh in
2012 to about 24,000 GWh by This will require generation capacity to rise to
over  gigawatts (GW) by The institutional arrangement of Ghana’ electricity
sector is displayed in figure  MoP is responsible for policy formulation and
some aspects of its implementation The Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
(PURC) and the Energy Commission are the economic and technical regulators of
the energy sector respectively As the Ghanaian power industry is unbundled and
consists of state-owned utilities The generation Utilities are the Volta River
Authority (VRA) and Bui Power Authority GRIDCo, the Electricity Company of Ghana
(ECG) and Northern Electricity Distribution Company (NEDCo) are responsible for
transmission and distribution along with IPPs — Sunon Asogli and CENIT Energy
Electricity System Electricity accounted for about 13% of total energy consumed
in Ghana in 2013 (Energy Commission, 2014) However, access to electricity is
skewed towards urban households, with over 87% having access to grid electricity
This compares with just under half of rural households using electricity as
their main lighting source (Ghana Statistical Service, 2012) Overall,
electricity demand is estimated to be  Figure : Ghana Electricity Sector
Institutional Structure Ministry of Power Generation Total installed electricity
generation capacity at December 2013 is ,847 MW (Energy Commission, 2014)
Hydropower capacity constitutes 64% of total generation capacity and thermal
capacity 36% Hydropower generation capacity includes the Akosombo, Kpong and Bui
hydropower generation facilities Thermal capacity sources include the Takoradi
Power Company, Takoradi International Company, Sunon-Asogli Power, Tema Thermal
Plant , Tema Thermal Plant , Mines Reserve Plant and CENIT Energy The country’
total electricity generated through the grid was 12,870 GWh (see table ) Recent
constraints in natural gas supply caused by damage to the WAGP have severely
curtailed the capacity of thermal power plants to meet peak demands of about
,745 MW Sunon- Asogli Power, which runs exclusively on natural gas, was
particularly affected Increasingly frequent shortfalls in generation have forced
the utilities to apply periodic load shedding since August Load shedding is
expected to be reduced when the recently commissioned Bui Hydro project reaches
full generation capacity of 400 MW, and gas supply from the WAGP is fully
restored To guide public and the private sector investment in generation, the
country’  generation master plan was commissioned by GRIDCo in close
collaboration with all stakeholders in the energy sector This long-term plan was
developed with  least-cost assumption It reflected technical and economic
constraints such as geographical distribution, power demand evolution,
operational constraints and fuel availability The plan considered  total
installed renewable energy capacity share of 10% by 2020 in order to comply with
the national renewable energy target The total required dependable capacity for
the base case scenario amounts to ,200 MW in 2020 and ,550 MW in The
corresponding installed renewable energy capacity would thus amount to 420 MW
and 550 MW respectively 10 Table : Electricity Generation by Plant Total
generation (GWh) Installed Capacity (MW) Plant Type 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Hydro Generation Akosombo Kpong Bui* ,020 160 266 ,842 ,035 — ,961 ,035 — ,495
,066 — ,950 ,121 — ,727 ,144 362 Sub-Total ,446 ,877 ,996 ,561 ,071 ,233 Thermal
Generation Takoradi Power Company (TAPCO) Takoradi International Company (TICO)
Tema Thermal  Power Plant (TT1PP) Tema Thermal  Power Plant (TT2PP) Mines
Reserve Plant (MRP) Sunon-Asogli Power Ltd (SAPP) CENIT Energy Ltd (CEL)
Takoradi T3 330 220 110 80 200 110 132 453 ,040 570 — 18 — — — ,234 ,160 591 28
20 138 — — ,137 657 559 50 12 ,224 — — ,061 ,168 622 141 20 848 94 — ,783 ,032
475 94 — 694 454 102 Solar Generation VRA Solar Plant*  — — — —  Sub-total ,234
,081 ,171 ,639 ,954 ,634 Grand Total ,682 ,958 10,167 11,200 12,025 12,870 *Bui
and Navrogo were commissioned in 2013 Source: Ghana Energy Commission, 2014
Transmission and Distribution distribution losses are estimated at % and %
respectively for each company The power generated in Ghana is carried through
,000 km of transmission lines across the country to 51 operational transformer
substations The lines operate at various voltages including 330 kV, 225 kV and
161 kV as depicted in figure  The transmission company GRIDCo has the mandate to
provide all participants in the power market with open access to the
transmission grid One aim is efficient power delivery, and transmission losses
average % For distribution purposes, power is ramped down to lower voltages
including kV and 11 kV for major bulk customers such as ECG and NEDCo Technical
and commercial The drive for national electrification has led to an expansion in
the national transmission and distribution grid since the late 1980s Several
programmes and projects have extended the electric grid to the Brong Ahafo,
Northern, Upper East and Upper West regions of Ghana and also supported the
national electrification efforts These are the National Electrification Scheme,
Northern Electrification Programme, the Northern Electrification and System
Reinforcement Project, the Rural Electrification Programme, and the Self- Help
Electrification Project 11 Figure : National Interconnected Transmission System
of Ghana Source: Ghana Grid Company Limited (GRIDCo) 12 Production Costs and
Tariffs The cost of power generation in Ghana varies from plant to plant
depending on  number of factors These include cost of construction, fuel type
and non-variable costs Hydropower constituted about 60% of the electricity
supply, with generation cost at  USD/kWh Thermal generation accounted for about
40% with costs at 09 USD/ kWh for natural gas and  USD/ kWh for light crude oil
and diesel to low rainfall, the electricity mix has increasingly shifted to
costlier thermal generation This has had  negative impact on the financial
position of utility service providers and justifies tariff reform The utility
service providers therefore requested  166% upward adjustment in electricity
tariffs to cover their operational and maintenance costs In 2013, PURC approved
tariff increase of % for all customer categories except for the lifeline tariff,
which was granted  65% increase The increases were part of efforts to acquire
full cost recovery of electricity generation and distribution costs The aim is
to introduce this over  scheduled period using an automatic adjustment formula
The average end-user tariff in Ghana is broken down into bulk generation charge,
transmission service charge and distribution service charge In 2012 these were
estimated at 053 USD/kWh, 013 USD/ kWh and 05 USD/kWh respectively, resulting in
an average end-user tariff of 012 USD/kWh (PURC, 2011) Electricity consumers are
grouped into three main categories - residential, non-residential (or
commercial) and special load tariff These are further subdivided into low,
medium and high voltage customers based on their maximum demand Residential and
non-residential customers are further segregated into separate tariff categories
Renewable Energy Resource and Potential Ghana is well endowed with renewable
energy resources, particularly biomass, solar, wind energy, and to  limited
extent, small- and mini-hydro energy as shown in table  When combined with
aggressive measures to promote energy efficiency, renewable energy development
can contribute substantially to expanding energy access, while reducing the
latent crises of energy insecurity stalking the country Ghana’ electricity mix
was historically dominated by hydropower, so residential tariffs were low and
did not reflect costs However, with growing electricity demand and hydropower
variability due Table : Renewable Energy Priority Projects Expected Installed
Capacity (MW) Investment Requirement (US$) Potential Renewable Energy Projects
Accelerated Timeline Status  MW constructed; construction of  20 MW plant on-
going On-grid solar PV plants 50 100 – 150 2012 – 2014 Medium – small Hydro 150
– 300 200 – 650 2018 – 2020 230 MW feasibility study ongoing Grid-tied Rooftop
Solar (net metered) 19 existing installations with total capacity of
approximately  MW 50 100 – 150 2012 – 2014 Wind resource assessment underway at
16 sites sponsored by VRA and the Energy Commission Wind parks 150 – 300 200 –
600 2018 – 2020 Source: MoEP, 2014; VRA, 2014 Biomass Potential Ghana’ total
stock of direct wood fuel is around 832 million tonnes Unless there are dramatic
improvements in energy efficiency, demand for wood fuel, the dominant energy
source, is expected to rise The increase from 14 million tonnes in 2000 is
projected to reach  million tonnes by 2015 and  million tonnes by If this trend
were to continue as projected, it would put pressure on the nation’ dwindling
forests, leading to major deforestation, with all the associated consequences
for climate change, agriculture and water resources However, wood fuel
consumption seems to have stabilised over the last decade or so, with  %
reduction in demand between 2000-Timber logging uses - million cubic metres (m3)
biomass annually, producing - million m3 of logging residues each year These
include edgings, offcuts, peeler cores, slabs, sawdust and residues 13 from
plywood manufacturing The Kumasi area in particular has  concentration of
residues due to the number of sawmills and plywood manufacturers located there,
whereas Accra has large-scale furniture mills in its vicinity Several smaller-
scale furniture producers are distributed throughout the country Potential wood
residue may also be obtained from road construction, forest skidding trails for
harvested timber haulage, forest clearings for agriculture and surface mining
sites food crops in Ghana Maize is grown across the whole country In 2008, about
million tonnes of maize were harvested from an area of about 850,000 ha,
increasing to about  million tonnes produced in There has been significant rise
In 2010, about million tonnes of cassava was harvested from an area of about
875,000 ha according to the Food and Agriculture Organisation Statistics
Division in High-yielding new varieties of cassava as part of the President’
Special Initiative on cassava production, have been in part responsible for the
increase in production since In 2013, the Food and Agriculture Organisation
Statistics Division estimated Ghana sugar cane production at 145,000 tonnes in
In Ghana, sorghum is cultivated in the savannah zones Food and Agriculture
Organisation crop statistics reported Ghana sorghum 2010 production of about
324,000 tonnes from an area of about 253,000 ha Ghana jatropha plantations
currently cover about ,534 ha and oil palm plantations about 320,000 ha in
cassava production Estimates by Duku, Gu and Hagan (2011) and Mohammed, et al
(2013), place bioenergy potential from crop residue at  terajoules with about
terajoules from animal manure Approximately 976,000 m3 of forestry residues were
generated in 2008,  potential source of bioenergy production (Duku, Gu and
Hagan, 2011) There are several other biomass potential reserves, for example,
trees unsuitable for commercial sale that are removed from plantations and
residues from lumber grade tree harvesting, which could also count as potential
sources of energy Small- and medium-scale hydropower potential Several oil palm
and timber processing firms have taken advantage of their residue streams to
generate electricity for internal use and also for export into the grid Table
lists some of the companies already generating electricity from their waste
resources Much more can be extracted out of the biomass sector The prospect of
harnessing the hydropower potential of small rivers in Ghana has been
investigated for many years, and many potential mini-hydropower sites have been
identified ECREEE defines small hydropower as plants with production capacity
less than 30 MW, but hydropower schemes of up to 100 MW qualify for renewable
electricity Feed-in Tariff (FiTs) under Ghana’ Renewable Energy Act Table  shows
potential hydropower sites in the different regions with individual capacities
of  kilowatt (kW) to ,000 kW Table  also shows small- and medium- scale
hydropower sites with  total capacity of 837 MW also qualifying for the FiT
According to its national energy policy, the Government of Ghana intends to
support the development of these additional hydropower capacities Detailed
technical and financial feasibility studies are under way at five selected sites
VRA is carrying them out at Juale, Pwalugu, Kulpawn and Daboya while the MoP is
conducting the Hemang study Urban areas generate large quantities of organic
municipal waste, with Kumasi and its suburbs ,600 tonnes daily, while generating
up Accra and its surrounding areas produce up to ,500 tonnes daily Municipal
waste generation in from  tonnes per day As it is convertible to energy, this is
potential source of bioenergy to the metropolitan centres ranges Besides wood
residues and municipal waste, energy crops could be used for biofuel production
jatropha, oil palm, in Ghana They sunflower, soybean and coconut for biodiesel
and cassava, maize, sugar cane and sweet sorghum for ethanol (Ahiataku-Togobo
and Ofosu-Ahenkorah, 2009) Maize and cassava are important staple include Table
: Modern Energy from Biomass Resources Plant location Installed capacity (kW)
Average annual energy (GWh) Kwae Oil Mills ,500  Benso Oil Mills 500  Twifo
Mills 610  Juaben Oil Mills 424  Source: Government of Ghana (2012) 14 Table :
Identified Mini Hydropower Sites in Ghana* Potential minimum power (kW)
Potential maximum power (kW) Region Number of sites Upper East and Upper West
499 ,100 Northern 16 913 ,420 Brong Ahafo 364 ,900 Western and Central  332 ,150
Ashanti  140 720 Eastern  569 ,150 Volta 17 ,919 12,065 * Individual site
potential ranges from  kW to ,000 kW Table : Potential Small- and Medium-
Hydropower Sites River basin Potential (MW) Average annual energy (GWh) Black
Volta Koulbi 68 392 Ntereso 64 257 Lanka 95 319 Jambito 55 180 Total: 282 ,148
White Volta Pwalugu 48 184 Kulpawn 36 166 Daboya 43 194 Total: 127 544 River Oti
Juale 90 405 Total: 90 405 River Tano Asuaso 25 129 Sedukrom 17 67 Jomoro 20 85
Tanoso 56 256 Total: 118 537 Pra River Awiasam 50 205 Hemang 90 336 Abatumesu 50
233 Kojokrom 30 136 Total: 220 910 Source: Energy Commission (2010) 15 Solar
Energy Resource The Ghana Meteorological Services Agency Data has been
collecting for over 50 years, data on the solar radiation and sunshine hours The
probable error for the daily irradiation data is 15% The Mechanical Engineering
Department at Kumasi’ Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST)
measures hourly global and diffuse irradiance, where the probable error is % The
monthly average solar irradiation in Ghana ranges between - kWh/m2/day, this
includes  hours at Kumasi in the cloudy semi- deciduous forest region to  hours
at Wa in the dry savannah region Northern Ghana, including northern parts of
Brong-Ahafo and the Volta, have  monthly average of - kWh/ m2/ day, which is
very high This area also experiences  major rainy season between July and
September, and the Harmattan,  hot, dry wind, between November and February
Ashanti, parts of Brong-Ahafo, Eastern, Western and parts of Central and Volta
regions have monthly average radiation level range of - kWh/ m2/ day (Energy
Commission, 2012) Greater Accra and the Central and Volta coastal regions have
monthly average radiation levels between - kWh/ m2/day (see figure ; Energy
Commission, 2012) Figure : Global Solar Irradiation in Ghana
Global (Total) Radiation (kWh/m2/day) Very Low Diffuse Radiation (32%) Very High
Diffuse Radiation (48%-53%) Moderate Diffuse Radiation (41%-45%) 300 60 120 180
240 Low Diffuse Radiation (36%-40%) Kilometers High Diffuse Radiation (45%-47%)
Source : Ministry of Power 16 About 15,000 solar systems have been deployed in
rural areas with an estimated installed capacity of about  MW This was achieved
through the Ghana Energy Access and Development Project (GEDAP) funded by
multiple donors It is being implemented by MoEP next six years in increments of
MW annually This would ensure the 10% renewables target (wind and solar) in the
energy portfolio is reached by Small-scale grid-connected solar PV systems have
been tested in Ghana, and there are 19 existing installations with  combined
capacity of around  MW One of these is the KNUST grid-connected solar PV system
on the roof of its College of Engineering The is 24 kW and has monitoring
equipment that takes readings at hourly intervals The system serves as  tool for
research and teaching and has been used to assess grid-connected solar PV grid-
connected systems VRA commissioned   MW grid-connected solar plant in Navrongo
in 2013 as part of its Renewable Energy Development Programme This aims to
install  total capacity of 10 MW in its first phase The Navrongo plant is the
first “large-scale” solar plant to be integrated into the national grid It
comprises six PV arrays covering  ha The China Wind Power Company completed the
installation for USD  million funded by VRA, which is receiving  grant of EUR
from KfW2 to add another 12 MW at Kaleo and Lawra in the Upper West Region The
state generator is also negotiating another 57 ha of land for grid-connected
solar electricity generation at Bongo in the Upper East Region It hopes to add
another 100 MW over the installed capacity total  number of international and
national developers have shown  growing interest in developing utility- scale
solar PV plants Blue Energy has announced it plans to build  155 MW solar PV
plant in the Western Region of Ghana  section of the solar PV panels of KNUST’
24 kWp system Photo: Ministry of Power  Formerly the Kreditanstalt für
Wiederaufbau Bankengruppe (KfW banking group), meaning Reconstruction Credit
Institute —  German government-owned development bank, based in Frankfurt  17
Wind Energy Resource Ghana’ technical wind power potential has been estimated at
more than ,000 MW Average wind speeds are - metres per second (/), corresponding
to wind class categories  and  shown in table  Overall, the most promising areas
for deployment of wind power plants are along the mountains in the south-eastern
part of the country and along the eastern coastal areas of the country It has
been estimated that  MW of onshore wind power could be established there with
wind speeds in excess of  / (Essandoh, Osei and Adam, 2014)  MW It has also
signed contracts for additional wind speed measurement at six sites to determine
which are best for wind power development: Anloga, Lekpoguno, Akplabanya,
Mankoadze, Amoma South and Gambaga To encourage grid-connected wind energy
systems,  technical and financial assessment was conducted at KNUST Energy
Center It was conducted using wind data collected at Mankoadze and Anloga Wind
speeds at Mankoadze averaged  / and were taken at 12  heights between January
2001 and July Anloga wind speeds were lower, at an average of  / taken at 20
heights between May 2006 and December Figure  shows that the annual mean wind
speed for Mankoadze increases from  / at 12  above ground level, reaching  / at
100  The VRA has entered into agreements with two wind infrastructure
manufacturers and project developers - Vestas Mediterranean and Elsewedy - to
develop two wind parks, capable of producing Table : Gross Wind Resource
Potential of Ghana Wind Power at 50  Wind Speed at 50  Percent Windy Land Total
Technical Capacity Total Area Wind Resource Utility Scale Wind Class /m2 km2 / %
MW Moderate  300 - 400  –  715  ,575 Good  400 – 500  –  268  ,340 Very Good
500 – 600  –  82 < 410 Excellent  600 – 800  –  63 < 315 Total ,128  ,640 Where:
is Watt Source: Ministry of Energy, 2013 Figure : Annual Mean Wind Profile for
Mankoadze and Anloga Source: KNUST 18 III ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE
ENERGY Historically, the institutional framework of the energy sector and
associated human capacities was designed to support large-scale, centralised
energy infrastructure For the most part, however, renewable energy development
requires more decentralised governance approaches, including the creation of new
policies, regulations and plans that catalyse the active participation of new
players in the public and private domain In addition, renewable energy
development often requires fundamental changes in the roles and responsibilities
of key actors making up the energy sector institutional framework This section
reviews the key energy stakeholders and the policy, regulatory, financing and
investment framework of the country’ energy sector  Key Energy Stakeholders and
Institutions The Ghana energy system is managed by the public sector MoP is
responsible for formulating, implementing, monitoring and evaluating power
sector policies VRA and Bui Power Authority are state-owned utilities that
generate the bulk of the country’ electricity supply GRIDCo manages the national
transmission and system operation and supplies electricity to industrial and
mining units as well as to the two VRA electricity distribution companies ECG
and NEDCo  number of regulatory agencies have been established by acts of
parliament This is to ensure all players in the energy sector function properly,
and to create  conducive environment for protecting and enhancing private
investment in the sector These agencies are the Energy Commission, PURC and the
National Petroleum Authority The Energy Commission advises government on energy
policy and strategy It is also involved in indicative planning of energy and
electricity system expansion and licensing energy sector operators (Energy
Commission, 2006) Established in 1997, PURC is the prime body for setting
tariffs and framing customer service regulations The National Petroleum
Authority is an independent regulator which reviews world market price
developments, the prices of imported finished products and the operations of
Ghana’ oil refinery The sector also has several active non-governmental
organisations (NGOs), research institutes and universities as well as industry
associations involved in  range of activities These include renewable energy
promotion, research and deployment Table 10 lists the institutions whose actions
can most influence the renewable energy trajectory in Ghana and briefly
describes their functions 19 Table 10: Key Institutions in Ghana’ Energy Sector
Institutions Functions Policy and Regulation Ministry of Power (MoP) Formulates,
implements, monitors and evaluates power sector policies Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum Formulates, implements, monitors and evaluates energy sector policies
Licenses, regulates and monitors energy service providers, develops indicative
national energy plans and advises the minister on energy policy Energy
Commission (EC) Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC) Regulates tariffs
and enforcement of customer service obligations of all public utilities and IPPs
Regulates, oversees and monitors activities in the downstream petroleum industry
National Petroleum Authority (NPA) Regulates and manages the utilisation of
petroleum resources, and co- ordinates policies on petroleum resources Petroleum
Commission (PC) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Distributes, monitors and
enforces environmental policies, including the energy sector Encourages and
promotes investments in Ghana, providing for the creation of an attractive
incentive framework and  transparent, predictable and facilitating environment
for investment Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) Implementation Volta
River Authority (VRA) Generation and transmission of electricity GRIDCo
Electricity transmission services Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG)
Distribution of electricity in southern Ghana Northern Electricity Department
(NED) Distribution of electricity in northern Ghana Crude oil and petroleum
product import, crude oil refining and bulk sale of petroleum products to OMCs
and bulk consumers Tema Oil Refinery (TOR) Ghana National Petroleum Corporation
(GNPC) Oil and gas exploration Bulk Oil Storage and Transportation Company
(BOST) Planning for laying and managing strategic petroleum product stocks Oil
Marketing Companies (OMCs) Distribution and marketing of petroleum products
Education and Research Carries out research, development, demonstration and
educational activities in energy technology, policy and management The Energy
Center, KNUST University of Energy and Natural Resources (UENR) Provides
training in science, technology and management of energy and natural resources
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) Pursues the implementation
of government policies on scientific research and development Non-governmental
Organisations Energy policy studies and analysis/clean energy enterprise
development KITE Association of Ghana Solar Industries (GSI) Promotes and raises
the profile of the solar industry, improves quality, develops standards and
arranges renewable energy training Promotes energy efficiency/conservation
measures and renewable energy technologies Energy Foundation New Energy Develops
and implements clean energy initiatives Dedicated to technologies that offer
engineering solutions to climate change, energy poverty and environmental
degradation CEESD 20  Policy and Regulatory Framework energy services for all
sectors of the Ghanaian economy At the same time, the country would be
transformed into  major exporter of oil and power by 2012 and 2015 respectively
(Ministry of Energy, 2010a) The specific goal of the policy on renewable energy
is to increase its proportion in the national energy mix and ensure its
efficient production and use This objective is to be reached via  number of
routes One is to promote the efficient use of biomass and improve production
while increasing regeneration Another is to convert most waste generated in
municipal activities, industrial and agricultural operations to energy Another
is to create fiscal and pricing incentives to enhance the development and use of
renewable energy Finally, Ghanaian engineers and scientists are to collaborate
with international experts to bring down the cost of solar and wind energy
technologies (ibid) During the second half of the 1990s, the Government of Ghana
initiated  broader energy sector reform This allowed the creation in late 1997
of PURC and the Energy Commission through two acts of parliament, Act 538: the
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission Act and Act 541: the Energy Commission
Act The Energy Commission was tasked with the technical regulation of the energy
sector, while PURC was mandated to handle the economic regulation of the energy
and water sectors In that same year, the vertically integrated VRA was to be
unbundled into separate transmission and system operation companies It retained
the task of electricity generation and distribution in the North through its
Northern Electricity Department This later became NEDCo while ECG was tasked
with electricity distribution in southern Ghana IPPs were allowed to enter the
market, and the first one was created in The Energy Sector Strategy and
Development plan was also completed by the Ministry of Energy in 2010, building
on SNEP, developed in 2006 by the Energy Commission Three main objectives
concerning the renewable energy sub-sector are to be implemented under this
strategy The first is to increase the renewable energy supply in the national
energy mix to 10% by The second is to create legislation to encourage renewable
energy technology development and utilisation by adopting  renewable energy law
The third is to manage municipal industrial and agricultural waste for energy
production (Ministry of Energy, 2010b) The Strategic National Energy Plan (SNEP)
completed by the Energy Commission in 2006 comprehensively examines the energy
resources available to Ghana It considers how and when to tap them economically
to ensure  secure and adequate energy supply for sustainable economic growth to
2020 (Energy Commission, 2006) The SNEP goal is to enable the development of
sound energy market that would provide sufficient, viable and efficient energy
services for Ghana’ economic development It will be achieved by articulating
comprehensive plan identifying the optimal path for developing, utilising and
efficiently managing the energy resources available to the country The plan
identified renewables (including wind, solar and biomass) as key energy sources
for long- term development and sustainable electricity supply Unfortunately the
huge potential of SNEP to create  market for renewable energy was not fully
realised This is because it was not formally adopted by the government One of
the challenges facing renewables development today is finding  way to redress
this situation and make SNEP  binding policy document The Renewable Energy Law
was adopted by Act 832 in It provided for the development, management,
utilisation, sustainability and adequate supply of renewable energy for heat and
power generation and related matters This law provides for the establishment of
two policy instruments The first is the FiT,  pricing incentive The second is
the Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO) They are available to all
electricity distribution utility or bulk customers, and aim to boost renewable
energy technology deployment in Ghana in  sustainable way The law also provides
rules for connecting  renewable energy generator to the transmission and
distribution systems and the establishing  renewable energy fund, the REF The
FiT rate was developed by PURC and published on  September 2013 (see table 11)
It is guaranteed for  period of ten years and subsequently subject to review
every two years The National Energy Policy was completed by the Ministry of
Energy in It envisages the development of an “Energy Economy” that will allow
secure and reliable supply of high quality, environmentally sustainable 21 Table
11:  Ghana Feed-in Tariffs (Gazetted in 2013) FIT effective 1st September 2013
(GHS/kWh) FIT effective 1st September 2013 (US cent/kWh) Renewable Energy
Technology Wind 1085 15 Solar 210 97 Hydro < 10 MW 5574 53 Hydro (10 MW > < 100
MW) 7436 73 Landfill Gas 4696 84 Sewage Gas 4696 84 Biomass 4696 84 Source: PURC
At 2013 exchange rate of  USD = 12 GHS  Financing and Investment Project is
hybrid credit facility comprising of  concessional loan and  buyer’ credit
facility between the Government of Ghana and Exim Bank of China There would have
been no progress in renewable energy development in Ghana, however modest,
without substantial inflows of foreign investment These are buttressed by donor
funding to support “soft” activities such as pilot testing of technologies,
business model development and institutional capacity building Most energy
projects in Ghana are carried out with the assistance of development partners
These include, for instance, the World Bank, ARB Apex bank, the United Nations
Development Programme, Danish International Development Agency and the Global
Environment Facility Similarly, the United Nations Environment Programme runs
the African Rural Energy Enterprise Development Programme For is  USD million
multi-donor project involving the World Bank’ International Development
Association, Global Environment Facility, African Development Bank, Global
Partnership on Output Based Aid, Africa Catalytic Growth Fund and the Swiss
Agency for Development and Co-operation The government has made some efforts to
set up national funds into which levies on energy to finance specific
consumption are paid development activities in the power sector These include:
() the Rural Electrification Levy paid into the National Electrification Fund,
(ii) the Street Lighting Levy (iii) the Power Factor Surcharge Levy paid into
the Electricity Demand Management Fund This funding mechanism is slowly being
applied for raising internal funds for renewable energy from conventional fuels
For example,  levy of 26 USD/litre3 on gasoline, kerosene and diesel fuel
products supports research, development and promotion of Ghana’ natural energy
resources — particularly renewable energy The levy goes into  fund called the
Energy Fund and yields an average USD 500,000 per annum instance, GEDAP The
recent establishment of  renewable energy fund under the Renewable Energy Act is
possibly the most important event affecting renewable energy development The
point of the fund is to mobilise financial resources for the promotion,
sustainable management and development, utilisation of renewable energy
resources Monies from the fund are to be used to promote the following: is The
GEDAP development objective to improve the operational efficiency of the power
distribution system and increase the population’ access to electricity This
helps move Ghana to  low-carbon economy through the reduction of greenhouse gas
emissions Electricity access expansion and renewable energy development are
subcomponents of GEDAP with  total project cost of USD million It is
multifaceted approach aimed both at grid extension and isolated grids Innovative
approaches, including new business models for developing and utilising renewable
energy sources • The country also borrows from the international financial
markets to fund energy projects For instance, the funding for the Bui
Hydroelectric • Scientific, technological and innovative research into renewable
energy  Equivalent to 78 GHS/kWh using exchange rate of  USD = 00049 Ghana cedi
(GHS) on  January 2014 22 Source: KNUST • Designing and implementing standards
for exemptions on renewable energy technologies given that most of this
technology and equipment is imported For investors importing generators to
invest in the renewable energy sector, the following specific incentives are
available: utilising renewable energy • Manufacturing equipment for developing
and utilising renewable energy • Programmes practices to adopt international
best • Total exemption from import duty on renewable energy generators,
including solar generators, wind turbines and technologies for generating energy
from municipal waste; • Development of infrastructure for renewable energy • VAT
exemption on imports of renewable energy products if the components are brought
in as  single piece ( not taken apart beforehand); and • Capacity building
development for renewable energy As part of efforts to further stimulate private
investment in the renewable energy sector, Investment Promotion Centre Act the
Ghana was passed in It provides for import duty • Customs import duty exemption
on plant, machinery, equipment and accessories imported specifically and
exclusively to set up an enterprise Good Practice Demonstration: Creating
Favourable Climate for Private Renewable Energy Investors Due largely to the
policy measures taken by the government to promote investments, Ghana has
witnessed growing inflows of financing into the renewable energy sector, the
bulk of it targeting the proven renewable energy resources for on-grid
electrification DEG,  German development financier with focus on the private
sector in developing countries is keen on increasing its investments in IPPs
with renewable energy sources in the West African sub-region, Ghana being  key
prospective market for its mission The private sector financing institution is
currently finalising arrangements with some independent power producers (IPP) to
build  biomass power plant and  couple of other plants to generate power from
renewable sources Out of the EUR  bn portfolio DEG has in Africa,  third is in
West Africa, amounting to about EUR 300 million With  standing portfolio of
about USD 270 million in Ghana, DEG has made investments of about USD 40 million
in 2012, and were expected to repeat that feat in 2013 (Ghana Daily Graphic,
2012; 13 November Issue)  Solar systems are exempted from VAT if the components
are brought in as  unit However, if batteries and inverters are brought in
separately, they are subject to VAT 23 Solar PV street lighting in island
community Photo: Ministry of Power 24 IV EMERGING ISSUES IN THE DEPLOYMENT OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY There are opportunities in Ghana to deploy renewable energy
systems capable of meeting  large variety of service needs However, resources
have to be allocated only to priority needs, the satisfaction of which can
generate high impacts at low costs This section focuses only on those service-
resource pairs prioritised during the RRA In each case, we take  more in-depth
look at the key concerns and barriers as renewable energy technologies are
scaled up It concludes with key action recommended by the RRA  On-grid
Electricity As discussed in section , Ghana enjoys an abundance of renewable
energy resources in the form of solar, wind, mini-hydropower and biomass These
resources are together theoretically capable of generating far more than the
targeted 550 MW electricity from renewables by 2020 prescribed in the generation
master plan This consists of 300 MW from hydropower and 250 MW from variable
renewable energy However planned and announced renewable energy projects amount
to about ,000 MW of installed capacity at the moment This includes 900 MW for
solar PV, 800 MW for wind and 300 MW for hydropower This is around four times
more than expected in the generation master plan This is partly due to the
approval of the FiTs, which has attracted investor interest However, several
problems still need to be solved if Ghana is to raise its share of renewable
energy in the national electricity mix to help close the gap between electricity
supply and demand Target Setting The National Energy Policy objective of using
renewable energy for 10% of total energy production by 2020 was translated into
the generation master plan as 10% of the electricity mix This focused
exclusively on grid-connected applications, which means % dispatchable and %
variable renewable energy power Investor interest in developing variable
renewable energy power has increased at  time when thermal power generation is
expensive and backup capacity almost nil The time has therefore come for the
government to assess the grid conditions for accommodating variable renewable
energy This will further help establish technology-specific targets and related
definite capacity additions, thereby increasing market confidence and
competition This should drive costs down Grid Integration of Variable renewable
energy Ghana has developed  comprehensive grid code revised most recently in
This establishes the requirements, procedures, practices and standards governing
the development, operation, maintenance and use of the high voltage transmission
system in Ghana In its present form, this grid code lacks two prerequisites that
would further enable the integration of utility-scale variable renewable energy
in the grid These are generation forecasting and priority dispatch At the
moment, the Ghana grid code requires generators to submit their production
capability and availability one day ahead so that the system operator can
prepare the next day’ generation schedule However, operators of variable
renewable energy plants can best provide accurate information on electricity
output on an hourly or sub-hourly basis The grid code thus needs 25 to be
revised and include specific conditions accommodating renewable energy
generators to provide accurate data This also has some implications for the
system operator, which would have to adapt by developing the necessary
capacities and procedures in its daily operation The grid code should in
addition provide for the priority dispatch of renewable power the grid Net
metering solar PV electricity is therefore an option to be further explored Key
net metering drivers include high solar increasing electricity retail tariffs,
the declining cost of solar PV and import tax exemptions on solar PV panels
Indeed, the 2013 tariff reform, which increased the retail price by 78%, offers
real opportunity to reduce electricity expenses This is especially true for
households consuming over 300 kWh and for all non-residential customers,
allowing them to become PV “prosumers” (figure 10) in Ghana, irradiation, The
RPO imposed on distribution utilities in the Renewable Energy Law opens the door
for consumers to sell renewable electricity to Figure 10: The 2013 Electricity
Tariffs Compared with Long Run Marginal Cost of Solar PV Source: Deutsche
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), 2013 Financial Support
Mechanisms and Payment Guarantees to IPPs As mentioned above, the Renewable
Energy Law provides the basis for developing grid-connected renewable energy
This is because it establishes supportive instruments like FiTs and the RPO for
distribution utilities and bulk consumers and requires all transmission or
distribution operators to connect  renewable energy generator within their area
However the proportion of renewable energy in the electricity mix of bulk
consumers has yet to be defined It should therefore be developed in the context
of the target for the entire renewable energy sector The Renewable Energy Law
also provides for the establishment of  renewable energy fund6 In addition, both
distribution utilities (NEDCo and ECG) are taking various initiatives to
increase their readiness to adopt smart grid technologies This will help scale
up grid-connected rooftop solar PV systems as these distribution utilities will
be better able to manage and integrate them into the grid There is therefore
need to raise awareness of these savings opportunities for these potential PV
prosumers This business opportunity needs to be marketed to local financial
institutions to design tailored-made financial products for this sector The
government therefore needs to engage in developing standards and codes for grid-
connected rooftop solar PV as well as supporting capacity building efforts for
local financial institutions  The term prosumer is used in the electricity
industry to refer to energy consumers who also produce their own power from
range of different on-site generators ( diesel generators, combined heat and
power systems, wind turbines and solar PV systems) 26 incentives, capital
subsidies, to offer financial production subsidies and equity participation for
renewable energy power generation diminishing as the country struggles to reduce
its budget deficit This could have major implications for the development of
renewable energy projects, as investments are most likely to be denominated in
foreign currency while revenues are expected in cedi Ghana needs to consider
designing effective currency risk mitigation instruments that will help increase
investor confidence in financing renewable energy projects This RRA finds that
the establishment of  new FiT regime, though necessary, is not sufficient to
unleash the maximum flow of investment into on-grid electrification projects
remaining concern is the provision of payment guarantees to IPPs, which will
affect the commercial viability of renewable energy projects This is due to the
fact that distribution companies ECG and NEDCo are saddled with debt The two
utilities are unable to meet their payment obligations to present suppliers and
thus cannot credibly offtake any renewable energy investment ECG has already
signed power purchase agreements (PPAs), but none of these projects has yet been
implemented Given the minimal experience of FiTs in Ghana, setbacks are likely
at the earliest stage of the scheme It is important that appropriate structures
are put in place to resolve such challenges, focusing on capacity building for
relevant public, private and civil society organisations Streamlining IPP Market
Entry for Renewables To enter the electricity market,  renewable energy IPP has
to interact with  number of regulatory agencies in the power sector once
detailed feasibility studies have been completed These include the Energy
Commission and PURC, the Environmental Protection Agency, MoP, the Ministry of
Finance and the Ghana Investment Promotion Agency These provide various
licences, approvals, clearances and incentives linked to the development of the
renewable energy project (see figure 11) This complex and lengthy procedure can
lead to significant administrative and transaction costs, and may discourage
potential investors and project developers from entering the market Thus there
is  need to set up  one-stop shop, which may help reduce complexity and assist
IPPs working through the bureaucracy The average FiT rate was equivalent to 14
USD/ kWh in 2013 when it was adopted Since then the Ghana cedi has fallen over
21% to  rate of GHS /USD within  year This is because foreign exchange reserves
are  The Renewable Energy fund is expected to be sourced by moneys approved from
the parliament, premiums payable by bulk consumers who fail to meet RPOs,
donations, grants and gifts received for renewable energy activities, moneys
approved by the board of the Energy Fund, and money generated by the Energy
Commission from the provision of services for renewable energy activities 27
Figure 11: Procedures for Entry into the Electricity Market with Renewables IPP
undertakes pre-feasibility study IPP identifies  buyer or an off-taker ( ECG or
another bulk customers) Detailed feasibility studies to ascertain technical
feasibility and financial viability of the project IPP interacts with relevant
regulatory agencies, such as the Energy Commission (EC) (licensing and technical
regulations) and PURC (pricing regulations) IPP obtains site clearance by
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and EC IPP obtains environmental permit
from EPA Concluding  memorandum of understanding between IPP and off-taker after
securing PURC’ no-objection in principle Obtaining license from the Energy
Commission IPP obtains relevant approvals of identified relief’ from
governmental agencies, such as (GIPC), Ministry of Power (renewable Energy Law)
and Ministry of Finance & Economic Planning, etc IPP concludes PPA with off-
taker  Decentralised Renewable Energy Applications Off-grid Electricity with
Solar PV The MoEP has promoted off-grid solar PV for more than two decades It
has focused primarily on lighting and other rural community household needs The
main systems promoted on the Ghanaian electricity market are solar home systems
and solar lanterns These are being promoted across the whole of Ghana, and over
,000 solar systems have been installed in about 89 communities throughout the
country They satisfy  range of uses including basic household lighting, radio
and television use, vaccine refrigeration, hospital and classroom lighting Other
applications are distance learning using television, street lighting, water
pumping for irrigation and rural mobile phone charging systems The total small-
scale solar capacity throughout the country is outlined in table The recommended
off-grid communities are shown in figure Table 12: Small-scale Solar PV Systems
in Ghana Installed Capacity (kW) Average Annual Production (GWh) Solar PV
Systems Rural home system 450  Urban home system 20  School system 15  Health
centre lighting   Vaccine refrigeration 42  Water pumping 120
Telecommunications 100  Battery charging system 10  Solar street lights 10
Total 793  Source: Energy Commission 2011 28 Figure 12: Map of Recommended Off-
grid Communities Showing Solar Radiation Levels Off-grid communities Small Hydro
Sites  -  (kWh/sq /day)  -  (kWh/sq /day)  -  (kWh/sq /day) Volta Lake Source:
Ministry of Energy (2012) One of the most successful examples of solar PV
finance for off-grid rural populations is the ARB Apex bank Ghana model This
comes under Electricity Access and Renewable Energy, part of GEDAP This helped
install 15,000 systems for 90,000 rural people unlikely to be connected to the
grid in the next five or ten years The model rested on three main pillars The
first was capacity building using Global Environment Facility funds to involve
rural and community banks and market to target populations The second, funded by
the International Development Association, was to remove finance barriers by
providing credit lines to rural off-grid households to purchase solar PV systems
The third, funded by the Global Partnership on Output Based Aid, was the
provision of partial grants for obtaining the relevant incentives for solar PV
systems and making loans affordable Through this model, systems are paid using
10% cash contribution from the beneficiary,  rural bank loan from the
International Development Association fund and grant support from the Global
Partnership on Output Based Aid Installation, operation and maintenance is
carried out by locally recognised companies (see figure 13)  Rural
electrification in Ghana aims to extend the grid to all communities apart from
islanders/lakeside inhabitants who cannot be reached due to their geographical
position 29 Figure 13: ARB APEX BANK GHANA Project Financing Plan Grant
(subsidy) between 30% - 50%  Installation and  year maintenance cost () Customer
contribution of 10% of amount less grant 10% (-) Loan component of 90% of amount
less grant 90% (-) Source: ARB Apex Bank, Ghana, 2011 The project has overcome
many barriers Although, not enough well-trained solar installers were available
and solar systems were perceived as weak compared to grid-connected electricity
due to usage limitations and previous installation failures Financial
institutions had  poor knowledge of solar products, financing costs were high
and politicians interfered of kWh per year amounting to  kWh per week If the
budget spent on lighting were replaced by electricity payments, each household
could afford to pay  USD/kWh This is much higher than the on-grid electricity
tariff in Ghana at the moment The total installed cost for solar PV mini-grids
per kilowatt-peak (kWp), island community taxes, is around USD ,The total
delivery cost for  50 kWp mini-grid system will be USD 491,500 for  maximal
annual output of 70,000 kWh including all The experience revealed that quality
after-sales service, well-designed products and repayment plans alongside
participating private sector company financial engagement are key to the success
of such projects To establish the technical and economic feasibility of solar PV
mini-grids, an analysis was conducted for Alorpkem,  typical island community of
around ,000 inhabitants It included  50 kWp planned solar PV plant with
distributed energy Based on similar rural electrification projects in Ghana, the
initial consumption in Alorpkem9 was estimated at 44,929 kWh/year For
electricity tariffs of  USD/kWh for households and  USD/kWh for commercial and
municipal users, the total revenue from electricity sales is 60,928 USD/year
These mini-grids produce an internal rate of return of % and  break-even point
in year 15 where 100% finance is provided The underlying assumptions are  cost
of capital of %, inflation rate at %, annual amortisation rate at %, operations
and maintenance at % and annual PV degradation of % The break-even point is in
year 12 for 50% debt finance and year 10 for % debt finance Mini-grid
Electricity with Hybrid Systems (Solar PV + Wind or Fossil) Mini-grids based on
renewable energy have been relatively unusual in Ghana The Government of Ghana
has been implementing the Northern Electrification Programme to ensure
electricity access becomes  reality Its target is universal access by 2020 via
grid extension However, certain remote communities, such as those in Ghana’
200-plus islands and Volta river lakesides, cannot be connected to the national
grid due to their geographical location The main activities of these communities
are fishing (accounting for over 75% of household incomes), crop farming and
trading These households spend about USD on energy per month, of which USD is
kerosene lighting and batteries for portable lights Charcoal and fuel for
gensets account for the bulk of the expenditure The present lighting requirement
of these island communities suggests each household has an average electricity
consumption However, the uniform tariff policy of 07 USD/kWh applies to mini-
grids in Ghana, which means they  Breakdown of   25  lights on for  /day  days
week is ( kWh),     mobile phones charged for  /week is (84 kWh) and   10
portable lamp charging for  /day for  days  week (14 kWh) Total is 38 kWh/week
Residential use 19,740 kWh per year on the basis of 73 kWh per household and
commercial/municipal use 25,190 kWh per year 30 Figure 14: Locations of DTI
Solar Dryer Tests in 2002 are not feasible from  private sector perspective This
is despite the huge motivation shown by around 97% of households and commercial
businesses to pay for electricity if their whole community gets connected This
was revealed by  2011 survey for the Government conducted on islands and at
lakesides The government should either set up special tariffs for mini-grids or
provide subsequent support to private operators willing to invest in mini-grids
The small size of these systems means they are not attractive to foreign
investors, so the sector will probably be left to local operators who face
financial and technical constraints Electricity access and renewable energy,
part of GEDAP, intends to remove the capacity and finance barriers to accelerate
mini-grid renewable energy such as small hydropower, wind, and biomass below 10
MW This will be achieved by providing business support to local renewable energy
developers, energy saving companies and commercial banks However, the Government
of Ghana should think of  more long-term sustainable support mechanism as GEDAP
is funded by donors When commissioned, the REF can help lower this barrier, as
it aims to provide financial incentives for mini- grid renewable power systems
for remote areas and islands Solar fish dryer at Tema Solar crop dryer at
Pokuase Solar kiln at Mankoadze Source: Jensen, 2002 to these challenges  2002
report by the Danish Technological Institute (DTI) captures interesting results
from  DANIDA-funded solar crop drying project involving the design, construction
and testing of three pilot solar dryers at the premises of three commercial
operators in the Greater Accra and Central Regions (See Figure 14) Many
electrification projects fail due to the lack of  clear definition of
competencies and responsibilities as well as political power and relationships
between different stakeholders There is  need to design reliable operating
schemes on the basis of local political frameworks and infrastructure to realise
sustainable, functional socio-economic system for mini-grids in Ghana The solar
dryer at Silwood Farms (on which the rest of this section will concentrate) the
total cost (without VAT) per unit was USD ,525, and the full cost of the
installation including civil works amounted to nearly USD 14,Though the report
did not cover the economic benefits gained by Silwood Farms from the solar crop
dryers, the DTI report concluded that in general, the dryer realised achieved
sound technical performance — consistently reducing moisture content in up to
600 kg of maize from approximately 20% to 10% within  days at 35° – 38° The
tests also demonstrated that solar crop dryers of this particular design can
achieve similar results with other locally grown crops such as cassava, pepper,
okra and pineapple (Jensen, 2002) There is currently very little expertise in
mini-grid management in Ghana For the government, it has become  concern lately
due to the challenges associated with the electrification of island communities
in Lake Volta For NGOs and research institutions, mini-grids are becoming
interesting concepts, because they could rely on freely available renewable
energy resources to generate electricity for remote rural communities However,
much more needs to be done to scale up the deployment of these technologies
favourable performance These results notwithstanding, the high capital cost of
solar crop dryers is an obvious limiting factor to their accelerated uptake
amongst low income farmers who make up the bulk of the potential market
Additionally, there are critical issues concerning the maintenance of the
systems to keep them operating at peak performance The seasonality of crop
production in the country, also means that the cost per tonne per year of using
solar dryers may be too Solar drying/Agro Process Heat with Solar Thermal In
Ghana, crops are traditionally dried using the sun The disadvantage of this
method is that crops and grain may be damaged by birds, rodents, wind and rain
or contaminated by dust and dirt Recent studies addressing solar dryer
performance, demonstrates the potential of practical solutions 31 high, given
that the dryers may only be needed for less than  months in  year in some cases
These high upfront capital and operating costs often make traditional sun
drying, even in the face of postharvest losses,  cheaper option for farmers
Commercial farmers who use irrigation facilities and are able to cultivate
variety of crops throughout the year may consider the use of solar dryers, but
again this will only succeed if there is adequate policy support in place for
acquiring these technologies, including the promotion of credit schemes economic
and food security This will help the country to achieve the objectives set in
the Food and Agriculture development Policy (FASDEP II) in Although the existing
tax adopted renewable energy exemption on technology is an asset, additional
incentives should be put in place for easing the acquisition of solar dryers as
well as for the development of solar drying markets The REF aims, amongst
others, to apply for provision on financial incentives, capital subsidies and
production based subsidies for renewable energy projects for non-electricity
purposes, however the fund is still not operational imported The cost barriers
to deployment of solar drying technology will eventually require that government
allocates sufficient amounts of public funding in support of the aforementioned
solutions and other measures However, it is also reasonable to expect that these
macro-level costs may be offset by several developmental benefits that are
attributable to solar crop dryers, including:  Modern Cooking/Heating with
Biomass More than 70% of households in Ghana continue to rely on firewood and
charcoal as their main source of cooking fuel Campaigns to reduce wood fuel
consumption within the biomass sector are targeting the introduction of
biodigesters to produce methane for cooking Improved cookstoves are being
promoted to increase efficient traditional biomass source use Popular improved
cookstove brands include Ahibenso, Gyapa and Toyola Efforts to promote improved
cookstoves were stimulated with the recent formation of the Ghana Alliance for
Clean Cookstoves This is the local chapter of the Global Alliance for Clean
Cookstoves • Job creation, especially where all or some of the components are
eventually manufactured locally or sourced at competitive prices from least-cost
suppliers • Wealth creation resulting from the reduction in post-harvest losses,
as well as general improvements in quality of produce, leading to increased
revenues from sales in high value domestic and export markets Improved
cookstoves have been the subject of several studies evaluating their fuel
savings and implications for forest degradation and greenhouse gas emissions
These have provided valuable feedback to guide continuous improvement in their
design The latest biannual survey was conducted in 2012 by Berkeley Air
Monitoring group,  Californian monitoring and Evaluation Company, using  team
from KNUST Energy Center It determined fuel savings and other parameters in
households that switched from ordinary coal pots to improved cookstoves in four
regions: Greater • Local capacity building — closely related to job creation,
while contributing to reduction in the involvement of costly foreign technicians
in the design, implementation, testing and mass production of crop-dryers With
new market opportunities opening up (new foreign direct investment in industrial
production), Ghana should consider promoting solar drying as  way to improve
agricultural productivity, while stimulating local agro-industrial growth for
Table 13: Charcoal Savings (kg/household/day) for Four Toyola Stove Sizes
Improved Stove Size Charcoal Savings Large commercial 50 Small commercial 43
Medium household 36 Small household 18 Source: Ministry of Power 32 Figure 15:
Average Amount of Time Saved per Day per Stove-Associated Activity Accra, Brong
Ahafo, Eastern and Northern regions Table 13 shows the results for charcoal
savings using Toyola household stoves as well as larger Toyola commercial stoves
hours Over  quarter of the women (26%) said they used their saved time to work
more for pay, 40% reported that they spent it with their families and 34%
reported that they used it for other activities such as household chores (figure
16) The main benefit of improved cookstoves were judged to be time savings
Average time savings accrued by users of the improved cookstove are estimated at
30 minutes per day during cooking However, very modest amounts of saved time
were reported from fuel gathering, stove tending – the feeding of fuel and
maintenance of combustion during cooking activities – and other related
activities such as purchasing charcoal (Figure 15) However, end-users in Ghana
reported similar smoke emissions from ordinary charcoal “coal pots” and improved
charcoal cookstoves Most households were of the opinion that smoke emissions
depend more on the quality of the charcoal than the stove Moreover, rural
households will not become enthusiastic enough about the government runs
thorough and sustainable their awareness-raising campaign acceptability improved
cookstoves unless the The average time saved per week, assuming that the
majority of women cook every day, is nearly improving Figure 16: Alternative
Activities for Participants Using Improved Cookstoves 33 Access to finance is
another important barrier to the promotion of improved cookstoves High interest
rates on loans have prevented supply-side investors from expanding their
businesses to reach greater production numbers Lack of support policy
initiatives obstructs upstream supply-side organisations from expanding their
businesses and reducing costs to end-users These initiatives need to create the
enabling environment for accelerated development and sustainable biomass energy
promotion for household energy needs technical and financial constraints These
include lack of technical expertise to develop bankable proposals and
insufficient working capital due to difficult loan access Other constraints
include high interest rates due to perception of high risk and lack of financial
institution expertise in evaluating off-grid renewable energy proposals There is
thus  need to build the capacity of local private operators and financial
institutions to develop and appraise bankable decentralised renewable energy
project proposals Recommendations Detailed descriptions of the recommendations
for each resource-pair can be found in the Annex The development and operation
of certain renewable energy technologies in mini-grids requires expertise in
assessing local conditions, installing and maintaining systems This is
particularly the case for hybrid systems because they use  greater range of
generation technologies and more complex management systems Utilities may also
perceive the management of mini-grids as expensive, so these may be better
managed by small- and medium-sized enterprises and Energy Saving Companies
Designing clear policy for off-grid mini-grids The country’ objective of
increasing rural access to electricity would be facilitated by creating  level
playing field for local private sector involvement The support announced through
the REF should be clearly defined, and reliable operating schemes designed
small-scale decentralised renewable energy mini-grids Competencies and
responsibilities, as well as political direction and relationships between
different stakeholders, should be clearly defined on the basis of local
political frameworks and infrastructure This would provide  sustainable,
functional socio-economic background for mini-grids in Ghana the for
Facilitating end-user access and improving cookstove awareness and acceptance
Electricity tariffs for off-grid systems should be reviewed to attract more
local private operators This could be accompanied by end-user access include
targeted facilitation options subsidies and deferred payment schemes that could
be pre-financed directly by the service providers or through  microfinance
institution  sound business model should be developed for both stand-alone
systems and mini-grids It needs to increase the viability and sustainability of
decentralised renewable energy projects and access to electricity services in
rural Ghana It could Increasing political support for promoting sustainable use
of biomass energy The government should continue to create and support policy
initiatives towards an environment accelerating the development and promotion of
sustainable biomass energy for households This is needed alongside present
policies and goals focused on remedies to deforestation effects caused partly by
traditional cookstove use This should be done by getting the REF up and running
as well as other finance support mechanisms These lending approaches and
sustainable credit programmes for low-income operators and farmers Researchers
should be supported in designing prototypes for solar dryers that could be
manufactured locally High interest rates on loans have prevented supply- side
investors from expanding their businesses and raising production There is  need
to further encourage entrepreneurs prepared to invest and support them by
building capacity, through grants programmes and by providing access to working
capital Matching government programmes are required to cultivate fast-growing
energy wood plots, improve charcoal production technologies and skills, and
improve cookstoves production include group in Ghana shows Previous experience
that communities often prefer grid connectivity due to its potential use for
higher-wattage appliances They may consider solar power to be inferior and may
even discontinue off-grid systems to put political pressure on governments This
is particularly true where the grid has been extended to neighbouring
communities Most farmers in Ghana have limited knowledge of labour-saving
technologies or post-harvest management, especially for perishable produce There
is  need Supporting private sector involvement The relatively small size of the
off-grid market means it is not very attractive to foreign investors This is why
the sector would probably be left to local private operators with the support of
donors and development partners Local private operators face 34 to run
awareness-raising campaigns and create communications strategies to educate
operators and farmers about the new business opportunities and benefits of off-
grid renewable energy one of the greatest constraints to renewables- based
electricity production in the country There are, however,  number of outstanding
issues that need to be addressed, such as the ability of utilities to absorb the
higher costs of FiTs Existing cookstove technologies need to be improved and new
and proven technologies introduced through innovations that not only increase
efficiency, but also reduce emissions This will decrease exposure to household
air pollution It is likely to have an impact on the user health while continuing
to support the local production of cookstoves If consumers are to adopt improved
cookstoves in the long term, the government should embark on critical mass
education to increase product market penetration and acceptability Even though
Ghana is aiming for 10% renewable energy electricity, could also explore
opportunities in the West African Power Pool with the possibilities of investors
generating power for the West African Power Pool using resources in Ghana This
would have socio-economic benefit for Ghanaians, creating jobs and adding income
to the economy Such power would not be subsidised in anyway by the Ghanaian
government it High start-up costs Start-up costs are one of the barriers
preventing  technology from being scaled up For most renewable energy
technologies, start-up costs are high Even when investment costs are not paid by
households, as with mini-grid or grid-connected systems, experience across the
world shows that tariffs are higher at present than those of large hydropower
and most thermal plants Investment costs are relatively high for the low-income
rural households needing renewable energy technologies such as solar PV and
biogas systems  Opportunities and Constraints Affecting Renewable Energy
Expansion Abundant resources The RRA has clearly shown in section  that Ghana is
endowed with an abundance of renewable energy resources in the form of solar,
wind, mini-hydropower and biomass Together, these resources are capable of
generating far more than the  target for 500 MW renewable electricity The state
generator VRA has taken  leadership position in renewable electricity
generation, cementing its earlier status as pace- setter in the power generation
sector Now that the  MW solar PV grid-connected system and expected expansion
has been commissioned, VRA is actively exploring additional opportunities for
solar PV, wind, mini-hydropower and biomass industry Admittedly, previously
suffered from  lack of approved FiTs These are necessary for the private sector
to get engaged in the industry With the recent publication of the FiTs, this
obstacle has been cleared and should stimulate private sector participation
Where these technologies are installed and marketed as part of social aid
projects, tariffs are nonetheless higher than those in urban households that are
often subsidised by the state Coupled with the high investment cost, is the lack
of low interest finance for renewable energy technologies After several years of
discussions, no clear solution has been found to these problems Going forward,
there is  need for government support similar to the subsidies enjoyed by grid
electricity and urban LPG consumers These must be appropriately targeted to
ensure that remote rural communities benefit from access to electricity and
modern fuels renewable energy the As far as scalability is concerned, renewable
energy projects have an additional advantage in that barriers to entry are lower
for local investors This contrasts with large hydropower and thermal plants It
levels the playing field, enabling smaller IPPs to compete favourably with the
big players for grid connection Apart from grid-connected and off-grid renewable
energy systems, there are also opportunities to explore mini-grids in remote
rural areas where renewable energy could be targeted to create agro-industries
to improve incomes Expanding off-grid technologies across the country After
several years of promoting renewable energy technologies, efforts are still
concentrated in the very large cities like Accra and Kumasi The majority of
solar PV system retailers are either in Accra or Kumasi and are not very visible
to smaller communities Not many business models market solar PV systems on
tariff basis, most require households and businesses to purchase and own the
system, which raises the financing challenges discussed above To create broader
awareness of these technologies, renewable energy businesses must be expanded to
other parts of the country Renewable Energy Act and FiTs The passage of the
Renewable Energy Act in 2013 and subsequent release of FiTs effectively removed
35 Regulatory transparency With the state generator entering the renewables
sector, there is always the temptation to bully its way through with the
utilities in obtaining PPAs It could use its existing power plants to influence
the negotiating process, which could create conflict with the private sector It
is important that everyone who meets requirements set by the regulator is given
fair chance of negotiating When necessary, bids must be used to prioritise
projects Least cost and quality of service should be the prime criteria It is
important that the regulator, in this case the Energy Commission, is not
perceived as biased by the investor community Social and environmental
compliance While promoting renewable energy investments, it is important that
investors fully comply with strict environmental and social impact reduction The
ambition for liquid biofuel has already sparked major disputes in Ghana, and
there are plenty of stories of land grab Other technologies requiring large
areas of land, such as solar and hydropower, could create conflict with the
original land users This is especially the case if the process for obtaining
land is not transparent enough Hydropower projects with the potential for
flooding must be particularly well monitored and appropriate compensations paid
before project construction is allowed to begin 36  REFERENCES Ahiataku-Togobo,
, and  Ofosu-Ahenkorah (2009), “Bioenergy Policy Implementation in Ghana”,
COMPETE International Conference, Lusaka Bazilian, , et al (2012), “Energy
Access Scenarios to 2030 for the Power Sector in sub-Saharan Africa”, Utilities
Policy, Vol 20, pp -13 November 2012,  Ghana Daily Graphic (2012), “GhanaWeb”,
published GhanaHomePage/NewsArchive/artikelphp?ID=256346, 15 November Duku, ,
Gu and  Hagan (2011), “Biochar Production Potential in Ghana:  review”,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol 15, pp 3539-ECOWAS (Economic
Community Of West African States) (2012), Ecowas Renewable Energy Policy, ECOWAS
Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency, Praia ECOWAS (2013), “West
African Power Pool”,  accessed 19 June Energy Commission (2006), Strategic
National Energy Plan 2006 - 2010, Energy Commission, Accra Energy Commission
(2010), “Data for the Development of GIS Maps”, Alternative Business Development
Scenarios and Toolkit for Renewable Energy Planning and Policy, Energy
Commission, Accra Energy Commission (2012), “Ghana: Sustainable Action for All,
Action Plan”,  SE4ALL-GHANA%20ACTION%20PLANpdf? Energy Commission (2014),
“National Energy Statistics 2000 - 2013”, Energy Commission, Accra ECREEE
(ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency) (2012), ECOWAS
Renewable Energy Policy (EREP), ECREEE, Praia, pp Essandoh, ,  Osei and  Adam
(2014), “Prospects of Wind Power Generation in Ghana”, International Journal of
Mechanical Engineering and Technology, Vol , No 10, pp 156-Ghana Ministry of
Energy (2013), “Ministry of Energy and Petroleum”,  accessed 19 June Ghana
Statistical Service (2012), 2010 Population and Housing Census: Summary Report
of Final Results, Ghana Statistical Service, Accra Ghana Statistical Service
(2013), Provisional Gross Domestic Product 2013, Ghana Statistical Service,
Accra Ghana Statistical Service (),  accessed 19 June GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft
für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH) (2013), “Opportunities for RE Market
Development in Ghana”,  ghana-behrlepdf Government of Ghana (2012), “Ghana
Sustainable Energy for All Action Plan”  SE4ALL-GHANA%20ACTION%20PLANpdf,
accessed 19 June Government of Ghana (2013), Highlights of the 2014 Budget,
KPMG, Accra GRIDCo (2011), Ghana Transmissions and Distribution Master Plan,
Ghana Grid Company, Accra IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency) (2013),
West African Power Pool: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu
Dhabi Jensen,  (2002), Test of solar dryers in Ghana, Danish Technological
Institute, Risoe Ministry of Energy (2010a), National Energy Policy, Ministry of
Energy, Accra Ministry of Energy (2010b), Energy Sector Strategy and Development
Plan, Ministry of Energy, Accra Mohammed, , et al (2013), “An Overview of
Agricultural Biomass Based Potential for Decentralised Rural Energy in Ghana”,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, Vol 20, pp 15-Public Utility
Regulatory Commission (2011), “Publication of Electricity and Water Tariffs in
the Gazette”, www
purccomgh/purc/sites/default/files/decemberbillingcycle2011_0pdf United Nations
Development Programme (2011), Human Development Report 2011, Palgrave Macmillan,
New York Volta River Authority (2014), “Power Generation: Facts & Figures”,
accessed 19 June WAGPA (West African Gas Pipeline Authority) (2011), “WAGPA”,
accessed 19 June 37 ANNEX Detailed description of recommended action ON-GRID
Action Target setting All renewable energy resources Service-resource pair() The
Northern Electrification Program objective of meeting 10% of the total energy
mix through renewable energy by 2020 was translated into the generation master
plan as 10% of the electricity mix The ministry in charge of energy is
responsible for co-ordinating  study assessing the grid condition for
accommodating variable renewable energy This will further help to establish
technology-specific targets and related definite capacity additions, thereby
increasing market confidence and competition This should drive costs down
Description Ministry of Power, Energy Commission, GRIDCo, all relevant
stakeholders and potential investors Actors End 2015 Timing Broad consultation
and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success Action Grid
integration of variable renewable energy All renewable energy resources Service-
resource pair() Ghana has developed  comprehensive grid code most recently
revised in 2009 It establishes the requirement, procedures, practices and
standards that govern the development, operation, maintenance and use of the
high voltage transmission system However, the grid code in its current form
lacks two prerequisites that would further enable the integration of utility-
scale variable renewable energy in the grid These are generation forecasting and
priority dispatch The ministry in charge of energy and the Energy Commission
should carry out consultations with all relevant stakeholders for the revision
of the grid code This is in order to include specific conditions accommodating
renewable energy generators to provide accurate data as well as for giving
priority dispatch for renewable power Description The Ministry of Power and the
Energy Commission is also to engage in developing standards and codes for grid-
connected rooftop solar PV as well as supporting capacity building for local
financial institution Ministry of Power, Energy Commission, all relevant
stakeholders Actors Mid-2016 Timing Broad consultation and engagement of all
relevant stakeholders Keys to success 38 Action IPP financial support mechanisms
and payment guarantees All renewable energy resources Service-resource pair()
The Renewable Energy Law provides for the establishment of  renewable energy
fund known as the Ghana Renewable Energy Fund or REF This is to offer financial
incentives, capital subsidies, production subsidies and equity participation for
renewable energy power generation It is also expected that the REF fills the gap
between the FiTs and retail prices in order to reduce the burden on end-users
The Energy Commission is to get the REF up and running given the renewed
interest of project developers since FiTs were adopted The Government of Ghana
should make provision for payment guarantees to IPPs which will affect the
commercial viability of renewable energy projects This is due to the fact that
distribution companies ECG and NEDCo are saddled with debt The two utilities are
not able to meet their payment obligations to their present suppliers and this
cannot credibly offtake any renewable energy investment The ECG has already
signed PPAs, but none of those projects has yet been implemented Moreover, the
instability of the Ghana cedi has some significant implications for the
development of renewable energy projects This is because investment is most
likely to be denominated in  foreign currency, while the revenues are expected
in cedi It is therefore important that Ghana considers designing effective
currency risk mitigation instruments to help increase investor confidence in
financing renewable energy projects Description Ministry of Power, Ministry of
Finance, Energy Commission, PURC, development partners, all relevant
stakeholders Actors End 2016 Timing Broad consultation and engagement of all
relevant stakeholders Keys to success Streamlining renewable energy IPP
procedure for entering the electricity market Action All renewable energy
resources Service-resource pair() The current process for  renewable energy IPP
to enter the Ghana electricity market requires it to interact with regulatory
agencies in the power sector once detailed feasibility studies have been
completed These are the Energy Commission and PURC, the Environmental Protection
Agency, Ministry of Power, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and the
Ghana Investment Promotion Agency These provide various licences, approvals,
clearances and incentives linked to the development of the renewable energy
project (see figure 11) This complex and lengthy procedure can lead to
significant administrative and transaction costs which may discourage potential
investors and project developers from entering the market Description Ghana
needs to set up  one-stop shop which may help reduce complexity and assist IPPs
working through this bureaucracy The Ministry of Power is to take the lead in
this activity jointly with all key stakeholders in Ghana Ministry of Power,
Ministry of Finance, Energy Commission, regulatory agencies, all relevant
stakeholders Actors End 2016 Timing Broad consultation and engagement of all
relevant stakeholders Keys to success 39 OFF-GRID Action Designing clear policy
for off-grid mini-grids Off-grid solar Service-resource pair() The Government of
Ghana has been implementing the Northern Electrification Programme with the
target of achieving universal access by 2020 via grid extension However, it is
not possible to connect the 200-plus island/lakeside communities in the Volta
river to the national grid due to their geographical location Moreover, many
electrification projects fail due to  lack of clear definition of competencies
and responsibilities as well as political power and relationships between
different stakeholders There is very little expertise in mini-grid management in
Ghana This has become  concern lately due to the challenges associated with the
electrification of island communities in Lake Volta Mini-grids are becoming
interesting to NGOs and research institutions because they could rely on freely
available renewable energy resources to generate electricity to remote rural
communities However, much more needs to be done to scale up the deployment of
these technologies The country’ objective to increase rural electricity access
would be facilitated by creating  level playing field for local private sector
involvement The support announced through the REF should be clearly defined, and
reliable operating schemes designed for small- scale decentralised renewable
energy mini-grids Competencies and responsibilities, as well as political power
and relationships between different stakeholders, should also be clearly defined
Description The Ministry of Power, alongside the Energy Commission and PURC,
need either to set up special tariffs for mini-grids or provide follow- up
support to private operators willing to invest in them and facing financial and
technical constraints They are not considered attractive to foreign investors
Once operating, the REF could be an option as it aims to provide financial
incentives for mini-grid renewable power systems for remote areas and islands
There is also  need to design reliable operating schemes based on the local
political and infrastructural framework to realise  sustainable and functional
socio-economic system for mini-grids in Ghana Ministry of Power, Ministry of
Finance, Energy Commission, PURC, Development Partners, all relevant
stakeholders Actors End 2016 Timing Broad consultation and engagement of all
relevant stakeholders Keys to success 40 Enhancing political support for
promoting sustainable use of biomass energy Action Biomass for heating Service-
resource pair() More than 70% of households in Ghana continue to rely on
firewood and charcoal as their main source of cooking fuel Campaigns to reduce
wood fuel consumption within the biomass sector aim to introduce biodigesters
that produce methane for cooking They also aim to promote improved cookstoves to
increase the efficient use of traditional biomass sources However, high interest
rates on loans have prevented supply-side investors from expanding their
businesses and raising production The government is to continue to create and
support policy initiatives enabling an environment that provides accelerated
development and promotion of sustainable household biomass energy This is needed
in addition to the current policies and goals focused on remedies to
deforestation caused partly by traditional cookstove use Description There is
also  need to encourage more entrepreneurs prepared to invest, and to support
them by capacity building, through  grants programme and by providing access to
working capital Matching government programmes are needed to develop fast-
growing energy wood plots, improve charcoal production technologies and skills,
and improve cookstoves production Ministry of Power, Ministry of Finance,
Ministry of Environment, Energy Commission, PURC, Private Sector, Development
Partners, all relevant stakeholders Actors End 2015 Timing Broad consultation
and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success Action Supporting
private sector involvement All decentralised renewable energy applications
Service-resource pair() The relatively small size of the off-grid market does
not make it very attractive to foreign investors, which is why the sector would
probably be left to local private operators with the support of donors and
development partners Local private operators face technical and financial
constraints These include  lack of technical expertise to develop bankable
proposals and insufficient working capital due to difficulty accessing loans
Other constraints are high interest rates due to  perception of high risk and
lack of local financial institution expertise in assessing off-grid renewable
energy proposals Description The Ministry of Power is to lead  capacity building
programme for local private operators and financial institutions to develop and
evaluate bankable decentralised renewable energy project proposals This
includes, for instance, training on how to assess local conditions and systems,
installation and maintenance Ministry of Power, Energy Commission, Private
sector, Financial Institutions, Training institutions, Research Centers, all
relevant stakeholders Actors End 2016 Timing Broad consultation and engagement
of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success 41 Facilitating end-user access to
technologies and improving awareness and acceptability of cookstoves Action All
decentralised renewable energy applications Service-resource pair() As in most
of African countries, the upfront cost of renewable energy technologies in
Ghana, including those for alternative cooking fuels, are too high for end-users
These are mainly in rural population To facilitate the spread of renewable
energy technologies and their acceptance by the local populace, the Government
of Ghana is to establish  set of end-user access facilitation options These
could include targeted subsidies and deferred payment schemes that could be pre-
financed directly by service providers or through  microfinance institution It
also needs to establish sound business models for both stand-alone systems and
mini-grids to increase the viability and sustainability of decentralised
renewable energy projects and access to electricity services in rural Ghana
Description This should be achieved by getting the REF up and running alongside
other financing support mechanisms like group lending approaches and sustainable
credit programmes for low-income operators and farmers Researchers should be
supported in designing prototypes for solar dryers that could be manufactured
locally The government is also to lead awareness-raising campaigns and
communications strategies improving end-user knowledge of the new opportunities
and benefits of off-grid renewable energy systems If consumers are to adopt
improved cookstoves in the long term, the government should embark on critical
mass education to increase product market penetration and acceptability Ministry
of Power, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Education, Civil Society, NGOs,
Development partners and all relevant stakeholders Actors End 2017 Timing Broad
consultation and engagement of all relevant stakeholders Keys to success 42