MINISTRY OF ENERGY Republic of Ghana NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY February 2010
FOREWORD It is an honour for me to present  foreword for this holistic National
Energy Policy for Ghana The Policy which was approved by Cabinet on 16th March
2010 is intended to guide the development and management of Ghana’ energy
sector, especially the emerging oil and gas sector, following the discovery in
commercial quantities of petroleum resources in Apart from creating  conducive
environment for increased investment in the energy sector in Ghana to create
jobs, national value added or export revenues, the policy also seeks to put in
place  framework for the efficient management of the energy resources as well as
revenues accruing therefrom The formulation of the policy has been done through
an extensive consultative process which has involved the review of policies of
several countries, discussions with institutions of Government, local
authorities, civil society organizations and academia, among others The
implementation of this Policy will require putting in place new legislation for
renewable energy resources development and also for oil and gas administration
and management of petroleum revenues, developing and implementing  communication
strategy to manage public anxiety and expectations, development of procedures
and criteria for competitive licensing and creation of  new institutional
framework for the sub-sector The Ministry of Energy has since prepared
strategic plan for the implementation of those activities and continued to work
in consultation with the different stakeholders to accomplish the same  wish to
use this opportunity to register my profound gratitude to  Prof John Evans Atta
Mills, President of the Republic of Ghana for his guidance in the development
and management of the energy sector in Ghana in general and in the formulation
of this Policy in particular My gratitude also goes to my colleagues in Cabinet
for their participation in the consultative workshop for the Cabinet sub-
committee on Economy and Finance which preceded the final submission for the
draft Policy to Cabinet and also their constructive critique of the policy
document during discussions in Cabinet My colleagues in the Ministry, Hon
Emmanuel Armah Kofi-Buah, Deputy Minister of Energy and Hon Dr Kwabena Donkor,
former Deputy Minister of Energy, provided very useful inputs into enriching the
final document The Technical Team at the Ministry led by Mr   Kemevor, Ag Chief
Director included Mr Michael Opam, Director of PPME: Dr Alfred Ofosu-Ahenkorah,
Executive Secretary of the Energy Commission, among others, worked really hard
to complete the development of the policy document The contribution of all the
stakeholders who participated in the various consultations is duly recognized
am grateful also to Dr  Adjaye,  Petroleum Engineer and Consultant, for his
valuable contributions which helped to shape the draft Policy document DR JOE
OTENG-ADJEI MINISTER Table of Contents PREFACE   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION    POWER SUB SECTOR  10  PETROLEUM SUB SECTOR15  RENEWABLE ENERGY
SUB SECTOR  20  WASTE -TO-ENERGY…………………………………………………………………23  ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND CONSERVATION  24  ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT 26  ENERGY AND
GENDER………………………………………………………………………27  MANAGING THE FUTURE  28  Abbreviations &
Acronyms BOST BSPD CDM EC ECG EPA GDP GNPC GoG GOIL GRIDCo GWh kW kWh  / MW MWh
NEF NPA OMC PSP PURC & REP RET SHEP TOR TICO VRA WAGPP WAPP WtE Bulk Oil Storage
and Transport Company Barrels Per Stream Day Clean Development Mechanism Energy
Commission Electricity Company of Ghana Limited Environmental Protection Agency
Gross Domestic Product Ghana National Petroleum Corporation Government of Ghana
Ghana Oil Company Ltd Ghana Grid Company Ltd Giga Watt hours kilowatt kilowatt
hour metre metres per second Megawatt Megawatt hour National Electrification
Fund National Petroleum Authority Oil Marketing Company Private Sector
Participation Public Utilities Regulatory Commission Research and Development
Rural Electrification Programme Renewable Energy Technology Self Help
Electrification Programme Tema Oil Refinery Takoradi International Company Volta
River Authority West African Gas Pipeline Project West African Power Pool Waste-
to-Energy  Preface This Energy Policy outlines the Government of Ghana’ policy
direction regarding the current challenges facing the energy sector The document
provides  concise outline of the Government’ policy direction in order to
contribute to  better understanding of Ghana’ Energy Policy framework It is
hoped that the document will facilitate the effective management and development
of the energy sector as well as provide the public with information about the
Government’ policy goals The document is, therefore, intended to serve as : -
Decision-making platform for the effective management and development of Ghana’
Energy Sector; - Guide to key stakeholders and institutions in the energy sector
highlighting the definition and implementation of key activities in respect of
their mandates; - Guide for coordinating the implementation and monitoring of
energy sector policies; and - Platform for dialogue on investment opportunities
with Ghana’ development partners and the private sector The document is divided
into nine () sections Section One () gives  brief account of the various policy
directions in the energy sector Section Two () acknowledges the concerns
relating to power and identifies appropriate measures to address them Section
Three () indicates the state of affairs in the energy sector with respect to
petroleum issues and the necessary Government interventions required to support
and enhance the growth of this sector Section Four () highlights Government’
efforts to increase the amount of renewable energy in the national energy mix
Section Five () gives  brief account of the measures being taken to tackle the
waste management problem in the country The focus is to convert all wastes to
energy Section Six () outlines Government’ attempt to ensure that energy is
supplied and used efficiently with the least possible wastage Section Seven ()
focuses on the course being pursued to limit the adverse effects of energy
production and usage on the integrity of the environment Section Eight ()
highlights the steps being taken by Government to mainstream gender concerns in
the energy sector Section Nine () explicates Government plans to develop the
sector to play its role as  fulcrum of the national economy  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Ghana’ Development Challenge Ghana has huge potential to grow and transform its
economy through industrialization, creating jobs and ensuring the equitable
distribution of wealth The fundamental goal of the Government of Ghana’
development agenda is to achieve macro-economic stability and grow the economy
to  middle income status by The Energy Challenge Ghana’ total energy supply has
to grow significantly to help achieve the development agenda goal The challenge
is how to increase the energy supply and also expand the energy infrastructure
in the country in  way that is sustainable The Energy Resources and Vision Ghana
is well endowed with  variety of energy resources including biomass,
hydrocarbons, hydropower, solar and wind It has the capacity to produce modern
bio-fuels and is exploring options to develop nuclear energy The energy sector
vision is to develop an “Energy Economy” to secure  reliable supply of high
quality energy services for all sectors of the Ghanaian economy and also to
become  major exporter of oil and power by 2012 and 2015 respectively Energy
Policy Platform This National Energy Policy outlines the energy sector goals,
challenges and actions In general, these goals are ambitious but they are also
feasible The Policy covers the broad spectrum of issues and challenges relating
to the following areas: () (ii) (iii) (iv) Waste-to-Energy; () Energy Efficiency
and Conservation; (vi) Energy and Environment; (vii) Energy and Gender; and
(viii) Managing the future of the sector Power Sub-sector; Petroleum Sub-sector;
Renewable Energy Sub-sector;  summary of the sub-sector policy framework is
provided below Power Sub-sector The goals of the power sub-sector are to
increase installed power generation capacity quickly from about ,000 MW today to
,000 megawatts (MW) by 2015, and increase electricity access from the current
level of 66% to universal access by The challenge is how to attract investments
to build the necessary infrastructure for the generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity throughout the country This is key to ensuring the
sustainable development of the sector Apart from financing, the policy focuses
on institutional and human resource capacity strengthening as well as regulatory
reforms required to create  competitive electricity market Creating the right
environment for private-public partnerships in the development of new power
plants is essential to the growth of the power sector The biggest obstacle to
achieving this is the issue of cost-recovery,  challenge that this policy tries
to directly address Petroleum Sub-sector The goals of the petroleum sub-sector
are to ensure the sustainable exploration, development and production of the
country’ oil and gas endowment; the judicious management of the oil and gas
revenue for the overall benefit and welfare of all Ghanaians; and the
indigenisation of related knowledge, expertise and technology The major
challenges regarding the sector, especially the upstream petroleum sub-sector,
are how to sustainably develop the oil and gas industry and judiciously manage
the revenue received from the industry In view of these goals and challenges,
the policy focuses on the regulation of the petroleum industry with respect to
licensing and operation of the oil and gas companies; improving Ghana’
institutional and human resource capacity; enhancing local content; and fiscal
incentives that will ensure maximum benefits to the people of Ghana The policy
seeks also to ensure transparency in the use and distribution of the oil revenue
Renewable Energy Sub-sector The Renewable Energy sub-sector covers biomass, mini
hydro, solar and wind resources The goals of the renewable energy sub-sector are
to increase the proportion of renewable energy in the total national energy mix
and ensure its efficient production and use The major challenges facing the
Renewable Energy sub-sector are to:  Sustain exploitation of woodfuel by
improving efficiency;  Reduce the high costs of solar and wind energy
technologies, which make them uncompetitive; and  Reduce the high cost of waste
collection and management for waste-to-energy technologies The renewable energy
policy actions shall focus on:  Improving production and promoting the
efficient use of biomass in the short term, while increasing regeneration; 
Switching from the use of biomass to alternative sources of energy;  Engaging
Ghanaian engineers and scientists to cooperate with international experts to
bring down the cost of solar and wind energy technologies; and  Creating fiscal
and pricing incentives to enhance the development and use of renewable energy
Waste-to-Energy The policy is to convert most of the wastes generated in
municipal activities, industrial operations and agricultural operations to
energy This comprehensive waste management approach will enable Ghana to
generate reasonable amount of energy from its wastes The major challenge is to
reduce the high cost of waste collection and management Energy Efficiency and
Conservation Energy production, transportation and utilisaton result in losses
and wastage Reducing these losses will lead to significant benefits for the
national economy The challenge is to reduce the wastage in all aspects of the
energy sector The policy will focus on removing the obstacles that have
constrained the promotion and implementation of energy efficiency and
conservation measures The policy measures required to promote energy efficiency
and conservation are fiscal incentives, awareness creation, institutional and
human resource capacity development, and financial intermediation Energy and
Gender Energy issues are of concern to all However, women are one of the most
important actors in the energy sector, in terms of their contact, use and
management of renewable energy sources, which in their very crude or primary
form are used mostly by women Biomass (primarily wood fuel and charcoal)
constitutes 66% of the total energy consumed in Ghana The negative health
impacts of indoor air pollution from traditional biomass fuels on women, girls
and babies remain  critical issue The goal is to mainstream these gender
concerns in the energy sector and align them with proper health, safety and
environmental standards Managing the future Policy actions addressing regulation
of the sector, mobilisation of investments for the sector, strengthening of
human capacity, research and development are addressed in the document This
document also contains information regarding the regulations governing
operations within the energy sector, as well as information pertaining to
strengthening the various regulatory agencies to enhance their effectiveness
INTRODUCTION  Ghana’ Development Challenge Ghana has  huge potential to grow and
transform its economy through industrialization with  view to creating jobs and
ensuring equitable distribution of wealth The fundamental goal of the Government
of Ghana’ development agenda is to achieve macro-economic stability and grow the
economy to  middle income status by Ghana’ total energy supply must increase
significantly if the development agenda is to be achieved Energy Consumption and
Supply Profile  In 20081, Ghana’ biomass energy consumption was million tonnes,
while petroleum products and electricity consumption were 01 million tonnes and
,059 GWh, respectively In terms of total energy equivalents, biomass (fuelwood
and charcoal) constituted %, with petroleum products and electricity accounting
for % and %, respectively  The Energy Sector Vision The energy sector vision is
to develop an “Energy Economy” that would ensure secure and reliable supply of
high quality energy services for all sectors of the Ghanaian economy, and to
become  net exporter of oil and power by 2012 and 2015, respectively  Challenges
The challenges facing the energy sector are: () inadequate infrastructure
requiring huge investments; (ii) inadequate access to energy services; (iii)
high cost of fuel for electricity generation; (iv) inadequate regulatory
capacity and enforcement; and () operational and management difficulties in
utility companies (vi) vulnerability to climate change and environmental impacts
(vii) inefficiency in the production, transportation and use of energy  The
Energy Sector Goal Within the context of energy sector vision, the goal of the
energy sector is to make energy services universally accessible and readily
available in an environmentally sustainable manner  Energy Sector Objectives The
policy objectives to achieve this goal are to: () Secure long term fuel supplies
for the thermal power plants; (ii) Reduce technical and commercial losses in
power supply;  Information from Energy Commission  (iii) Support the
modernisation and expansion of energy infrastructure to meet growing demands and
ensure reliability; (iv) Increase access to modern forms of energy; () Improve
the overall management, regulatory environment and operation of the energy
sector; (vi) Minimise the environmental impacts of energy supply and consumption
through increased production and use of renewable energy and make energy
delivery efficient; (vii) Ensure cost recovery for energy supply and delivery;
(viii) Ensure the productive and efficient use of energy; (ix) Promote and
encourage private sector participation in the energy sector; and () Diversify
the national energy mix by promoting renewable energy sources nuclear and coal ;
POWER SUB SECTOR  Overview Electricity is the dominant modern energy form used
in the industrial and service sectors accounting for 69% of modern energy used
in the two sectors of the national economy The generation and supply of
electricity provides employment for  significant number of Ghanaian
professionals It is also an important source of foreign exchange earnings in the
country as Ghana exports power to neighbouring countries, including Togo, Benin,
and Burkina Faso The Ghana electricity supply industry is unbundled with
separate jurisdictions and entities regarding activities of electricity
generation, transmission and distribution Electricity generation is undertaken
by the state- owned Volta River Authority (VRA), which operates the Akosombo
Hydro Power Station, Kpong Hydro Power Station and the Takoradi Thermal Power
Plant (TAPCO) at Aboadze VRA is also  minority joint partner with TAQA,  private
sector company which owns and operates the Takoradi International Power Company
(TICO) thermal power plant also located at Aboadze Bui Power Authority (BPA),
another state-owned entity, is charged with the implementation of the Bui Hydro
electric Power Project In addition, independent power producers have been
licensed to build, own and operate power plants The IPP projects are at various
stages of development The National Interconnected Transmission System (NITS) for
electricity is owned and operated by the Ghana Grid Company (GRIDCO)GRIDCO is
state-owned company The distribution of electricity is done by the Electricity
Company of Ghana (ECG),  state-owned company, and the Northern Electricity
Department (NED),  subsidiary of the Volta River Authority (VRA) The Energy
Commission (EC) and the Public Utilities and Regulatory Commission (PURC)
regulate the electricity supply industry The Energy Commission, in addition to
being responsible for technical regulations in the power sector, also advises
the Minister for Energy on matters relating to energy planning and policy The
PURC on the other hand is an independent regulatory agency responsible for the
economic regulation of the power sector with the mandate to approve rates for
electricity sold by electricity distribution utilities The Ministry of Energy is
responsible for formulating, monitoring and evaluating policies, programmes and
projects in the energy sector It is also the institution charged with the
implementation of the National Electrification Scheme (NES) which seeks to
extend the reach of electricity to all communities in the long term Ghana has an
installed capacity of 1960MW made up of hydro and thermal facilities Electricity
demand which is currently 1400MW is growing at about 10% per annum It is
estimated that Ghana requires capacity additions of about 200MW to catch up with
increasing demand in the medium to long term The existing power plants are
unable to attain full generation capacity as  result of limitations in fuel
supply owing to rising fuel prices and uncertainty in rainfall and water inflows
into the hydroelectric power facilities Ghana has an extensive transmission
system which covers all the regions of the country Transmission infrastructure
has, however, deteriorated over the years, resulting in transmission
bottlenecks, overloaded transformer sub stations and high system losses The
electricity distribution infrastructure is extensive providing access to about
66% of the population However, it is old and obsolete, leading to frequent
interruptions in power supply and relatively high system losses While national
access is about 66%, access in the three northern regions is about 30% 10  Sub-
sector Goal The goal is to become  major exporter of power in the sub-region by
This will be achieved through capacity addition; modernisation of transmission
and distribution infrastructure  Challenges The challenges facing the power sub-
sector are to:  Sustain power generation capacity expansion, as well as
rehabilitate and reinforce the transmission and distribution infrastructure to
meet the projected growth in power demand of 10% per year in the medium term2; 
Secure long term reliable and cheaper fuel for the operation of the thermal
power plants;   Achieve cost recovery for electricity services in spite of
relatively low incomes; and  Reduce power system losses and waste in
electricity supply and consumption Increase access to electricity of consumers,
especially in the rural areas;  Expansion of Power Supply Infrastructure The
first step towards the delivery of reliable power supply services and becoming
net exporter of power by 2015 will be to increase power supply infrastructure
Policy Direction The policy direction is to attract private investments to
support the public sector to improve and expand the capacity of the existing
infrastructure ) Power Generation Capacity The policy objective is to increase
installed generation capacity from about ,0003 MW to ,000 MW in the medium term
To achieve this objective, Government will pursue the following policy actions:
Thermal Power Plants  Seek financing from the private sector for the
rehabilitation and expansion of existing power plants  Complete the
construction of on-going power projects  Encourage private sector investment in
the construction and ownership of additional power plants Hydro Power Resources
Development  Complete the development of the Bui Hydropower Project on the
Black Volta; and  Support the development of small and medium4 scale hydro
power projects on other rivers, including the Western Rivers (Ankobra, Tano and
Pra), River Oti, and the White Volta  The medium term refers to  period of
years up to This refers to installed capacity in 2009 and includes the Emergency
Power Units of 126 Megawatts (MW) 11 ) Transmission Infrastructure The policy
objective is to provide adequate, safe and reliable electricity transmission
network To achieve this, Government will:  Support the mobilisation of
commercial and domestic capital resources to supplement external funding for
transmission infrastructure development;  Enforce technical regulations and
operational standards; and  Provide support for the maintenance of existing
transmission infrastructure ) Distribution Infrastructure Policy Direction The
policy direction will be to seek adequate investment to improve the electricity
distribution network and thereby reduce high system losses5 and improve the poor
quality of electricity supply Accordingly, Government will:  Assist
distribution utilities in regaining their financial heath;  Encourage
distribution utilities to seek commercial loan financing to modernise their
infrastructure;  Encourage the injection of investment capital from private
sources and from the domestic capital market in the medium to long term; and 
Support management in the restructuring of the distribution utilities’
operations towards achieving improved operational performance  Securing fuel
supply for power generation Policy Direction In order to secure future fuel
supplies, efforts will be made to increase and diversify the fuel mix in power
generation The following policy actions will be pursued: Infrastructure for new
fuel supply sources  Support the strategic exploitation of domestic natural gas
discoveries through fiscal incentives, financial support, and creation of
favourable and effective regulatory environment; and  Encourage public-private
partnership financing of natural gas infrastructure  Small scale hydropower
project refers to  hydropower project with generating capacity between  MW and
10 MW Medium scale hydropower project refer to  hydropower project with
generating capacity between 10 MW and 100 MW  Currently total system losses are
estimated at 25%, consisting of technical losses of 11% and commercial losses of
14% 12 Nuclear Power Development  Develop nuclear power as an option for
electricity generation in the long term Coal Power Development  Develop coal as
an option for electricity generation in the long term Regional Integration of
Energy Resources  Support regional initiatives for integrating energy
infrastructure to expand and accelerate cross-border energy trade and
investments  Secure supplies of cheaper fuels such as natural gas from Ghana’
domestic natural gas resources and the West Africa Gas Pipeline Project for
power generation  Harmonise the legal, regulatory and institutional regimes in
conformity with the ECOWAS Energy Protocols  Increasing Access to Electricity
Supply Policy Direction The policy objective is to achieve universal access to
electricity by extending the reach of electricity infrastructure to all
communities by To meet this objective, Government will pursue the following
policy actions: Infrastructure Development  Increase funding from Government
and other multilateral and bilateral sources for the National Electrification
Scheme  Support private sector co-financing with Government for grid-extension
to designated franchised zones;  Establish  sustainable internally generated
funding mechanism for rural electrification;  Support new service connections
for electricity in rural areas;  Address institutional and market constraints
that hamper increasing electricity access to the poor; and  Promote productive
uses of electricity as an integral part of the Rural Electrification Programme
Street Lighting Access and Infrastructure  Provide street lighting
infrastructure in all Regional Capitals and subsequently in all District
Capitals  Develop sustainable mechanisms to finance the operation and
maintenance of street lighting infrastructure 13  Electricity Pricing Policy
Direction The objective is to ensure that electricity pricing is efficient and
competitive while providing rates that are affordable Government will pursue the
following measures with respect to pricing and the setting of rates for
electricity:  Uniform electricity tariffs throughout the country;  Support the
implementation of cost recovery pricing in electricity supply  provide special
rates for the needy in society (lifeline tariffs)  Base wholesale dispatching
of generating units on Economic-Merit-Order Dispatch principles  Electricity
generated from Akosombo and Kpong Hydro Power plants shall not be the subject of
bilateral contract; and  Regulate pricing of transmission and distribution
services to achieve financial sustainability of the utility companies as well as
ensure consumer protection  Power Sector Reforms Power sector reforms were
initiated in 1995 to ensure an efficient and effective power sector and also to
allow increased private sector investment and participation In implementing the
Power Sector Reform Programme, Government will continue to pursue the following
actions:  Promote competition in the generation of electricity through the
development of  Wholesale Electricity Market (WEM), ;  Create the environment
for retail competition in the electricity market;  Facilitate the entry of
Independent Power Producers (IPPs); and  Ensure improved performance of
electricity utility companies 14  PETROLEUM SUB SECTOR  Overview The petroleum
industry is segmented into upstream, midstream and downstream which covers
activities from exploration and production of petroleum through transportation
to the marketing of the final products Ghana has five sedimentary basins that
are considered to have prospects for oil and gas: the Tano Basin, Saltpond
Basin, Accra/Keta Basin, Cape Three Points Basin which are all off-shore and are
fairly well explored; and the Voltaian Basin which is on-shore and is hardly
explored In July 2007, Ghana National Petroleum Corporation and its partners
discovered oil in commercial quantities in the Jubilee field in the offshore
Tano/Cape Three Points Basin of the Ghanaian continental shelf Appraisal work
conducted on the field has estimated reserves of oil at about 800 million with
an upside estimate of  billion barrels The field has substantial associated
natural gas reserves In addition to the Jubilee Field, there have been more
discoveries in the Mahogany Deep, Odum, Tweneboa and Sankofa Exploration
activities are being intensified, and it is expected that more discoveries will
be made both offshore and on-shore With the significant potential economic
prospects offered by the discovery of oil and gas  key pre-occupation of
government is to ensure judicious exploitation and maximum benefits to Ghanaians
of the oil and gas resources It is expected that the development of the oil and
gas industry will stimulate accelerated economic growth, job creation, poverty
reduction and general prosperity to the people of Ghana  To satisfy this
expectation, there is the need to build the necessary human, financial and
technological capacity of Ghanaians to be able to participate fully in the
petroleum industry This can be achieved through  well formulated Ghanaian local
content and participation policy and regulatory environment The petroleum
products marketed in Ghana are () Premium Gasoline; (ii) Kerosene; (iii) Gas
oil; (iv) Residual Fuel Oil; () LPG; and (vi) Premix Approximately 70%of
products is produced by Tema Oil Refinery (TOR) and the remaining 30% from
imports The country imports all of its crude oil requirements which is refined
at TOR The TOR, whose capacity is 45,000 Barrels-Per-Stream-Day (BSPD), is
wholly owned by the Government of Ghana Bulk supply petroleum products are
fairly reliable and are done through an extensive infrastructural network
comprising of storage depots located at strategic parts of the country,
pipelines for the movement of petroleum products, Bulk Road Vehicles (BRVs) and
also barges located on the Volta Lake Secondary distribution and retail
activities comprise () transportation of refined products from the bulk storage
depots by road and (ii) retailing of the products at the pump It is projected
that the requirement for the major petroleum products -gasoline, kerosene, gas
oil and LPG- will increase significantly from 62 million tonnes in 2005 to 49
million tonnes by 2015 representing an average annual growth rate of % over the
period The consumption of these products could grow faster if the strong
economic growth experienced in the past decade should continue On the basis of
these projections, Ghana will continue to import refined products to meet
national consumption requirements Access to petroleum products in Ghana is
satisfactory but has to be improved as the population grows There are presently
total of ,700 petroleum products retail outlets of which 37% are Service
Stations6 (SS), 20% are Filling Stations (FS) and 43% are Reseller Outlets (RO)
The total number of retail outlets represents an access ratio of 71 retail
outlets per one million people There are also vendors who sell mainly kerosene,
in all rural communities thereby increasing the accessibility of petroleum
products in most parts of the country In addition to the service stations and
reseller outlets, the Ministry of Energy,  The Service Stations and Filling
Station are big retail outlets located mainly in the cities and large towns
while the Reseller Outlets are small outlets serving mainly the rural areas 15
under the Rural Kerosene Distribution Improvement Project (RKDIP), has extended
the reach of kerosene retail outlets to ,540 rural communities by installing
,000 litre capacity surface tanks for the retailing of kerosene  Sub sector Goal
The goal is to sustain and optimise the exploitation and utilisation of Ghana’
oil and gas endowment for the overall benefit and welfare of all Ghanaians,
present and future  Upstream and Midstream  Challenges The major challenges in
meeting the goal for the upstream and midstream activities are: () Sustain
interest in exploration activities; (ii) Security of the oil and gas
installations; (iii) Environmental sustainability; (iv) Maximise local content
and participation in petroleum industry; and () Prudent management of revenue
from oil and gas exploitation; Policy Direction In addressing the challenges
Government seeks to pursue the following actions: Hydrocarbon Resources
Development and Management  Manage Ghana’ oil and gas resource endowment to
ensure the sustainability of the reserves and of the environment Regulation 
Strengthen the regulatory agency for the regulation of all activities related to
upstream, midstream and downstream oil and gas industry in Ghana Oil Revenue
Management  Manage oil and gas revenues transparently and ensure equity for the
benefit of present and future generations of Ghanaians; and  Facilitate the use
of revenue from the oil and gas sector to other sectors of the economy
Investments Framework  Encourage investments along the oil and gas industry
value chain; and  Facilitate periodic reviews of the terms and conditions in
the Model Petroleum Agreement and other relevant regulations to sustain interest
in exploration and production Local Content, Local Participation and Local
Capacity Development  Maximise the benefits of oil and gas wealth generation on
comprehensive local content platform by optimising the use of local expertise,
goods and services, job creation for people, 16 businesses and financing in all
aspects of the oil and gas industry value chain, and retention of the benefit
within Ghana;  Develop local capacity in all aspects of the oil and gas value
chain through education, skills and expertise development, transfer of
technology and know-how;  Achieve maximum practicable influence over
development initiatives for local/domestic stakeholders;  Maximise local
content and local participation in all aspects of oil and gas industry value
chain within  decade;  Increase the capacity and international competitiveness
of domestic businesses and industrial sectors; and  Create supportive
industries that will sustain economic development Security  Ensure security for
oil and gas industry installations and operations, with an emphasis on engaging
National Security Agencies to assist in the provision of protective security for
the oil and gas industry installations and activities Natural Gas Utilisation
and Commercialisation  Maximise the utilisation of natural gas reserves by
prohibiting flaring or venting of natural gas produced within Ghana unless
necessary in operations;  Discourage re-injection of natural gas unless it
results in increased benefits to the associated operations;  Assign to GNPC any
natural gas produced in the country either in association with crude oil or not
in association with crude oil unless otherwise agreed in the Petroleum Agreement
;  Support GNPC or some other national entity to secure the required financing,
in partnership with private sector, to develop infrastructure for the
utilisation of all natural gas produced in the country; and  Facilitate the
utilisation of natural gas for the development of  viable domestic petrochemical
industry Human Resource Development and Technology Transfer  Support capacity
building at all levels in the country’ technical, vocational and tertiary
institutions; and  Oblige Licensees to provide facilities for training and
technology transfer as an integral part of their operations 17 Downstream
Policy Goal The goal is to facilitate the universal access to adequate, reliable
and cost effective petroleum products such as Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
Challenges The challenges facing the petroleum sub sector include:       
Inadequate refining infrastructure Inadequate infrastructure for the
transportation of petroleum products Inadequate storage infrastructure
Inadequate and inefficient distribution of petroleum products Inadequate sales
outlets Ineffective implementation of petroleum pricing mechanism weak
institutional and regulatory environment  Expansion of Petroleum Products Supply
Infrastructure Policy Direction The policy focus for the petroleum downstream
sub-sector is therefore to attract investments in order to expand the capacity
of the existing infrastructure in the medium to long term To meet the short to
medium term objective, Government will pursue the following:  Expand the
national crude oil refining capacity through public and private sector
investment;  Secure increased private sector investment in partnership with the
public sector for the expansion of infrastructure for the supply of petroleum
product;  Allocate adequate resources to meet national strategic petroleum
stocks requirement; and  Support mobilisation of domestic capital markets for
petroleum supply infrastructure and operations  Increasing Access to Petroleum
products Policy Direction The policy focus is to extend the reach of petroleum
products to all Ghanaians To meet this objective, Government will pursue the
following policy actions:  Expand petroleum product storage capacity, and
extend petroleum products bulk distribution infrastructure to all parts of the
country;  Support expansion of the supply and reach of LPG to homes and small
businesses; and  Address institutional and market constraints that hamper
increasing access of petroleum products 18  Petroleum Sector Reforms Policy
Direction Government’ policy actions will focus on:  Completing the full cycle
of the deregulation 10 Petroleum Pricing Policy Direction Government will: 
Ensure pricing of petroleum products at cost recovery levels while maintaining
uniform national prices for petroleum products;  Base ex-refinery prices of
petroleum products on import parity prices of petroleum products or other cost-
effective pricing formula;  Regulate transportation and distribution charges
for petroleum products to ensure reasonable profit margins for transporters and
distributors; and  Apply cross-subsidies between petroleum products to achieve
specific national development objectives 19  RENEWABLE ENERGY SUB SECTOR
Overview Ghana is well endowed with renewable energy resources, particularly
biomass7, solar and wind energy The development and use of renewable energy and
waste- to- energy8 resources have the potential to ensure Ghana’ energy security
and mitigate the negative climate change impacts The use of waste-to- energy
resources has the potential to act as  significant part of the national
sanitation programme Biomass is Ghana’ dominant energy resource in terms of
endowment and consumption Biomass resources cover about million hectares of the
million hectare land mass of Ghana, and is the source of supply of about 60% of
the total energy used in the country The vast arable and degraded land mass of
Ghana has the potential for the cultivation of crops and plants that can be
converted into  wide range of solid and liquid biofuels The production,
transportation, sale and pricing of woodfuels are all undertaken by the private
sector except for taxes and levies which are regulated by local Government
authorities The woodfuels business will continue to be operated and managed by
the private sector The development of alternative transportation fuels such as
gasohol and other biofuels can provide substitute fuels for the transportation
sector and help diversify and secure future energy supplies of Ghana By virtue
of its geographic location, Ghana is well endowed with solar resources which
could be exploited for electricity generation and low heat requirements in homes
and industries Solar energy utilisation has however been limited owing to its
comparatively higher cost Government is committed to improving the cost-
effectiveness of solar and wind technologies by addressing the technological
difficulties, institutional barriers, as well as market constraints that hamper
the deployment of solar and wind technologies Even though the overall potential
of mini-hydro is limited, 21 potential mini9 hydro sites that could be developed
for power generation have been identified in the country The generating
capacities of these sites range between 4kW and 325kW  Goal for the sub-sector
The goal of the renewable sub-sector is to increase the proportion of renewable
energy, particularly solar, wind, mini hydro and waste-to-energy in the national
energy supply mix and to contribute to the mitigation of climate change
Challenge The challenge is to increase renewable energy in the national energy
mix in  sustainable manner  Biomass Policy Direction The policy focus is to: 
Support sustained regeneration of woody biomass resources through legislation,
fiscal incentives, and attractive pricing;  Biomass constitutes woodfuel and
charcoal  Waste-to-Energy is the conversion of waste material to energy  Mini
hydro refers to hydropower project with generating capacity of less than  MW 20
 Promote the establishment of dedicated woodlots for wood fuel production; 
Promote the production and use of improved and more efficient biomass
utilisation technologies  Promote the use of alternative fuels such as LPG as
substitute for fuel wood and charcoal by addressing the institutional and market
constraints that hamper increasing access of LPG in Ghana; and Biomass Pricing
The policy for pricing woodfuels focuses on:  Prices based on market forces;
and  Taxes and levies on woodfuels being regulated by the appropriate national
agencies or local authorities, as may be necessary  Liquid Biomass Fuels The
policy is to:  Balance biofuel development against food security;  Support the
development of indigenous alternative transportation fuel industry based on bio-
energy resources (Biofuels); and  Support private sector investments in
cultivation of biofuel feedstock, extraction of the bio-oil and refining of bio-
oil into secondary products by creating appropriate legislation  Solar and wind
Policy Direction The policy focus is to:  Improve the cost-effectiveness of
solar and wind technologies  Create favourable regulatory and fiscal regimes; 
Support indigenous research and development to reduce the cost of solar and wind
energy technologies; and  Support the use of decentralised off-grid alternative
technologies (such as solar PV and wind) where they are competitive with
conventional electricity supply 21  Mini Hydro Policy Direction The policy
actions are:  Create appropriate fiscal and regulatory framework; and  Provide
pricing incentives for mini hydropower projects 22  WASTE-TO-ENERGY  Overview
Waste-to-Energy projects have become  very important mechanism for the
management of the growing sanitation problem facing urban communities as well as
means of contributing to energy supply and security Significant amounts of
wastes are generated in Ghana These include () municipal waste (both solid and
liquid), (ii) industrial wastes, and (iii) agricultural wastes There are many
energy technologies which can convert these waste materials into electricity,
heat and fuel The conversion technologies include () combustion, (ii)
gasification (iii) pyrolisis (iv) anaerobic digestion () fermentation, (vi)
esterification While many waste-to-energy technologies are mature and widely
applied in other parts of the world, they are relatively more expensive compared
to conventional technologies particularly due to the high cost of waste
collection and management Some waste-to-energy technologies have been utilised
in Ghana in the past These include () anaerobic fermentation of municipal waste
and industrial liquid wastes to produce biogas for heating, and (ii) combustion
of solid wastes to produce electricity in Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems
in wood and oil palm industries  Policy Goal The goal is to convert most of the
wastes generated in municipal activities, industrial operations and agricultural
operations to energy  Challenge The major challenge to the development of waste-
to-energy technologies in Ghana is the high cost associated with the collection
and management of waste materials Policy Direction The policy focus is to
convert municipal, industrial and agricultural waste into energy as  means of
managing the growing sanitation problems while contributing to energy supply
security In that regard the specific policy actions will be to:  Maximise
energy production from waste  Divert waste from landfills (prohibit burying of
waste and landfills)  Facilitate access to grid for waste to energy power
plants  Develop infrastructure for waste collection and supply to waste-to-
energy facilities 23  ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION  Overview The growth in
the demand for fuelwood and charcoal is estimated at % per annum Electricity
demand, on the other hand, is growing between %-% annually while consumption of
petroleum products is estimated to increase at about % per annum Energy
efficiency and conservation can help reduce these high growth rates The losses
in the production, transportation and use of energy are also high System losses
in electricity distribution are about 25% while wastage in the end-use of
electricity is estimated at about 30% Reduction of losses in energy supply and
more efficient use of energy would also reduce the demand for energy and delay
investment in energy supply infrastructure Efforts, in the past, have been made
by the Ministry of Energy and other agencies to promote energy efficiency and
conservation in homes and industries These efforts have however not resulted in
sustained adoption of energy efficiency and conservation in the country owing to
number of financial and institutional obstacles Empirical evidence also suggests
that pricing of energy services has been successfully used to encourage
consumers to adopt measures to conserve energy and use energy efficiently To
encourage and sustain energy efficiency and conservation in the development of
the sector requires new and innovative interventions to deal with the challenges
Goal The goal is to ensure efficient production and transportation as well as
end-use efficiency and conservation of energy  Challenge The challenges are: 
Inefficient energy pricing  Inadequate financing for energy conservation and
efficiency  Limited awareness of energy conservation measures Policy Direction
The following policy directions will be pursued by Government to conserve and
use energy efficiently: General  Establish appropriate pricing regime for
energy services that would provide incentives to domestic and industrial
consumers to voluntarily manage their energy consumption;  Develop and
implement programmes and measures to help consumers optimise their energy use; 
Support  sustained and comprehensive public education and awareness creation
campaign on the methods and benefits of energy conservation;  Promote the
establishment of  Centre for Energy Efficiency; and 24  Discontinue, through
legislation, the local production, importation and use of high energy consuming
vehicles and inefficient electricity consuming equipment and appliances
Transportation  Develop and implement measures to reduce petroleum product
consumption in transportation;  Enforce the implementation of the zonal system
for lifting of petroleum products from dedicated storage depots;  Encourage the
use of fuel enhancing additives; and  Reduce electricity transmission and
distribution losses 25  ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT  Overview The impact of the
production and use of energy on the environment is undeniable and varying in its
degrees The exploitation of biomass for energy purposes results in
deforestation, while the use of fossil- based fuels contributes to carbon
dioxide emissions The use of inferior cooking equipment also has negative health
impacts The production and transportation of crude oil and petroleum products
and the flaring of natural gas associated with petroleum production have
associated environmental risks  Goal The goal is to ensure that energy is
produced and utilised in an environmentally sound manner  Challenge The
challenge is to  Mitigate the environmental hazards of energy production,
transportation and use  Build capacity to adapt and mitigate the effects of
climate change  Regulate all activities in the energy sector to protect the
environment Policy Direction To address the challenge, Government will: 
Promote the use of environmentally friendly energy supply sources such as
renewable energy (solar, wind, waste) in the energy supply mix of the country; 
Encourage  shift from oil to gas wherever gas is  technically feasible
alternative;  Promote the use of improved wood fuel burning equipment for
cooking in households and other commercial activities;  Support and actively
participate in international efforts and cooperate with international
organisations that seek to ensure sustainable delivery of energy to mitigate
negative environmental impacts and climate change;  Encourage and enable all
relevant entities engaged in activities in the energy sector to explore and
access international environmental financial mechanisms and markets to overcome
investment, technology and other relevant barriers;  Ensure effective disposal
of all hazardous substances and materials associated with the production,
transportation and use of energy; and  Facilitate environmental protection
awareness programmes 26  ENERGY AND GENDER  Overview Energy issues are of
concern to all However, women are one of the most important actors in the energy
sector, in terms of their contact, use and management of energy With woodfuels
constituting the bulk of the energy used for cooking and heating in Ghanaian
homes and in other commercial activities, women in Ghana bear the brunt of the
pollution and negative health impacts of emissions from these fuels Given that
majority (57%) of Ghanaians live in rural areas, statistics show that many
people, especially women, lack access to electricity and rely on biomass for
cooking The negative health impacts of indoor air pollution from traditional
biomass fuels on women, girls and babies remain  critical issue in Ghana’ energy
development  Policy Goal The goal is to mainstream Gender in the Energy Sector
Challenges The Energy and Gender challenges include:  Dominance of women in the
collection and use of fuelwood and charcoal  High Exposure of women to indoor
pollution  Limited involvement of women in the planning and management of
energy services  Limited capacity of women in management positions in the
Energy Sector Policy Direction In addressing the Energy and Gender challenges
Government will:  Promote the use of modern forms of energy in households; 
Support the capacity development of women in the energy Sector;  Promote the
development of solar and other renewable forms of energy on off grid
communities; and  Ensure participation of women in the formulation and
implementation of energy interventions 27  MANAGING THE FUTURE  Overview
Effective management is critical for the sustainable development of the energy
sector To achieve this requirement requires  transparent regulatory regime and
strong institutional and human capacities as well as  vibrant financial platform
There are three regulatory agencies established by Acts of Parliament to ensure
the proper functioning of all players in the energy sector and to create the
requisite conducive environment for protection of private investment in the
sector These are Energy Commission, Public Utility Regulatory Commission and
National Petroleum Authority The Energy Commission (EC) has responsibilities for
the licensing of operators and setting technical standards for power sector and
natural gas transportation The EC also advises the Minister for Energy on energy
sector policy and planning issues The Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
(PURC) is responsible for electricity tariffs approval, monitoring quality of
service and consumer protection The Ministry of Energy has the mandate to
regulate upstream petroleum activities including the granting of licenses for
petroleum exploration, development and production National Petroleum Authority
(NPA) combines the responsibilities of the licensing of operators in the
downstream petroleum sector and setting of technical standards and enforcement
as well as pricing of petroleum products These regulatory institutions are
limited in their professional capacity and operational effectiveness This leads
to uncertainty in regulation resulting in difficulties in the supply and
delivery of energy services With the recent developments in the petroleum
sector, there is also the need to streamline the regulatory environment to avoid
duplication and conflict of mandates  Regulatory Environment Goal The policy
goal is to build  transparent and effective regulatory environment as well as
strengthen the regulatory institutions to fulfil their mandate effectively
Challenges The challenges are:  Inadequate financial resources for operational
activities  Inadequate human resources Policy Direction The policy actions for
the development of the regulatory environment will focus on the following: 
Streamline regulations and institutional arrangements;  Strengthen human
resource capacity of the regulatory institutions; 28  Ensure the independence
of the national regulatory agencies;  Implement administrative and regulatory
changes that will enhance the financial independence of regulatory institutions;
and  Strengthen the capacity of regulatory agencies to enforce regulations
Mobilisation of Investment for Energy Sector Development The energy sector
requires huge capital investment (16 Billion US Dollars) to develop
infrastructure in the energy sector – petroleum, power and renewable energy-in
the medium term Goal The goal is to encourage public and private sector
investment in the energy sector Challenges The challenges for the sector are to:
 Establish  transparent and effective regulatory environment; and  Transparent
and efficient pricing regime for energy services Policy Direction Government
will:  Provide  conducive legal, fiscal, and regulatory environment to attract
investment into the energy sector;  Encourage the capital markets, including
the Ghana Stock Exchange, to raise financing for investments in the energy
sector;  Establish transparent and non-discriminatory practices in the
implementation of rules and regulations; and  Ensure efficient and transparent
pricing regime for energy services  Building Human Resource Capacity and & The
effective development of the energy sector requires Ghana to build the requisite
levels of human resource capacity Effective and well-focused Research and
Development (&) will also contribute to accelerating the development of the
sector Goal The goals are to build adequate Ghanaian human resource capacity in
the control and management of the energy sector, and create an enabling
environment for effective & 29 Challenges The challenges are to:  Mainstream
human resources development and & issues in all energy sector operations; and 
Develop requisite educational and institutional capacity to support Ghanaian
expertise and skills development in the energy sector Policy Direction
Government will pursue the following actions:  Develop comprehensive Ghanaian
local content in all aspects of energy sector operations;  Ensure maximum
ownership and management control of all aspects of the energy sector;  Support
the training of Ghanaians in all fields of energy development and management and
build capacity in indigenous manufacture of energy technologies;  Increase the
allocation of resources for energy & activities;  Give priority to adaptive &
in energy technology while promoting basic research;  Support the
transformation of Ghanaian energy research institutions into Centres of
Excellence for energy research and development; and  Collaborate with relevant
Government, local and international agencies to develop capacity of tertiary and
allied institutions for training and research  Implementing the Energy Policy To
make the necessary impact on the national economy will require that the
management, operations and monitoring of the energy sector receive adequate
focus Team work and total commitment of all stakeholders should be the primary
driving principle to ensure smooth implementation of the National Energy Policy
To achieve this objective, the following actions will be pursued:  Develop
requisite human resource capacity and logistical support for the implementation
and monitoring of the Energy Policy;  Strengthening the Policy, Planning,
Monitoring and Evaluation Divisions of relevant Ministries, Departments and
Agencies;  Regular interaction between the Ministry of Energy and relevant
Ministries, Departments and Agencies, Traditional Authorities, Members of
Parliament, District Assemblies to discuss issues relating to the National
Energy Policy;  Refine strategies and programmes to achieve the policy goals;
and  Develop comprehensive programme to create awareness and ensure acceptance
among policy makers and the general public on the National Energy Policy 30 31