BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  SUMMARY Barbados National Energy Policy /
Energy security and aﬀordability through diversity and collaboration:
Establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy sector for Barbados The
Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP)  document is designed to achieve the 100%
renewable energy and carbon neutral transformational goals by 2030, becoming the
ﬁrst island-state in the world to do so Our goal is to be 100% renewable by
2030! BNEP is an energy revolution that will enrich the lives of all Barbadians
and inspire others around the world Over the years, Barbados has sought to
maintain an energy sector where energy resources are universally available at
reasonable prices The island can be proud of the fact that there is virtually
100% access to electricity  Barbados National Energy Policy /  Speciﬁc goals
include: Provision of reliable, safe, aﬀordable, sustainable, modern and climate
friendly energy services to all residents and visitors Zero domestic consumption
of fossil fuels economy wide Export of all hydrocarbons produced both on land
and oﬀshore Maximising local participation (individual and corporate) in
distributed renewable energy (RE) generation and storage (democratisation of
energy) Minimise the outflow of foreign exchange Creating  regional centre of
excellence in RE research and development  Barbados National Energy Policy /
Current situation: Barbados is energy import-dependent and relies on trade to
meet its energy needs Consequently,  momentary disruption or trade imbalance can
lead to uncertainty in access to energy as prices fluctuate on the world market
Target energy mix:  way of mitigating these impacts is to reduce the volume of
carbon dioxide emissions by increasing the use of renewable energy technologies
or investing more in energy efficiency In this way, we will also help to protect
the environment and ﬁght climate change Currently, over 90% of the energy used
for electricity production in Barbados is derived from carbon-based fuels which
is  drain on foreign exchange resources “Due to their size and location,
Caribbean SIDS are particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change As
developing economies relying on sectors vulnerable to climate patterns such as
tourism, agriculture and ﬁshing, Caribbean nations would be greatly aﬀected by
the ongoing rise in sea levels, changes in rain patterns and temperatures, and
increasing intensity of natural disasters identiﬁed by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)” (IADB, 2016) The country’ goal is to ensure
smooth energy transition, with the development of the oﬀshore and onshore
resources, building revenue for the country and skills that can be exported The
oﬀshore resources are yet to be explored, but preliminary studies suggest there
are promising potential resources, especially natural gas, laying under the
ocean  Barbados National Energy Policy /  Four main types of energy will be
explored:  types of energy  the future: solar, wind, ocean and biomasss All
relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to identify priority
geographical areas for renewable energy  Barbados National Energy Policy /
Objectives: 49% Fossil fuel reduction by 2023 52% Increase in renewable energy
by 2023 100% Increase in renewable energy by 2030 100% Fossil fuel reduction by
2030 The proposed target mix is anticipated to result in:  An annual total
energy savings of $400 - $800 million per year at current market prices  Help
protect the environment by displacing approximately  million tonnes of CO2
equivalent  The beneﬁt to Barbados is estimated at $ billion annually from the
removal of fossil fuels  Barbados National Energy Policy /  BNEP visionary
goals:  Barbados National Energy Policy /  BNEP overall objectives: Overall
Objective : Increasing the amount of renewable energy sources used in the energy
mix to 100% (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 10: Improving the
efficiency in the production and consumption of energy products within the
various sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Achieving
aﬀordability and access to all classes of consumers in energy products and
services (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 11: Improving the
awareness and understanding of energy production and consumption, its impacts
and the associated environmental and socio-economic consequences within all
sections of the public (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective :
Increasing the amount of renewable energy sources used in the energy mix to 100%
(related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 12: Increasing the number of
persons locally with qualiﬁcations and skills relating to energy production and
management of renewable and fossil fuel sources (related to Visionary Goal )
Overall Objective : Establishing  consistent and comprehensive legislative and
regulatory framework to govern activities in various energy sub-sectors (related
to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental impacts
associated with the production and consumption of energy resources locally
(related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Increasing diversity in the
types of energy sources used within the energy sector (related to Visionary Goal
) Overall Objective : Increasing the extent of renewable energy resources used
in Barbados that are obtained from indigenous sources (related to Visionary Goal
) Overall Objective 14: Ensuring reliability and continuity of energy supply in
the various local energy subsectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall
Objective 15: Attaining the lowest price sustainable by the local economy for
various energy sources consumed in Barbados, while maintaining environmental
efficiency (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Encouraging local
investment in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, with  view to
increasing the number of shareholders and players in the various energy sub-
sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 16: Establishing eﬀective
partnerships between national and international entities for local energy
projects (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Promoting more local
entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy and increasing fossil fuel energy
development for export throughout the energy sub-sectors (related to Visionary
Goal ) Overall Objective 17: Establishing eﬀective systems to support  hub for
research and development in renewable energy (related to Visionary Goal )
Overall Objective : Increasing collaboration within the energy sub-sectors and
among the cross-cutting sectors that have an impact on energy supply or
consumption (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 18: Maximise the use
of small scale distributed generation within the energy mix (related to
Visionary Goal 10)  Barbados National Energy Policy /  Barbados has set some
very ambitious and important goals for the year It is key that we all work
together to achieve these goals Visit  and discover how you can participate in
this energy revolution by saving energy and developing more energy efficient
habits Become an Energy Champion  (246)    Trinity Business Complex
info@energygovbb Country Road    St Michael, Barbados