 May 8th - 3PM Final Barbados Declaration on Achieving Sustainable Energy for
All in Small Island Developing States (SIDS) We, the Ministers and other Heads
of Delegation of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) present at the
Ministerial Conference on “Achieving Sustainable Energy for All in SIDS –
Challenges, Opportunities, Commitments” in Bridgetown, Barbados - May 2012,
Reaffirm that the Barbados Programme of Action (BPOA) and the Mauritius Strategy
of Implementation (MSI) remain the essential blueprints for addressing the
sustainable development needs of Small Island Developing States (SIDS) In this
regard, SIDS remain fully committed to ensuring the full and effective
implementation of the BPOA and the MSI and we urge our development partners to
provide, in  timely and predictable manner, financial and the successful
implementation of the BPOA and MSI (agreed) technical support to ensure
Reaffirm United Nations General Assembly resolution 65 of 20 December 2010
which, inter alia declared 2012 the International Year of Sustainable Energy for
All (agreed)  Emphasize that achieving sustainable energy for all in SIDS
includes providing all households with access to modern and affordable renewable
energy services, while eradicating poverty, safeguarding the environment and
providing new opportunities for sustainable development and economic growth
(agreed) Challenges  Remain deeply concerned that SIDS continue to face acute
sustainable development challenges resulting from their unique and specific
vulnerabilities and characteristics SIDS remain highly vulnerable notably due to
their small open economies, narrow in economies of scale, remoteness, high
export resource base, disadvantages concentration, high dependency on imports
with high vulnerability to energy and food price shocks and speculation, and
relatively high levels of national debt These combined vulnerabilities have been
further exacerbated by the current global energy, food, financial and economic
crises, the increased incidence of natural disasters, and environmental
challenges (agreed)  Express our grave concern that international action to
address climate change has been slow and grossly inadequate given that climate
change and sea level rise is already threatening the viability and survival of
SIDS Global emissions continue to increase, putting the world on  pathway that
would result in an increase in global mean temperatures of more than  degrees
Celsius, which is far in excess of the well below   degrees Celsius goal
proposed by AOSIS and other vulnerable developing countries (agreed)  Remain
deeply concerned that most SIDS are highly dependent on imported oil and other
fossil fuels for transport and electricity generation and this is  major source
of economic vulnerability for SIDS This leaves SIDS highly exposed to oil-price
volatility The increasing cost of imported fossil fuels represent  major
impediment to the achievement of sustainable development and poverty eradication
in SIDS as scarce financial resources are diverted from efforts to promote
social and economic development and ensure environmental protection Furthermore,
many remote and rural SIDS communities have little or no access to modern and
affordable energy services (agreed)  Underscore that while SIDS contribute the
least to global emissions and have limited human, financial and technical
resources, our nations continue to take significant actions towards the
reduction of our own emissions including through regional and inter-regional
energy initiatives as our contribution to resolving global climate change and as
demonstration of our moral leadership in the fight against climate change
(agreed) Opportunities  Emphasize that important lessons have been learnt from
the implementation of the BPOA and MSI over the last decades including the value
of SIDS-SIDS cooperation and collaboration, and fostering SIDS led partnerships
with development partners (agreed)  Further emphasize that there are
commercially feasible options for providing energy such as wind, solar,
geothermal, and ocean energy, and that many SIDS are particularly suited to
these options because of their geographical location However, these technologies
must be made, accessible, affordable and adaptable to the needs and particular
circumstances of SIDS communities In this regard, we strongly urge the
international community particularly developed countries to ensure the provision
of financial resources, technology transfer and capacity building to SIDS
(agreed) Further recognize that there are significant opportunities for SIDS to
collectively develop their vast renewable energy resources to meet present and
future needs as well as the potential to export energy to other economies , and
that through collective action SIDS can drive the development of SIDS
–appropriate technology to ensure realization of the benefits of their renewable
energy resources In order to capitalize on these opportunities SIDS require
financial resources, capacity building and technology transfer (agreed)
Recognize that the current high global cost of fossil fuels provides
opportunities for investments in the development of the vast and underutilized
renewable energy resources in SIDS which could form the basis for  new
sustainable and resilient economy in SIDS (agreed)  Underline the strong
interdependence between energy and such sectors as water and food and
agriculture as well as the importance of increased access to sustainable energy
services to saving lives, eradicating poverty, improving health and ensure
meeting human needs (agreed) Commitments Remain committed to work towards the
continued development and implementation of policies and plans to ensure the
transformation of the current fossil fuel based energy sector to  modern,
affordable and efficient renewable energy sector, and urge our development
partners to provide the required support to enable us to achieve this objective
(agreed) Welcome the commitment by some SIDS to undertake the actions contained
in Annex I1 of this Declaration aimed at promoting transformational activities
in the areas of, inter alia, affordable and modern energy access, renewable
energy, energy efficiency and low carbon development, in the context of
sustainable development (agreed) Call on the international community including
regional and international development banks, bilateral donors, the UN system,
the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the private sector to
provide adequate and predictable financial support and investments as well as
technological transfer and capacity building to ensure the achievement of the
voluntary commitments contained in Annex  of this Declaration (agreed) Welcome
in this regard the commitments made by the Governments of Denmark, Norway to
support the efforts of SIDS to promote renewable energy, energy efficiency and
low-carbon development including achieving the voluntary commitments made by
some SIDS contained in Annex  of this declaration (agreed) Initiatives Welcome
the efforts of SIDS to develop and implement national, regional and inter-
regional energy policies, plans and strategies to address the special
vulnerabilities of SIDS, while ensuring supplies of secure, reliable, affordable
and environmentally friendly energy and power (agreed) Welcome also the SIDS-
SIDS Sustainable Energy Initiative (SIDS Dock) as  valuable tool to support
these efforts and encourage SIDS that have not yet done so to consider becoming
members of SIDS Dock (agreed)  This Annex will remain open until May 25th 2012
for further inscriptions by SIDS  This list will remain open until May 25th 201
for further indications of support by development partners  Acknowledge the
initial financial support to SIDS Dock provided by the Governments of Denmark
and Japan and call on other development partners to provide support to SIDS Dock
(agreed) Acknowledge also the contributions of UNDP and the World Bank in the
implementation of SIDS Dock activities at the country and regional levels
(agreed) Acknowledge further the role of IRENA in supporting SIDS in their
efforts to accelerate renewable energy deployment, and call for its greater
involvement in supporting SIDS efforts In this context, we encourage SIDS that
have not joined IRENA to consider doing so (agreed) Welcome the efforts of the
UN Secretary-General in organizing and coordinating activities during the
International Year of Sustainable Energy for All In this regard, we note with
interest the Sustainable Energy for all initiative, and look forward to discuss
it in the relevant intergovernmental fora We further acknowledge that this
initiative has identified three interlinked objectives which underpin the goal
of achieving sustainable energy for all by 2030: • Ensuring universal access to
modern energy services; • Doubling the global rate of improvement in energy
efficiency; • Doubling the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix
(agreed) Recognize other important regional and sub-regional initiatives
implemented by SIDS aiming to provide sustainable energy for all (agreed) Rio
+20 Welcome the convening of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio +20) in Brazil in June 2012 as an important opportunity for the
international community to secure renewed political commitment for sustainable
development and assess progress to date and the remaining gaps in the
implementation of the outcomes of the major summits on sustainable development
(agreed) Reiterate that the outcomes of the Rio+20 Conference must be ambitious
and convey the urgency of fully embracing the sustainable development agenda
including the fulfillment of all commitments related to SIDS (agreed) Express
our full support for the convening of 3rd Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of SIDS in 2014 as  tangible outcome on SIDS at Rio +(agreed) Invite
all SIDS to use this declaration in our preparations for the Rio+20 Conference
and to record their support of it in our national interventions there (agreed)
Expression of Gratitude Express our profound gratitude appreciation to the
Government of Barbados and UNDP for co-hosting this Conference and invite the
Government of the Republic of Nauru in its capacity as Chair of AOSIS and the
Government of Barbados to submit this Declaration to the Government of Brazil
and the UNSG as  contribution to the UNCSD (agreed)  Annex  Listing of Voluntary
Commitments by SIDS aimed at promoting Transformational Activities in the Areas
of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency, Energy Access and low Carbon Development
in the Context of Sustainable Development Country Voluntary Commitment
Renewable Energy Generation — to increase Barbados the share of economically
viable renewable energy in Barbados’ energy mix, with an indicative target of
about 29 percent of all electricity consumption to be generated from renewable
sources by 2029;  Electric Energy Efficiency — to achieve savings in the
country’ consumption of electricity, with an indicative overall target of 22
percent savings by 2029 compared to  ‘business as usual’ scenario;  Renewable
Energy – Targets and objectives Cape Verde until   Increase the coverage rate
of electricity network to 100%  Universalize access to energy in  facilitated
way while guaranteeing quality  Guarantee that at least one island is 100%
renewable until 2020  Reduce the importation of fuels for the production of
electric energy in 30% until 2020  Reduce emission of gases with greenhouse
effect in 35% until 2020  Guarantee that at least 10% of public lights are
based on renewable energy Increase the micro-production, for that purpose using
renewable energy, focusing on public buildings with the goal of reducing the
energy bill cost   Guarantee the penetration rate of electric vehicles in %
until 2030  Guarantee that at least 30% of the unsalted water for human
consumption is produced based on renewable energy  Pursue the goal of  %
emitter country until 2030   Energy Efficiency Target and objectives until 2030
 Achieve target of 30% of energy efficiency through the promotion and the use
of new technology so as to achieve greater efficiency both in the production as
well as in the transportation, distribution and consumption Cook Islands 50% of
inhabited islands electricity needs to be provided by renewable energy in 2015
and 100% by 2020 through implementing the Cook Islands Renewable Energy Chart
with key strategies that: () Ensure the use of proven renewable electricity
technology options () Ensure the policy and regulatory environment is aligned
with the 50% by 2015 and 100% by 2020 renewable energy goal () Ensure ongoing
education, awareness and advocacy for renewable energy and energy efficiency ()
Strengthen the required capacity to implement the Cook Islands renewable energy
targets The Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica commits to:  Increase
renewable energy generation from the current 30% from hydro to 100% by adding
geothermal energy to the mix; and Dominica  Become carbon negative by exporting
renewable energy to its neighbours - Guadeloupe and Martinique - by Dominican
Republic Objectives to  Promote local and sustainable use of biofuels,
particularly in the transport sector in order to reduce dependence on imports
and emissions of greenhouse gases and protecting the environment  Plan and
promote the development of infrastructure for generation, transmission and
distribution of electricity, operating at the standards of quality and
reliability of service established by the rules  Encourage strict enforcement of
environmental regulation in electricity generation aimed at the  adoption of
sustainable management practices and mitigation of climate change  Promote
culture of citizenship and business efficiency, by inducing  wise use practices
in electricity and promoting the use of equipment and processes to lower energy
use or better use of it Grenada is committed to transition to  low carbon
development path through increasing the efficiency of energy usage and the
further deployment of indigenous sources of renewable energy Grenada voluntarily
commits to  minimum target of reducing its total GHG emissions by 20% below
Business As Usual by "  Will ensure that reliable energy is provided to Grenada
Guyana all in Guyana within an economically, environmentally and socially
sustainable framework; with increasing consideration of renewable energy sources
Recognizing the need for urgent action in addressing climate change has crafted
Low Carbon Development Strategy to protect and maintain Guyana’ forests to
reduce global carbon emissions and at the same time attract resources for the
country to grow and develop  Will develop and harness hydropower which will
transform the electricity sector by providing about 90% of Guyana’ electricity
from renewable energy  Has embarked on  programme to install about 15,000 home
solar photovoltaic systems primarily in hinterland communities  Continues to
encourage the development of renewable energy by removing duties and taxes on
renewable energy equipment and energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs)
and light emitting diode (LED) lights Is in the process of conducting energy
assessments/audits of public, residential and commercial buildings with the
objective of reducing energy consumption and attaining higher levels of energy
efficiency   Will continue to promote awareness and disseminate information on
sustainable energy   Provide all citizens with access to reliable & Maldives
sustainable energy services at lowest possible cost  Achieve carbon neutrality
in the energy sector by year  Promote energy conservation and energy efficiency
Increase national energy security   Promote renewable energy technologies
Strengthen the institutional and legal framework of the energy sector Marshall
Islands Pursuant to the Republic of Marshall Islands 2009 National Energy Policy
and Energy Action Plan, the 2011 National Climate Change Policy Framework and
Joint National Action Plan (for climate change adaptation, energy security and
disaster risk reduction), and the Green Energy Micronesia initiative:   40%
reduction in CO2 emissions below 2009 levels by 2020;  Electrification of 100%
of urban households and 95% of rural outer atoll households by 2015;  The
provision of 20% of energy through indigenous renewable resources by 2020;
Improved efficiency of energy use in 50% of households and businesses, and 75%
of government buildings by 2020;   20% efficiency improvement in  transportation
sector fuel use by 2020;  Feasibility studies and internationally supported
financing plans for innovative ‘game-changing’ renewable energy and sustainable
development opportunities including Majuro atoll waste-to-energy and
Kwajalein/Ebeye atoll OTEC plants undertaken by Mauritius Reduce dependence on
fossil fuels, Increase the share of renewable energy and Promote energy
efficiency and conservation through the following actions:  Increasing the share
of renewable energy(including solar power, wind energy, hydro power, bagasse and
landfill gas) to around 35% by 2025  Removal of barriers impeding the
development of renewable energy  Use of innovative renewable energy
technologies  Promoting and monitoring energy efficiency measures across all
sectors  Democratizing energy supply and promoting the participation of Small
Independent Power Producers in electricity generation using renewable resources
Promoting sustainable buildings and conducting energy audits of public buildings
Adopting product labeling and energy efficiency standards  Medium to long term-
At least 50% of energy demand provided by alternative sources of energy,
including through renewable sources by Nauru  Long term milestone- Viable power
generating capacity including alternative renewable energy sources by 2025 Palau
Deliver clean, secure and affordable energy for all citizens of Palau while
treating the environment responsibly Respond to the risk of climate change by
adaptation to changes and by mitigation through reducing greenhouse gases caused
by the production and use of energy  vision for  reliable and resilient energy
sector delivering sustainable low emission energy services by:  Providing clear
policy direction on the future of Palau’ energy sector  Appropriate regulations
to secure energy services at competitive prices  Maximizing cost efficient
energy efficiency and renewable energy resources and conservation of energy wile
safeguarding the environment  Promoting environmentally sustainable energy
technologies with the aim to substitute fossil fuels  Supporting consumers
through the transition towards renewable energy Increase the contribution of
renewable energy to the national energy supply by 20% by 2020 and support the
development of indigenous energy sources  Saint Lucia  To promote energy
efficiency at all levels and in all sectors at the national level  To reduce the
consumption of electricity in the public sector by 20% by 10  To strengthen the
institutional and legal framework for sustainable energy  To develop and
implement standards and guidelines for energy efficient products  To develop and
establish  suite of fiscal measures and  financing mechanism for greater
penetration of sustainable energy technologies and products  To facilitate
capacity- building , innovation, research and development for sustainable energy
To implement  comprehensive sustainable energy education and awareness programme
To provide an enabling environment for sustainable energy that simultaneously
allows the private sector to generate business opportunities that are consistent
with the Green Economy Concept  Reduce projected increase in peak demand by % by
2015 and 10% by 2010 an strive to reduce power losses down to  total of % by
2015 and % by 2020 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  Deliver 30% of projected
total electricity output from Renewable Energy Sources (RES) by 2015 and 60% by
2020 Increase energy security and diversify the energy portfolio   Reduce
projected consumption of fossil fuels in the transport sector by 10% by 2015 and
15 % by 2020  Reduce projected electricity generation by % by 2012 and 15% by
2020 Increase the contribution of Renewable Energy to total energy by 20% by the
year  Promoting energy efficiency practices in all  Samoa sectors Increase
Public and Private investment on Renewable Energy in transport fuels and
electricity generation   Energy regulatory function established  Diversification
of the energy mix by the use Seychelles and promotion of renewable energy
sources in all energy uses and services in all sectors, including electricity,
cooling, transport, residential, commercial and industrial Ultimately achieving
the set target of 15% energy supply from renewable energy by 11  Provide the
whole population with access to  safe, secure, affordable, reliable and high
quality of energy services while ensuring environmental protection Increase
security of energy supply   Promote efficient use of energy and conservation
Strengthen the institutional and legal framework of the energy sector  By 2020
power generation – 50% of energy would be produced by renewable energy Timor
Leste  By 2030 all families will have access to electricity 24 hours  day  By
2030 approximately all 100,000 families will have access to solar energy  By
2015 there will no household(family) in the capital city using firewood for
cooking  To reduce Tonga’ greenhouse gas emissions and improve energy security
through 50% renewable energy mix in the Energy Transformation sector by the end
of the Tonga Energy Roadmap  [TERM] implementation period Tonga  To improve
efficiency of electricity supply and demand sides by 18% by the end of the TERM
implementation period  All Tongans shall access to clean, reliable and
affordable energy services by the end of TERM implementation period  Establish
phased comprehensive set of action plans to put in place  long term
institutional arrangement which provides strong leadership and coordination of
energy sector activities  Power Generation – 100% renewable energy Tuvalu by
2020 Implementation Principles - - Wind  – 40% of demand (if feasible) -
Biodiesel % of demand (import) -  Solar PV 60 – 95% of demand Energy Efficiency
– improvements of 30% of current annual demand of Funafuti 12