 REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP) [RFP-026] Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados
Renewable Energy Roadmap International Renewable Energy Agency Abu Dhabi, UAE
[December, 2015] Deadline for submission: 12 January, 2016 Time: 00 hrs Abu
Dhabi time Page  of 39 RFP-026 Section : Letter of Invitation Abu Dhabi, 17
December, 2015 Dear Madam or Sir, The International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) hereby invites you to submit  Proposal to this Request for Proposal
(RFP) for the following consultancy for: Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados
Renewable Energy Roadmap This RFP includes the following documents: Section  –
This Letter of Invitation Section  – Instructions to Proposers (including Data
Sheet) Section  – Terms of Reference (TOR) including technical evaluation
criteria Section  – Proposal Submission Form Section  – Documents Establishing
the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer Section  – Technical Proposal
Form Section  – Financial Proposal Form Section  – General Terms and Conditions
(attached herewith)  Your offer comprising of  Technical and Financial Proposal,
in separate sealed envelopes, should be submitted in accordance with the Data
Sheet  You are kindly requested to submit an acknowledgment letter to IRENA via
the following email procurement@irenaorg or the following addressee and
location: International Renewable Energy Agency, IRENA Secretariat, Masdar City,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Procurement Section , 2nd floor [RFP-026],
Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap The letter
should advise whether your company intends to submit  Proposal and if not, we
would appreciate your kind indication of the reason, for our records purposes
Should you need further clarification, kindly communicate with the contact
person indicated in the attached Bid Data Sheet duly assigned to handle all
queries for this RFP We look forward to your Proposal and thank you in advance
for your interest in IRENA procurement opportunities Yours sincerely, David
Iyamah Director of Administration and Management Services Page  of 39 RFP-026
Section : Instruction to Proposers Definitions of Terms ) “Contract” refers to
the agreement that will be signed by and between the IRENA and the successful
proposer, all the attached documents thereto, including the General Terms and
Conditions (GTC1) and the Appendices ) “Country” refers to the country indicated
in the Data Sheet ) “Data Sheet” refers to such part of the Instructions to
Proposers used to reflect conditions of the tendering process that are specific
for the requirements of the RFP ) “Day” refers to calendar day ) “Government”
refers to the Government of the country that will be receiving the services
provided/rendered specified under the Contract ) “Instructions to Proposers”
(Section  of the RFP) refers to the complete set of documents which provides
Proposers with all information needed and procedures to be followed in the
course of preparing their Proposals ) “LOI” (Section  of the RFP) refers to the
Letter of Invitation being sent by IRENA to the Proposers ) “Proposal” refers to
the Proposer’ response to the Request for Proposal, including the Proposal
Submission Form, Technical and Financial Proposal and all other documentation
attached thereto as required by the RFP ) “Proposer” refers to any legal entity
that may submit, or has submitted,  Proposal for the provision of services
requested by IRENA ) “RFP” refers to the Request for Proposals consisting of
instructions and references prepared by IRENA for purposes of selecting the best
service provider to perform the services described in the Terms of Reference )
“Services” refers to the entire scope of tasks and deliverables requested by
IRENA under the RFP ) “Supplemental Information to the RFP” refers to  written
communication issued by IRENA to prospective Proposers containing
clarifications, responses to queries received from prospective Proposers, or
changes to be made in the RFP, before the deadline for the submission of
Proposals ) “Terms of Reference” (TOR) refers to the document included in RFP as
Section  which describes the objectives, scope of services, activities, tasks to
be performed, respective responsibilities of the proposer, expected results and
deliverables and other data pertinent to Page  of 39 RFP-026 the performance of
the range of duties and services expected of the successful proposer  GENERAL
IRENA solicits Proposals in response to this Request for Proposal (RFP)
Proposers must strictly adhere to all the requirements of this RFP No changes,
substitutions or other alterations to the provisions stipulated in this RFP will
be accepted unless approved in writing by IRENA However, whilst fully complying
with the RFP requirements, Proposers are encouraged to provide any suggestions
and solutions that may achieve  more cost-effective and value-for-money approach
to fulfilling the requirements of this RFP  Submission of  Proposal shall be
deemed to constitute an acknowledgement by the Proposer that all obligations
stipulated by this RFP will be met and unless specified otherwise, the Proposer
has read, understood and agreed to all the instructions provided in this RFP
Any Proposal submitted will be regarded as an offer by the Proposer and not as
an acceptance of an offer of any Proposal by IRENA This RFP does not commit
IRENA to award  contract   Proposer shall not be in any position of conflict of
interest arising from their current or future work with respect to IRENA All
Proposers found to have  conflict of interest shall be disqualified Proposers
may be considered to have  conflict of interest with one or more parties in this
solicitation process, if they:  are or have been associated in the past, with
firm or any of its affiliates which have been engaged with IRENA to provide
services for the preparation of the design, specifications, Terms of Reference
and other documents to be used for the procurement of the goods and services to
be purchased in this selection process;  were involved in the preparation and/or
design of the programme/project related to the services requested under this
RFP;  have owners, officers, directors, controlling shareholders, or key
personnel who are related to IRENA staff involved in procurement functions;
submit more than one Proposal in this RFP, either as an individual entity, or
through its membership with  joint venture/consortium/association that is also
submitting  Proposal for the same contract   are found to be in conflict for any
other reason, as may be established by, or at the discretion of, IRENA  CONTENTS
OF PROPOSAL  Sections of Proposal Proposers are required to complete, sign and
submit in the number of copies the following documents:  Proposal Submission
Covering Letter Form (see RFP Section );  Documents Establishing the Eligibility
and Qualifications of the Proposer (see RFP Section  and Data Sheet);  Technical
Proposal (see prescribed form in RFP Section );  Financial Proposal (see
prescribed form in RFP Section );  Proposal Security, if applicable (if required
and as stated in the Data Sheet, see Page  of 39 RFP-026 prescribed Form in RFP
Section );  Any attachments and/or appendices to the Proposal (including those
specified under the Data Sheet)  Clarification of Proposal Proposers may request
clarification of any of the RFP documents no later than the number of days
indicated in the Data Sheet before the proposal submission date Any request for
clarification must be sent in writing, or by electronic means to the IRENA
address indicated in the Data Sheet IRENA will respond in writing, or by
electronic means and will send written copies of the response (including an
explanation of the query but without identifying the source of inquiry) to all
Proposers who have provided confirmation of their intention to submit  Proposal
IRENA shall endeavor to provide such responses to clarifications in an
expeditious manner, but any delay in such response shall not cause an obligation
on the part of IRENA to extend the submission date of the Proposals, unless
IRENA deems that such an extension is justified and necessary  Amendment of
Proposals At any time prior to the deadline for submission of Proposals, IRENA
may for any reason, such as in response to  clarification requested by
Proposer, modify the RFP in the form of  Supplemental Information to the RFP All
Proposers who have provided confirmation of their intention to submit  Proposal
will be notified in writing of all amendments to the RFP In order to afford
prospective Proposers reasonable time to consider the amendments in preparing
their Proposals, IRENA may, at its discretion, extend the deadline for
submission of Proposals, if the nature of the amendment to the RFP justifies
such extension  PREPARATION OF PROPOSALS  Cost of Proposal The Proposer shall
bear any and all costs related to the preparation and/or submission of the
Proposal, regardless of whether its Proposal was selected or not IRENA shall in
no case be responsible or liable for those costs, regardless of the conduct or
outcome of the process Language of Proposal The Proposal, as well as all related
correspondence exchanged by the Proposer and IRENA , shall be written in the
language () specified in the Data Sheet Any printed literature furnished by the
Proposer written in  language other than the language indicated in the Data
Sheet, must be accompanied by  translation in the preferred language indicated
in the Data Sheet For purposes of interpretation of the Proposal, and in the
event of discrepancy or inconsistency in meaning, the version translated into
the preferred language shall govern Proposal Submission Form The Proposer shall
submit the Proposal Submission Form using the form furnished in Section  of the
RFP Page  of 39 RFP-026 Technical Proposal Format and Content Unless otherwise
stated in the Data Sheet, the Proposer shall structure the Technical Proposal as
follows: Expertise of Firm/Organization – this section should provide details
regarding management structure of the organization, organizational
capability/resources, and experience of organization/firm, the list of
projects/contracts (both completed and ongoing, both domestic and international)
which are related or similar in nature to the requirements of the RFP, and proof
of financial stability and adequacy of resources to complete the services
required by the RFP (see RFP Clause 15 for further details) Proposed
Methodology, Approach and Implementation Plan – this section should demonstrate
the Proposer’ response to the Terms of Reference by identifying the specific
components proposed, how the requirements shall be addressed, as specified,
point by point; providing  detailed description of the essential performance
characteristics proposed; identifying the works/portions of the work that will
be subcontracted; and demonstrating how the proposed methodology meets or
exceeds the specifications, while ensuring appropriateness of the approach to
the local conditions and the rest of the project operating environment This
methodology must be laid out in an implementation timetable that is within the
duration of the contract as specified in the Data Sheet Management Structure and
Key Personnel – This section should include the comprehensive curriculum vitae
(CVs) of key personnel that will be assigned to support the implementation of
the proposed methodology, clearly defining the roles and responsibilities vis--
vis the proposed methodology CVs should establish competence and demonstrate
qualifications in areas relevant to the TOR In complying with this section, the
Proposer assures and confirms to IRENA that the personnel being nominated is
available for the Contract on the dates proposed If any of the key personnel
later becomes unavailable, except for unavoidable reasons such as death or
medical incapacity, IRENA reserves the right to render the proposal non-
responsive Any substitution arising from unavoidable reasons shall be made only
with the approval of IRENA Other Information as may be relevant to the Proposal
The Technical Proposal shall not include any financial information  Technical
Proposal containing any form of financial information that could lead to the
determination of the price offer may be declared non-compliant Financial
Proposals The Financial Proposal shall be prepared using the attached standard
form (Section ) It shall list all major cost components associated with the
services, and the detailed breakdown of such costs All outputs and activities
described in the Technical Proposal must be priced separately on  one-to-one
correspondence Any output and activities described in the Page  of 39 RFP-026
Technical Proposal but not priced in the Financial Proposal, shall be assumed to
be included in the prices of other activities or items, as well as in the final
total price Currencies of Proposals All prices from Proposers originating from
outside the Country specified in the Data Sheet shall be quoted in the currency
indicated in the Data Sheet However, where Proposals are quoted in different
currencies, for the purposes of comparison of all Proposals -- IRENA will
convert the currency quoted in the Proposal to US Dollar, in accordance with the
prevailing UN operational rate of exchange on the last day of submission of
Proposals; and Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the
Proposer The Proposer shall furnish evidence of its status as an eligible and
qualified vendor, using the forms provided under Section , Proposer Information
Forms The documentary evidence of the Proposer’ qualifications to perform the
Contract, if the contract is awarded to the Proposer, shall be established to
the IRENA’ satisfaction This evidence shall include, and must demonstrate, the
following: that, in the case of  Proposer offering to supply goods under the
Contract which the Proposer did not manufacture or otherwise produce, the
Proposer has been duly authorized by the goods’ manufacturer or producer to
supply the goods in the country of final destination; and that the Proposer has
the financial, technical, and production capability necessary to perform the
Contract Joint Venture, Consortium or Association If the Proposer is  joint
venture, consortium, or association, all of the parties shall be jointly and
severally liable to IRENA for the fulfillment of the provisions of the Contract
and shall designate one party to act as  leader with authority to legally bind
the joint venture, consortium, or association The leader or lead entity,
composition or the constitution of the joint venture, consortium, or association
shall not be altered without the prior consent of IRENA  The description of the
organization of the joint venture/consortium/association must be clearly defined
in the course of establishing the eligibility of the Proposer, by defining the
expected role of each of its component/member firm in the course of performing
the services defined in the TOR Where  joint venture/consortium/association is
presenting its track record and experience in  similar undertaking as those
required in the TOR, it should present such information in the following manner:
 Those that were undertaken together by the joint
venture/consortium/association jointly and severally; and Page  of 39 RFP-026 
Those that were undertaken by the individual members of the joint
venture/consortium/association expected to be involved in the performance of the
services defined in the TOR Previous contracts completed by individual experts
working privately but who are permanently or were temporarily associated with
any of the member firms cannot be claimed as the experience of the joint
venture/consortium/association or those of its members, but should only be
claimed by the individual experts themselves in their presentation of their
credentials Alternative Proposals Unless otherwise specified in the Data Sheet,
alternative proposals shall not be considered Period of Validity Proposals shall
remain valid for the period specified in the Data Sheet, commencing on the
submission deadline date also indicated in the Data Sheet  Proposal valid for
shorter period shall be immediately rejected by IRENA and rendered non-
responsive In exceptional circumstances, prior to the expiration of the proposal
validity period, IRENA may request Proposers to extend the period of validity of
their Proposals The request and the responses shall be made in writing, and
shall be considered integral to the Proposal  SUBMISSION AND OPENING OF
PROPOSALS Submission and Opening of Proposals The Financial Proposal and the
Technical Proposal Envelopes MUST BE COMPLETELY SEPARATED and each of them must
be submitted sealed individually and clearly marked on the outside as either
“TECHNICAL PROPOSAL” or “FINANCIAL PROPOSAL”, as appropriate Each envelope MUST
also bear the name of the Proposer The inner and outer envelopes shall:  bear
the name and address of the Proposer  be addressed to IRENA as specified in the
Data Sheet and  bear  warning not to open before the time and date for proposal
opening, as specified in the Data Sheet If all envelopes are not sealed and
marked as required, IRENA will assume no responsibility for the misplacement or
premature opening of the Proposal Proposers may always submit their Proposals by
mail/courier or by hand delivery When so specified in the Data Sheet, Proposers
shall have the option of submitting their Proposals electronically When the
Proposals are expected to be in transit for over 24 hours, the Proposer must
ensure that sufficient lead time has been provided in order to comply with
IRENA’ deadline for submission Under such circumstances, the Proposer must
inform IRENA of the exact date and time of their dispatch, through the
submission of the official receipt and supporting documents (airway bill, etc)
issued by the forwarding/courier company that will deliver the Proposal to IRENA
Page  of 39 RFP-026 Proposers submitting Proposals by mail or by hand shall
enclose the original and each copy of the Proposal, in separate sealed
envelopes, duly marking the envelopes as “Original Proposal” and “Copy of
Proposal” as appropriate The number of copies required shall be as specified in
the Data Sheet In the event of any discrepancy between them, the original shall
govern The original and copies of the Proposal shall be signed by the Proposer
or person() duly authorized to commit the Proposer The Proposer shall submit the
original and copies of the Proposal in separate envelopes, marked “ORIGINAL” and
“COPY” The envelopes shall then be sealed in an outer envelope Deadline for
Submission of Proposals and Late Proposals Proposals must be received by IRENA
at the address and no later than the date and time specified in the Data Sheet
IRENA shall not consider any Proposal that arrives after the deadline for
submission of Proposals Any Proposal received by IRENA after the deadline for
submission of Proposals may be declared late, rejected, and returned unopened to
the Proposer Withdrawal, Substitution, and Modification of Proposals Proposers
are expected to have sole responsibility for taking steps to carefully examine
in details the full consistency of its Proposals to the requirements of the RFP,
keeping in mind that material deficiencies providing information requested by
IRENA , or clarity in the description of services to be provided, may result in
the rejection of the Proposal IRENA shall not assume any responsibility
regarding erroneous interpretations or conclusions made by the Proposer in the
course of understanding the RFP out of the data furnished by IRENA Proposer may
withdraw, substitute or modify its Proposal after it has been submitted by
sending  written notice in accordance with RFP Clause 19, duly signed by an
authorized representative, and shall include  copy of the authorization (or
Power of Attorney) The corresponding substitution or modification of the
Proposal must accompany the respective written notice All notices must be
received by IRENA prior to the deadline for submission and submitted in
accordance with Clause 19 (except that withdrawal notices do not require copies)
The respective envelopes shall be clearly marked “WITHDRAWAL,” “SUBSTITUTION,”
or MODIFICATION” Proposals requested to be withdrawn shall be returned unopened
to the Proposers No Proposal may be withdrawn, substituted, or modified in the
interval between the deadline for submission of Proposals and the expiration of
the period of proposal validity specified by the Proposer on the Proposal
Submission Form or any extension thereof Proposal Opening IRENA will open the
Proposals in the presence of an ad-hoc committee formed by IRENA If electronic
submission is permitted, any specific electronic proposal opening Page  of 39
RFP-026 procedures shall be as specified in the Data Sheet The Proposers’ names,
modifications, withdrawals, the presence or absence of documents, and such other
details as IRENA may consider appropriate, will be announced at the opening No
Proposal shall be rejected at the opening stage, except for late submission, for
which the Proposal shall be returned unopened to the Proposer  EVALUATION AND
COMPARISON OF PROPOSALS Confidentiality Information relating to the examination,
evaluation, and comparison of Proposals, and recommendation of contract award,
shall not be disclosed to Proposers or any other persons not officially
concerned with such process, even after publication of the contract award Any
effort by  Proposer to influence IRENA in the examination, evaluation and
comparison of the Proposals or contract award decisions may, at IRENA ’
decision, result in the rejection of its Proposal In the event that  Proposer is
unsuccessful, the Proposer may seek  meeting with IRENA for debriefing, but said
debriefing shall be limited to the discussions of the strengths and weaknesses
of the Proposal of said Proposer, and no information relating to the Proposal or
rating of other Proposers may be discussed Clarification of Proposals To assist
in the examination, evaluation and comparison of Proposals, IRENA may, at its
discretion, ask any Proposer for  clarification of its Proposal IRENA’ request
for clarification and the response shall be in writing Notwithstanding the
written communication, no change in the prices or substance of the Proposal
shall be sought, offered, or permitted, except to provide clarification, and
confirm the correction of any arithmetic errors discovered by IRENA in the
evaluation of the Proposals, in accordance with RFP Clause Any unsolicited
clarification submitted by  Proposer in respect to its Proposal, which is not
response to  request by IRENA, shall not be considered during the review and
evaluation of the Proposals Preliminary Examination of Proposals IRENA shall
examine the Proposals to determine whether they are complete, whether the
documents have been properly signed, and whether the Proposals are generally in
order IRENA reserves the right to reject any Proposal after preliminary
examination of Proposal, if IRENA finds justifiable reason for such rejection,
including but not limited to the discovery of significant or material deviation,
conflict of interest, fraud, among others Evaluation of Proposals Page 10 of 39
RFP-026 IRENA shall examine the Proposal to confirm that all terms and
conditions under the IRENA General Terms and Conditions and Special Conditions
have been accepted by the Proposer without any deviation or reservation The
evaluation committee shall review and evaluate the Technical Proposals on the
basis of their responsiveness to the Terms of Reference and other documentation
provided, applying the evaluation criteria, sub-criteria, and point system
specified in the Data Sheet Each responsive Proposal will be given  technical
score  Proposal shall be rendered non-responsive at this stage if it does not
substantially respond to the RFP, and particularly the Terms of Reference, or if
it fails to achieve the minimum technical score indicated in the Data Sheet In
the second stage, only the Financial Proposal of those Proposers who achieve the
minimum technical score will be opened for evaluation for comparison and review
The Financial Proposal Envelopes corresponding to Proposals that did not meet
the minimum passing technical score shall be returned to the Proposer unopened
The overall evaluation score will either be based either on  combination of the
technical score and the financial offer, or the lowest evaluated financial
proposal of the technically qualified Proposers The evaluation method that
applies for this RFP shall be as indicated in the Data Sheet, IRENA shall
reserve the right to determine to its satisfaction the validity of information
provided by the Proposer, through verification and reference checking, among
other means that it deems appropriate, at any stage within the selection process
Responsiveness of Proposal IRENA’ determination of  Proposal’ responsiveness is
to be based on the contents of the Proposal itself substantially responsive
Proposal is one that conforms to all the terms, conditions, and specifications
of the RFP without material deviation, reservation, or omission If  Proposal is
not substantially responsive, it shall be rejected by IRENA and may not
subsequently be made responsive by the Proposer by correction of the material
deviation, reservation, or omission Nonconformities, Errors and Omissions
Provided that  Proposal is substantially responsive, IRENA may waive any non-
conformities or omissions in the Proposal that do not constitute  material
deviation Provided that  Proposal is substantially responsive, IRENA may request
the Proposer to submit the necessary information or documentation, within
reasonable period of time, to rectify nonmaterial nonconformities or omissions
in the Proposal related to documentation requirements Such omission shall not be
related to any aspect of the price of the Proposal Failure of the Proposer to
comply with the request may result in the rejection of its Proposal Provided
that the Proposal is substantially responsive, IRENA shall correct arithmetical
Page 11 of 39 RFP-026 errors on the following basis:  if there is  discrepancy
between the unit price and the line item total that is obtained by multiplying
the unit price by the quantity, the unit price shall prevail and the line item
total shall be corrected, unless in the opinion of IRENA there is an obvious
misplacement of the decimal point in the unit price, in which case the line item
total as quoted shall govern and the unit price shall be corrected;  if there is
an error in  total corresponding to the addition or subtraction of subtotals,
the subtotals shall prevail and the total shall be corrected; and  if there is
discrepancy between words and figures, the amount in words shall prevail, unless
the amount expressed in words is related to an arithmetic error, in which case
the amount in figures shall prevail subject to the above If the Proposer does
not accept the correction of errors made by IRENA, its Proposal shall be
rejected Fraud and Corruption IRENA implements  policy of zero tolerance on
fraud and corrupt practices and is committed to preventing, identifying and
addressing all acts of fraud and corrupt practices against IRENA as well as
third parties involved in IRENA activities  AWARD OF CONTRACT Right to Accept,
Reject, or Render Non-Responsive Any or All Proposals IRENA reserves the right
to accept or reject any Proposal, to render any or all Proposals as non-
responsive, and to annul the solicitation process and reject all Proposals at
any time prior to award of contract, without thereby incurring any liability to
the affected Proposer, or any obligation to inform the affected Proposer() of
the grounds for IRENA ’ action IRENA shall neither be obliged to award the
contract to the lowest price offer Award Criteria Prior to the expiration of
proposal validity, IRENA may award the Proposer, whose proposal offers best
value for money being the proposal that has obtained the highest score based on
the evaluation method indicated in the Data Sheet Right to Vary Requirements at
the Time of Award At the time of award of Contract, IRENA reserves the right to
vary the quantity of services and/or goods, by up to  maximum 15% of the total
price offer, without any change in the unit price or other terms and conditions
Contract Signature Within fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt of the
Contract, the successful Proposer shall sign and date the Contract and return it
to IRENA Page 12 of 39 RFP-026 Performance Security performance security, if
required, shall be provided in the amount and form provided in Section  and by
the deadline indicated in the Data Sheet, as applicable Failure of the
successful Proposer to comply with the requirement of RFP Clause 33 or RFP
Clause 34 shall constitute sufficient grounds for the annulment of the award and
forfeiture of the performance security if any, on which event IRENA may award
the Contract to the Proposer with the second highest rated Proposal, or call for
new Proposals Bank Guarantee for Advance Payment In the event that the advanced
payment requested exceeds 20% of the total proposal price, or exceed the amount
of $30,000, IRENA shall require the Proposer to submit  Bank Guarantee in the
same amount as the advanced payment  bank guarantee for advanced payment shall
be furnished in the form provided in Section , and by the deadline indicated in
the Data Sheet, as applicable Proposer’ Conference When appropriate,  proposer’
conference will be conducted at the date, time and location specified in the
Data Sheet All Proposers are encouraged to attend Non-attendance, however, shall
not result in disqualification of an interested Proposer Minutes of the
proposer’ conference will be either posted on the IRENA website, or disseminated
to the individual firms who have registered or expressed interest with the
contract, whether or not they attended the conference No verbal statement made
during the conference shall modify the terms and conditions of the RFP unless
such statement is specifically written in the Minutes of the Conference, or
issued as an amendment in the form of  Supplemental Information to the RFP
Vendor Protest IRENA vendor protest procedure provides an opportunity for appeal
to those persons or firms not awarded  purchase order or contract through
competitive procurement process This procedure is not available to non-
responsive or untimely Proposers or those with rejected Proposals In the event
that you believe you have not received fair treatment, the following email
provides further details regarding IRENA vendor protest procedures:
Protest@irenaorg Page 13 of 39 RFP-026 Instructions to Proposers DATA SHEET The
following data for the services to be procured shall complement, supplement, or
amend the provisions in the Instruction to Proposers In the case of  conflict
between the Instruction to Proposers and the Data Sheet, the provisions in the
Data Sheet shall prevail Project Context : IRENA RFP two envelopes approach
Service for: Title of Services/Work: Quantitative Analysis for the Barbados
Renewable Energy Roadmap Country: IRENA-Bonn Office English Language of the
Proposal: Conditions for Submitting Proposals for Parts or sub-parts of the TOR
Not allowed Conditions for Submitting Alternative Proposals  shall not be
considered  pre-bid conference will be held: NO  120 days Period of Proposal
Validity commencing on the submission date Proposal Security  Not Required
Validity of Proposal Security  Not Required Proposal Prices shall be subjected
to Taxation  Yes, pls submit  price inclusive of all applicable taxes Advanced
Payment upon signing of contract  Not allowed Liquidated Damages will be imposed
in accordance with general terms & conditions for professional service attached
hereto as section   Not Required Performance Security Preferred Currency of Bid
Proposal and Method for Currency conversion Single Currency: [USD] UN exchange
rate Page 14 of 39 RFP-026 Deadline for submitting requests for clarifications/
questions Three () working days before the submission Date/deadline Contact
Details for submitting clarifications/questions Focal Point in IRENA : Luay
Shalkhoub, Chief Procurement Officer LShalkhoub@IRENAOrg Or procurement@irenaorg
No of copies of Proposal that must be submitted None Proposal submission address
International Renewable Energy Agency, IRENA HQ , Masdar City, PO Box 236, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates Tel: 00971  417 9000 Deadline of Submission Date: 12
January 2015; Time: 00 Hrs Abu Dhabi time  Not Allowed Procedures and
conditions for electronic submissions of the Proposals Page 15 of 39 RFP-026
Evaluation method to be used in selecting the most responsive Proposal The
combined scoring methodology shall be applied, which consists of the following
steps: Only those Offerors who attain 70% of the obtainable scores of the 100
points in the evaluation of the technical proposal will have their financial
proposal envelope opened The financial proposals shall be opened and will
receive  weighting of 30% while the technical evaluation will receive 70% The
company with the highest combined technical and financial scoring will be
awarded the contract The evaluation criteria is indicated below in section
Required Documents that must be Submitted to Establish Qualification of
Proposers  All relevent documentation including company profile should not
exceed Fourty (40) pages, excluding the latest and audited registration
certificates statments financial  Certificate of Registration of the business,
including Articles of Incorporation, or equivalent document if Proposer is not
corporation  Quality Certificate (, ISO, etc) and/or other similar
certificates, accreditations, awards and citations received by the Proposer, if
any Page 16 of 39 RFP-026 SECTION  TERMS OF REFERENCE (TOR) Quantitative
Analysis for the Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap Secretariat of the
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) IRENA Innovation and technology
Centre (IITC) Bonn BACKGROUND The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
is an inter-governmental organization, mandated by member states from around the
world to support renewable energy In accordance with its Statute, IRENA’
objective is to “promote the widespread and increased adoption and the
sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy” These forms include bioenergy,
geothermal energy, hydropower, ocean, solar, and on and off-shore wind power
IRENA' Innovation and Technology Centre (IITC) in Bonn, Germany provides
cutting-edge information on renewable energy technologies and innovations, while
seeking new pathways for the global transition to  sustainable energy future As
centre of excellence for renewable energy technology and innovation, IITC
researchers stays abreast of the latest developments and translates them into
practical, policy-friendly tools for IRENA’ Members IRENA’ researchers produce
ground-breaking, and continually updated, cost data for renewable energy
technologies, assistance with energy technology planning, project development,
and strategies to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of innovation for
renewable energy One of the key areas of the IRENA’ work programme is centered
on assisting islands in their transition towards renewable energy One of the key
activities in this area, supported by voluntary contributions from the German
Government (Ministry of Environment – BMUB), is the development of roadmaps for
the transition of islands towards renewable energy The Government of Barbados
through its Division of Energy and Telecommunication in the Prime Minister'
Office and the IRENA have agreed to cooperate on the development of  renewable
energy roadmap for Barbados The objective of the roadmap is to assist Barbados
in transitioning its energy sector away from the current dependence on fossil
fuels to reliance The roadmap will support the on local, sustainable renewable
energy resources Government’ vision of an energy sector that:  Enhances
economic growth by reducing energy costs;    Reduces investment needs for
power generation by promoting energy efficiency and Improves energy security by
reducing dependency on imported fossil fuels; Increases affordability of energy
services for the consumers; conservation;  Reduces greenhouse gas and the
emission of local pollutants from fossil fuel combustion In support of this
vision the roadmap will identify least-cost transition pathways supporting
locally available renewable energy deployment in the electricity sector The
local electric utility is the investor owned Barbados Light and Power Company
(BLPC) operating under the 2013 Electric Light and Power Act (ELPA) and
regulated by the Fair Trading Commission of Barbados Renewable energy options
for transportation and stationary applications will also be explored The
transition to renewable energy involves the integration of both dispatchable and
variable renewable energy (VRE) into the generation mix of the local electric
grid, using both utility- scale and distributed systems In the case of Barbados,
dispatchable resources include thermal Page 17 of 39 RFP-026 power generation
from biomass Variable renewable energy systems include wind power and solar
photovoltaic systems both at utility scale and the roof-top level In addition to
rooftop solar PV, distributed RE systems include end-use technologies like solar
hot water systems and renewable energy for refrigeration and space cooling (
solar cooling, sea water air conditioning, etc) To allow the use of RE in land
transportation, both biofuels and electric vehicles recharged from RE are viable
options Integrating significant shares of renewable energy into the Barbados
energy system will require careful planning, the development of clear detail
options for deployment and  supportive policy environment The roadmap will
assist the Government of Barbados in understanding the possible pathways to high
shares of renewable energy and in developing specific plans to achieve its
renewable energy goals At present the Government' goal as identified in its
Sustainable Energy Framework is 29% primary renewable energy penetration by 2029
(See Annex  below) However, the BLPC has limited itself to the analysis of
medium term scenarios of up to % RE penetration derived from 80 MW of
intermittent wind and solar in its Wind and Solar Integration Study (See Annex
), leaving the remaining % to be supplied by waste to energy and biomass thermal
power plants that are assumed to materialize in the near future The BLPC
currently has  peak demand for electricity of about 150 MW, with total installed
capacity of about 260 MW Most of their scenarios do not require any mitigation
measures Indeed, only the scenario with the highest penetration ( %) would
require minimal (but necessary) control systems, operational and system
adjustments to maintain stability and reliability of grid operations However,
the BLPC did conduct  feeder level study on two of its feeders and determined
that they can both accommodate the expected amount of variable renewables under
certain assumptions Furthermore, the BLPC study builds on the assumptions made
by the BLPC in its 2012 Integrated Resource Plan, some of which have not
materialised (See Annex ) Hence the long term study contemplated here by IRENA
goes beyond the level of RE penetration considered by the BLPC, and in addition
to  least-cost scenario it includes  29% scenario as well as  100% scenario
OBJECTIVE The objective of this study is to conduct the detailed quantitative
analyses necessary to support the development of the Renewable Energy Roadmap
for Barbados These analyses will include national energy planning and power
systems planning Scenarios will include  100 percent renewable energy scenario,
least cost scenario, and an explicit treatment of electric vehicles and end-use
RE technologies SCOPE OF WORK The Contractor will assist IRENA in providing
quantitative analyses in support of the following:  Long-term planning using the
Long Range Energy Alternatives Planning System (LEAP): The Contractor will
develop LEAP models that quantify least-cost options for the expansion of
generation capacity and transmission and distribution infrastructure that are
needed to meet electricity demand in Barbados over  twenty five year planning
horizon The models will take into account the base case expansion plan
identified by the BLPC in its 2012 integrated Page 18 of 39 RFP-026 resource
plan (IRP) This will account for non-utility energy expansion involving
renewable energy for refrigeration, space cooling, solar hot water, and electric
vehicles The analysis should be conducted with the aim of assessing economic and
social impacts, investment decisions and policy recommendations Key scenarios
will include but are not limited to:   29% renewable energy share by 2029  The
least cost expansion over the planning horizon  100% renewable energy share
over the planning horizon Data available for the LEAP model are described in
Annex  Key economic assumptions may be found on the web site of the Central Bank
of Barbados Technical assumptions and data concerning the utility expansion plan
are to be found in the BLPC' 2012 IRP, in the 2015 grid integration study, and
on the company' web site The Contractor will therefore compute energy, economic
and employment impacts as part of the long term planning exercise These impacts
will inform the computation of cost benefit ratios and net present values for
the scenarios under consideration The Contractor will also design and deliver
training workshop early in their work plan that describes the key concepts that
will be employed throughout the study The purpose is to facilitate the Division
of Energy and its invitees in their understanding of these concepts This will be
followed by  more detailed workshop at the end of the study that would equip the
Division of Energy to conduct benefit costs analyses of new scenarios, plus
monitor the markets for renewable energy  Review of the BLPC Base Case and
Assumptions The Contractor will assist IRENA in the review of the BLPC' base
case model and assumptions made in its 2012 IRP, and2015 grid integration study
Base on this review, the Contractor will develop  PLEXOS model and calibrate its
outputs against those of the BLPC as contained in its 2012 and 2015 reports (See
Annex ) These reports contain sufficient generation plant, load, pricing and
other data to develop  PLEXOS production cost model with all of the load
aggregated at  single node No grid data is publicly available in the reports,
except for  single line diagram for the entire transmission and distribution
grid and  single line diagram for two of the major feeders on the island The
Contractor should therefore propose how they intend to fill this data gap if at
all possible The Contractor will also review and make recommendations on the
need to identify  new reference year, and to develop  new base case model if
recommended Page 19 of 39 RFP-026 The Contractor is also expected to calibrate
their model against the PLEXOS model internal to the BLPC, which includes the
full technical details of the transmission grid, transformers, connecting lines
and loads at the substations The Division of Energy is expected to facilitate
this exchange of data with the BLPC, and will share the data with IRENA who in
turn will inform the Contractor The Contractor will conduct  difference analysis
in order to validate the outputs of their model, and incorporate improvements
upon consultation with IRENA The Contractor will recommend to IRENA and to the
Division of Energy if and how to develop  new base case using updated
information ( on RE technologies cost, oil price scenarios, gas availability
scenario, etc) and without having access to the grid data The Contractor, upon
consultation with IRENA and the Division of Energy, will develop  new base case
generation expansion plan and model this in both PLEXOS and LEAP, calibrating
the latter on the PLEXOS model Once this is concluded, the Contractor and IRENA
will hand over the LEAP model to the Division of Energy, together with  training
on how the model was developed, the assumptions used and how the Division of
Energy can independently use it for supporting future policy making efforts The
LEAP model will include end uses of energy, end use RE technologies and more
detailed model of energy use for transportation, as PLEXOS is focused
exclusively on the power sector These models will form the analytical kernel of
the cost benefit analysis, net present value and policy analysis to be conducted
by the Contractor  Scenario Development and Analysis in PLEXOS The Contractor
will propose how it will develop  number of scenarios, based on the three supply
scenarios described in section , with any necessary additional scenario for
demand, energy prices to be analysed as part of the development of the Roadmap
Initially the scenarios will be modelled in the energy planning model LEAP The
Contractor will develop an approach to model the socio-economic impacts of the
energy sector by introducing “labour intensities” in  manner similar to how the
models incorporate energy intensities The Contractor will quantify the impacts
of the scenarios when compared against the base case, and compute net present
values and benefit cost ratios for each scenario The Contractor will also
develop the corresponding bottom-up engineering models for each scenario using
PLEXOS The scenarios will consider higher levels of penetration of both Page 20
of 39 RFP-026 dispatchable and variable renewable energy compared to those
considered by the BLPC in their IRP report of 2012 and their grid integration
study The Contractor is expected to make the necessary assumptions using the
available sources or using other publicly available sources to develop the
model, including assumptions about resource adequacy and the timing of the
installation of new plants under the various scenarios, and discuss these
assumptions with IRENA, the Division of Energy and BLPC for their feedback The
models and their outputs should be benchmarked and calibrated against similar
runs by the BLPC using the more detailed PLEXOS models internal to the company
In order to facilitate the benchmarking exercise, the Division will request that
the BLPC run models that correspond to the scenarios developed by IRENA in
collaboration with the Contractor The Division will request that the results be
returned to the Division for sharing with IRENA and the Contractor The
Contractor will conduct the calibration comparing results, and improving their
models as necessary The Contractor will conduct  difference analysis in order to
compare the outputs of the simplified models, and incorporate improvements upon
consultation with IRENA and the BLPC The Contractor will also review any
corresponding optimal load flow analysis, stability analysis, resource adequacy,
and other grid impact and mitigation studies that are expected to be conducted
by the BLPC on the behalf of the Division, and – if made available at least one
month before the deadline for submission of the final report – adjust the models
to include the necessary grid integration measures The scenarios developed by
the Contractor will consider technologies and strategies not yet considered by
the BLPC from  planning perspective  suggested list of technologies that will be
considered for resource expansion is given below This list is not exhaustive and
the Contractor should include in their proposal additional scenarios and
technologies that are deemed appropriate to Barbados The technologies are:
Solid biomass – An additional thermal plant fuelled 100 percent by leucaena
(river tamarind) This goes beyond the 25 MW plant already under consideration
The Contractors will build  model for this additional plant and define its
optimal size based on the sustainable yield of available biomass resources and
least cost planning criteria Page 21 of 39 RFP-026  Utility Scale Solar –
consideration for any additional projects that would reduce the electricity
supply cost, to be deployed by either independent power producers (IPP) or the
BLPC The Contractor will take into account, consulting with the Division of
Energy, any new projects that are being considered by the recently established
Light and Power Advisory Committee This Committee was commissioned under the new
Electric Light and Power Act, ELPA (2013) The Contractor will supplement this
with data from publicly available sources such as the IRENA Global Atlas ( (  )
IRENA figures cost and RE  Utility Scale Wind – The Contractor will consider any
new projects planned by both the BLPC and IPP’ that are made known to the
Committee The BLPC has announced that  wind farm is currently planned for the
northern part of the Island of Barbados called East Lamberts, St Lucy Nominal
plant data is published in the company’ IRP study As no resource assessment is
available publicly for this project, the Contractor will develop data from
publicly available sources such as the IRENA Global Atlas/DTU Global Wind Atlas
and manufacturer’ data for wind turbines  Direct Control Demand Response The
Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it intend to model the impacts of
demand side management The Contractor is hereby made aware that the BLPC has
made  presentation to the Division that summarises  recent DSM study Upon award
of the contract, the Contractor will use the data contained in the BLPC’
presentation on demand side management (DSM) to analyse the potential and
impacts of direct control demand response technologies, with due consideration
given to the limited information made available  Price-Based Demand Response The
Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it intend to model the impacts of
price-based demand response Upon the award to the contract, the Contractor will
use the data contained in the BLPC’ presentation on demand side management (DSM)
to the Division to analyse the potential and impacts of price-responsive demand
response technologies  Utility Scale Battery Storage The Contractor shall
describe in its proposal how it intends to model utility scale storage options
The Contractor shall consider the full array of storage technologies and
recommend the most suited technologies for application in Barbados Due
consideration will be given to enough storage to support  100 percent renewable
energy scenario  Customer Owned Battery Storage The Contractor shall describe in
its proposal how it intends to model customer owned battery storage options Upon
the award of the contract, the Contractor will build  model for this class of
technologies, and will analyse its potential to provide both back up energy to
customers, as well as to provide  demand response mechanism to the BLPC The
Contractor will model this technology using the simplified PLEXOS model, with
the understanding that the Page 22 of 39 RFP-026 results would be approximate as
the simplified models do not account for this distributed nature of this
resource  Ice storage for applications in air-conditioning and refrigeration
systems The Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it intends to model
customer owned ice storage options, in particular for commercial (incl hotels)
and industrial customers The Contractor will build  model for this class of
technologies The Contractor will analyse its potential to provide both back up
energy to customers, as well as to provide  demand response option for the BLPC
( possibility to switch off the chiller when necessary and rely on ice storage
for  limited time to provide cooling services) The Contractor will model this
technology using the simplified PLEXOS model, with the understanding that the
results would be approximate as the simplified models do not account for this
distributed nature of this resource  Utility-Owned Pumped Hydro Storage The
Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it intends to model system wide
utility storage options The Contractor will build  model for this class of
technologies The Contractor will analyse its potential to provide both back up
energy to customers, as well as to provide  grid management mechanism to the
BLPC  Electric Vehicles The Contractor shall describe in its proposal how it
intends to model electric vehicles and their interactions with the BLPC
electricity grid Based on an analysis of the evolution of the vehicle stock in
Barbados (in LEAP), the Contractor will include electricity demand from EVs to
all demand scenarios Due consideration will be given to charging time of the EVs
(day or night), its impact on BLPC load shape and on integration of solar and
wind, with an assessment of the impact on overall electricity supply cost The
Contractor is expected to make recommendations on the ideal charging strategy
for EVs, the appropriate market signals ( time of use pricing) or regulations to
ensure  positive impact of EVs on electricity supply cost, and the costs of not
adopting the optimal strategy The Contractor will build  model for this class of
technologies The Contractor will analyse its potential to provide both back up
energy to customers, as well as to provide  grid management mechanism to the
BLPC  Grid Impact Studies  The scenarios developed by Contractor will benefit
greatly from support from  grid study to explore the grid integration measures
necessary for each of the identified scenarios These studies are necessary in
order to determine the engineering feasibility of the scenarios, especially in
relation to the impacts due to the integration of high levels of variable
renewable energy It is expected the BLPC will conduct detailed studies of the
impact of the scenarios, developed by the Contractor for IRENA, on grid
operations and make the results available to the Division The Contractor and
IRENA are expected to be informed by the Division concerning these studies The
Contractor will review the outputs and modify their scenario models as Page 23
of 39 RFP-026 appropriate, if provided by BLPC to the Contractor at least one
month before deadline for submission of the final report from the Contractor to
IRENA If the results of these studies will not be made available to the
Contractor in due course, the Contractor will provide detailed description of
how to include the grid integration measures identified into the PLEXOS and LEAP
models developed The Contractor will also provide data on the likely costs
impacts of these measures within the context of the scenarios for Barbados:  The
operational and non-operational measures that may be employed by BLPC to
mitigate the effects of integration of high levels of variable renewable energy
The mitigation measures are expected to range from grid reinforcement, to
automatic generation control, to the use of storage options, and to the use of
demand response options The employment of these mitigation measures is expected
to provide operational flexibility and other benefits  It is expected that the
grid impact studies from the BLPC will include:   steady state optimal power
flow analysis of the transmission grid down to the level of the sub-stations for
each scenario developed The optimal power flow analysis will reveal those
critical hours of the year when the transmission system is approaching its
operational security limits   further contingency analysis that would examine
the impact of any significant event during the critical hours identified 
feeder level analysis that would explicitly account for the distributed nature
of the resources This analysis would include voltage impacts, as well as
contingency impacts due to  loss of system resources or load at the level of the
distribution grid  transient stability analysis for each scenario In the event
that the BLPC does not provide the supporting studies, the Contractor will not
be required to offer any additional reports on this subject, but only  detailed
description of how to include the grid integration measures identified into the
PLEXOS and LEAP models developed   Cost Benefit Analysis The Contractor will
conduct costs-benefit analysis for each scenario The analysis will compare the
base case with the scenarios The analysis will comprise of an evaluation of the
net economic benefits and costs (if any) of the scenario versus the base case
The analysis will be conducted in PLEXOS using the production cost routine
therein and supplemented by spreadsheets as needed The benefits would comprise
at least of – but not limited to - reduced production costs, reduced CO2 and
other environmental emissions, plus any other financial benefits based on any
increased operational flexibility imposed by the scenario The costs are
primarily those of the technology employed in scenarios plus the cost of any
mitigation Page 24 of 39 RFP-026 measure These benefits and costs will be used
to calculate  discounted net present value and benefit cost ratio for each
scenario Based on the results of the policy analysis, the Contractor will then
recommend the least cost pathway to meet the 29% renewable energy target by
2029, the least-cost generation mix (without  constraint on minimum RE share)
and the 100 percent renewable energy target Of particular importance would be
the assessment of costs and benefits of imposing policy constraints on local
content, local job creation and local investments, to advise the Division of
Energy in their policy making efforts  Protocol for Market Monitoring The
Contractor will develop  protocol which is intended to guide the Minister with
Responsibility for Energy in fulfilment the role of the issuance of licenses to
any utility operator under the Electric Light and Power Act, ELPA The protocol
should reflect all the technical issues contemplated in this request for
proposals The Contractor should consider that the Division of Energy is not
likely to obtain  full power systems planning model that incorporates data for
the transmission grid, the distribution grid, substations and the connecting
lines Hence the Division, acting on the behalf of the Minister should be empower
with the necessary protocols to monitor the acquisition of renewable energy
resources The Division should also be empowered with the knowledge to ask
meaningful questions of the utility that are intended to ensure its safe and
reliable operation within the context of the high penetration levels of variable
renewable energy resources The Contractor will include in its proposal the scope
of the protocol, and the nature and frequency of data collection The protocol
should also contain guidance on the framing of the questions that should be
asked by the Minister when interrogating the utility Page 25 of 39 RFP-026
EXISTING RESOURCES, REPORTS AND DATA SOURCES The data sources and the
assumptions will be provided by the Division of Energy through its liaison with
number of Government agencies, non-governmental agencies and the private sector
The Contractor will also review the following list of existing studies and
information resources:  Integrated Resource Plan, Barbados Light and Power
Company, See  (visited on 24 November 2015);  Executive Summary, Barbados Wind
and Solar Integration Study, Barbados Light and Power Company, See  studyhtml
(visited on 24 November 2015);  Grid Code - Interconnection Requirements for KV
and Below, Barbados Light and Power Company, BLPC, See  Rev1-May%pdf (visited on
24 November 2015);  Barbados National Economic Statistics (and Assumptions),
Central Bank of Barbados See  (visited on 24 November 2015);  UNDP Report: Base
Line Grid Report (of the BLPC), 2015;  UNDP Report: Grid Characterization Report
(of the BLPC), 2015;  Electric Light and Power Act, ELPA See  (visited on 25
November 2015);  Fair Trading Commission of Barbados See  Rest of the page
intentionally left blank Page 26 of 39 RFP-026 (TIMELINE (ESTIMATED) Timeline
for the finalization of the report will be at latest by 20 May If time is
considered insufficient,  cost-neutral extension of - months can be considered,
if clearly requested by the Contractor in its offer IRENA will confirm the
possibility of this extension in the response to the successful bidder Specific
milestones will be as in the table below In case of delays in the award of the
contract, the milestones will be postponed accordingly PROJECT MILESTONES Award
of contract Kick-off workshop in Barbados (- days, depending on need) Date (all
dates are for 2016) Before  February February or early March, depending on
schedule of stakeholders By 14 March Tentatively  April Inception Report
Presentation in Barbados of: () LEAP base case model, and () PLEXOS base case
model and calibration results Submission of Scenarios with NPV and BCR analyses,
benchmarking results, plus grid impact results (optional – if grid study results
received by 20 April) Delivery of the complete version of the LEAP and PLEXOS
scenario models, with accompanying draft report to the Division of Energy and
IRENA including  draft Market Monitoring Protocol Final workshop with
presentation of the results in Barbados, including hand-over training for the
LEAP model to Division of Energy and IRENA Final adjustments to the models,
based on the discussions in the final workshop, and finalization of the report
including the Market Monitoring Protocol By  May By  May Tentatively 11 May 20
May DELIVERABLES  Inception Report  Report and presentation on: () LEAP base
case model; and () PLEXOS base case model; and () Calibration results  Report
and presentation of: () Scenarios with NPV and BCR analyses; () grid impact
results (if possible); () Benchmarking results  Complete draft versions of the
LEAP and PLEXOS models for each scenario  Draft Report to accompany the draft
LEAP and PLEXOS models under # above, and including  draft Market Monitoring
Protocol;  Final Workshop incl LEAP training  Final Report and LEAP and PLEXOS
Models Page 27 of 39 RFP-026 Annex
The National Sustainable Energy Framework See  sustainable-energy-policy  Most
of the information references can be found in BLPC’ Integrated Resource Plan and
BLPC’ Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive Summary which can be
accessed at the following locations: Integrated Resource Plan: Main Report
%20February%202014%20-%20Clean%20Copypdf Integrated Resource Plan: Appendices
through AA :  %20February%202014%20-%20Appendices%20-%20Clean%20Copypdf
Integrated Resource Plan: Appendix :  %20February%202014%20-%20Appendix%20ABpdf
Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive Summary:
Barbados%20Wind%20and%20Solar%20Integration%20Study%20- %20Exec%20Summarypdf
Wind and Solar Resources Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study Executive
Summary:  Renewable Energy Rider (net billing solar PV systems) aggregate
capacity at the end of August 2015 is as follows: Page 28 of 39 RFP-026
Utility-Planned Renewable Energy Projects St Lucy Energy Gateway Solar Project
Capacity: 12 MW DC, 10 MW AC Energy Production: 20, 000 kWh Configuration:
Ground mounted on 42 acres of land at Trents, St Lucy Current status: Under
construction In-service date: Expected to be in-service in Q3 Lamberts Wind Farm
Project Capacity: 10 MW Energy Production: 30,170 kWh Configuration: 11 turbines
located at Lamberts, St Lucy Current status: Finalising land access with land
owner In-service date: Expected to be in-service in Q4  PLEXOS data inputs
Please refer to the Integrated Resource Plan and its Appendices as follows:
Integrated Resource Plan & Appendices: Page 29 of 39 RFP-026 System operating
philosophy Please refer to the Integrated Resource Plan as follows: Integrated
Resource Plan: Electricity Demand Forecast Please refer to the Integrated
Resource Plan and its Appendices as follows: Integrated Resource Plan &
Appendices: Hourly Electricity demand Data Available hourly load profile for
typical weekday, Saturday and Sunday of 2010, and total monthly demand for each
month of Hourly Electricity demand Data Measured solar radiation, averaged from
all installed pyranometers in Barbados Data with 10 minutes resolution, from :00
am to :00 pm of 18 April Rest of the page intentionally left blank Page 30 of 39
RFP-026 TECHNICAL EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR PROPOSALS
Summary of Proposal Evaluation Score Weight  Technical Evaluation 70%  Financial
Evaluation 30% Technical Evaluation Criteria Score Weight  Proposed approach,
methodology and implementation plan: ) Propose an approach to carry out the work
along with providing  target-oriented work plan that is realistic and in line
with the milestones provided within the TOR (10%); ) Recognize the important
aspects related to the individual tasks Indicate in the proposal the allocation
of resources dedicated of each of the tasks outlined in the TOR (%) ) Identify
and describe the tools that will be used, and which functions in particular will
be used to carry out the analysis based on the data available and the expected
results (10%) 30% ) Highlight possible challenges in the performance on the
tasks required according to the timeline, and propose solutions that will be
considered as risk mitigation measures, including use of own data and
engineering expertise based on previous similar projects to fill any information
gap (%)  Expertise of the firm / organization: ) Present documented experience
and knowledge on issues related to the development of long term energy planning
models using PLEXOS and LEAP (not necessarily in the same project) Provide
references of similar projects, including national energy roadmaps, utility
integrated resource plans and master plans, highlighting which of team members
proposed for this work were involved in the referenced projects, and what their
role was (20%) 40% ) Present documented experience and knowledge on issues
related to the development of grid studies using PLEXOS and the appropriate grid
modeling tools ( ETAP, Power-Factory, PSLF, etc) Provide references of similar
projects where the output from PLEXOS was used to perform  grid integration
study for large shares of variable renewable energy using the appropriate tools,
and the output of this study where used to update the PLEXOS model,  including
any grid integration measures identified as necessary Please highlight which of
team members proposed for this work were involved in the referenced projects,
and what their role was (10%) Page 31 of 39 RFP-026 ) Present documented
experience and knowledge on issues related to the development of power sector
modeling and energy planning in islands Any previous experience in Barbados or
similar context will be advantageous Please highlight which of team members
proposed for this work were involved in the referenced projects, and what their
role was (10%)  Team quality: ) Provide  breakdown of the composition of the
team and  detailed allocation of the time spent on each task by each team member
(%); 30% ) Provide the relevant qualifications and experience of the experts who
will be directly involved in the project in various capacities (including
project manager - not less than 15 years of experience - PLEXOS modeler, LEAP
modeler and grid integration studies expert – each of the three with no less
than  years of experience) For each team member, provide CV and samples of
relevant work undertaken (25%); TOTAL 100% Page 32 of 39 RFP-026 Section :
Proposal Submission Form This form must be returned along with the submission
signed and stamped from authorized person To: IRENA, Chief Procurement Officer
Dear Sir/Madam: We, the undersigned, hereby offer to provide professional
services for IRENA’ Consultancy Service for indicated subject with your Request
for Proposal dated and our Proposal We are hereby submitting our Proposal, which
includes the Technical Proposal and Financial Proposal sealed under  separate
envelope We hereby declare that all the information and statements made in this
Proposal are true and we accept that any misinterpretation contained in it may
lead to our disqualification We confirm that we have read, understood and hereby
accept the Terms of Reference describing the duties and responsibilities
required of us in this RFP, and the General Terms and Conditions of IRENA ’ We
agree to abide by this Proposal for 120 days We undertake, if our Proposal is
accepted, to initiate the services not later than the date indicated in the Data
Sheet We fully understand and recognize that IRENA is not bound to accept this
proposal, that we shall bear all costs associated with its preparation and
submission, and that IRENA will in no case be responsible or liable for those
costs, regardless of the conduct or outcome of the evaluation We remain, Yours
sincerely, Authorized Signature [In full and initials]: Name and Title of
Signatory: Name of Firm: Contact Details: Page 33 of 39 RFP-026 Section :
Documents Establishing the Eligibility and Qualifications of the Proposer
Proposer Information Form  Proposer’ Legal Name [insert Proposer’ legal name]
In case of Joint Venture (JV), legal name of each party: [insert legal name of
each party in JV]  Proposer’ actual or intended Country of Registration: [insert
actual or intended Country of Registration]  Proposer’ Year of Registration:
[insert Proposer’ year of registration]  Proposer’ Legal Address in Country of
Registration: [insert Proposer’ legal address in country of registration]
Proposer’ Authorized Representative Information Name: [insert Authorized
Representative’ name] Address: [insert Authorized Representative’ Address]
Telephone/Fax numbers: [insert Authorized Representative’ telephone/fax numbers]
Email Address: [insert Authorized Representative’ email address]  Attached are
copies of original documents of: [check the box(es) of the attached original
documents]  Articles of Incorporation or Registration of firm named in , above,
in accordance with ITB Sub- Clauses  and   In case of JV, letter of intent to
form JV or JV agreement  In case of government owned entity, documents
establishing legal and financial autonomy and compliance with commercial law
Joint Venture Partner Information Form [The Proposer shall fill in this Form in
accordance with the instructions indicated below]  Proposer’ Legal Name: [insert
Proposer’ legal name]  JV’ Party legal name: [insert JV’ Party legal name]  JV’
Party Country of Registration: [insert JV’ Party country of registration] Page
34 of 39 RFP-026  JV’ Party Year of Registration: [insert JV’ Part year of
registration]  JV’ Party Legal Address in Country of Registration: [insert JV’
Party legal address in country of registration]  JV’ Party Authorized
Representative Information Name: [insert name of JV’ Party authorized
representative] Address: [insert address of JV’ Party authorized representative]
Telephone/Fax numbers: [insert telephone/fax numbers of JV’ Party authorized
representative] Email Address: [insert email address of JV’ Party authorized
representative]  Attached are copies of original documents of: [check the
box(es) of the attached original documents]  Articles of Incorporation or
Registration of firm named in   In case of government owned entity, documents
establishing legal and financial autonomy and compliance with commercial law
Page 35 of 39 RFP-026 Section : Technical Proposal Form TECHNICAL PROPOSAL
FORMAT SECTION : EXPERTISE OF FIRM/ ORGANISATION This section should fully
explain the Proposer’ resources in terms of personnel and facilities necessary
for the performance of this requirement  Brief Description of Proposer as an
Entity: Provide  brief description of the organization / firm submitting the
proposal, its legal mandates/authorized business activities, the year and
country of incorporation, types of activities undertaken, and approximate annual
budget, etc Include reference to reputation, or any history of litigation and
arbitration in which the organisation / firm has been involved that could
adversely affect or impact the performance of services, indicating the
status/result of such litigation/arbitration  Financial Capacity: Provide the
latest Audited Financial Statement (Income Statement and Balance Sheet) duly
certified by  Public Accountant, and with authentication of receiving by the
Government’ Internal Revenue Authority Include any indication of credit rating,
industry rating, etc  Track Record and Experiences: Provide the following
information regarding corporate experience within the last five () years which
are related or relevant to those required for this Contract Name of project
Client Contract Period of activity Types of activities undertaken Status or Date
Completed References Contact Details (Name, Phone, Email) Value SECTION  -
APPROACH AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN This section should demonstrate the Proposer’
responsiveness to the specification by identifying the specific components
proposed, addressing the requirements, as specified, point by point; providing
detailed description of the essential performance characteristics proposed; and
demonstrating how the proposed methodology meets or exceeds the specifications
Approach to the Service/Work Required: Please provide  detailed description of
the methodology for how the organisation/firm will achieve the Terms of
Reference of the project, keeping in mind the appropriateness to local
conditions and project environment  Technical Quality Assurance Review
Mechanisms: The methodology shall also include details of the Proposer’ internal
technical and quality assurance review mechanisms Page 36 of 39 RFP-026
Reporting and Monitoring: Please provide  brief description of the mechanisms
proposed for this project for reporting to the IRENA and partners, including
reporting schedule  Subcontracting: Explain whether any work would be
subcontracted, to whom, how much percentage of the work, the rationale for such,
and the roles of the proposed sub-contractors Special attention should be given
to providing  clear picture of the role of each entity and how everyone will
function as  team SECTION : PERSONNEL  Management Structure: Describe the
overall management approach toward planning and implementing this activity
Include an organization chart for the management of the project describing the
relationship of key positions and designations  Staff Time Allocation: Provide
spreadsheet will be included to show the activities of each staff member and the
time allocated for his/her involvement (Note: This spreadsheet is crucial and no
substitution of personnel will be tolerated once the contract has been awarded
except in extreme circumstances and with the written approval of the IRENA If
substitution is unavoidable it will be with  person who, in the opinion of the
IRENA project manager, is at least as experienced as the person being replaced,
and subject to the approval of IRENA  No increase in costs will be considered as
result of any substitution)  Qualifications of Key Personnel Provide the CVs for
key personnel (Team Leader, Managerial and general staff) that will be provided
to support the implementation of this project CVs should demonstrate
qualifications in areas relevant to the Scope of Services Page 37 of 39 RFP-026
Section : Financial Proposal Form Financial Proposal Form The Proposer is
required to prepare the Financial Proposal in  separate envelope from the rest
of the RFP response as indicated in RFP The format shown below is required in
preparing the Financial Proposal  Cost Breakdown by Cost Component: The
Proposers are requested to provide the overall cost breakdown for all
deliverables based on the following format IRENA shall use the cost breakdown
for the price reasonability assessment purposes as well as the calculation of
price in the event that both parties have agreed to add new deliverables to the
scope of Services Prices should be in USD inclusive of VAT / All Taxes & fees
(if applicable) *Total Period of the Engagement (Days) –per categories of staff
assigned Name / Designation of the Proposed Staff Rate / Cost per day (USD)
Total in USD No Description of deliverables Deliverable : Kick-off workshop in
Barbados ( day- require  trainer and  assistant) Deliverable : Inception Report
Deliverable : Draft report and  day consultations in Barbados on: () LEAP base
case model; and () PLEXOS base case model; () Calibration results Deliverable :
Review of the grid study developed by BLPC (if provided by deadline) based on
deliverable  and update of the PLEXOS and LEAP models based on this study
(Optional, but quotation is required ) Deliverable : Delivery of the complete
version of the LEAP and PLEXOS models, with accompanying draft report to the
Division of Energy and IRENA Page 38 of 39 RFP-026 including  draft Market
Monitoring Protocol Deliverable : delivery of final workshop with presentation
of the results in Barbados ( day), including hand-over training for the LEAP
model to Division of Energy and IRENA ( additional day) Deliverable : Final
Report and LEAP and PLEXOS Models including final adjustments to the models,
based on the discussions final workshop, and in the report the of finalization
including the Market Monitoring Protocol Grand Total in USD *Note on
deliverbales : As per TOR, It is expected that this project duration is
approximately  months of work The estimated actual days of work on the analysis
is not expected to exceed 60 +/- 10%  Total estimated work days to complete the
tasks  Total Lump Sum: USD WITHOUT TRAVEL COST The fee must be all inclusive of
VAT / All Taxes & fees (if applicable) The Fee should not include cost of travel
Any travel, if authorized by IRENA, will be made in accordance with IRENA’
travel policy For: Name of Bidder:-------------------------- Authorised
Signatory:------------------- Name:--------------------------------------
Designation:-------------------------------
_______________________________________ Signature Date: ____________/ 2015 Page
39 of 39 RFP-026