Table of Contents ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  INTRODUCTION 10
METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH 13 OVERARCHING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY 16 ENERGY
TARGETS 19 IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT: 25 • List of Policy Measures • • Results
Framework • Monitoring and Evaluation Framework • Risk Analysis • Management
Arrangements 26 32 39 42 46 52 Implementation Activities by Year and Thematic
Area DEVELOPING COMMUNITIES THROUGH RENEWABLE ENERGY – COMMUNITY INVOLVEMNT IN
54 KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 56 APPENDIX  -
ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY 58 APPENDIX  – ALLOCATION OF
ACTIVITIES & RESPONSIBLE PARTIES 74 APPENDIX  – RISK REGISTER GUIDELINES 88
APPENDIX  – RISK REGISTER THREAT RATING DESCRIPTION 93 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY |  LIST OF TABLES Table 1A Energy Mix Scenario
2030 22 Table 2A Schedule of Installation of Renewable Energy Over the Next
years 22 Table 3A Schedule of Electricity of Electricity Production (GWh) from
Renewable Energy Over the Next  years 23 Table 4A Schedule of Investment in
Renewable Energy Over the Next  years ($) 24 Table 5A Spatial Requirements for
Electricity Generation Facilities (Acres) 24 LIST OF Figures Figure  Main
Working Groups of Implementation Plan 15 Figure  2015 Electricity Consumption by
Sector 20 Figure  2015 Energy Demand 21 Figure  2015 Energy Production 21 53
Figure : Project Implementation Management Structure  | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS AG BAPE Office of the
Auditor General Barbados Association of Professional Engineers Barbados
Community College Barbados Chamber of Commerce & Industry Barbados Cane Industry
Corporation Barbados Defense Force Bio Economy Group Barbados Economic Recovery
and Transformation Programme Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd Barbados
National Energy Policy Barbados National Oil Company Ltd Barbados Renewable
Energy Association Barbados Statistical Service Corporate Affairs and
Intellectual Property Office Caribbean Center for Renewable Energy & Energy
Efficiency Chief Parliamentary Counsel Enabling Activity Environmental
Protection Department in the Ministry of Environment and National Beautification
Energy Equivalency Licenses Energy Service Companies Electrical Vehicle Fossil
Fuel Free Feed-In-Tariff Fair Trading Commission Government Electrical &
Engineering Department Gigawatt hours Inter-American Development Bank
Implementation Plan Independent Power Producers Integrated Resource Planning
Ministry of Agriculture & Food Security Ministry of Environment & National
Beautification Ministry of Education, Technology and Vocational Training
Ministry of Energy & Water Resources MFAFT Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Foreign
Trade Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs & Investment Ministry of Health and
Wellness Ministry of Labor and Social Partnership Relations MOFEI BCC BCCI MOH
MOL BCIC BDF BEG BERT MOU MSBEC Ministry of Small Business, Entrepreneurship and
Commerce Ministry of Transport, Works and Maintenance Megawatt hours National
Climate Change Committee Non-Governmental Organisation National Petroleum
Corporation Pan American Health Organisation Public Implementation Unit in the
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs & Investment Policy Measures Project
Monitoring and Coordination Team Private Sector Project Steering Committee
Public Sector Smart Energy Public Service Vehicles Association Project Task
Force Resource Coordination Team Renewable Energy Renewable Energy Licensing
Regime Samuel Jackman Prescod Institute of Technology Specific, Measurable,
Achievable, Relevant, Time Bound Sanitation Service Authority in the Ministry of
Environment & National Beautification to be determined Town & Country Planning
Department Terms of Reference Technical Vocational Educational Training Council
University of the West Indies MTWM BL& BNEP BNOCL BREA BSS CAIPO MWh NCCC NGO
NPC PAHO PIU CCREEE CPC EA EPD PM PMCT PS PSC PSSEP PSVA PTF RCT RE RELR SJPI
EEL ESCOs EV FFF FIT FTC GEED GWh IADB IP IPP IRP MAFS MENB SMART SSA TBD TCPD
TOR TVET METVT MEWR UWI IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
|  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Substantial contributions are acknowledged from the wide
cross-section of stakeholders, including non- governmental organisations, public
and private sector representative from the various thematic areas outlined in
the Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP) This document reflects feedback from
number of partners who will collectively play  vital role in implementing and
validating the various milestones outlined in this plan The inputs provided by
the following organisations are appreciated: • Alliance of Public Transport
Operators • Barbados Cane Industry Corporation • Barbados Chamber of Commerce
and Industry • Barbados Defense Force • Barbados Light & Power Co Ltd • Barbados
National Oil Company Ltd • Barbados National Terminal Company Ltd • Barbados
Renewable Energy Association • Barbados Sugar Industries Ltd • Coastal Zone
Management Unit • Delegation of the European Union • • McEnearney Quality Inc •
Megapower Ltd • Ministry of Energy and Water Resources • Ministry of Environment
and National Beautification • Ministry of Transport, Works and Maintenance •
Nassco Ltd • National Petroleum Corporation • Pavana Energy Inc • Petroleum
Dealers Association • RUBIS Caribbean • Sanitation Service Authority • Simpson
Motors Ltd • Simpson Oil Ltd • The Fair Trading Commission • Transport Board •
United Nations Development Programme for Barbados and the OECS Innogen
Technologies Inc • Williams Solar In addition,  wish to recognise the
contributions of the associate consultants, Miss Kristin Qui and Mr Ryan Als, in
helping to structure the approach and finalise various aspects of this document
| IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY EXECUTIVE SUMMARY To
assist the Government of Barbados with achieving its 2030 vision of becoming
100% fossil fuel free (FFF) by 2030, the Government of Barbados, with the
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MEWR), commissioned the development of
this implementation plan (IP) to supplement the Barbados National Energy Policy
(BNEP)  Oil and Gas Supply;  Transport; and  Renewable Energy Supply and Storage
Working group seminars were held from November 2018 to December During the
Renewable Energy Stakeholders meeting,  survey was administered to identify
critical factors relating to opportunities and threats to the implementation of
the 100% FFF vision 35 interviews with persons from various organisations helped
to flesh out specific activities for implementation to be carried out by those
organisations This IP identifies output-level measures that will accelerate full
integration of renewable energy (RE) into Barbados’ energy mix The first section
of the document explains the methodology and approach undertaken to develop the
IP Following the methodology section, is  projection of Barbados’ target
renewable energy mix in 2030, including calculations for target numbers, details
on costs and benefits and spatial requirements for the renewable energy
technologies necessary to achieve the 2030 vision The IP also includes  detailed
implementation toolkit, which includes an implementation strategy by year and
thematic area listing the required activities to achieve the 100% FFF target by
2030,  results framework,  monitoring and evaluation framework, and potential
management arrangements Key limitations and assumptions of this IP are included
toward the end of the document, followed by three appendices Appendix  lists the
activities to be implemented by various entities and stakeholders, Appendix  and
describe the risk register guidelines and threat rating The working groups
identified some concerns to be addressed in order to achieve the 100% FFF vision
and proposed solutions to these concerns Specifically, these concerns include
resource identification and mobilisation, capacity building, communication and
change management For resource identification and mobilisation, the
establishment of  Resource Coordination Team (RCT) will serve to identify
sources of technical and financial resources and will be responsible for project
concept and proposal writing and review and other related activities This team
will be cross-sectoral and comprise of experts from various Government
Ministries  detailed capacity assessment was listed as necessary during the
initial stages of implementation in order to identify gaps in the various
entities/organisations required to create an enabling environment for achieving
the 2030 vision The capacity assessment will focus on staffing, technology and
training For communication, the working groups identified the need for
communication channels that facilitate constant dialogue across the working
groups as necessary This will include an online dialogue platform, quarterly
stakeholders meetings with members of all working groups, allowing for updates
on progress and inviting comments for consideration Finally,  framework will be
established to assist individuals and organisations in making the change to 100%
FFF The The IP approach reflected  multi-sectoral stakeholder process The
methodology consisted of  working groups separated by thematic area:  Natural
Environment and Climate Change;  Electricity Supply, Energy Efficiency and
Conservation; IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY |
framework will focus on the principles of awareness, desire, knowledge, ability
and reinforcement (ADKAR) Monitoring and evaluation of the IP will include
project inception workshop to determine roles, ownership, responsibilities,
reporting, communication, decision- making structures, staffing and other key
factors and requirements for successful start of the project Several reports and
logs, along with an annual project review and annual review report, will assist
in monitoring of implementation  mid-term review and final evaluation will focus
on delivery of project results The IP includes energy targets for 2030 based on
various estimates and assumptions Over the next  years, 2019 to 2023, 295 MW of
renewable energy is one possible scenario could be potentially be commissioned,
consisting of  minimum of 160 MW of solar photovoltaics and  minimum of 120 MW
of wind This scenario also identifies 80 MW of energy storage The scheduled
implementation of technologies will result in 688 GWh of electricity from
renewable energy sources in the first  years of implementation The estimated
cost of achieving 100% renewable energy by 2030 is about $ billion, while the
estimated economic benefit from the sector on an annual basis is projected to
average around $ billion per year over the ten year implementation period, which
can be attributed to  release of resources used to import fossil fuels It was
found that greater local investment might result in greater local benefits,
whereas greater foreign investment means less benefits being retained locally
detailed risk register included in the IP reflects the concerns expressed in the
working group sessions, as well as from the individual interviews with key
stakeholders These threats to implementation will guide the Project
Implementation Team accordingly along with relevant remedial actions aimed at
minimising and/or avoiding the occurrence of identified threats In terms of
management of implementation,  Project Management Team (PMCT) and Project Task
Force (PTF) will be established The PMCT will support the delivery of the
outputs The responsibilities of the PMCT include day-to-day management and
coordination of the project and its respective activities,  Monitoring and
Evaluation, Procurement, Administrative Support, Technical Support and Finance
and Awareness and Communication within the IP Spatial requirements for each of
the renewable energy technologies vary by technology The IP finds that solar
photovoltaic facilities will need  minimum of 317 acres while wind technology
will need 50 acres The estimated total spatial requirement for renewable energy
generation facilities is 758 acres Land requirements for biomass are based on
requirements for feedstock The IP estimates between 25 000 to 28 000 acres
necessary for biomass feedstock (sugar cane and king grass) and food The PTF, or
Project Board will consist of representatives from various Government
Ministries, including MEWR, Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and
Investment, the National Climate Change Committee (NCCC), the Barbados Chamber
of Commerce and  representative from  relevant Non-Governmental Organisation
Page 48 of the IP includes  visual of the reporting structure for the various
teams The implementation toolkit in this IP consists of: )  list of Policy
Measures; ) ) Results Frameworks; ) Monitoring and Evaluation Framework; ) Risk
Analysis; and ) Project Management Arrangements Implementation activities by
year and thematic area; It is important to note key assumptions and
considerations related to the development of the IP The first assumption is that
supervision of this implementation plan will be done by the PMCT Second, it is
assumed that the thematic working groups outlined in the IP will continue to
meet  | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY and provide
oversight to the activities and that other stakeholders will be integrated into
the IP as necessary It is also expected that stakeholders will formally take
ownership of various activities and can therefore be considered responsible for
particular activities The fourth assumption is that public communication of
developments regarding progress and milestone achievements will occur and fifth,
resource mobilisation team will be established to identify financial and
technical resources for the activities outlined in this IP Recognising these
limitations, the IP is designed as  ‘working document’ with sufficient
flexibility and adaptability to rapidly incorporate inputs at any given time,
without compromising the overall quality of the outputs identified In terms of
considerations/limitations, the first is that the narrow timeline for
consultation in development of this IP resulted in the prioritisation of
thematic areas based on input from  range of relevant documents For this reason,
some thematic areas are disproportionately represented However, the IP will
advance working group engagements to incorporate other critical sectors
throughout the project cycle Second, although the working group sessions were
well attended and representative of the core drivers of the IP, input from other
critical stakeholders will be needed to fully align activities to the existing
operations of relevant institutions IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY |  INTRODUCTION 10 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY INTRODUCTION The purpose of the IP is to identify the necessary
activities that will accelerate the paradigm shift across various sectors,
towards the realisation of full integration of renewable energy (RE) into the
energy mix of Barbados The IP therefore promotes functional cooperation
primarily amongst government agencies, private sector entities and non-
governmental organisations (NGOs) in an effort to ensure the most relevant
participatory framework throughout the identification process and submission of
key activities in the 100% FFF initiative safeguards Awareness, Communication
and Knowledge Management are also vital areas in which NGOs can assist The
overarching focus of NGOs will be on the alignment of the outputs and outcomes
of the IP, relative to generally accepted standards and targets such as the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals In the area of developing renewable
energy sources, Barbados must achieve ambitious targets that will contribute to
an increase in the reliability of the energy supply, reduce negative impacts on
the environment, economic growth and the development of jobs and employment As
result, the Government of Barbados has embarked on an agenda of becoming 100%
Fossil Fuel Free (FFF) by 2030, while taking into consideration  number of
exogenous constraints beyond the parameters of its regulatory and developmental
jurisdiction Worth noting within these constraints are considerations for the
availability and costs of various renewable energy (RE) technologies, both of
which are driven by external aggregate factors of demand, supply and rate of
technological advancement In line with the 2030 vision, the Government of
Barbados, through the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources, has commissioned
the development of this Implementation Plan (IP) to supplement the Barbados
National Energy Policy (BNEP) To that extent, the IP recognises the importance
of the government institutions in facilitating regulatory, legislative and other
policy-related measures to streamline existing processes and effectively adapt
to the changing local and international realities in the renewable energy sector
In order to address long-term sustainability throughout the transition, the
private sector has to be afforded opportunities to maximise on the economic
benefits aligned to various technologies and aspects of renewable energy (
generation, distribution and storage) The role of the private sector therefore
develops within  model of economic sustainability, that further enables the
transfers of capital and technology necessary to ensure that Barbados is in
touch with developments in the international RE sector The activities in this IP
have evolved from key provisions in the BNEP, such as the overarching vision,
associated goals, objectives and policy measures The IP advances the BNEP
framework by identifying activities, risks and measurable results These features
collectively define the enabling environment in the short-term (first  years)
that would allow for the long-term realisation of becoming 100% FFF in Barbados,
within the given resource and time constraints NGOs have  key role to play in
the rollout and overall success of the IP The NGOs will ensure that the
activities are executed in  manner that encompasses various developmental
considerations such as gender mainstreaming and environmental and engineering
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 11 • Environmental and
health benefits – The transition to RE will allow decreases in the overall
levels of CO₂ and other greenhouse gas emissions in Barbados This development
will add value to the sustainability and/or restoration of many aspects of the
natural environment and may reduce the incidence of some health related matters
During the development of the IP, support from key stakeholders in the public,
provided the necessary platform for initial targeted inputs These stakeholders,
throughout the consultation process, highlighted many determining factors that
were crucial for success in the 100% FFF initiative Key among these were: •
Government commitment to transitioning to RE – International Agenda – This
endeavour of 100% FFF will signal that Barbados is establishing  serious and
leading agenda not only regionally but also across the world, for other
countries to observe and follow • The Government of Barbados has established the
transition to RE as an item high on its priority list and “Mission Critical”
agenda This therefore allows for minimal or no disruption in seeking cooperation
with relevant government agencies • Tourism – The international agenda will
result in Barbados being able to exploit and capitalise on another niche markets
in the international tourism sector ( Eco-Tourism) This in turn may positively
affect foreign exchange revenue generation • Exposure to external market
volatility - Unpredictability of developments in external energy markets and
subsequent impacts on fossil fuel prices • Prevailing economic conditions
(foreign exchange) –  significant portion (approximately %) of Barbados revenue
is utilised for importing fossil fuels This consumption presents an inverse
relationship to the overall levels of foreign exchange reserves To assist in the
overall management of critical activities, the IP has developed and incorporated
an Implementation Toolkit, which is intended to add value to the pace of
implementation and the quality of intended outputs • Geographical location – At
1939° , 5432° , Barbados can take advantage of ‘prime’ levels (exposure and
duration) of RE such as solar There are also some geographical advantages with
respect to other types of RE;  wind and wave energy 12 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY METHODOLOGY & APPROACH IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 13 METHODOLOGY & APPROACH The IP reflects
multi-sectoral engagement process, consistent with the approach used to create
the Barbados National Energy Policy () The IP recognised the need for critical
input from  wide variety of key stakeholders, as well as the various tools
utilised in the collection, analysis and incorporation of information that
validated the activities and timelines proposed These tools were:Working Groups
- Stakeholders categorised into five () main working groups, along with three ()
crosscutting thematic areas as depicted in Figure  Working Group seminars were
held as follows: indicated  suitable time and date to conduct follow-up
interviews Survey –  survey was conducted during the Renewable Energy
Stakeholders meeting, hosted by the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources on
Wednesday, November 28 at the Sir Lloyd Erskine Sandiford Center On the survey,
respondents identified critical factors relating to opportunities and threats to
the implementation of the 100% FFF vision 12 respondents at the meeting also
Interviews – 35 individual interviews were conducted with various organisations,
identified as responsible parties, over the period November 21, 2018 - December
, 2018 for discussions on specific activities 14 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Streetlighting signing ceremony Figure  - Main
Working Groups of Implementation Plan IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 15 OVERARCHING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY 16 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY OVERARCHING IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY In order
to achieve the intended results, outcomes and goal of the IP, it is essential to
take preparatory steps that immediately address some concerns identified by
stakeholders These concerns are: The RCT will comprise  cross section of
relevant entities that regularly interact with funding agencies in the area of
Energy, Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction These may
include, but not be limited to: Resource Identification and Mobilisation
Resourcing the many activities within the IP will be  decisive factor in its
overall success, as preliminary estimates suggest that BBD $ billion will be
required to achieve the 2030 vision It is therefore important to develop
structured and adaptable framework to map all possible sources of technical and
financial resources available to the executing agencies involved This exercise
will be undertaken by  Resource Coordination Team that will assist in: • The
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources • The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
Foreign Trade • The Ministry of Environment and National Beautification • The
Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment •  representation of local
entities participating in  RE Project Concept and Proposal Writing and the
financial sector and international development space Review (Technical and
Administrative) as needed  Providing implementation support where applicable The
RCT will meet at least every quarter IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 17 Capacity Building Implementation efforts will initially focus
on identifying capacity gaps in key organisations that have essential roles in
creating an enabling environment for the IP to progress at  reasonable rate
These institutions include Town and Country Planning Department, Fair Trading
Commission, Barbados Renewable Energy Association, Environmental Protection
Department, Barbados National Oil Company Ltd, Barbados National Standards
Institute, Government Electrical Engineering Department, Department of Energy,
Sanitation Services Authority and the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and
Investment  detailed capacity assessment will focus on addressing the following
questions: Communication The creation and maintenance of forums for constant
dialogue is essential for success of the IP Communication channels, which
utilise the guidance and technical expertise of the established working groups,
will allow for timely adaptation to any relevant developments in both the
external and internal stakeholder environment  quarterly stakeholder’
consultation, consisting of all members of established working groups, will
communicate project progress and invite comments for further consideration
Communication on implementation progress, aided by the creation of  reliable
online digital platform, will highlight the status of implementation of various
activities, targets (outputs) and justifications for any shortfalls This
platform, although dedicated primarily to communicating progress, adds to the
overall of accountability of responsible parties • Staffing – Do these
organisations possess the quantity and quality skillset needed to facilitate
their roles in delivering results outlined in the IP? Change Management As the
evolution to 100% FFF implicates  rapid transition in  relatively short period,
it is important to adopt an approach that supports individuals, teams and
organisations in making the change Therefore,  series of change management
engagements to promote an ADKAR framework, where ADKAR reflects the principles
of awareness, desire, knowledge, ability and reinforcement is needed to
capitalise on sustainable support from all stakeholders These are all critical
areas to change management • Technology – Do these organisations possess the
requisite hardware and software apparatus, which will allow for uninterrupted
service provision to various activities outlined in the IP? • Training – What
are key capacity building engagements that will allow these organisations reach
or surpass an acceptable standard of delivery and continuously be aware of
modern developments in their field of operations, in alignment to the activities
outlined in the IP? To advance this effort, ongoing initiatives such as the
Public Sector Smart Energy Programme (PSSEP) will be utilised PSSEP will be
undertaking  cross-sectorial capacity assessment, which will help to identify
critical gaps in the readiness and adaptability of public and private sector
institutions to the paradigm shift In addition, PSSEP will action the findings
and address some of the capacity gaps directly, through the provision of
training, equipment and other related and relevant resources It is important to
adopt an approach that supports individuals, teams and organisations in making
the change 18 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY ENERGY
TARGETS IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 19 ENERGY
TARGETS The Government of Barbados stated its commitment to transition the
island to 100% renewable energy by In order to achieve this target by the stated
period, there needs to be  clear energy mix that can be implemented at feasible
investment and operation costs The planned energy mix will also include
technologies that can operate under the following constraints over the planning
period of 2030: • The target demand for energy • The spatial requirements for
generation • Emission of CO2 for energy produced and consumed • Capital and
operation expenditure to • commission and operate IP Electricity is heavily
consumed by all the major economic sectors The consumption of these sectors is
depicted and listed as follows for the base year 2015: 20 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY The demand for energy during the base year
is depicted and listed as follows: In 2018 electricity production from solar
stood at % IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 21 Energy
Source Installed Capacity (MW) 205 Solar (centralised) 105 Solar (distributed)
150 Wind onshore 150 Wind offshore 15 Biomass & Waste-To-Energy 132 Energy
storage (centralised) 68 Energy storage (distributed) 625 Total (Excluding
Storage) Table 1A – Energy Mix 2030 Scenario The current demand for electricity
is recorded to be 944 Gwh per for the period Given the above, the estimated
demand used to determine the above mix was 1400 Gwh (See Table 1A) allow for the
complete removal of fossil fuel, but may allow the reduction of the carbon
emissions via fuel switching to natural gas Additionally, it is foreseeable that
the airline industry will also most likely continue to use aviation fuel over
the planning horizon ( 10 years) It is important to note that the energy mix
will also be constrained by technology Hence, the fishing industry and the
cruise industry will be impacted, as many of these vessels utilise diesel and
heavy fuel oil The challenge here is that over the planning horizon and the
initial implementation period the technology may most likely not With regards to
energy savings, it has been acknowledged that emphasis must be placed on
strategic investment in renewable infrastructure, in order to capitalise on
annual energy savings of $400 – $800 million1      Total 32 32 32 32 32 PV 160
120 Wind 120 15 Bio-Energy 15 Total forecasted renewable energy requirement (MW)
295 20 20 20 20 Energy Storage (MW) 80 Table 2A - Schedule of Installation of
Renewable Energy Over the Next  Years (MW)  Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd
(2019) Delivering 100% Renewable Energy by 2030 [Draft White Paper] 22 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY During the first five
years of the implementation period of 2019 to 2023, 295 MW of renewable energy
and 80 MW of energy storage is forecasted to be commissioned Solar photovoltaics
will require  minimum of 160 MW to be installed while  minimum of 120 MW of wind
will need to be installed to achieve the target of 100% renewable energy by mix
is impacted by the technical limits of the electrical grid, the environment
impact assessment, construction and installation time needed Additionally, the
regulatory and permitting processes will have to be accelerated by  significant
margin It must be noted that Waste-to-Energy is not scheduled within the first
years of implementation, as the planning and construction time required would
place this technology in year  of the schedule The 295 MW in the first  years
will represent 46% of the total capacity energy mix The baseload technologies
which accounts for 15 MW of the total capacity, given their nature, will require
more planning and construction time and consequently are scheduled to be
commissioned in year  of the implementation period The scheduling of the energy
The successful implementation of the technologies identified in Table 2A will
result in 688 GWh of electricity being produced from renewable energy sources as
is observed in Table 3A      Total 48 48 48 48 48 PV Wind 65 Bio-Energy 65 48 48
48 08 13 Total 65 Table 3A - Schedule Electricity Production (Gwh) From
Renewable Energy Over the Next  Years The investment required by the renewable
energy sector to advance the agenda of 100% renewable energy by the year 2030 is
estimated to be about $ billion The majority of the resources expected to be
expended are $875 million and $270 million, in years  and  respectively as the
larger projects are scheduled to be completed in these two periods (See Table
4A) Of course, the rate of investment will be impacted by the enabling
environment that is required to be established within the renewable sector For
instance,  clear and stable price is the foundation on which the sector will
rest energy, as Barbados will no longer be incurring an economic loss of 70
cents on every dollar to consume fossil fuel Additionally, the support to the
renewable energy sector in terms of financial services, installation,
construction, plant operation, and professional services are other sources of
economic activity anticipated to emerge However, this is dependent on the level
of local investment that will become involved in the sector There will also be
an opportunity for Barbadians to become exporters of energy once the cost of
batteries become economically feasible, as energy will becomes more portable
Hence, with greater local investment will come greater benefits being retained
in Barbados, while  heavy infiltration of foreign investment will result in an
inverse outcome; less benefit being retained locally The economic benefit that
is anticipated to accrue from the sector on an annual basis is projected to
average around $ billion per year over the ten (10) year implementation period
This benefit is expected to be derived from the release of resources that would
have been used on imported IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY | 23      Total $00 $00 $00 $00 $00 PV $00 $- $- $- $48 $- Wind $48 $- $-
$- $- $25 Biomas $25 Sub-Total $,73 $60 $60 $60 $60 Energy Storage (MW) $40 $00
$60 $60 $,08 $85 Total $,13 Table 4A - Schedule of Investment In Renewable Over
the Next  Years ($) The spatial requirements for electricity generation vary
between the different technologies For example, the spatial footprint for ground
mounted solar photovoltaics can range between  to  acres per megawatt depending
on the configuration of the system In the case of roof mounted system, the
availability of space will be impacted by how much of the roof is south facing,
shaded and size of the roof Solar photovoltaic has  large spatial footprint and
consequently there are not too many complimentary economic activities that can
operate once  solar farm is installed Wind technology has  lower spatial
footprint for electricity generation relative to solar photovoltaics and can co-
exist with other economic activities such as agriculture of space (See Table 5A)
It is estimated that the sector will require approximately  minimum of 367 acres
of space during the first five () years of implementation The total spatial
requirement for renewable energy is estimated to be 758 acres of space by
Baseload technologies’ spatial requirements for generation can be considered
low, relative to the requirement for wind and solar technologies The bulk of the
land requirement for biomass (sugar cane and king grass) relates to the
feedstock The amount of land that will be used to produce the feedstock is
estimated to be between 25 000 to 28 000 acres In the case of bio- methane, farm
waste, manure, food waste, and gasses are expected to be the principle
feedstocks The production of feedstock for energy can be rotated with food crops
in very much the cycle as that of sugar cane Hence, biomass offers significant
synergies with agriculture and can be seen as an opportunity for income
stabilisation During the first five years of implementation, solar photovoltaic
generation facilities will need  minimum of 317 acres of space while wind
technology will need 50 acres      Total 36 36 36 36 36 PV 80    33  Wind 33
92 Bio-Energy 92 36 36 36 36 28 Total 72 NB: It is assumed that wind
developments are set back by the international distance rules  impact distance
from the base of the Turbine Table 5A - Spatial Requirements for Electricity
Generation (Acres) 24 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY |
25 IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT The implementation toolkit provides essential and
results- oriented support to the project management team (PMCT) in its regular
oversight of the IP, by highlighting specialized areas from which it can
ascertain progress and make timely decisions The toolkit consists of: List of
Policy Measures All aspects of the IP, its thematic work plans and responsible
parties, are guided by the overarching policy measures outlined in the BNEP
These are:  List of Policy Measures - provides  comprehensive list of all Tier
derivatives (Policy Measures) from which the PMCT and/or Quality Assurance can
reference completed, ongoing or forthcoming activities Oil and Gas Supply
Implementation activities by year and thematic area - provides an annualized
schedule of activities across thematic areas using Gantt charts   Establish
regularly held investor conferences to inform potential developers about the
rules and requirements needed to undertake activities in the Oil and Gas sector
Results Frameworks - identifies the intended results, outputs annual
deliverables in the form of SMART indicators Increase the cultivation of data
relating to the geological and geophysical conditions in the offshore Oil and
Gas sector to aid the government in setting license fees and determining levels
of royalties   Monitoring and Evaluation Framework - outlines the key components
and tools for providing periodic inspections of progress  Develop  licensing
system with clear criteria on the ranking of various factors critical to the
decision on bids This system should be made available widely to potential
bidders as well as the public  Risk Analysis - identifies risks to
implementation and appropriate response Components of the risk register include
risk number, category of risk (financial, political, reputational etc), Risk
name, Risk description, probability of occurrence, consequences, Severity
(probability times consequence) and response category (transfer, mitigate,
share, accept)  Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management
in offshore Oil and Gas activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if
stipulations are not met  Project Management Arrangements - defines the
relationship between key project proponents and identifies reporting lines and
scope of oversight accordingly  Develop  capacity-building programme locally to
prepare the workforce for employment in the emerging Oil and Gas offshore sector
26 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  Create an enabling
environment that will empower local businesses to participate effectively in the
supply of goods and services to the offshore Oil and Gas sector Remove MTBE from
gasoline and diesel, and replace it with ethanol and bio-diesel Promote linkages
with the agriculture sector to encourage the production of agro-energy crops
where financially and economically viable  Offer fiscal incentives for
developers, which are tied to factors such as the expected internal rate of
return Encourage energy efficiency in the transportation sector  Establish
wealth management programme to Provide tax incentives to vehicle dealerships
that train their mechanics to maintain and repair EVs ensure that revenues from
the offshore Oil and Gas sector are used effectively  Develop an unambiguous
system for determining Establish  programme for identifying appropriate whether
future gas find should be used for export or included as part of the domestic
market international sources of funding to facilitate and assist the government
in transitioning from fossil fuels to EVs Produce legislation that identifies
limits on the amount of Oil and Gas resources that can be exploited in the short
term Remove duties and VAT from EVs and encourage  scheduled approach to
increasing their use in the national transportation fleet, while at the same
time, not harming government’ revenue stream Build  defence and security
framework to protect the Exclusive Economic Zone Develop  road network that
promotes energy efficiency Transportation Sector Establish the use of management
technology in public transit,  using smartphone apps to verify arrival times of
buses Create  system that includes mobile charging stations for vehicles Create
biofuel standards for wholesale and retail supply of vehicles Introduce ethanol
rather than MTBE as an anti- knock agent Establish  transportation information
system to provide data for transportation and energy policies, strategic
planning, tracking of CO2 emissions, and environmental impacts Implement more
stringent regulations on vehicles’ exhausts and emissions Integrate charging
stations with traditional gas Introduce more renewable energy and clean energy
stations into the public transportation system Construct more charging stations
for EVs Provide appropriate incentives to promote “green pumps” within service
stations and on commercial properties IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 27 Control and maintain CO2 emissions at levels Produce
standards and specifications for generation, consistent with local and global
climate change targets supply, dispatch, transmission, distribution, storage and
consumption that allow the electricity sector to operate in  financially,
economically, environmentally, and technically viable manner Establish  system
that facilitates the change from traditional vehicles to those powered by
renewable energy, taking transition costs into consideration Institute targets
for limits on CO2 emissions in the electricity sector Implement standards for
streetlight efficiency Promote the use of renewable and other clean sources of
energy to produce electricity Provide cost incentives that encourage investment
in required infrastructure with charging stations etc Develop clear rules for
determining roles and Acquire more details on the number of vehicles timelines
for updating the Integrated Resource Plan using each fuel type Use SMART meters
as part of an advanced Establish standards in charging and other renewable
communication infrastructure for distribution management, to facilitate the use
of more intermittent technologies and aid in demand-side management energy
infrastructure related to fuelling Develop  regulatory framework for the
implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply technology Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Electricity Supply Establish efficiency standards
governing electricity Establish electric market structures that reduce the
effects of monopolistic operations where financially and economically feasible
production for utility and distribution-scale operations Develop  maximum useful
life and cost/ Create  pricing mechanism for electricity from performance ratio
of operations for generation equipment renewable energy suppliers Devise
protocols for interconnectivity between IPPs Create legislation and regulations
to govern and the utility to supply electricity movement towards greater energy
efficiency in businesses and residences in Barbados Expand electricity
regulation to include the wide-ranging aspects of the market, generation,
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use within the
electricity sector Create an energy efficiency plan as  policy guideline
document 28 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Develop an
energy conservation education and Energy and the Environment and Climate Change
awareness programme that will promote lifestyle changes among Barbadians with
regard to energy consumption Promote energy efficiency in the productive and
trading sectors Standards and protocols for the safe and effective Develop
sectoral energy efficiency and consumption standards for buildings, and encode
them in the Town and Country Planning Act disposal of equipment and devices in
the energy sector sustainable environmental management Establish or adopt
business standards for the design framework for the upstream offshore petroleum
sector of energy efficient homes and offices Create energy efficiency standards
for appliances decommissioning fund for the energy sector to and equipment used
for residential, commercial and industrial purposes facilitate the
decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations and facilities Provide
equity for households that are unable to pay Standards and protocols for energy
production in the petroleum and renewable energy subsectors that promote and
encourage the goal of zero harm to the people and the environment for energy
efficiency retrofits and products Develop  set of regulations in tandem with all
government ministries involved in the energy sector, which identifies  clear and
defined process for new applicants in energy efficiency projects Information
systems and infrastructure that promote the flow of information requiring
environmental standards, best practices and legislation Produce  system of
duties, taxes and economic incentives to promote greater use of high-efficiency
energy technologies Studies within the sector that assess the correlation
between carbon dioxide emissions and health risks ( cancer and asthma) Implement
standards for insulation in buildings Use Life Cycle Analysis to determine the
best Create  mechanism to cap and trade CO2 emissions materials to be used for
buildings and other construction projects within the Barbados energy sector
Provide  trade facility that allows holders of CO2 emissions permits to trade
with other emitters of CO2 Provide equity for households that are unable to pay
for energy efficiency retrofits and products Develop strong rules for capping
CO2 emissions Establish  clear international agenda for the acquisition of
climate change funding IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY |
29 Renewable Energy Supply and Storage Provide regular and clear communication
to the public on developments within the renewable energy industry Institute
efficiency standards for manufacturing local renewable energy products such as
solar water heaters Establish appropriate fiscal incentives for emerging
Diversify and optimize the renewable energy mix renewable energy and storage
technologies that results in the maximisation of socio-economic and financial
benefits to Barbados Promote an enabling environment that encourages local
involvement in renewable energy projects Establish  capacity-building programme
locally to prepare the workforce for employment in the renewable energy sector
Create  system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for
renewable energy technologies Develop  central database containing details on
the extent of renewable energy resource available at various locations in
Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential) Define land areas for bio-energy
and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan Establish and support
infrastructure for the Establish legislation and regulations that provide for
transparent process in acquiring licences for supplying electricity from
renewable energy sources collection, handling, and processing of organic
material to produce energy Provide fiscal and financial support for research
Provide an enabling environment that encourages collaborative approaches to
producing renewable energy that is technically sound, and is financially,
economically and environmentally viable and development in bio-energy
technologies and methods Develop standards of production for bio-methane from
biogas Establish  programme of international financing and ‘in kind’ assistance
that effectively supports the supply of renewable energy, and promotes Barbados’
economic growth and competitiveness Create standards for electricity generation
efficiency in the bio-energy, wind energy and other renewable energy subsectors
Increase staffing (secretariat) and human capacity to support local NGOs such as
BREA Develop  clear protocol for clients to follow for investigating and
trouble-shooting in new renewable energy systems with  method of recourse for
clients in case of unsatisfactory company performance Promote an enabling
environment that encourages local involvement in renewable energy projects 30 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Produce  legislative and
regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and plant
decommissioning Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in
PV systems Implement proven storage technologies and Devise  strategy for
expanding Barbados’ systems that promote renewable energy and are economically,
environmentally and financially viable renewable energy markets into the
Caribbean Establish  transparent decision protocol for choosing between energy
storage measures Establish  system for recycling and disposing of batteries at
end of use (cradle to cradle) Site tour GAIA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 31       )           (
, )   (
,
32 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 33
ffi        ,                 ’                34 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 35  ’
36 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 37  ’
38 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Results Framework
Outputs Thematic Area Year   Report on current data management systems for
geological and geophysical data collection completed • Oil and Gas •  Oil and
Gas Committee Meetings held • Report on recommendations to enhance Auditor
General’ role in Wealth Management Fund submitted  Post-Discover Framework for
Offshore Oil and Gas sector completed  Comprehensive Security Response Strategy
for Offshore Oil and Gas sector developed • • • Operational Standards for
Offshore Oil and Gas sector developed • Environmental Guidelines for licensing
consideration for offshore Oil and Gas sector developed  Communication Strategy
Offshore Oil and Gas sector developed  Investors/Developers Conference for
offshore Oil and Gas sector held  General Framework for Wealth Management Fund
developed • • • •  Review Reports on adjusting duties on EVs completed • • •
Transportation  Framework to address emission levels of vehicles developed
Vehicle Fuel Consumption Study completed  Review Report on integrating charging
stations in all new major developments completed  Awareness and Communication
Strategy for Energy Efficiency in the Transportation Sector developed  National
Transportation Network Strategy developed  Regulatory Framework for Vehicle to
Grid Storage developed • • • • Biofuel Standards for wholesale and retail supply
of vehicles developed •  Pilot Project to test data collection methods for
vehicle exhaust and emissions completed  Framework for Emissions Data Collection
in private and public sector developed  Pilot Project for EV usage on major
routes completed • • • Standard Framework for Asset Management Plan for IPPs
developed • Standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices
developed • Standards for appliances and equipment used for residential,
commercial and Electricity Supply, Energy Efficiency and Conservation industrial
purposes developed • List of targeted technologies from each RE subsector
identified • Standards for the insulation of buildings IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 39 • Standards for equipment and devices used
in disposal of equipment and devices Natural Environment and Climate Change in
the energy sector developed • Protocols for disposal of equipment and devices
established •  Framework for standardised measurement of CO2 equivalent
emissions across the energy sector developed  Revised Energy Mix completed
Capacity Assessment to identify critical skillset gaps in the RE Sector
completed  Capacity Building Programme commenced  Database for analysing
specific and aggregated RE resources across Barbados developed • • • • Renewable
Energy Supply and Storage • Legislation governing the acquisition of licences
for supplying electricity from RE sources developed •  RE subsector working
groups established •  meetings of Multi-stakeholder Group on communication held
•  public engagements of Multi-stakeholder Group on Communication held •
Standards for manufacturing local renewable energy products developed  Framework
for protection of IP patents for RE technologies developed • • Lands for bio-
energy and wind production identified • Standards for production of bio-methane
from biogas developed • Standards for electricity generation efficiency in bio-
energy, wind and other RE subsectors developed • Legislation and regulatory
framework for bio-energy production, distribution storage and plant
decommissioning completed  Regional RE Expansion Strategy for Barbados developed
• • Decision protocols for selecting from amongst energy storage measures
developed • Guidelines for integration of batter technology in PV systems
developed •  Battery disposal strategy and guidelines developed Outputs Thematic
Area Year   Data management system for geological and geophysical analysis
developed  skill and capacity assessment for offshore Oil and Gas sector
conducted  training programme with key overseas and local institutions
established  Resource Mobilisation Unit Established • • • • • Awareness and
communication programme communicating opportunities for enterprises ( laundry
service, food supply, waste management) developed  Report on review of Corporate
Tax Rate completed  Mechanism for external/independent performance review of
Wealth Management Fund identified Oil and Gas • • 40 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring
System Completed • •  Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities
completed • Legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater
energy Electricity Supply, Energy Efficiency and Conservation efficiency in
businesses and residences in Barbados created  Targeted school engagement
programme developed  Toolkit for basic, DIY household energy audits developed
Terms of reference for requirement of private sector to designate energy
efficiency officers developed Incentives for ESCOs whose activities are aligned
to that of suggestions of relevant energy audits identified  Digital
platform/extension for easy referencing of standards for various equipment and
appliances developed  Digital Platform to facilitate simultaneous input from key
multiple agencies in project approval process identified  Project review
committee in (TCPD) to expedite review of projects over  certain size formed • •
• • • • •  Framework to support private waste reuse/recycling developed • •
Legislation to govern effective waste disposal developed • Natural Environment
and Climate Change  Training programme in environmental management for offshore
upstream Oil and Gas provided • Legislation for decommissioning and abandonment
of energy operations developed • Joint information system that promotes the flow
of information requiring environmental standards, best practices and legislation
established • Study to assess correlation between CO2 emissions and health risks
conducted Infrastructure for the collection, handling, and processing of organic
material to produce energy provided • Renewable Energy Supply and Storage •
Fiscal and financial support for research and development in bio-energy
technologies and methods provided • Legislative and regulatory framework for
bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and plant decommissioning provided
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 41 Monitoring and
Evaluation Framework • Based on the initial risk analysis submitted (see Risk
Analysis),  risk log shall be developed and regularly updated by reviewing the
external environment that may affect implementation In accordance with the
accepted project management standards, policies and procedures within the
Executing Agency (MEWR), implementation will be monitored through the following:
• Based on the above information, to be recorded in Inception Workshop The
project will be officially launched no later than three months after the project
start with  Project Inception Workshop for those with assigned roles and
responsibilities in the project' organisational structure, and where
appropriate/feasible, technical policy advisors as well as other stakeholders
location suitable to the PTF,  Project Progress Reports (PPR) shall be submitted
by the Project Coordinator to the Programme Steering Committee through Project
Assurance (MEWR), using  standard report format agreed to by the PTF •  project
Lesson-learned log shall be activated and regularly updated to ensure on-going
learning and adaptation within the MEWR, and to facilitate the preparation of
the Lessons-learned Report at the end of the project The Inception Workshop will
address  number of key issues including: () Assist all key stakeholders to fully
understand and take ownership of the project () Detail the roles, support
services and complementary responsibilities of MEWR staff vis  vis the project
team () Discuss the roles, functions, and responsibilities within the project’
decision-making structures, including reporting and communication lines, and
conflict resolution mechanisms () The Terms of Reference (TOR) for project staff
is reviewed as needed () Provide  detailed overview of reporting, & requirements
The & work plan and budget should be agreed and scheduled () Discuss financial
reporting procedures and obligations, and arrangements for annual audit () Plan
and schedule Project Task Force (PTF) meetings Roles and responsibilities of all
project organisation structures should be clarified and meetings planned The
first PTF meeting should be held within the first  months following the
inception workshop •  Monitoring Schedule Plan shall be developed to track key
management actions/events Annually • Annual Review Report An Annual Review
Report shall be prepared by the Project Coordinator and shared with the Project
Board • Annual Project Review Based on the above report, an annual project
review shall be conducted during the fourth quarter of the year or soon after,
to assess the performance of the project and appraise the Annual Work Plan (AWP)
for the following year In the last year, this review will be  final assessment
This review, commissioned by the Project Board, may involve other stakeholders
as required It shall focus on the extent to which progress is made towards
outputs, and that these remain aligned to appropriate outcomes Within the annual
implementation cycle • On  quarterly basis,  quality assessment shall record
progress towards the completion of key milestones, based on the criteria and
methods captured in an approved Quality Assurance Assessment Form Project
Evaluation Due to the complexity of this project and the myriad of inter-related
components being implemented by multiple responsible parties, mid-term and final
evaluations are proposed These are to occur during the fourth quarter of 2024
and 2029 respectively • An Issue Log shall be created and updated by the Project
Coordinator to facilitate tracking and resolution of potential problems and/or
requests for changes 42 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY The Mid-Term Review will determine progress being made toward the
achievement of outcomes and will identify course correction if needed It will
focus on the effectiveness, efficiency and timeliness of project implementation;
will highlight issues requiring decisions and actions; and will present initial
lessons learned about project design, implementation and management Findings of
this review will be incorporated as recommendations for enhanced implementation
during the final half of the project’ term The organisation and terms of
reference of the mid-term review will be decided after consultation between the
parties to the IP The Terms of Reference (TOR) for this Mid-term review will be
prepared by the MEWR based on guidance from the Public Implementation Unit (PIU)
in the Ministry of Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment This independent
expert will be recruited at least six months prior to the planned commencement
of the mid-term review The management response and the review will be uploaded
to  location as designated by the MEWR and accessible to the PSC The final
evaluation will focus on the delivery of the project’ results as initially
planned (and as corrected after the mid-term review, if any such correction took
place) The final evaluation will look at impact and sustainability of results,
including the contribution to capacity development and the achievement of global
environmental benefits/ goals The TOR for this evaluation will be prepared by
the MEWR based on guidance from the PIU The Final Evaluation should provide
recommendations for follow-up activities and requires management responses
Monitoring and Evaluation Work Plan Type of & activity Responsible Parties
Budget US$ Excluding project team staff time Time frame Inception Workshop and
Report • Project Coordinator • MEWR ,000 Within first two months of project
start up Quality Assessment • UNDP/CONANP/PCU • Oversight by Project None
Quarterly Coordinator • PMCT PPR • PMCT None Annually Periodic status/ progress
reports • PMCT None Quarterly Project Steering Committee Meetings • Project
Coordinator • MEWR None Following Project "Inception Workshop" and subsequently
at least Quarterly IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 43
Mid-term Review • PMCT • MEWR • PIU • External Consultants ( review team) 30,000
At the mid- point of project implementation 30,000 At least three months before
the end of project implementation Final Evaluation • PMCT • MEWR • PIU •
External Consultants ( evaluation team) Audit • MEWR • PMCT 20,000 (indicative
cost per year: ,000) Annually Visits to field sites • MEWR • PMCT As needed
TOTAL INDICATIVE COST Excluding project team staff time and staff and travel
expenses 84,000 44 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
Cruise Terminal IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 45
Risk Analysis The risks reflect the concerns expressed in the working group
sessions, as well as the individual interviews with key stakeholders These
threats to implementation will guide the Project Implementation Team
accordingly, along with relevant remedial actions aimed at minimising and/or
avoiding the occurrence of identified threats 46 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY | 47 48 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 49 50 | IMPLEMENTATION
PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 51 Management Arrangements • Other Project Board Member
The MEWR will establish  Project Team, referred to as the Project Management
Team (PMCT), which will be entrusted to support the MEWR to deliver on the
outputs outlined in this IP The PMCT will assist with the coordination of multi-
stakeholder deliverables and monitor the progression of the various established
enabling activities The MEWR will provide financial oversight and fiduciary and
safeguard handling capacity The Project Steering Committee will liaise with the
Barbados Cabinet Sub-Committee on Energy for its members to participate actively
during meetings and to propose agenda items to be discussed The PTF will provide
guidance, in accordance with overarching policy direction, to the PMCT on
specific components project as outlined in this IP document and in alignment
with the policy measures of the BNEP The PTF is responsible for making, on
consensus basis, management decisions for the project, in particular when
guidance is required by the PMCT, including recommendation for approval of IP
revisions IP reviews by this group are made at designated decision points
(including at least annually) during the running of the IP, or as necessary when
raised by the PMCT Project Management Team The PMCT will be responsible for the
day-to-day management and coordination of the project and its respective
activities It will be responsible for the general management actions, such as
the preparation of consolidated annual work plans and technical and financial
reports to be presented to the Project Task Force The PMCT will provide services
of Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, Procurement, Administrative
Support, Technical Support and Finance and Awareness and Communication within
the IP The organisation of the PMCT will reflect  focus on these services, as
well as coordination of activities across responsible parties and thematic areas
identified The PMCT of the MEWR- overseen project will report to the Project
Steering Committee The PMCT will be recruited by the MEWR and will be given the
authority to manage the implementation components on  daily basis as per the
boundaries established by this IP The responsibilities of the PTF shall include,
but not be limited to:  Review, approve and amend this IP, including the
Monitoring and Evaluation (&) framework  Monitor compliance with the IP’
objectives  Discuss progress and identify solutions to problems facing any of
the IP' partners  Review and approve the Annual Work Plan (AWP) Project Task
Force The Project Task Force (PTF) – is constituted of MEWR, Ministry of
Finance, Economic Affairs and Investment,  representative of the National
Climate Change Committee (NCCC),  representative from the Barbados Chamber of
Commerce and  representative from  relevant Non- Governmental Organisation The
roles of the following specific members of the PSC are as follows: and the
consolidated financial and progress reports  During the life of the IP, review
proposals for major budget re-allocation such as major savings or cost
increases, or for use of funds for significantly different activities  Review
evaluation findings related to impact, effectiveness and the sustainability of
the IP • Executive representing the Project ownership to chair the group (MEWR)
Monitor both the budget and the prompt delivery of financial, human and
technical inputs to comply with the work plan • Senior Beneficiary representing
the interests of those who will ultimately benefit from the project to ensure
the realisation of benefits from the perspective of national beneficiaries
(NCCC) 52 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY  Ensure the
participation and ownership of accordance to standards that shall ensure
management for development results, best value money, fairness, integrity,
transparency and effective international competition On occasion when there is
no consensus on any particular matter within the PSC, the final decision shall
rest with the MEWR stakeholders in achieving the objectives of the IP  Ensure
communication of the project and its objectives to stakeholders and the public
Approve the project communication strategy and public information plans prepared
by the PTF Management Committee The Management Committee (MC) will meet at least
once  month, led by the Project Coordinator of the PMCT The MC will be comprised
of MEWR and other stakeholders invited on an as-needed basis ( other ministries)
The MC will discuss and agree work plans, provide for information exchange and
synergies between IP components and agree on TORs, recruitment of experts and
other related managerial activities Facilitate linkages with high-level
decision-making Convene ordinary meetings to consider the proposals and
recommendations, as well as the progress made by the IP Convene, if necessary,
extraordinary meetings The project team, for decisions, consults the PTF when
their tolerances ( constraints normally in terms of time and budget) are
exceeded The project team acts as the secretary to the PTF and is responsible
for organising meetings, preparing meeting documents and follow up on PTF
recommendations The PTF will convene four times  year and can meet
extraordinarily whenever circumstances require Project Assurance The Project
Assurance role is the responsibility of MEWR Reporting Structure The PMCT
provides quarterly reports to the PTF on progress and other relevant associated
developments of the project The PTF reports to the Cabinet Sub- Committee on
Energy, which provides oversight to the IP and filters comments and directives
through the PTF to the PMU In order to ensure MEWR ultimate accountability for
the project results, PTF decisions will be made in Figure : Project
Implementation Management Structure IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 53 DEVELOPING COMMUNITIES THROUGH RENEWABLE ENERGY COMMUNITY
INVOLVEMENT IN ESTABLISHING RE SYSTEMS IN HOUSEHOLDS 54 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Management Arrangements The EEL can
therefore create many avenues for small, medium and large-scale economic
activity across Barbados, thereby favourably affecting employment and foreign
exchange generation Tailoring the instrument to accommodate an approach of ‘one
licence per property’ also adds value to the prospects of entrepreneurship and
the ability to generate new small businesses in the RE sector, with the creation
of  new and broader base of clients The feasibility of collateralising the
instrument will be  focus of the study, with  view to exploring opportunities
where economically disenfranchised and vulnerable persons with property holding
rights can utilise their EELs to offset  variety of financial burdens such as
the inability to service some forms of debt ( taxes owed and loans) One critical
measure of success in the IP will be how well it promotes the involvement,
development and empowerment of residents at the community level Traditionally,
measuring this indicator implicated  heavy reliance on outputs of awareness and
communication However, this IP embarks on an ambitious proposition to create
more formal, robust and sustainable engagement with all communities across
Barbados, by establishing  Renewable Energy Licensing Regime (RELR), which when
launched, would automatically monetize all property interests in Barbados, with
respect to the prospects of renewable energy generation at their respective
locations The study identified in Activity 93, under Renewable Energy Supply and
Storage will serve as  major catalyst for this engagement The study aims to
validate and define the framework for establishing an RE market of tradable
instruments ( licences) for all residential, commercial and agricultural
properties The establishment of the RELR will enable small (8000sq ft or less),
medium (8001 sq ft – 43559 sq ft) and large ( acre and above) property owners
across Barbados, including government, to trade energy equivalency licenses
(EEL) at their discretion, subject to any accompanying relevant trade
regulations and national development plans The study will also explore and make
recommendations addressing situations in which individuals reside in  structure
that they own, while not being the actual owners of the land on which the
structure is stationed This consideration centres on the IP’ commitment to
creating the largest possible base of local involvement in the transition to
100% FFF With this approach, every property owner in Barbados will have
calculated stake in the paradigm shift to becoming 100% FFF The EEL can
therefore create many avenues for small, medium and large-scale economic
activity across Barbados, thereby favourably affecting employment and foreign
exchange generation IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 55
KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND LIMITATIONS OF IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 56 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Management Arrangements engagements to
incorporate other critical sectors throughout the project cycle This IP will
operate effectively under specific conditions that are assumed to be in
operational alignment with the approach of the Ministry of Energy and Water
Resources, as party responsible for overall quality assurance These assumptions
are:  Broad Stakeholder Participation – Although the working group sessions were
well attended and representative of the core drivers of the IP, input from other
critical stakeholders will be needed to fully align activities to the existing
operations of relevant institutions While this omission would normally implicate
less-than favourable progression towards reaching the outlined objectives, the
IP is designed as  ‘working document’ with sufficient flexibility and
adaptability to rapidly incorporate inputs at any given time, without
compromising the overall quality of the outputs identified To address this
possible dilemma, the IP may receive additional inputs in the period between the
establishment of the Project Steering Committee and the Inception Workshop This
will allow sufficient time to include considerations from other key agencies in
advance of the PSC, outlining the scope of the IP during its kick-off workshop
These agencies include:  Management Arrangements – Implementation will be
supervised by  team of officers, collectively  project management team, who will
be tasked with delivering on the results outlined in the IP  Working Groups –
Thematic Working Groups will continue to meet and provide additional oversight
to activities  Working Groups – Additional stakeholders from under and/or non-
represented thematic areas will be integrated into the IP  Responsible Parties -
Stakeholders (MOU etc) will formally commit to being champions of the various
activities to which they are identified as Responsible Parties • The Ministry of
Finance, Economic Affairs  Public Communication - Developments regarding
progress and milestone achievements will be communicated to the general public
and Investment • Ministry of Education, Technological and Vocational Training •
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade • Ministry of Housing, Lands and
Rural Development • Ministry of Tourism and International Transportation •
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and the Blue Economy • Ministry of the Public
Service • Ministry of Youth and Community Empowerment  Resource Coordination
Team (RCT) - An RCT, dedicated to identifying financing opportunities for the
activities in the IP, will be established Throughout the development of the IP,
there were  number of factors taken into consideration, to which timely
adjustments were made with  view to preserving the integrity and quality of the
IP These considerations include: With regards to the energy targets, at this
stage the IP presents preliminary forecasts of requirements for key variables
These values are to be likely revised following the completion of the Integrated
Resource Plan by the Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd Therefore, the IP
acknowledges in advance that possible amendments may impact the predictions for:
Consultation Time frame - The IP, which involved the assessment of 92 policy
measures via  workshops and 35 individual interviews, resulted in the
identification of 145 enabling activities over the period November 19, 2018
through December 14, This narrow timeline resulted in the prioritisation of
thematic areas based on input from  wide range of relevant documents ( Barbados
Second National Communication, 2015) Therefore, within this IP some thematic
areas appear disproportionately represented However, in light of this fact, the
IP will advance working group • Schedule of Installation of Renewable Energy
Over the Next  Years (MWh) • Schedule Electricity Production (GWh) from
Renewable Energy Over the Next  Years • Schedule of Investment in Renewable
Energy Over the Next  Years • Spatial Requirements for Electricity Generation
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 57 APPENDIX  58 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY APPENDIX  ALLOCATION OF
ACTIVITIES BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY For ease of reference in the below table, please
note that some policy measures relative to others • Numbers under column heading
‘PM’ relate to Policy • Enabling activities with more than one associated
Measures identified on pages 16 to responsible party are in Red text while
activities with one responsible party are in Black text • The following
Responsible Parties are listed in • Letters under column heading ‘EA’ relate to
the sequence of Enabling Activities In some instances, you may find that
enabling activities are the same as the policy measure This reflects the
detailed level of alphabetical order Barbados Association of Professional
Engineers Sector PM# EA# Enabling Activity Review building codes to include best
materials to be used for building and construction projects  58 Create, adapt
and adopt standards for electricity generation efficiency in the bio-energy,
wind energy and other renewable energy subsectors  86 Barbados Community College
PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish capacity-building programme based on
capacity assessment 70 Barbados Chamber of Commerce and Industry PM# EA#
Enabling Activity Create standardised framework (processes, contractual
arrangements, &, maintenance standards) governing RE installations  76
Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication 77  Establish schedule of
public engagements forums ( town hall meetings, press releases etc) 77  Devise
strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean 88
Barbados Cane Industry Corporation PM# EA# Enabling Activity Provide fiscal and
financial support for research and development in bio-energy technologies and
methods  84 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 59
Barbados Defence Force PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Build marine security and
response capacity   Conduct Risk Assessment 11  Conduct GAP analysis 11 Bio-
Economy Group PM# EA# Enabling Activity Identify and/or develop  sustainable
financial framework to enable organisations to actively participate in RE
activities  75 Revise incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to
allow for measurement consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then
apply relevant incentives  80  Define land areas for bio-energy and wind
production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan 82  Develop standards of
production for bio-methane from biogas 85 Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd
PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Develop an Integrated Resource Planning tool to
determine energy mix 36  Undertake Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring
System 41  Develop framework for more frequent collection of data and CO2
emissions and targets 41  Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant
entities 44  Develop Asset Management plan 46  Develop media campaign (social
media, television, radio, GIS) 49  Allow for adjustments to mix via
comprehensive IRP 69 create standardised framework (processes, contractual
arrangements, &, Maintenance standards) governing RE installations  76
Establish  transparent decision protocol for choosing between energy storage
measures 89  Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV
systems 90 Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote
renewable energy and are economically, environmentally and financially viable
91 60 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Barbados
National Oil Company Ltd PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Review existing framework
Establish  Petroleum Authority   Conduct  review of current data management
systems   Develop  data management system   Develop  post-discovery framework
Conduct evaluation on methodology and approach to determining
appropriate/optimum extraction rates  10  Provide training in environmental
management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 60 Barbados National Standards
Institute PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Develop standards for companies to operate
in the Oil and Gas sector   Create biofuel standards for wholesale and retail
supply of vehicles 12 Review building codes to integrate charging stations into
new developments (residential, commercial and open public spaces)  27 Review
building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments
(residential, commercial and open public spaces)  34  BL& already covered in
Standards of Services Agreement 45  Develop energy efficiency standards for IPPs
45 Create energy efficiency standards for appliances and equipment used for
residential, commercial and industrial purposes  53  Implement standards for
insulation in buildings 57  Identify standards for equipment and devices 59
Develop standards and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and
renewable energy subsectors  62 Create standardised framework (processes,
contractual arrangements, &, Maintenance standards) governing RE installations
76 Institute efficiency standards for manufacturing local renewable energy
products such as solar water heaters  78 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 61  Develop standards of production for bio-methane
from biogas 85 Create, adapt and adopt standards for electricity generation
efficiency in the bio-energy, wind energy and other renewable energy subsectors
86 26 Create clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV
systems 90 Barbados Renewable Energy Association PM# EA# Enabling Activity 42
Develop Awareness and Communication Programme 49  Develop media campaign (Social
media, television, radio, GIS) 63 14 Establish joint information system
Establish sector and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and
collaboration on  regular basis 73  Identify and/or develop  sustainable
financial framework to enable organisations to actively participate in RE
activities 75  Create  standardised framework (processes, contractual
arrangements, &, maintenance standards) governing RE installation’ 76  77
Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication 77  Establish schedule of
public engagements forums ( town hall meetings, press releases etc) Revise
incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to allow for measurement
consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply relevant
incentives 80  Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote
renewable energy and are economically, environmentally and financially viable 91
Barbados Statistical Service PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish
transportation information and management system 13 Barbados Water Authority PM#
EA# Enabling Activity  Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant
entities 44 62 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
Corporate Affairs and Intellectual Property Office PM# EA# Enabling Activity
Create  system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for
renewable energy technologies  81 Caribbean Centre for Renewable Energy and
Energy Efficiency PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Devise  strategy for expanding
Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean 88 Chief Parliamentary
Counsel PM# EA# Enabling Activity Formulate clear legislation governing
environmental management in offshore Oil and Gas activities, with provisions for
removal of licenses if stipulations are not met    Review and enhance relevant
policies and guidelines related to Auditor General   Develop appropriate
legislation 10  Review and/or establish appropriate legislation, policies and
response mechanisms 12 Create legislation and regulations to govern movement
towards greater energy efficiency in businesses and residences in Barbados  47
Develop legislation to govern effective waste disposal 59 Establish legislation
and regulations that provide for  transparent process in acquiring licenses for
supplying electricity from renewable energy sources  72 Establish Sector and
subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on
regular basis  73 Produce  legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy
production, distribution, storage, and plant decommissioning  87 Environmental
Protection Department PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Formulate environmental and
other guidelines  Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management
in offshore Oil and Gas activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if
stipulations are not met    Develop Awareness and Communication Strategy
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 63  Review and/or
establish appropriate legislation, policies and response mechanisms 11
Establish  transportation information and management system 13 Develop framework
based on quantitative variables to incentivise and penalise below average and
excessive emission levels respectively  26  Conduct pilot project to test
framework 26  Develop framework for more robust emission data collection in
private and public sector 29  Develop Air Emission/Transport Management Systems
29  Undertake Pilot for digitised Air Emissions Monitoring System 41  Develop
framework for more frequent collection of data and CO2 emissions and targets 41
Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities 44  Review building
codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE) is incorporated 51  Establish or adopt
business standards for the design of energy efficient homes and offices 52
Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and
tracking on applications from multiple relevant entities  55 Review building
codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction
projects  58  Identify waste streams and characterise lifespans 59  Identify
standards for equipment and devices 59  Develop protocols for disposal of
equipment and devices 59  Develop framework to support private waste reuse /
recycling 59  Examine existing Environmental Act and Marine Pollution Control
Act and inform legislation 60 Examine options for waste treatment and identify
best practices for dealing with industrial waste  60  Provide training in
environmental management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 60 Develop standards
and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and renewable energy
subsectors  62 14 Establish joint information system 63 15 Develop public
awareness programme 63  Conduct study to assess correlation between carbon
dioxide emissions and health risks 64 64 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Determine and mandate standardised methodology to measure
CO2 equivalent emissions across the energy sector  65  Identify volumes of
emissions and markets for trading 65  Establish  system for recycling and
disposing of batteries at end of use (cradle to cradle) 92 Fair Trading
Commission PM# EA# Enabling Activity Develop  regulatory framework for the
implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply technology  35  Create
pricing mechanism for electricity from renewable energy suppliers 37 Expand
electricity regulation to include the wide-ranging aspects of the market,
generation, distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use
within the electricity sector  39 Establish sector and subsector working group
forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on  regular basis  73  Establish
multi-stakeholder group on communication 77  Establish schedule of public
engagements forums ( town hall meetings, press releases etc) 77 Develop
framework for ongoing review of VAT, NSRL, Import Duties etc on RE and
associated apparatus ( storage)  79 Provide stability and confidence amongst RE
investors by making  determination on price and mechanism for RE ( FIT)  80
Revise incentive categories to Intermittent, Firm and Storage to allow for
measurement consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply
relevant incentives  80 26 Create clear guidelines for integration of battery
technology in PV systems 90 Implement proven storage technologies and systems
that promote renewable energy and are economically, environmentally and
financially viable  91 Government Electrical and Engineering Department PM# EA#
Enabling Activity  Review building codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE) is
incorporated 51  Establish or adopt business standards for the design of energy
efficient homes and offices 52 Review building codes to include best materials
to be used for building and construction projects  58 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 65 Create standardised framework (processes,
contractual arrangements, &, maintenance standards) governing RE installations
76 Create, adapt and adopt standards for electricity generation efficiency in
the bio-energy, wind energy and other renewable energy subsectors  86 26 Create
clear guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems 90
Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy
and are economically, environmentally and financially viable  91 Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security PM# EA# Enabling Activity Develop platform with
application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on
applications from multiple relevant entities  55 Produce  legislative and
regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and plant
decommissioning  87 Ministry of Environment and National Beautification PM# EA#
Enabling Activity  Develop policy recommendation for cabinet decision 65
Establish and support infrastructure for the collection, handling, and
processing of organic material to produce energy  83 Ministry of Education,
Technology and Vocational Training PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish training
programmemes with key overseas institutions  Ministry of Energy and Water
Resources PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish Oil and Gas stakeholder committee
Establish  Petroleum Authority   Host conferences and inform potential
developers   Conduct  review of current data management systems   Review
existing framework  66 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
Develop awareness and communication strategy   Formulate environmental and other
guidelines  Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management in
offshore Oil and Gas activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if
stipulations are not met    Build marine security and response capacity
Establish  Resource Mobilisation Unit   Develop  berthing facility for offshore
Oil and Gas   Establish Wealth Management Fund   Develop mechanism for
external/independent performance reviews of strategic plans   Develop  post-
discovery framework  Conduct evaluation on methodology and approach to
determining appropriate/ optimum extraction rates  10  Establish  transportation
information and management system 13  Incentivise projects focused on generating
Biodiesel for public transport vehicles 14  Government will cover the cost of
training for first  mechanics 19  Develop Awareness and communication Strategy
30 This activity is  continuation of an ongoing Energy Smart Fund Programme in
the Division of Energy, in collaboration with the Enterprise Growth Fund,
Caribbean LED Lighting Inc and the Barbados Light and Power Company Ltd  31
Conduct study to establish benchmark and facilitate future comparisons 33
Develop Integrated Resource Planning tool to determine energy mix 36 Expand
electricity regulation to include the wide-ranging aspects of the market,
generation, distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use
within the electricity sector  39  Develop Awareness and Communication Programme
42 Develop clear rules for determining roles and timelines for updating the
Integrated Resource Plan  43  Establish Data Sharing Agreements between relevant
entities 44  Develop an energy efficiency plan as  policy guideline document 48
Develop  public sector energy conservation programme 48  Develop toolkit for
basic, DIY household energy audits 49  Develop media campaign (social media,
television, radio, GIS) 49 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY | 67 Develop terms of reference for requirement of private sector to
designate energy efficiency officers  50 Provide incentives for ESCOs whose
activities are aligned to that of suggestions of relevant energy audits  50
Conduct Pilots and case studies showing the costs benefits 50 Provide equity for
households that are unable to pay for energy efficiency retrofits and products
54 Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input
and tracking on applications from multiple relevant entities  55  Identify key
technologies to be targeted 56 Develop framework and criteria for incentives to
promote greater use of energy efficiency technologies  56  Implement pilot
project to assess impact of incentive 56  Provide training in environmental
management for offshore upstream Oil and Gas 60  Develop legislation for
decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations 61  Establish
decommissioning fund 61 Develop standards and protocols for energy production in
the petroleum and renewable energy subsectors  62  establish joint information
system 63  Establish  clear international agenda for the acquisition of climate
change funding 68  Establish preliminary/baseline mix 69  Allow for adjustments
to mix via comprehensive IRP 69  Conduct capacity assessment to identify
critical skillsets in the RE sector 70 Develop  central database containing
details on the extent of renewable energy resource available at various
locations in Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential)  71 Establish Sector
and subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on
regular basis  73 Replicate and expand on existing approaches such as GCF to
facilitate future financing engagements  74 Identify and/or develop  sustainable
financial framework to enable organisations to actively participate in RE
activities  75  Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication 77  Establish
schedule of public engagements forums ( town hall meetings, press releases etc)
77 68 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Provide fiscal
and financial support for research and development in bio-energy technologies
and methods  84 Produce  legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy
production, distribution, storage, and plant decommissioning  87  Devise
strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the Caribbean 88
Conduct feasibility study into the creation of RELR 93 Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Foreign Trade PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish training
programmemes with key overseas institutions   Establish  Resource Mobilisation
Unit   Establish  clear international agenda for the acquisition of climate
change funding 68 Create  system to ensure the protection of intellectual
property and patents for renewable energy technologies  81 Ministry of Finance,
Economic Affairs and Investment PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish  Resource
Mobilisation Unit   Provide tax incentives to businesses that directly engage
the offshore sector   Establish Wealth Management Fund   Develop mechanism for
external/independent performance reviews of strategic plans   Review duties on
EVs 14  Review duties on EVs 19  Establish Resource Mobilisation Unit 20
Quarterly simultaneous review of Duties, VAT, Excise Tax in line with BERT
programme 21  Provide incentives to buffer costs (import, sales and operations)
30 Provide cost incentives that encourage investment in required infrastructure
with charging stations etc  32  Conduct study to establish benchmark and
facilitate future comparisons 33 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 69 Develop terms of reference for requirement of private sector
to designate energy efficiency officers  50  Develop assessment tool to
determine household income levels 54 Develop framework and criteria for
incentives to promote greater use of energy efficiency technologies  56
Implement pilot project to assess impact of incentives 56  Establish  Resource
Mobilisation Unit 66 Replicate and expand on existing approaches such as GCF to
facilitate future financing engagements  74 Develop framework for ongoing review
of VAT, NSRL, Import Duties etc on RE and associated apparatus ( storage)  79
Create  system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for
renewable energy technologies  81 Provide fiscal and financial support for
research and development in bio-energy technologies and methods  84  Review
Corporate Tax Rate  Ministry of Health and Wellness PM# EA# Enabling Activity
Develop platform with application template to facilitate simultaneous input and
tracking on applications from multiple relevant entities  55  Conduct study to
assess correlation between carbon dioxide emissions and health risks 64 Ministry
of Labor and Social Partnership Relations PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Advanced
and/or develop relevant courses at local institutions  70 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Ministry of Small Business, Entrepreneurship
and Commerce PM# EA# Enabling Activity Develop awareness and communication
strategy Communicate opportunities for enterprise  laundry service, food supply,
waste management   Ministry of Transport, Works and Maintenance PM# EA# Enabling
Activity  Establish  transportation information and management system 13
Undertake pilot projects for electric vehicle usage along major routes to
determine efficiency 14  Stricken penalties pertaining to offloading/onboarding
points 18  Develop awareness and communication strategy 18  Develop National
Transportation Network Strategy 22  Develop transportation information and
management system 23 Develop framework based on quantitative variables to
incentivise and penalise below average and excessive emission levels
respectively  26  Conduct pilot project to test framework 26  Develop Air
Emission/Transport Management Systems 29  Conduct study to establish benchmark
and facilitate future comparisons 33  Establish Data Sharing Agreements between
relevant entities 44 National Petroleum Corporation PM# EA# Enabling Activity
Develop  post-discovery framework  Conduct evaluation on methodology and
approach to determining appropriate/optimum extraction rates  10  Establish Data
Sharing Agreements between relevant entities 44 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 71 Private Sector Road Transportation Sector PM# EA#
Enabling Activity  Explore retrofitting options for existing fleet 14  Create
system to incorporate mobile maintenance and support for EVs 24  Construct more
charging stations for EVs 28 Samuel Jackman Prescod Institute of Technology PM#
EA# Enabling Activity  Establish capacity-building programme based on capacity
assessment 70 Sanitation Service Authority PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Identify
waste streams and characterise lifespans 60  Identify standards for equipment
and devices 59  Develop protocols for disposal of equipment and devices 60
Develop framework to support private waste reuse/recycling 59  Develop
legislation to govern effective waste disposal 59  Develop education and
awareness programme for public dissemination 59  Identify and adopt
international best practice and international framework 60  Identify and adopt
international best practice and international framework 60  Examine existing
Environmental Act and Marine Pollution Control Act and inform legislation 60
Examine options for waste treatment and identify best practices for dealing with
industrial waste  60  Establish  system for recycling and disposing of batteries
at end of use (cradle to grave) 92 72 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Town and Country Planning Department PM# EA# Enabling
Activity Review building codes to integrate charging stations into new
developments (residential, commercial and open public spaces)  27 Review
building codes to integrate charging stations into new developments
(residential, commercial and open public spaces)  34 Create legislation and
regulations to govern movement towards greater energy efficiency in businesses
and residences in Barbados  47  Review building codes to ensure energy
efficiency (RE) is incorporated 51  Establish or adopt business standards for
the design of energy efficient homes and offices 52 Develop platform with
application template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on
applications from multiple relevant entities  55  Form project review committee
to expedite review of projects over  certain size 55  Implement standards for
insulation in buildings 57 Review Building codes to include best materials to be
used for building and construction projects  58  Define land areas for bio-
energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan 82 University
of the West Indies PM# EA# Enabling Activity  Establish training programmers
with key overseas institutions   Establish capacity-building programme based on
capacity assessment 70 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY |
73 APPENDIX  74 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
APPENDIX  ALLOCATION OF ACTIVITIES & RESPONSIBLE PARTIES Responsible Party PM#
Policy Measure EA# Enabling Activity Establish Oil and Gas stakeholder committee
BNOCL - MEWR  Establish regularly held investor conferences to inform potential
developers about the rules and requirements needed to undertake activities in
the Oil and Gas sector Host conferences and inform potential developers  MEWR
Develop standards for companies to operate in the Oil and Gas sector  BNSI
Conduct  review of current data management systems BNOCL - MEWR  Increase the
cultivation of data relating to the geological and geophysical conditions in the
offshore Oil and Gas sector to aid the government in setting license fees and
determining levels of royalties Develop  data management system  BNOCL   Review
existing framework BNOCL  Review existing framework MEWR Develop  licensing
system with clear criteria on the ranking of various factors critical to the
decision on bids This system should be made available widely to potential
bidders as well as the public Develop awareness and communication strategy  MEWR
Formulate enviornmental and other guidelines  EPD - MEWR Formulate clear
legislation governing environmental management in offshore Oil and Gas
activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are not met
Formulate clear legislation governing environmental management in offshore Oil
and Gas activities, with provisions for removal of licenses if stipulations are
not met CPC - EPD - MEWR   Develop Awareness and Communication Strategy  EPD
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 75 Establish training
programmemes with key overseas institutions METVC - MFAFT - UWI  Advancde and/or
develop relevant courses at local institutions  METVT - MOL Develop  capacity-
building programme locally to prepare the workforce for employment in the
emerging Oil and Gas offshore sector  Build marine security and response
capacity  BDF - MEWR MEWR - MFAFT - MOFEI Establish  Resource Mobilisation Unit
Develop awareness and communication Strategy Communicate oppurtunities for
enterprise- laundry service, food supply, waste management  MSBEC Create an
enabling environment that will empower local businesses to participate
effectively in the supply of goods and services to the offshore Oil and Gas
sector  Provide tax incentives to businesses that directly engage the offshore
sector  MOFEI Develop  berthing faciity for offshore Oil and Gas sector  MEWR
Offer fiscal incentives for developers, which are tied to factors such as the
expected internal rate of return   Review Corporate Tax Rate MOFEI Establish
Wealth Management Fund MEWR - MOFEI  Review and enhance relevant policies and
guidelines related to Auditor General Establish  wealth management programme to
ensure that revenues from the offshore Oil and Gas sector are used effectively
CPC  Develop mechanism for external/ independent performance reviews of
strategic plans MEWR - MOFEI  Develop an unambiguous system for determining
whether  future gas find should be used for export or included as part of the
domestic market Develop  post-discovery framework BNOCL - MEWR - NPC   76 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Conduct evaluation on
methdology and approach to determining appropriate/ optimum extraction rates
Produce legislation that identifies limits on the amount of Oil and Gas
resources that can be exploited in the short term BNOCL - MEWR - NPC  10 Develop
appropriate legislation  CPC Conduct Risk Assessment  BDF Conduct GAP analysis
Build  defence and security framework to protect the Exclusive Economic Zone BDF
11 Review and/or establish appropriate legislation, policies and response
mechanisms  EPD Create biofuel standards for wholesale and retail supply of
vehicles Create biofuel standards for wholesale and retail supply of vehicles 12
BNSI Establish  transportation information system to provide data for
transportation and energy policies, strategic planning, tracking of CO2
emissions, and environmental impacts Establish  transportation information and
management system BSS - EPD - MEWR - MTWM 13  Incentivise projects focused on
generating Biodiesel for public transport vehicles  MEWR Undertake pilot
projects for EV usage along major routes to determine efficiency Introduce more
renewable energy and clean energy into the public transportation system  MTWM 14
Review duties on EVs  MOFEI Explore retrofitting options for existing fleet  PS
Stricken penalties pertainimg to offloading/onboarding points  MTWM Encourage
energy efficiency in the transportation sector 18 Develop awareness and
communication strategy  MTWM - PSVA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 77  Review duties on EVs MOFEI Provide tax incentives to vehicle
dealerships that train their mechanics to maintain and repair EVs 19 Government
will cover the cost of training for first  mechanics  MEWR Establish  programme
for identifying appropriate international sources of funding to facilitate and
assist the government in transitioning from fossil fuels to EVs Establish
Resource Mobilisation Unit 20  MOFEI Remove duties and VAT from EVs and
encourage  scheduled approach to increasing their use in the national
transportation fleet, while at the same time, not harming government’ revenue
stream Quarterly simultaneous review of Duties, VAT, Excise Tax in line with
BERT programme 21  MOFEI Develop National Transportation Network Strategy
Develop  road network that promotes energy efficiency 22  MTWM Establish the use
of management technology in public transit,  using smartphone apps to verify
arrival times of buses Develop transportation information and management system
23  MTWM Create system to incorporate mobile maintenance and support for EVs
Create  system that includes mobile charging stations for vehicles 24  PS
Introduce ethanol rather than MTBE as an anti-knock agent 25  / Develop
framework based on quantitative variables to incentivise and penalise below-
average and excessive emission levels respectively  EPD - MTWM Implement more
stringent regulations on vehicles’ exhausts and emissions 26 Conduct pilot
project to test framework  EPD - MTWM 78 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Review building codes to integrate charging stations into
new developments (residential, commercial and open public spaces)  BNSI
Integrate charging stations with traditional gas stations 27 Review building
codes to integrate charging stations into new developments (residential,
commercial and open public spaces)  TCPD Construct more charging stations for
EVs Construct more charging stations for EVs 28  PS Develop framework for more
robust emission data collection in private and public sector  EPD Control and
maintain CO2 emissions at levels consistent with local and global climate change
targets 29 Develop Air Emission/Transport Management Systems  EPD - MTWM Develop
Awareness and communication Strategy Establish  system that facilitates the
change from traditional vehicles to those powered by renewable energy, taking
transition costs into consideration  MEWR 30 Provide incentives to buffer costs
(import, sales and operations)  MOFEI Implement standards for streetlight
efficiency 31  Already in progress MEWR Provide cost incentives that encourage
investment in required infrastructure with charging stations etc Provide cost
incentives that encourage investment in required infrastructure with charging
stations etc 32  MOFEI Conduct study to establish benchmark and facilitate
future comparisons MEWR - MOFEI - MTWM Acquire more details on the number of
vehicles using each fuel type 33  Review building codes to integrate charging
stations into new developments (residential, commercial and open public spaces)
Establish standards in charging and other renewable energy infrastructure
related to fuelling 34  BNSI - TCPD Develop  regulatory framework for the
implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply technology Develop
regulatory framework for the implementation of vehicle to grid storage and
supply technology 35  FTC IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY | 79 Establish electric market structures that reduce the effects of
monopolistic operations where financially and economically feasible Develop
Integrated Resouce Planning tool to determine energy mix 36  BL& - MEWR Create
pricing mechanism for electricity from renewable energy suppliers Create
pricing mechanism for electricity from renewable energy suppliers 37  FTC Devise
protocols for interconnectivity between IPPs and the utility to supply
electricity / - Already addressed in the Grid Code 38  Expand electricity
regulation to include the wide ranging aspects of the market, generation,
distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission, and electricity use within the
electricity sector Expand electricity regulation to include the wide ranging
aspects of the market, generation, distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission,
and electricity use within the electricity sector FTC - GEED - MEWR - CPC 39
Produce standards and specifications for generation, supply, dispatch,
transmission, distribution, storage and consumption that allow the electricity
sector to operate in  financially, economically, environmentally, and
technically viable manner Produce standards and specifications for generation,
supply, dispatch, transmission, distribution, storage and consumption that allow
the electricity sector to operate in  financially, economically,
environmentally, and technically viable manner 40  BNSI Undertake Pilot for
digitised Air Emissions Moniotoring System BL& - IPPs - EPD  Institute targets
for limits on CO2 emissions in the electricity sector 41 Develop framework for
more frequent cllection of data and CO2 emissions and targets BL& - IPPs - EPD
Promote the use of renewable and other clean sources of energy to produce
electricity Develop Awareness and Communication Programme 42  BREA - MEWR
Develop clear rules for determining roles and timelines for updating the
Integrated Resource Plan Develop clear rules for determining roles and timelines
for updating the Integrated Resource Plan 43  MEWR 80 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Use SMART meters as part of an advanced
communication infrastructure for distribution management, to facilitate the use
of more intermittent technologies and aid in demand-side management Establish
Data Sharing Agreements between relevant entities BL& - BWA - EPD - MEWR - MTWM
- NPC 44  Establish efficiency standards governing electricity production for
utility and distribution-scale operations Develop energy efficiency standards
for IPPs 45  BNSI Develop  maximum useful life and cost/performance ratio of
operations for generation equipment 46  Develop Asset Management Plan BL& - IPPs
Create legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater energy
efficiency in businesses and residences in Barbados Create legislation and
regulations to govern movement towards greater energy efficiency in businesses
and residences in Barbados 47  CPC - TCPD Develop an energy efficiency plan as
policy guideline document Craft an energy efficiency plan as  policy guideline
document 48  MEWR Develop toolkit for basic, DIY household energy audits Develop
an energy conservation education and awareness programme that will promote
lifestyle changes among Barbadians with regard to energy consumption  BREA -
MEWR 49 Develop media campaign (Social media, television, radio, GIS) BL& - BREA
- IPPs - MEWR  Develop terms of reference for requirement of private sector to
designate energy efficiency officers MEWR - MOFEI  Promote energy efficiency in
the productive and trading sectors Provide incentives for ESCOs whose activities
are aligned to that of suggestions of relevant energy audits 50  MEWR Conduct
pilots and case studies showing the costs benefits  MEWR Develop sectoral energy
efficiency and consumption standards for buildings, and encode them in the Town
and Country Planning Act Review building codes to ensure energy efficiency (RE)
is incorporated EPD - GEED - TCPD 51  IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY | 81 Establish or adopt business standards for the design of
energy efficient homes and offices Establish or adopt business standards for the
design of energy efficient homes and offices EPD - GEED - TCPD 52  Create energy
efficiency standards for appliances and equipment used for residential,
commercial and industrial purposes Create energy efficiency standards for
appliances and equipment used for residential, commercial and industrial
purposes 53  BNSI Develop assessment tool to determine household income levels
MOFEI Provide equity for households that are unable to pay for energy efficiency
retrofits and products 54 Provide equity for households that are unable to pay
for energy efficiency retrofits and products  MEWR Develop platform with
aplication template to facilitate simultaneous input and tracking on
applications from multiple relevant entities EPD - MAFS MEWR - MOH - TCPD
Develop  set of regulations in tandem with all government ministries involved in
the energy sector, which identifies  clear and defined process for new
applicants in energy efficiency projects  55 Form project review committee to
expedite review of projects over  certain size  TCPD Identify key technologies
to be targeted  MEWR Develop framework and criteria for incentives to promote
greater use of energy efficiency technologies Produce  system of duties, taxes
and economic incentives to promote greater use of high-efficiency energy
technologies MEWR - MOFEI 56  Implement pilot project to assess impact of
incentived MEWR - MOFEI  Implement standards for insulation in buildings
Implement standards for insulation in buildings 57  BNSI - TCPD Review Building
codes to include best materials to be used for building and construction
projects Use life cycle analysis to determine the best materials to be used for
building and other construction projects BAPE - EPD - GEED - TCPD - EPD 58  82 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Identify standards for
equipment and devices BNSI - EPD - SSA  Develop protocols for disposal of
equipment and devices  EPD Standards and protocols for the safe and effective
disposal of equipment and devices in the energy sector Develop framework to
support private waste reuse/recycling  EPD -SSA 59 Develop legislation to govern
effective waste disposal  CPC - SSA Develop education and awareness programme
for public dissemination  SSA Provide training in environmental management for
offshore upstream Oil and Gas BNOCL - EPD - MEWR  Identify waste streams and
characterise lifespans  SSA Identify and adopt international best practice and
international frameword  sustainable environmental management framework for the
upstream offshore petroleum sector  SSA 60 Examine existing environmental act
and Marine Pollution Control Act and inform legislation  EPD - SSA Examine
options for waste treatment and identify best practices for dealing with
industrial waste  EPD - SSA Develop legislation for decommissioning and
abandonment of energy operations  decommissioning fund for the energy sector to
facilitate the decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations and
facilities  MEWR 61  Establish decomissioning fund MEWR IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 83 Standards and protocols for energy
production in the petroleum and renewable energy subsectors that promote and
encourage the goal of zero harm to the people and the environment Develop
Standards and protocols for energy production in the petroleum and renewable
energy subsectors BNSI - EPD - MEWR  62 Standards and protocols for the safe and
effective disposal of equipment and devices in the energy sector Develop
protocols for disposal of equipment and devices  SSA BREA - EPD - MEWR
Information systems and infrastructure that promote the flow of information
requiring environmental standards, best practices and legislation Establish
joint information system  63 Develop public awareness programme  EPD Studies
within the sector that assess the correlation between carbon dioxide emissions
and health risks ( cancer and asthma) Conduct study to assess correlatin between
carbon dioxide emissions and health risks EPD - MOH - PAHO 64  Determine and
mandate standardised methodology to measure CO2 equivalent emissions across the
energy sector  EPD Create  mechanism to cap and trade CO2 emissions within the
Barbados energy sector 65 Identify volumes of emissions and markets for trading
EPD Develop policy recommendation for cabinet decision  MENB Establish  clear
international agenda for the acquisition of climate change funding Establish
Resource Mobilisation Unit  66 MOFEI Establish  clear international agenda for
the acquisition of climate change funding Establish  clear international agenda
for the acquisition of climate change funding MFAFT - MEWR  68 Establish
preliminary/ baseline mix Diversify and optimize the renewable energy mix that
results in the maximisation of socio-economic and financial benefits to Barbados
MEWR 69 Allow for adjustments to mix via comprehensive IRP  BL& - MEWR 84 |
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Conduct capacity
assessment to identify critical skillsets in the RE sector  MEWR Establish
capacity-building programme locally to prepare the workforce for employment in
the renewable energy sector 70 Establish Capacity-building programme based on
capacity assessment BCC - SJPIT - TEVT - UWI  Develop  central database
containing details on the extent of renewable energy resource available at
various locations in Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential) Develop
central database containing details on the extent of renewable energy resource
available at various locations in Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential)
71  MEWR Establish legislation and regulations that provide for  transparent
process in acquiring licences for supplying electricity from renewable energy
sources Establish legislation and regulations that provide for  transparent
process in acquiring licences for supplying electricity from renewable energy
sources 72  CPC Provide an enabling environment that encourages collaborative
approaches to producing renewable energy that is technically sound, and is
financially, economically and environmentally viable Establish Sector and
subsector working group forums to facilitate dialogue and collaboration on
regular basis BREA - CPC - FTC - MEWR 73  Establish  programme of international
financing and ‘in kind’ assistance that effectively supports the supply of
renewable energy, and promotes Barbados’ economic growth and competitiveness
Replicate and expand on existing approaches such as GCF to facilitate future
financing engagements MEWR - MOFEI 74  Identify and/or develop  sustainable
financial framework to enable organisations to actively participate in RE
activities Increase staffing (secretariat) and human capacity to support local
NGOs such as BREA BEG - BREA - MEWR 75  Develop  clear protocol for clients to
follow for investigating and trouble- shooting in new renewable energy systems
with  method of recourse for clients in case of unsatisfactory company
performance Create standardised framework (processes, contractual arrangements,
&, maintenance standards) governing RE installations 76  BCCI - BL&
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 85 Develop  clear
protocol for clients to follow for investigating and trouble- shooting in new
renewable energy systems with  method of recourse for clients in case of
unsatisfactory company performance Create standardised framework (processes,
contractual arrangements, &, maintenance standards) governing RE installations
BNSI - BREA - FTC - GEED 76  Establish multi-stakeholder group on communication
BCCI - BREA - FTC - MEWR  Provide regular and clear communication to the public
on developments within the renewable energy industry Establish schedule of
public engagements forums ( townhall meetings, press releases etc) 77 BCCI -
BREA - FTC - MEWR  Institute efficiency standards for manufacturing local
renewable energy products such as solar water heaters Institute efficiency
standards for manufacturing local renewable energy products such as solar water
heaters 78  BNSI Develop framework for ongoing review of VAT, NSRL, Import
Duties etc on RE and associated apparatus ( storage) Establish appropriate
fiscal incentives for emerging renewable energy and storage technologies 79  FTC
- MOFEI Provide stability and confidence amogst RE investors by making
determination on price and mechanism for RE ( FIT)  FTC Promote an enabling
environment that encourages local involvement in renewable energy projects
Revise incentive categories to intermittent, firm and storage to allow for
measurement consistency and comparability across RE technologies, then apply
relevant incentives 80 BEG - BREA - FTC  Create  system to ensure the protection
of intellectual property and patents for renewable energy technologies Create
system to ensure the protection of intellectual property and patents for
renewable energy technologies CAIPO - MFAFT - MOFEI 81  Define land areas for
bio-energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development Plan Define
land areas for bio-energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development
Plan 82  BEG - TCPD 86 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
Establish and support infrastructure for the collection, handling, and
processing of organic material to produce energy Establish and support
infrastructure for the collection, handling, and processing of organic material
to produce energy 83  MENB Provide fiscal and financial support for research and
development in bio-energy technologies and methods Provide fiscal and financial
support for research and development in bio- energy technologies and methods
BCIC - MEWR - MOFEI 84  Develop standards of production for bio-methane from
biogas Develop standards of production for bio-methane from biogas 85  BEG -
BNSI Create standards for electricity generation efficiency in the bio- energy,
wind energy and other renewable energy subsectors Create standards for
electricity generation efficiency in the bio-energy, wind energy and other
renewable energy subsectors BAPE - BNSI - GEED 86  Produce  legislative and
regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and plant
decommissioning Produce  legislative and regulatory framework for bio-energy
production, distribution, storage, and plant decommissioning CPC - MAFS - MEWR
87  Devise  strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into the
Caribbean Devise  strategy for expanding Barbados’ renewable energy markets into
the Caribbean BCCI - CCREEE - MEWR 88  Establish  transparent decision protocol
for choosing between energy storage measures Establish  transparent decision
protocol for choosing between energy storage measures 89  BL& Create clear
guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems Create clear
guidelines for integration of battery technology in PV systems BL& - BNSI - FTC
- GEED 90  Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote
renewable energy and are economically, environmentally and financially viable
Implement proven storage technologies and systems that promote renewable energy
and are economically, environmentally and financially viable BL& - BREA - FTC -
GEED 91  Establish  system for recycling and disposing of batteries at end of
use (cradle to grave) Establish  system for recycling and disposing of batteries
at end of use (cradle to grave) 92  EPD - SSA IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 87 APPENDIX  88 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY APPENDIX  RISK REGISTER GUIDELINES Description of Risk
Register Column Helpful Hints for Risk Assessment Once risks are identified,
they should be given  unique identification number, beginning with
Identification number of each risk No: The name used should be consistent for
each focal area The name of the project Project: Generally, the risk breakdown
structure is  way of categorising or grouping risks by the potential cause of
the risk The primary category or functional area that the risk pertains to
Category: Opportunity/Threat: Risk identified as an opportunity in the
assessment section of the risk register Opportunity Risk identified as  threat
in the assessment section of the risk register Threat Risk identified as an
opportunity and  threat in the assessment section of the risk register
Opportunity/Threat: In the identification process, think about risks relevant to
the project scope, schedule, or cost Additionally think of risks that may affect
the agency' reputation Brief, generally unique, description of the risk specific
to the Project Summary Description: The goal is to ensure that other users of
the register can interpret the risk identified Try to be specific and not overly
vague Sample risk statement templates are "If <uncertain event> -> then <effect
on objectives>" or "Due to <definite cause>, <uncertain event> may occur,
resulting in <effect on objectives> Detailed description of the risk, generally
including  "cause", possible "risk event", and "effects" Detailed Description:
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 89 The estimated
likelihood in percent (%) of the risk occurring based on current state of the
risk For subsequent risk assessments as response plans are implemented, the
value should reflect the estimated probability at the time of assessment
Probability: The estimated most likely cost impact of the risk if it were to
occur (in millions of dollars) For subsequent risk assessments as response plans
are implemented, the value should reflect the estimated impact at the time of
assessment Most Likely (Cost): Response Category: Threat Response - Pick One
Indicates that the project team has decided not to change the project plan to
deal with  risk, or is unable to identify any other suitable response strategy
It should be noted, that mitigation or transference is not necessary for all
risk threats, particularly those with  small severity rating Judgment must be
used as to whether  more rigorous (and potentially costly) response should be
implemented If "accept" is chosen as the response, generally the pre-and post-
response assessment ratings remain the same Accept Allocates  portion of
ownership of  risk threat to another party who is best able to minimise the
impact and/ or probability of the risks Allocates all or  portion of ownership
of  risk opportunity to another party who is best able to maximise its
probability of occurrence and increase the potential benefits if it does occur
Share 90 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY If "mitigate"
is chosen as the response, generally the pos-response assessment is lower than
the pre-response assessment Seeks to reduce the probability and/ or impact of
risk threat to below an acceptable threshold Mitigate If "transfer" is chosen as
the response, generally the post response assessment is lower than the pre-
response assessment If the risk were fully transferred with no residual risk,
the post-response assessment would equal zero Allocates all ownership of  risk
threat to another party who is best able to minimise the impact and/or
probability of the risk Transfer Involves changing the project plan to eliminate
the risk threat or to protect the project objectives from its impact If "avoid"
is chosen as the response, generally the risk is totally eliminated in the post
response assessment Avoid Response plans should be specific enough to implement
It is okay to include steps to implementation For example, further study may be
needed (prior to implementing  response plan) to determine whether it would be
effective; or options may need to be evaluated and decided upon by the project
team prior to implementation Owners assigned are those who are best able to
monitor the risk and implement the response More than one owner can be assigned,
but it should be clear what each owner is responsible for Primary plan to
address the risk Response: If multiple people are assigned as owners, it should
be clear what each of their roles are and what they are individually responsible
for Person or people assigned to implement the response plan and monitor the
risk Risk Owner: IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 91
Status: Risk is being actively monitored and controlled, but the response plan
has not been initiated Active (Not Started) Risk is being actively monitored and
controlled, and the response plan is currently being implemented Active
(Ongoing) The risk is still being actively monitored and controlled; however all
work on the response plan is complete Active (Complete) Risk is not currently
high priority, but may become active in the future This status is not often used
Dormant (Not Started) Risks that are no longer applicable should be listed as
"retired" and not deleted from the register Risk is no longer  threat to project
objectives Retired (Complete) Utilise the comments section to provide updates on
actions or owners, or to note changes associated with the response plans Include
any comments associated with the risk and the update to the risk in this box
Tracking Comments: 92 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
APPENDIX  IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY | 93 APPENDIX
RISK REGISTER THREAT RATING DESCRIPTION Impact Rating Context Project Impacts
Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High “Does not meet acceptable standards and
Design Exception not likely “Does not meet acceptable standards and requires
Design Exception “Requires Design waiver “Requires Design Variance “Negligible
impacts to design quality Unacceptable impacts to long-term maintenance Major
impacts to long-term maintenance Significant impacts to long-term maintenance
Minor impacts to long-term maintenance Negligible impacts to long-term
maintenance Quality Project does not meet need and purpose” Changes unacceptable
to TxDOT or stakeholders” Major scope reduction” Minor scope reduction” Barely
noticeable” “ Cost (% of project cost) “ cost increase = % cost increase = %
cost increase = % cost increase = % cost increase > % “Schedule (% of project
schedule, subject to schedule analysis)” delay = % delay = % delay = % delay = %
delay > % Probability Rating      Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High
Probability of occurrence -15% % % % % Note: probability scale for threats and
opportunities are color coded the same to ensure conditional formatting of cells
is consistent and severity rankings are calculated correctly      Needed to
reach 100 Low Medium-Low Medium Medium-High High Total 15 15 35 15 20 100  Scale
modifier 94 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY Risk
Register: Severity Matrix IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY | 95 96 | IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY