Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 –2030 Division of Energy Trinity Business
Complex Country Road ST MICHAEL : / :  : info@energygovbb  :   TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF TABLES LIST OF FIGURES LIST OF ACRONYMS FOREWORD EXECUTIVE SUMMARY CORE
VALUES     14 16 17 VISION STATEMENT 20 VISIONARY GOALS 20 OVERALL OBJECTIVES 22
TARGET ENERGY MIX SECTION : INTRODUCTION  PURPOSE OF THE BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY 25 POLICY (BNEP) () 26 What is the BNEP designed to achieve? 26  SECTION
OVERVIEW 26  BARBADOS ENERGY SECTOR- BRIEF DISCUSSION 26 Electricity 28 Solar
Water Heaters 28 Solar PV 28 Wind Energy 28 Bio-energy 28 Natural Gas for
Domestic Cooking and Industry 28 Transportation 29 Energy Efficiency 29 BREA 29
Energy Consumers 29 Petroleum 30 Barbados Energy Roadmap - Produced 30 by IRENA
TABLE OF CONTENTS cont’  REGIONAL ENERGY CONTEXT AND ITS 31  Oil and Gas Supply
Sector Objectives 66 66 Policy Measures - Oil and Gas Supply INFLUENCE ON
BARBADOS 67  Renewable Energy Supply  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONTEXT AND ITS 32 69
Renewable Energy Supply Sector Objectives INFLUENCE ON BARBADOS 71 Sector
Objectives Specific to Solar Energy  Economy 32 72 Sector Objectives Specific to
Bio-energy Expected Future International Energy Market 34 72 Sector Objectives
Specific to Wind Energy  Climate Change 37 72 Energy Storage - Renewable Energy
Technology 37 74 Policy Measures - Renewable Energy Sector and Storage
REGULATORY AND LEGISLATIVE CONTEXT 38 75  ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY
CONSERVATION 40  BARBADOS ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND DEMAND - SUMMARY CHARTS AND
TABLES 76 Energy Efficiency and Conservation Sector Specific Objectives
National Energy Use 40  Electricity Generation 42 Policy Measures - Energy
Efficiency and Conservation 76  MULTI-CRITERIA APPROACH (MCA) 45 77  ELECTRICITY
SECTOR SECTION : PRELIMINARY ENERGY MIX TARGETS 47 49 78 Electricity Sector
Specific Objectives 80 Policy Measures Electricity Supply Energy Efficiency
Target The Natural Gas Factor 51 80  ENERGY AND TRANSPORTATION 81 Transport
Sector Specific Objectives 81 Policy Measures Transport Sector SECTION : VISION,
GOALS, AND OVERALL OBJECTIVES  STRUCTURE  CORE VALUES  VISIONARY GOALS  OVERALL
OBJECTIVES 53 83  ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT 84 Energy and Environment Sector
Objectives 54 84 Policy Measures -Energy and the Environment 57 84 Climate
Change 58 86 Climate Change Sector Specific Objectives 61 86 Policy Measures for
Climate Change 86 Human Resources and Institutions: Capacity and Development
SECTION : SECTOR SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES & MEASURES  INTRODUCTION 63 87  HUMAN
RESOURCES AND INSTITUTIONS - CAPACITY SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES 64  ENERGY SUPPLY 64
88 Policy Measures for Human Resources Institutions: - Capacity and Development
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030  ENERGY AND THE CROSS-CUTTING
SECTORS - OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES 89  Agriculture 90 Agriculture Sector Specific
Objectives 90  Tourism 90 91 Tourism Sector Specific Objectives 91 Industry,
Manufacturing and Construction  Manufacturing, Construction and Building Sector
Specific Objectives 91 Key Policy Measures for the Waste Management Sector 92
Waste Management Sector Specific Objectives 92 92 Water Water Sector Specific
Objectives 92  Health and Safety 92 Health and Safety and Environment Sector
Specific Objectives 93 93 Disaster Management Sector Specific Objectives -
Disaster Management 95 99 95 12 IMPLEMENTATION, GOVERNANCE AND REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK Key Policy Measures - Cross Cutting Areas  TRADE IN GOODS AND SERVICES
WITHIN THE ENERGY SECTOR 96 103 Governance and Regulatory Framework Sector
Specific Objectives 96 Trade in Energy Specific Objectives 103 Policy Measures -
Governance and Regulatory Framework 96 Policy Measures - Energy Trade 98 10
ENERGY ACCESS AND INFRASTRUCTURE SECTION : POLICY TARGETS & DEVELOPMENT OF
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 105 98 Energy Access and infrastructure Specific Sector
Objectives 98 Policy Measures for Energy Access and Infrastructure SECTION :
DEVELOPMENT OF INDICATORS & MONITORING SYSTEM 109 98 11 ENERGY INVESTMENT AND
FINANCING REFERENCES 124 98 Investment and Financing Sector Objectives 98 Policy
Measures Energy Investment and Financing   List of TABLES Table : List of Main
Indicators 23 Table : Total Fuel Consumption for Electricity Production 2015
Table : Estimations of Installed Capacity by Technology 43 48 Table :
Estimations of Installed Storage 49 Table : Main Indicators and Targets for BNEP
106 List of FIGURES 40 Figure : Total Barrels of Oil Demand per Day 41 Figure :
Demand by Energy Source 2006 to 2015 43 Figure : Fuel Inputs for Electricity
Production 2015 Barbados 44 Figure : Electricity Sales by Demand Group 54 Figure
: Policy Inverted Pyramid 59 Figure : Summary Table of Vision Statement and
Visionary Goals 100 Figure : Priority Geographical Areas for Renewable Energy
Deployment Figure : Source: Dr Thomas Rogers,  Desktop Study into the Wind
Resource in Barbados, 2017 101  List of TABLES List of Acronyms BCC Barbados
Community College kt Kilotonne BDS$ Barbados Dollar kW Kilowatt BFF Bridging
Fossil Fuel kWh Kilowatt hours BL& Barbados Light and Power Co Ltd LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design BNEP Barbados National Energy
Policy BNOC Barbados National Oil Company MCA Multi-Criteria Approach BOE
Barrels of Oil Equivalent MMBTU Million British Thermal Units BOPD Barrels of
Oil per Day MTBE Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether BREA Barbados Renewable Energy
Association BTU British Thermal Unit MUS$ Millions of US Dollars MWh Megawatt
hours BWA Barbados Water Authority NDC Nationally Determined Contributions List
of FIGURES CIF Cost Insurance and Freight NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
-SERMS Caribbean Sustainable Energy Roadmap and Strategy CARICOM Caribbean
Community NPC National Petroleum Corporation OTEC Ocean Thermal Energy
Conversion PAM Policy Analysis Matrix MEWR Ministry of Energy and Water
Resources DRC Domestic Resource Cost PPA Power Purchase Agreements PUB Public
Utilities Board PV Photovoltaics EIA Energy Information Administration RER
Renewable Energy Rider ELPA Electric Light and Power Act RFP Request for
Proposals EU European Union SEFB Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados EV
Electric Vehicle FCA Fuel Clause Adjustment SIDS Small Island Developing States
FOB Freight on Board SJPI Samuel Jackman Prescod Institute of Technology FTC
Fair Trading Commission GDP Gross Domestic Product TCF Trillion Cubic Feet GWh
Gigawatt hours TVET Technical Vocational Education and Training IADB Inter-
American Development Bank IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme IPP Independent Power Producer UWI
University of the West Indies IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency WDA
Woodbourne Development Area  FOREWORD exposure of volatile fossil fuel markets
and has created  timeframe during which Barbados’ transition to  sustained Green
Economy can and must be achieved The Barbados National Energy Policy  through
its set of visionary goals and objectives has fully endorsed the Government’
agenda and in this regard has as its vision: “Energy security and affordability
through diversity and collaboration: Establishing and maintaining  sustainable
energy sector for Barbados” The Barbados National Energy Policy establishes
comprehensive policy for Barbados in areas relating to the supply and
consumption of energy across all associated sectors It was developed using
collaborative approach, which included several rounds of interviews,
stakeholders meetings and consultations throughout Barbados’ energy sector All
views were considered The policy also benefitted from the consideration of
extensive research of regional and international jurisdictions that have
experienced both challenges and opportunities in their transition to
sustainable energy sector It is with great pleasure that  present the Barbados
National Energy Policy 2019-This revolutionary policy will see the
transformation of Barbados from  petroleum based economy to the first green,
100% renewable energy and carbon neutral island state in the world This
initiative will build  sustainable energy sector based on the use of renewable
energy, energy efficiency and conservation with the export of fossil fuels found
either onshore or offshore, to assist in the development of this new paradigm
The key approach used in developing the policy was  Multi-Criteria Approach
(MCA), where the impact of the policies chosen were taken from as wide- ranging
perspective as possible This meant that the cross-cutting nature of the sector
was highlighted and the often competing interests relating to finance,
economics, the natural environment, technology and social development were
considered and consolidated We are cognizant of the fact that fossil fuels
dominate Barbados’ current energy mix, as over 90% of the energy used for
electricity production in Barbados is derived from carbon based fuels which is
drain on foreign exchange resources In addition, the volatility in pricing
associated with these products exposes the economy to exogenous shocks which
adversely impacts the competitiveness and economic resilience of the country The
Government has therefore taken the decision to totally transform the economy of
Barbados through the de-risking of its direct link to the The ambitious Barbados
National Energy Policy has crafted  course of action to safeguard the
responsible exploration and production of fossil fuels both onshore and
offshore, which will be exported and some of the proceeds used to further
develop the island’ sustainable energy sector  BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
2019 - 2030 “ Energy security and affordability through diversity and
collaboration: Establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy sector for
Barbados As we embark upon this new journey, let us be ever mindful that we have
set in train an energy revolution that will enrich the lives of all Barbadians
and inspire others around the world The Barbados National Energy Policy presents
to us  course of action, that once implemented will result in  diverse sector
where energy is reliably produced, efficiently consumed and makes  tangible
contribution, however minute, to climate mitigation This policy at its core
seeks to ensure that energy is affordable to all, while powering our society on
the basis of collaboration Our task is therefore not only to produce energy but
to do so in  manner which enfranchises the population by creating  market for
the wealth generated to be spread and remain on- shore We must therefore as
Small Island Developing State strive to realise the goals of this policy work
and recognise that the sole responsibility for its failure or success lies with
us  wish to express my heartfelt gratitude to all the stakeholders who made
contributions to the development of this policy and to the staff of the Ministry
of Energy and Water Resources for their tireless efforts in this regard This is
“big deal”; the realisation of which will define our future  DIVISION OF ENERGY
TEAM 10 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 DIVISION OF ENERGY TEAM 11
11 12 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 13 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY cross-cutting nature of the sector
was highlighted and issues related to finance, economics, the natural
environment, technology and social development were considered in  consolidated
manner This Barbados National Energy Policy (BNEP)  document is designed to
achieve the 100% renewable energy and carbon neutral island- state
transformational goals by These include: The BNEP spans all aspects of the
energy sector, and provides  framework for moving the island from  fossil fuel
based economy to one completely based on renewable energy sources The policy
provides direction for managing this revolutionary transformation and ensuring
viability from all points of view along the way • Provision of reliable, safe,
affordable, sustainable, modern and climate friendly energy services to all
residents and visitors • Zero domestic consumption of fossil fuels economy wide
• Export of all hydrocarbons produced both on land There is reason for optimism
in Barbados’ bold embrace of renewable energy technology, as it builds on its
reputation of being  leader in the Caribbean and the western hemisphere Indeed,
the success of the solar water heating industry is  source of pride for the
country, the recent development of the local solar photovoltaic (PV) industry
and the burgeoning electric vehicle market in Barbados are also encouraging The
BNEP provides  basis for building on these successes while seeking to expand the
use of these and other renewable energy technologies such as wind and biofuels
and offshore • Maximising local participation (individual and corporate) in
distributed renewable energy (RE) generation and storage (democratisation of
energy) • Minimise the outflow of foreign exchange • Creating  regional centre
of excellence in RE research and development The BNEP builds on efforts of
previous projects and activities to establish  comprehensive policy for Barbados
in areas relating to the supply and consumption of energy across all associated
sectors It was developed using  collaborative approach, which included several
rounds of interviews and consultations throughout Barbados’ energy sector in
2016 and 2017, as well stakeholder meetings in The policy also benefitted from
the consideration of research and documented accounts of regional and
international jurisdictions that have experienced both challenges and
opportunities However, even as Barbados promotes the development of renewable
energy, there are ongoing plans to explore for fossil fuel resources offshore
This patrimony will be pursued aggressively with the view to maximise foreign
exchange gains from the export of any exploited hydrocarbons Recognising the
importance of the prudent use of energy resources as  way to ensuring
sustainability and  thriving economy, the BNEP also highlights the importance of
energy efficiency throughout the various sectors and subsectors in the industry
The key approach used in developing the BNEP was  Multi-Criteria Approach (MCA),
where the impacts of the policies chosen were taken from as wide-ranging
perspective as possible This meant that the 14 Major sectors of the energy
economy that were identified inter alia in completing the BNEP were the
following: • Oil and Gas Supply • Renewable Energy Supply • Energy Efficiency
and Conservation • Electricity • Transportation • Environment • Human Resources
• Health and Safety • Trade • Governance and Regulation • Other Cross-Cutting
Sectors This MCA deviated to some extent from previous approaches where the
least cost approach was more dominant It was thought that in considering these
sometimes conflicting elements of development,  number of core values for energy
development in Barbados had to be identified While these core values were not
ranked, they clarified some of the priorities to be considered in making the
decisions The values formed the basis of the Vision Statement and Visionary
Goals discussed later 15 Core Values The Core Values identified were: • Economic
enfranchisement – ensuring the average Barbadian can participate and benefit
equitably in the new energy paradigm • Environmental responsibility -
elimination of Barbados’ carbon footprint • Stability - price, regulatory,
technical • Reliability - including continued access to energy • Efficiency in
the production and consumption of all energy resources • Diversity - reduction
of vulnerability through use of multiple sources • Ownership of business -
opportunities for local investment that minimise the outflow of foreign exchange
• Maximum use of indigenous energy resources • Maximum level of collaboration •
Multidisciplinary cross-cutting approach • Systematic development of the energy
sector based on renewable energy • Education, awareness and capacity building •
Environmental protection and ecology, especially in connection with climate
change and public health • Innovation - develop Barbados as  centre of
excellence for research and development in renewable energy From these analyses
the following Vision Statement and Visionary Goals were developed for Barbados
16 BNEP Vision STATEMENT Energy security and affordability through diversity and
collaboration: Establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy sector for
Barbados “ “ 17 An energy sector that offers  diversity of sustainable energy
options 18 19 Visionary Goals: Overall Objectives Visionary Goal : An energy
sector that offers  diversity of sustainable energy options, with  trajectory to
achieve 100% Renewable Energy by 2030 (core value - diversity) From these
Visionary Goals, the following Overall Objectives were developed for the energy
sector Overall Objective : Increasing the amount of renewable energy sources
used in the energy mix to 100% (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An
energy sector where consumption and production of energy resources occur with
the maximum level of efficiency feasible (core value - efficiency) Overall
Objective : Achieving affordability and access to all classes of consumers in
energy products and services (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An
energy sector that offers basic energy products and services that are affordable
to local citizens (core value - affordability) Overall Objective : Achieving
stability and predictability in energy product prices over the long term
(related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers
continuous and reliable supply of energy (core value - reliability) Overall
Objective : Establishing  consistent and comprehensive legislative and
regulatory framework to govern activities in various energy sub-sectors (related
to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers opportunities
for development of human capacity and collaboration (core value - capacity and
collaboration) Overall Objective : Increasing diversity in the types of energy
sources used within the energy sector (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary
Goal : An energy sector that offers significant opportunities for local
entrepreneurship and international investment (core value - entrepreneurship)
Overall Objective : Increasing the extent of renewable energy resources used in
Barbados that are obtained from indigenous sources (related to Visionary Goal )
Visionary Goal : An energy sector that minimises the environmental impacts and
contribution to global climate change (core value - environment) Overall
Objective : Encouraging local investment in energy projects and programmes in
Barbados, with  view to increasing the number of shareholders and players in the
various energy sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An
energy sector that is governed by sound management and clear legal regulatory
frameworks (core value - regulation) Visionary Goal : An energy sector that
positions Barbados as  centre of excellence for innovation, research and
development in renewable energy (core value - innovation) Overall Objective :
Promoting more local entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy and
increasing fossil fuel energy development for export throughout the energy sub-
sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal 10: An energy sector that
provides opportunities for all Barbadians (including the most vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change) to participate in and benefit from the transformation
to 100% RE (core value - equity) Overall Objective : Increasing collaboration
within the energy sub-sectors and among the cross-cutting sectors that have an
impact on energy supply or consumption (related to Visionary Goal ) 20 Overall
Objective 10: Improving the efficiency in the production and consumption of
energy products within the various sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal )
These Overall Objectives were used as the basis for Specific Sector Objectives
within the different sectors, some of which were identified above The discussion
and list of Specific Sector Objectives are included in the main document Overall
Objective 11: Improving the awareness and understanding of energy production and
consumption, its impacts and the associated environmental and socio-economic
consequences within all sections of the public (related to Visionary Goal ) The
Specific Sector Objectives were used as the basis of some suggested measures
also included in the main document These measures will be expanded in the
development of the Implementation Plan, which is expected to emerge as the next
stage of the work after the completion of the BNEP Overall Objective 12:
Increasing the number of persons locally with qualifications and skills relating
to energy production and management of renewable and fossil fuel sources
(related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental
impacts associated with the production and consumption of energy resources
locally (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 14: Ensuring reliability
and continuity of energy supply in the various local energy subsectors (related
to Visionary Goals ) Overall Objective 15: Attaining the lowest price
sustainable by the local economy for various energy sources consumed in
Barbados, while maintaining environmental efficiency (related to Visionary Goal
) Overall Objective 16: Establishing effective partnerships between national and
international entities for local energy projects (related to Visionary Goal )
Overall Objective 17: Establishing effective systems to support  hub for
research and development in renewable energy (related to Visionary Goal )
Overall Objective 18: Maximise the use of small scale distributed generation
within the energy mix (related to Visionary Goal 10) 21 Target Energy Mix During
the planning horizon (2019 to 2030) there will still be economic activities such
as construction, cruise tourism, air transport and fisheries which may not be
technologically possible to power completely by renewable energy It is also
noted that there are currently approximately 22,000 local consumers of natural
gas and the network is likely to be expanded It is the Government’ policy to
phase out local consumption of natural gas by 2030, replacing natural gas with
an appropriate renewable fuel() The BNEP used  planning horizon of 11 years (),
and assessed current activities and projections in energy use for Barbados to
develop targets in percentage mix for energy use in GWh These targets were set
more as  basis for discussion than as absolute goals They generated much debate
throughout the consultation process and are expected to be reviewed and modified
if necessary within the timeframe The above fossil fuel reduction targets can be
stated as increased production of energy from renewable energy targets for
electricity generation where feasible The targets below are expressed in terms
of renewable energy Targets can be viewed as minimum levels to be obtained
However, if stakeholders are able to exceed the targets, this would be
desirable, especially if they improve financial, environmental, economic or
technological performance The proposed target mix is anticipated to result in an
annual total energy savings of $400 - $800 million per year at current market
prices The discounted social profit or benefit to Barbados is estimated at $
billion annually from the removal of fossil fuels In order to achieve the above
benefits the heavy fossil fuel reductions required are: 49% 100% fossil fuel
reduction by 2023 fossil fuel reduction by 2030 52% 100% Increase in renewable
energy by 2023 Increase in renewable energy by 2023 In this approach, factors
including economic deficits, level of taxation, GDP, oil prices, and costs of
tradeable and non-tradeable goods were considered The indicators below are among
those that will be used to monitor the performance of the energy sector over the
planning horizon: 22 Name of Indicator (Units) Baseline (2015) Aggregate Energy
Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 324 Total Energy Consumption per Capita (BOE/Persons) 03
Percent Share of Renewable Energy of Total Energy (%)  CO2 Emissions/Final
Consumption (kt/BOE) 0029 Total No of Persons Employed in the Energy Sector (No)
/ Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) 37 Percent of electric vehicles (%)
Percentage of distributed generation (%)  Percent Share of Renewable Energy
Investment of Total GDP (%)  Table : List of Main Indicators Establishing the
appropriate indicators is critical in determining an effective system of
monitoring that will allow the BNEP to be updated and revised on  timely basis
for continuous improvement It is expected that the government will work with
members within the different sectors to develop the Implementation Plan It is
important to note that the Implementation Plan will not only develop indicators
and targets, but it will also identify more specific programmes, determine
strategies and assign the roles and responsibilities to various groups,
organisations and agencies to achieve these objectives There will also be an
assessment of resources needed for various actions, and some suggestions of
funding options for consideration The recently developed NGO, Barbados Renewable
Energy Association (BREA), is expected to play  role in the area of renewable
energy development and energy efficiency, advocating on behalf of the energy
sector Other stakeholders likely to be involved will include The Barbados Light
& Power Co Ltd (BL&), the Barbados National Oil Co (BNOC), the Fair Trading
Commission (FTC), the Barbados National Standards, Government Electrical and
Engineering Department, various government ministries in energy and other cross-
cutting sectors 23 “ Over the years, Barbados has sought to maintain an energy
sector where energy resources are universally available at reasonable prices 24
SECTION  INTRODUCTION 25 INTRODUCTION  Purpose of the Barbados National Energy
Policy (BNEP) () change It is recommended that  policy review be undertaken at
least once every five years Modifications to policy recommendations are not only
possible, but expected The BNEP was developed to provide clear direction to the
government in the short, medium and long term, for the development of renewable
and non-renewable aspects of energy Issues related to energy production, energy
consumption and energy efficiency are considered and addressed  Section
Overview This first section discusses the Barbados energy sector, highlighting
achievements, activities and challenges up to The section also provides an
assessment of likely present and future influencing factors on the sector from
regional and international perspective The legislative and regulatory framework
that governs activities within the energy sector in Barbados is then presented
within the context of information emerging from these factors What is the BNEP
designed to achieve? The BNEP is intended to provide  framework to guide
decision making with regard to energy development in Barbados At the outset, it
defines  broad Vision Statement followed by Visionary Goals and Overall
Objectives up to Later in the document, specific objectives under the various
sub-sectors are identified There are also some recommended measures that are
expected to play  role in achieving the goals identified Charts detailing the
current energy mix and associated costs are presented, as is  description of the
Multi- Criteria Approach (MCA), which is used as the underlying approach for
developing the BNEP It is important to note that the BNEP is NOT designed to
prescribe specific, detailed actions to be taken in any of the sub-sectors
identified It also does not determine specific targets within the various sub-
sectors, strategies needed within the sector, or specific roles and
responsibilities of individuals or agencies that are required to achieve its
stated goals and objectives The section sets the context for the Objectives and
Targets outlined later in the document All these aspects are undeniably
important if the BNEP is to be effective, but it is expected that these will be
explored in more detail in the Implementation Plan, which will be developed as
follow-up to this document  Barbados Energy Sector - Brief Discussion Over the
years, Barbados has sought to maintain an energy sector where energy resources
are universally available at reasonable prices Nonetheless, the BNEP suggests
some sector-wide targets for energy mix based on the Ministry of Energy and
Water Resources (MEWR) data, highlighting the availability and cost of various
energy sources The island can be proud of the fact that there is virtually 100%
access to electricity and that gradually, more sustainable forms of energy were
being integrated into the energy mix in terms of electricity The policy’ 11-year
planning horizon allows for the assessment of long- term scenarios and impacts,
with frequent reviews of the document as circumstances 26 BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 delivery and other energy services However, the main
fuel for electricity generation remains Bunker “” heavy fuel oil and the main
fuels for transportation remain diesel and gasoline The rate of transformation
to RE in both the electricity generation and transport sectors must be
aggressively accelerated to meet the 2030 Vision The island can be proud of the
fact that there is virtually 100% access to electricity and that gradually, more
sustainable forms of energy were being integrated into the energy mix in terms
of electricity delivery and other energy services 27 farm The government has set
distributed generation target of having at least 35,000 buildings with rooftop
or ground-mounted solar PV systems that are resilient to extreme wind events (
Category  Hurricanes) Electricity The island’ electric utility, The Barbados
Light & Power Co Ltd (BL&), established in 1899, was one of the earliest in the
Caribbean It is  vertically integrated monopoly, regulated by the Fair Trading
Commission (FTC), and is now totally owned by Emera Inc,  Canadian based company
Their existing license, which was gained in 1986, allows BL& to have the sole
franchise to sell electricity in Barbados up to Wind Energy While wind energy
has not taken off significantly, there are plans to develop this technology to
complement existing solar installations BL& continues to investigate the
possibility of establishing  wind farm in Lambert’, St Lucy alongside the
existing PV farm there Given the planning horizon of the BNEP, the issue of
extension of the license or  change in the structure of the electricity market
will need to be addressed as this policy goes into implementation We discuss
later how changes in technology towards more renewable decentralised forms of
energy may necessitate  change in the structure of the industry However, details
on the electricity industry and opportunities for competition or new business
models are outside the scope of the BNEP Bio-energy Also, in light of  declining
sugar cane industry on the island, there is increasing confidence in the
agricultural sector that there can be greater use of biomass and biogas in the
energy sector Bagasse has, at times, been used to generate energy in the sugar
cane industry and there is considerable interest in building on this experience,
with some farmers considering switching to high fibre canes to produce biomass
rather than sugar Solar Water Heaters Starting in 1974, in the midst of the
international oil crisis, Barbados invested in the area of solar water heating,
and that industry now stands out like  beacon of success in the Caribbean
series of government economic incentives and tax write-offs coupled with strong
entrepreneurship shown by early developers, led to significant growth of the
industry There are local companies that now export to the rest of the Caribbean
and even further afield Indeed, Barbados is one of the leading countries for
solar water heaters per capita, both in the western hemisphere and the world
Natural Gas for Domestic Cooking and Industry The National Petroleum Corporation
(NPC) currently has approximately 22,000 customers of which approximately ,000
are commercial entities There is continued demand for piped natural gas for
cooking as an alternative to liquified petroleum gas (LPG) influenced by the
current pricing mechanism for natural gas and convenience Similarly, industries
use natural gas as the fuel source for their boilers Current demand for natural
gas is approximately  million cubic feet per day (approximately half of which is
now imported as domestic supply has declined) It is noted that the NPC plans to
expand the natural gas distribution network To achieve the 2030 Vision of zero
fossil fuel consumption domestically, it will be necessary to switch from piped
natural gas to  piped biogas if the distribution network is not to become
stranded asset Barbados, having established itself as  regional leader in
renewable energy through its success in solar water heating, seeks to build on
that reputation by achieving similar success in developing other renewable
energy technologies However, while there have been some successes, there is
still much more that can be done on the island to achieve the desired level of
sustainability In the new energy scenario, with  significant amount of
distributed rooftop solar PV and battery storage, widespread use of electric
vehicles and the discontinuation of the use of natural gas, it is anticipated
that consumers (households currently using natural gas or LPG) may switch to
energy efficient, modern electric stoves Solar PV Recent efforts in securing
more sustainable energy mix provide reason for optimism The establishment of
photovoltaic projects throughout the island in the last five years has led to
many new players either getting involved or expanding in the market The local
utility has also played its part by establishing  10 MW solar 28 Energy
Efficiency Efforts in Barbados have not been limited to energy production In the
area of energy conservation and energy efficiency, there have also been projects
designed to retrofit incandescent and fluorescent lights with LEDs Moreover,
efforts are ongoing to establish and implement efficiency standards for
buildings, refrigeration and air conditioners While the use of solar water
heaters for hot water only contribute  small percentage of energy in the overall
energy mix, there is no doubt that this industry has made  significant social
impact at  household level This signals to consumers that it is possible to
achieve environmental sustainability in energy use, while at the same time
achieving economic benefits Transportation Barbados is already  leader in the
region with over 300 electric vehicles on the road However, this is  small
percentage of the approximately 100,000 vehicles on the island The 2030 Vision
calls for the elimination of the use of diesel and gasoline for local transport
over the next decade This will require either retrofitting of the existing fleet
and/or restricting the importation of conventional vehicles and incentivising
the importation of electric and alternative renewable fuel vehicles
Additionally,  much more efficient mass transit system will be required
reliable charging station infrastructure will need to be rapidly developed to
provide consumer confidence along with training of  cadre of technicians to
install, operate and maintain the new green transportation technologies BREA
Interest in pursuing renewable energy development further has been such that
NGO, the Barbados Renewable Energy Association (BREA), was established within
the last eight years BREA was created to advocate for the use of renewable
energy, and facilitate the continued growth of the industry The advocacy and
research roles of NGOs will be critical to achieving the 2030 Vision Energy
Consumers Apart from efforts made at the domestic and the individual
entrepreneurship levels, large consumers of electricity have also begun to
address sustainability through self-generation or developing large-scale
renewable energy projects for themselves The Barbados Water Authority (BWA) is
one such entity that has been exploring that option While there is still  lot to
be done to establish suitable infrastructure for increased use of EVs and other
vehicles powered by alternative fuels, the local petroleum companies appear open
to facilitating the change as long as the costs for such transitions can be done
in the most equitable manner feasible 29 The draft roadmap considers future
scenarios with increased energy efficiency on the demand customer side,  low oil
price scenario, and  scenario where  greater number of electric vehicles are
imported All of this is considered within the context of the government’
intended Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) emerging from the Paris
Agreement in This NDC sets  goal of 65% of electricity generation to be produced
from renewable sources by The NDC will be revised to reflect the new 100% RE,
economy wide, goal Petroleum Meanwhile, even as there are considerable efforts
to develop renewable energy projects and improve energy efficiency in the
sector, there are continued efforts to gain more fossil fuel resources through
government’ drilling and exploration exercises offshore The possibility of
significant oil or gas find could potentially lead to considerable economic
benefits for Barbados when used for export Any such fossil fuel resource should
be developed in  way that it does not affect the overall trajectory to the
sustainability of the entire energy sector Although the BNEP attempts to give
direction for the Implementation Plan and activities in the various sectors,
there was need for  level of flexibility to allow for the assessment and
evaluation of technologies not yet considered viable, but that may become major
players in the future Barbados Energy Roadmap - Produced by IRENA During the
development of the BNEP, the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MEWR) also
engaged the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to develop  daft
Renewable Energy Roadmap for Barbados The BNEP therefore is designed to focus on
the ‘how’ rather than the ‘what’ with respect to energy sector development
IRENA’ study focused largely on the electricity sector and the possibilities for
greater efficiency, as well as an increased use of renewable energy That draft
roadmap identified the following goals as part of the Barbados Government’
vision In addition to the focus on flexibility, it is recognised that the BNEP
will need to be considered in the context of broader economic policy documents
in other sub-sectors of the Barbados Government This will include policies such
as the industrial policy, the trade policy, the transport policy and the
disaster management policy An energy sector that: • Enhances economic growth by
reducing energy costs It is also expected that the BNEP will help in giving
further guidance and streamline existing processes • Improves energy security by
reducing dependency on imported fossil fuels • Reduces cost of energy service
for consumers • Reduces investments needed for power generation by promoting
energy efficiency and conservation • Reduces the emission of greenhouse gases
and local pollutants from fossil fuels The economic, environmental and social
goals identified in their study are in keeping with the goals identified through
the analysis of the Barbados energy sector in developing this policy The BNEP’
goals are consistent with many of the goals presented in the roadmap and provide
framework for further actions that can be developed from it 30  Regional Energy
Context and its Influence on Barbados () optimisation of domestic production of
energy in an environmentally sound manner; and () facilitation of the growth of
internationally competitive regional industries The Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) encompasses twenty countries in the Caribbean region focusing on
“economic integration; foreign policy coordination; human and social
development; and security” (CARICOM, 2016) CARICOM seeks to safeguard each
member’ access to clean, reliable, affordable and stable energy and also aids
the progression of comparable regional industries These goals are similar to
some of the core values of the BNEP that are discussed in the next section
Regional integration with other Caribbean countries is an option for meeting
future energy supply needs (regional projects, sharing of research and
development, harmonisation of policies, laws etc) However, there are distinct
challenges in the coordination of relevant policies, strategies and plans There
are also issues pertaining to the unavailability of timely and relevant data,
pricing and the increasing international demand for petroleum, rising petroleum
prices, and the security of supplies for regional trade (CARICOM Energy Policy,
2013) Within the Caribbean, the energy context is dictated by the international
energy market, as fossil fuels account for 80% of the primary energy supply
Other major resources of energy within the region are hydro, solar, wind,
biomass and geothermal The Caribbean Community has established targets of 47%
reduction in fossil fuel use by 2027 (-SERMS) The CARICOM Energy Policy (2013)
is  wide-ranging framework document that considers issues of energy production
and consumption (both renewable and non-renewable programmes) from  regional
perspective The issue of trade between territories and the impacts of programmes
such as Petro Caribe are discussed in this policy However, it should be noted
that Barbados was not  signatory to the Petro Caribe agreement The main goals of
the CARICOM Energy Policy are: “ 80% fossil fuels account for () provision of
sustainable and secure supplies of energy, accessible to all CARICOM citizens;
() fundamental transformation of the energy sectors of the Member States of the
Community so that they can contribute to the sustainable development of the
Community; of the primary energy supply Other major resources of energy within
the region are hydro, solar, wind, biomass and geothermal 31  International
Energy Context and its Influence on Barbados Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) such as Barbados are especially vulnerable to international factors,
mainly because of their remoteness, lack of economic diversification and high
reliance on international imports  Economy International oil prices have an
impact on short and medium term renewable energy development Higher oil prices
often result in greater local interest in renewable energy development to offset
the high cost of energy from fossil fuels The state of the international or
global economy can impact the economic performance of Barbados and affect
attitudes to spending and investments Over the last eight years, the
international economy experienced contraction and low growth in some major
industrialised countries The global economy, according to the United Nations,
grew at  slower pace of % over the period 2008 to During the last  to 10 years,
the global economy was characterised by: For example, as oil prices soared to
$147 per barrel in 2008 (far above the long-run average of $45 per barrel),
there was considerable interest in the development of renewable energy
technologies throughout the Caribbean, to mitigate the impact of the higher cost
of energy from fossil fuels In 2010, the Renewable Energy Rider (RER) was
introduced and this led to  substantial increase in the number of solar
photovoltaic (PV) installations During the period 2013 to 2015, PV installations
expanded five-fold, moving capacity from  megawatts to 9MW (Investigation of
Likely Reactions to the Removal of Green Energy Incentives – Antilles Economics
2016) •  financial debt crisis • High and escalating oil prices • Declining and
low interest rates • High liquidity in the banking sector • Weak demand for
goods and services The expansion of PV installations benefited in large measure
from the facilitation of the RER, and the fiscal incentives implemented in 2013
to support the use of renewable energy in electricity supply by homes and
businesses (Investigation of Likely Reactions to the Removal of Green Energy
Incentives – Antilles Economics 2016) This proved to be  good incentive for the
development and installation of PV and other renewable energy technologies
However, as oil prices have fallen, the BL&’ Fuel Clause Adjustment (FCA) has
also been reduced, resulting in considerably less incentive for new individuals
to start generating electricity to sell to the grid through renewable energy
technologies Meanwhile, higher oil prices internationally also increased the
incentive to explore and extract petroleum resources that may be more costly to
produce • Fluctuating employment The global economy is comprised of countries
and trading blocs that are recovering, as well as those that continue to grapple
with economic uncertainty The USA, for example, employed monetary policies such
as quantitative easing to address its debt problem, while the European Union
(EU) initially used austerity but with limited success However, the EU has
engaged its own brand of quantitative easing, which has resulted in some
stabilization in employment, inflation, and GDP Other countries whose economies
are based on commodities, especially those based on oil, experienced economic
contraction beginning in China, which operates  planned (not market driven)
economy, has engaged in  controlled decline of economic output of % This
controlled decline has resulted in decline in other markets, and in commodity
based economies in particular It is expected that global economic growth will
continue to be uneven over the next decade One of the main aspects of the BNEP
and the Implementation Plan that will follow, is to ensure that the incentives
for renewable energy generation remains high at times when oil prices are both
high and low There will also be  need to ensure that Barbados is able to take
advantage of onshore and offshore petroleum resources when prices on the
international market are favourable totheir development 32 BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 33 33 The increased consumption in global energy is
expected to be driven by increased economic growth in the developing and
emerging economies Indeed, the International Energy Outlook 2016 has projected
that the world’ GDP, adjusted for purchasing power, will increase at an annual
rate of % Furthermore, the Outlook projects that economic growth in the
developing and emerging economies will expand on average by % per annum Expected
Future International Energy Market Given that Barbados currently remains  net
importer of petroleum products, it is  price taker Therefore an understanding of
oil price forecasts in the short-term and the long-term can help to inform
appropriate courses of action by policy makers According to the  Energy
Information Administration (EIA), it is expected that global energy consumption
will continue on its upward trend over the next thirty years This view of future
demand is driven by the conclusion that economies such as China and India will
account for more than half of the world’ total increase in energy by The
International Energy Outlook 2016 as presented by the EIA, projects that by 2040
global energy consumption will increase by 48% from 549 quadrillion BTUs
(billion barrels of oil) to 815 quadrillion BTUs (billion barrels of oil) It is
further anticipated that much of the increased consumption of global energy will
be derived from the developing and emerging economies, which are expected to
register an increase in energy consumption of 71% by The International Energy
Outlook 2016 further indicates that its expectation is for increased consumption
across all the major energy sources Interestingly, the Outlook points to
renewable energy sources being the fastest growing energy source for the period
up to 2040, with consumption of this resource growing at an annual rate of % The
view of the International Energy Outlook 2016 is that nuclear power will be the
second- fastest growing energy source by 2040, expanding at an annual rate of %
The long term international consumption of natural gas is expected to increase
at  rate of % 34 per year where annual consumption is forecasted to be
approximately 203 TCF by According to the US Energy Information Administration –
International Energy Outlook 2016, natural gas is an important fuel in the
production of electricity This is the case, as natural gas is viewed as an
attractive fuel source because of its fuel efficiency Consequently, several
governments worldwide, as  means of reducing CO2 emissions, promoted the use of
natural gas to displace the more carbon-intensive fuels To meet the expected
growing demand, world producers are projected to increase natural gas supplies
by an estimated 69% by Although consumption of non-fossil fuels is expected to
grow at  faster rate than fossil fuel, the Outlook projects that fossil fuel
will account for 78% of energy use by The previous target for renewable energy
consumption was that 29% of its electricity consumption was to be supplied by
renewable energy by 2029 (Draft Energy Policy, 2013) The long-term energy price
outlook for Barbados will be influenced by the global price of energy on the one
hand, and its ability to move away significantly from fossil-based consumption
on the other hand One of the fundamental constraints to moving towards more
renewable energy sources is government’ heavy reliance on the revenue derived
from fossil fuel consumption Indeed, this is  paradox because fossil fuel
consumption contributes significantly to the loss of the national resource
Therefore, as Barbados moves towards elimination of fossil fuel use by 2030, the
Government of Barbados must overcome its dependence on such sources for revenue
This will be one of the key issues to be addressed in determining the measures
and strategies in the Implementation Plan which follows the BNEP and for the
long-term energy development of Barbados Volatility in oil prices is expected to
continue, thereby contributing to uncertainty within the energy sector in the
future If expectations for future consumption within the developing and emerging
economies hold true, the follow-on would be significant increases in oil prices
However,  countervailing factor to this view is that renewable energy is
projected to hold more prominence within the energy market and will be
constraining factor on energy prices The International Energy Outlook 2016
proffers  reference oil price forecast of US$00 per barrel for the period up to
Of course, this forecast may vary and, consequently, the Outlook points to
minimum price of US$00 per barrel and  maximum oil price of US$00 per barrel in
the long-run However, international oil prices are expected to fluctuate between
US$00 to US$00 in the short to medium terms, with some occasions where there may
be breaches of these support and resistance boundaries “ The increased
consumption in global energy is expected to be driven by increased economic
growth in the developing and emerging economies Over the last ten years,
Barbados faced significant constraints, which led to weak economic performance
where average Gross Domestic Product registered flat growth (Barbados Economic
Report, 2015) Additionally, Barbados has been grappling with high fiscal
deficits For example, the fiscal deficit as  percentage of GDP was % in Rising
debt has also presented  significant challenge to Barbados over the last ten
(10) years in terms of its unemployment rate This unemployment rate has hovered
between 10% and 12% The economic challenges that Barbados faced over the last
ten years have been observed through several credit downgrades by international
agencies These downgrades have had  negative impact on the cost of debt to the
Barbados Government and the private sector 35 36  Climate Change “ In seeking to
develop the BNEP, it was important to examine Barbados in the regional and
international context, including its position as one of the group of countries
known as Small Island Developing States (SIDS) effects such as higher frequency
of extreme weather events, rising sea levels, destruction of coastlines and
inundation of ground water Generally, small islands lack the natural and
financial resources to alleviate these ongoing challenges (UN 2015) Barbados, as
SIDS, is vulnerable to international and regional trends and momentary shocks
that can affect technology, resource availability and the pricing of energy
products Barbados and other Caribbean Community (CARICOM) members face
challenges with regard to climate change These impacts can be felt through
effects such as higher frequency of extreme weather events, rising sea levels,
destruction of coastlines and inundation of ground water Generally, small
islands lack the natural and financial resources to alleviate these ongoing
challenges (UN 2015) “Due to their size and location, Caribbean SIDS are
particularly susceptible to the impacts of climate change As developing
economies relying on sectors vulnerable to climate patterns such as tourism,
agriculture and fishing, Caribbean nations would be greatly affected by the
ongoing rise in sea levels, changes in rain patterns and temperatures, and
increasing intensity of natural disasters identified by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)” (IADB, 2016) These types of impacts can have
profound effect on the economy, and are caused largely by carbon dioxide
emissions related to the combustion of fossil fuels The economic consequence of
fossil fuel consumption in Barbados is that there is  loss of resources through
foreign exchange, efficiency and environmental costs Analysis indicates that
under  business-as–usual scenario, the Barbados economy is likely to lose on
average $64 for every dollar of benefit it receives from the supply and
consumption of fossil fuel (MEWR) develop schemes to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions worldwide Carbon trading schemes such as the Clean Development
Mechanism, have provided some funding opportunities for Caribbean islands to
develop renewable energy and energy efficiency projects Barbados is energy
import-dependent and relies on trade to meet its energy needs Consequently,
momentary disruption or trade imbalance can lead to uncertainty in access to
energy as prices fluctuate on the world market  Technology The development of
technology to more easily extract petroleum resources or to use renewable
resources more efficiently and at  lower cost, can increase the economic
viability of activities in the energy sector This can result in more attractive
costs to investors with lower payback times Additionally, improvements in energy
storage technologies improve the stability and reliability of renewable energy
technologies  way of mitigating these impacts is to reduce the volume of carbon
dioxide emissions by increasing the use of renewable energy technologies or
investing more in energy efficiency Over the years, there have been attempts at
the international level to 37 There have been developments in technology
worldwide that have affected energy development within Barbados and the
Caribbean For example, the development of fracking as  means of extracting
natural gas reserves has increased the availability of this particular commodity
worldwide, and costs have been reduced as  result Therefore, some traditional
natural gas producers, such as Trinidad and Tobago, have lost market share in
locations such as the US Also, there has been greater incentive to look for
markets in the Caribbean, including Barbados, to purchase this natural gas
Developments in renewable energy technologies such as wind and solar have also
led to reduction in prices per kilowatt hour in recent years This increased
economic viability of many renewable energy technologies, has led to growth in
the industries worldwide, as investors and IPPs can now have lower payback times
and higher rates of return for their investments Barbados and Caribbean islands,
with their high resource availability of wind and solar energy, and
comparatively high cost of conventional fossil fuels, have become more
attractive to investors in renewable energy technologies in various parts of the
world In Barbados, solar electricity from PVs is the renewable energy technology
that is growing to the greatest extent, with prices per kilowatt hour steadily
declining The BNEP promotes  practical approach that engages solar electricity
technologies that result in an overall benefit for Barbados The policy advances
an energy mix that considers both intermittent and base load renewable energy
technologies INTERNATIONAL Tecnologies Fracking BARBADOS New tecnologies In Pvs
Solar Energy  Regulatory and Legislative Context In developing the BNEP, it was
important to take into consideration the current regulatory and legislative
framework within Barbados In 2007, the Government of Barbados produced an Energy
Policy to give direction to the development of the overall sector This wide-
ranging policy addressed issues relevant to the fossil fuel sector and renewable
energy resources At that time, the Barbados Government was seeking to explore
new potential offshore petroleum wells while taking advantage of emerging
renewable energy technologies and markets For further development of renewable
energy technologies, there will also need to be improvements in energy storage
technologies This will reduce the variability of grid tied renewable energy
technologies which, due to their intermittent nature, affect the stability of
the grid The opportunity for energy storage is particularly relevant to  small
island such as Barbados, as the grid is isolated, with no provision to
interconnect to other islands This means that in many cases, the installed
capacity for renewable energy sources is far greater than that which would be
needed for  conventional fossil fuel generator to produce the same amount of
energy in GWh This is discussed later when considering specific challenges to
renewable energy development and associated targets In keeping with the interest
in developing offshore petroleum, the government established the Offshore
Petroleum Act and the Offshore Petroleum Taxation Act in These Acts contain the
rules governing the exploration and production of offshore oil in Barbados and
consider the limits and optimum levels of production to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the petroleum sector 38 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 -
2030 Recognising the changes and recent advances in energy technologies,  number
of legislative and regulatory provisions have been introduced or updated in
anticipation of the development of new energy markets in Barbados Many of these
changes in regulation and legislation have been in the area of the electricity
sector In January 2001, the Fair Trading Commission (FTC) was established,
taking over from the Public Utilities Board (PUB) in ensuring that rates and
standards of service for The Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd (BL&) were
maintained at  reasonable level The provisions governing the regulation of the
electric utility are contained in the Utilities Regulations Act Cap The
electricity sector has changed significantly in recent years, with the company
being now wholly owned by  Canadian company, Emera Inc The introduction of more
renewable energy sources has made it more likely that BL& will face competition
from other companies with the ability to generate electricity at  commercial
level In anticipation of such continuing developments,  new Electric Light &
Power Act (ELPA) was produced in 2013, incorporating revisions for the first
time since the early 1900s • Pilot Consumer Finance Facility (BDS $  million):
Provides interest rate rebates for commercial entities offering renewable energy
or energy efficiency products • CFL Distribution Facility (BDS$ million):
Provides free compact fluorescent lamps to BL& residential customers • / Rebate
Trade in Facility (BDS$ million):  50% rebate to residences and businesses,
which replace older air conditioners with more energy efficient models In view
of the changing energy markets and technologies, there were also further energy
policy documents produced in 2010 and In 2010, the Sustainable Energy Framework
for Barbados (SEFB) was executed through the Inter-American Development Bank
(IADB) The programme was designed to establish areas of technical assistance and
support for sustainable energy programmes in Barbados One element of this
technical assistance was the development of the Energy Smart Fund •
Discretionary Grant Facility (BDS$ million): Funds for institutional support to
execute and implement the Smart Fund This includes education and awareness
programmes In 2013,  Draft National Sustainable Energy Policy was produced in an
attempt to build on many aspects of the Draft Energy Policy developed in The
2013 document emphasised the sustainable production and use of various energy
resources Efficient use of fossil fuel production and consumption, along with
the development of renewable energy technologies, were the key areas of focus of
this draft policy Below are the six facilities provided through the Energy Smart
Fund provided by the IADB • Technical Assistance Facility (BDS $ million):
Grants for pre-investment, economic and technical feasibility studies • Energy
Efficiency Retrofit and Renewable Energy Finance Facility (BDS$12 million):
Provides subsidised loans for implementing renewable energy projects that have
shown to be financially viable Further incentive for developing renewable energy
technologies, was given through the establishment of the Renewable Energy Rider
(RER) proposed by BL& and approved by the FTC in The RER allowed domestic
customers to sell renewable energy back 39  Barbados Energy Consumption and
Demand - Summary Charts and Tables to the utility at the rate of  times the
level of the Fuel Clause Adjustment (FCA) This was under  “sale of excess” or
“buy all, sell all” arrangement, depending on the metering configuration In July
2016, the RER credit changed, and the rate is now no longer tied to the FCA but
rather is calculated using  resource cost approach The temporary RER credit is
now $416/ kWh for PV and $315/kWh for wind energy, for systems up to 500 kW of
installed capacity  National Energy Use The demand for energy in Barbados over
the last ten years is characterised by  declining trend The average demand of
primary and secondary energy was estimated at 11,297 BOE per day Energy demand
over the period declined, reflecting the economic challenges that Barbados has
been facing Barbados’ demand for energy peaked in 2008 at an estimated 12,056
barrels of oil per day (BOPD), while the lowest level of demand was observed in
2014, estimated at 10,132 BOPD  list of the energy projects and programmes
undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources during the period 2009
to 2017 is attached to this document The BNEP further facilitates economic and
environmental sustainability through development of regulatory and legislative
mechanisms to build on and support those that currently exist TOTAL BARRELS OF
OIL DEMAND PER DAY Figure : Total Barrels of Oil Demand per Day 40 Natural gas
is not  significant contributor in the energy sector, adding only % to the
energy mix However, its widespread use in Barbados for (domestic) cooking, and
various activities in the tourism and industrial sectors, has had  considerable
social impact The benefit of this fuel source is that it is less carbon
intensive than other fossil fuels However, it is still  fossil fuel, and its use
without carbon capture and storage is unsustainable in the context of climate
change Currently, fossil fuels, predominantly heavy fuel oil, dominate Barbados’
energy mix: • Heavy Fuel Oil – 37% • Diesel - 18% • Gasoline – 17% • Kerosene –
% • LPG – % • Sugar Cane Bagasse – % • Natural Gas – % • Other (electricity
produced within utility) – 14% • Solar water heaters - < % The use of solar
water heaters for domestic water heating has also risen significantly since
However, its effect on the overall energy mix is still under % The heavy fuel
oil is mainly used in the generation of electricity DEMAND BY ENERGY SOURCE
Figure : Demand by Energy Source 2006 to 2015 41 Oil was discovered in Barbados
as far back as the 18th century Currently, oil that is produced on the island is
sent to Trinidad for refining The Barbados National Oil Company (BNOC) is
government-owned company that produces oil and gas onshore, and imports fossil
fuels Onshore oil production is mainly from the Scotland Sand Formation located
in the Woodbourne Development Area (WDA) field; Barbados produces approximately
700 BOPD Regarding natural gas, the equivalent of 500 BOPD are produced by the
BNOC under the operation of the National Petroleum Corporation (NPC) The BNOC
and the NPC are being merged into one entity • Heavy Fuel Oil – 74% • Kerosene –
% • Bagasse – % • Diesel – % • Natural Gas – % • Solar – %  Electricity
Generation Fuel Feed Stock for Electricity Production: Over the last 11 years,
the fuel feedstock used in Barbados for the production of electricity consisted
in large measure of fossil fuels The main fuels included heavy fuel oil,
kerosene, diesel and natural gas Within the sugar industry, electricity
production was mainly fuelled by bagasse In recent times, solar energy has
become  small but growing contributor to electricity production In 2015, the
fuel input sources for electricity production was registered as follows: The
configuration above demonstrates the high trade dependence required for Barbados
to produce its electricity However, in 2016, Barbados’ production capacity for
solar electricity increased from 10MW to over 22 MW, contributing an estimated %
of the total electricity distributed The table and chart on the following page
demonstrate the current fuel contribution to the total amount of electricity
produced 42 Fuel Feedstock MMBTUs Fuels Diesel 230,80 HFO ,830,87 Kerosene
,841,78 Bagasse 592,40 Solar 59,04 Natural Gas* 24,80 Total MMBTUS 10,578,69
Table : Total Fuel Consumption for Electricity Production 2015 * Accounts for
use of natural gas to produce electricity in the manufacturing sector FUEL
INPUTS FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCTION 2015 BARBADOS Figure : Fuel Inputs for
Electricity Production 2015 Barbados 43 Electricity consumption over the last
ten years was distributed as follows: • Domestic – 33% • Commercial – 21% •
Public – 16% • Tourism/Hotel – 15% • • Other – % Industrial – % ELECTRICITY
SALES BY DEMAND GROUP Figure : Electricity Sales by Demand Group 44  Multi-
Criteria Approach (MCA) The average consumption for electricity in Barbados
during the period under consideration is MWh Electricity is central to economic
output in Barbados and brings significant value to the country from  social
perspective The social cost of the production of electricity was estimated to be
$06 for every dollar earned from the production and distribution of electricity,
and the Barbados economy produced on average, BDS$00 from every KWh produced and
distributed The BNEP seeks to build on the value that the electricity sector
brings to Barbados by introducing the appropriate energy sources and ensuring
that the highest level of efficiency in electricity generation from these
sources is achieved and maintained This focus and the resulting activities will
be important in improving the sustainability of the electricity supply
Additionally, the policy will attempt to provide  balance between the interest
of the society and that of the electricity producers Given the previous
discussions in this section, it is clear that there is  need to consider the
broad factors that influence energy availability, cost, and global environmental
impacts in Barbados It is recognised that policies which consider energy in
terms of its overall impact on economic, environmental and social systems, will
allow the country to become more energy independent (UNEP, 2014) The BNEP
attempts to achieve sustainability in the energy sector by using  Multi-Criteria
Approach that is consistent with the overall mandate to have zero fossil fuel
consumption domestically In seeking to determine the ideal option or path of
renewable energy development, this policy will consider the broad economic,
environmental and social impacts This means that an option with  higher per
kilowatt-hour cost may still be chosen if it is deemed to have  lower
environmental impact or can provide wider social gains Barbados intends to
steadily increase its share of renewable energy in the local market, widening
the diversification of energy resources, promoting energy security and
eliminating the reliance on imported fossil fuels, which is now based on about
90% imported resources However, an analysis conducted by the MEWR suggests that
this target could lead to high electricity prices if only solar PV installation
is undertaken There may be  more sustainable mix of renewable energy resources
which will lead to  reduced long-term cost Possible ways for achieving this
target were identified as increased use of renewable energy technologies such as
waste to energy, biomass, cogeneration, wind energy, solar photovoltaic and
solar thermal In all of the sub-sectors, various stakeholders are encouraged to
consider energy, economic and social factors in determining the best energy
options This approach is consistent with more recent international approaches to
global sustainability, where issues of social equity and global environmental
impact of issues such as climate change are strongly considered before any
change or expansion of energy production or development This Multi-Criteria
Approach was the basis on which the preliminary targets presented in the next
section were chosen See Section  for further details on the specific model used
to determine the targets The Government has increased its efforts to achieve
increased energy efficiency and sustainability by promoting energy efficient
technologies and its vision of “green economics,” which provides incentives to
the public to be energy efficient Barriers to this sustainability effort have
been identified as limited access to capital, lack of detailed regulations,
limited access to technology and lack of grid connection rules Consideration was
given to the use of rankings and weights for the model However, at this stage,
given the number of stakeholders to be considered, and the contextual precedence
allotted to value or objective, these aspects were omitted Nevertheless, it is
possible that they will be considered while the Implementation Plan is being
developed The BNEP further considers these issues as it seeks to provide
strategies for overcoming some of the limitations to sustainable development in
Barbados 45 “ It is the policy position of the Government to phase out local
consumption of natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas by ” 46 SECTION
PRELIMINARY ENERGY MIX TARGETS 47 PRELIMINARY ENERGY MIX TARGETS  Preliminary
Energy Mix Targets Another significant challenge is that the benefits,  savings
in foreign exchange from renewable energy sources, are not immediately
transferred to government’ revenues The concern is that in order for the country
to make substantial progress towards  more sustainable energy mix, government
will likely be required to provide further incentives Using the MCA to determine
the energy mix targets discussed below, some key factors were considered,
including: • The market cost of energy • The socio-economic and environmental
cost of energy • The maturity of energy technologies • The financial and
economic benefits of applying The energy mix target in the BNEP consists of
renewable energy, variable and intermittent technologies The target proposed in
the BNEP requires 100% reduction in fossil fuel (heavy fuel oil, diesel,
gasoline, kerosene, natural gas and LPG) consumption; one possible replacement
scenario is depicted below: various energy sources and technologies • The
economic and fiscal context of Barbados The market and economic costs of energy
dictated the rate at which fuel switching could occur given the need to ensure
that Barbados’ competitiveness was not negatively impacted over the eleven-year
planning horizon of the BNEP This factor had to be balanced against the fact
that fossil fuel represents  significant drain on the economic resources of the
country From the outset, it was recognised that  move towards greater use of
renewable energy was attractive for both economic and environmental reasons
Potential Installed Capacity (MW) Energy Source Solar Centralised 205 Solar
Distributed 105 Wind onshore 150 Wind offshore 150 The major constraint in
moving from an economy based on fossil fuels to one based on renewable energy,
is the fact that many of the renewable energy sources are intermittent in nature
This means that they are unable to be dispatched on demand This is in contrast
to traditional fossil fuels, which are available whenever needed Renewable
energy sources therefore operate at less than full capacity much of the time,
and this increases the cost of generation from  utility’ perspective Biomass and
Waste-To-Energy 15 Energy Storage (Centralised and Distributed) 200 Total
(Excluding storage) 635 Table : Estimations of Installed Capacity by Technology
However, to compensate for the intermittency of wind and solar highlighted in
the energy mix, investment in storage is needed to provide stability to the
operation of the grid It is anticipated that approximately 150MW of storage is
required 48 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 Impact of modern battery
storage technology Potential Installed Capacity Energy Source The percentages in
the energy mix above reflect only one possible future scenario Battery storage
and smart grid technologies are likely to play  key role in the future energy
mix, reducing the need for baseload energy More detail on the future renewable
energy mix will emerge as the Implementation Plan and Integrated Resource and
Resilience Plan are developed in consultation with the major stakeholders Energy
storage centralised 132 Energy storage distributed 68 Total 200 Table :
Estimations of Installed Storage Energy Efficiency Target The implementation of
the BNEP is expected to reduce domestic fossil fuel consumption from 11000 BOE/
day to  BOE/day This represents an estimated fossil fuel reduction of 100%
Further, energy efficiency policy measures for electricity consumption and
transportation are expected to result in  reduction in energy consumption of 20%
below Business as Usual (BAU) over the planning period The total expected
generation is contingent on the energy efficiency target being met on an annual
basis This installed capacity of renewable energy technologies is expected to
generate approximately 1400GWh and this will result in savings of approximately
$400BDS to $800BDS million annually in fuel savings with an estimated capital
cost of $ billion Additionally this scenario is anticipated to displace
approximately  million tonnes of CO2 equivalent 49 50 It is anticipated that
some of the natural gas will be replaced by bio-methane, as specified within the
energy mix, produced from renewable biogas sources Indeed, the potential of bio-
methane makes it likely to become  viable source of domestic gas The organic
component of municipal solid waste (MSW) can also be converted to bio-methane “
Currently, the National Petroleum Corporation (NPC) supplies  million cubic feet
(mmcf) per day to 22,000 customers of which approximately 750 are commercial
customers and, it is expected to increase due to expansion Not withstanding the
government’ policy position to phase out natural gas in the long-term, it is
expected that natural gas production for domestic cooking will expand in the
near term as well, and that there may be also greater uptake of natural gas as
fuel for commercial and industrial consumers Currently, the National Petroleum
Corporation (NPC) supplies  million cubic feet (mmcf) per day to 22,000
customers of which approximately 750 are commercial customers and, it is
expected to increase due to expansion There is potential to produce biogas from
municipal solid waste, organic waste streams, growth of biofuels et al which
could potentially replace natural gas The residential customers are expected to
phase out their use of natural gas to an alternative product Similarly, to meet
the government’ target of being  100% renewable energy and carbon neutral island
state by 2030, customers who use liquefied petroleum gas will also have to use
electric stoves or an alternative product  There is potential to produce biogas
from municipal solid waste, organic waste streams, growth of biofuels et al
which could potentially replace natural gas In order to achieve the benefits
discussed above,  reduction in the volume of fossil fuels currently used in
energy generation will have to occur by the following increments over the
eleven-year planning horizon: • 49% fossil fuel reduction by • 100% fossil fuel
reduction by The Natural Gas Factor It is the policy position of the Government
to phase out local consumption of natural gas and liquefied petroleum gas by The
above fossil fuel reduction targets can be stated as increased production of
energy from renewable energy targets for electricity generation Economy wide
targets are expressed below in terms of renewable energy In Barbados, despite
our best efforts, there may be some economic activities that prove difficult to
transition to renewable energy sources such as cruise tourism, and air transport
However, the GHG emissions from these sectors may not be wholly attributable to
the host country under to-be-decided international rules • 50% renewable energy
by • 100% renewable energy by 51 “ …there is cohesion between activities within
the sector, the objectives and the overarching Vision Statements” 52 SECTION
VISION, GOALS AND OVERALL OBJECTIVES 53 VISION, GOALS AND OVERALL OBJECTIVES
Structure The Overall Objectives are seen as appropriate for the policy makers
in the energy sector, and are not viewed as critical to communicate to the
general public They, however, set the tone for the Specific Objectives, and are
the basis for moving towards results and activities that are more tangible These
Overall Objectives can be modified over the planning horizon of the BNEP as the
economic and social circumstances change and as new technologies emerge to
become commercially viable The BNEP provides  broad policy framework, which has
Vision Statement, Visionary Goals, Overall Objectives, and Specific Objectives
that are presented at different levels of abstraction Higher levels of
abstractions present statements that are more general and over-arching whereas
lower levels of abstraction provide statements that are more specific (Highest
Level of Abstraction) - Vision Statement First Level Second Level Visionary
Goals Third Level Overall Objectives Fourth Level Specific Objectives (Lowest
Level of Abstraction) - Measures Fifth Level The Vision Statement and Visionary
Goals are given with the general public and overall government policy makers in
mind For this reason, Visionary Goals are limited to eight, making them easier
to memorise or integrate into shorter presentations It is not expected that
these will be changed over the time of the BNEP planning horizon, as they
represent broad wide-ranging goals Figure : Policy Inverted Pyramid The Specific
Objectives are expected to be developed by members working within those specific
sectors, and can be modified as priorities change and new industries develop
Although these will be modified, it is important to make sure that each level of
abstraction flows directly from the one above it 54 • Visionary Goal: An energy
sector that offers diversity of sustainable energy options with  trajectory
towards 100% This relationship is illustrated in Fig , which presents the Policy
Inverted Pyramid In the BNEP, the overarching statement is the Vision Statement
This statement flows into the Visionary Goals, which then give rise to the
Overall Objectives These Overall Objectives inform the Specific Objectives which
relate to individual sub-sectors of the energy economy The measures chosen for
each sector will feed into those Specific Objectives • Overall Objective:
Increasing diversity in the types of energy sources used in both the renewable
and fossil fuels sectors • Specific Objective:  renewable energy sector that has
greater involvement of smaller investors in the system Structuring the BNEP in
this way ensures that there is coordination and cohesion between activities
within the sector, the objectives and the overarching Vision Statement •
Measure: Establish  system to ensure protection of intellectual property and
patents The Vision Statement and all of the emerging goals and objectives were
structured around  number of Core Values that were obtained from interviews and
consultations with local stakeholders, as well as the assessment of issues
identified in previous policy documents prepared for Barbados and members of
CARICOM The CARICOM Energy Policy and the Jamaica National Energy Policy were
referred to in this regard Recent research conducted by the consultant into
factors affecting the development of renewable energy in the Caribbean was also
considered (Ince, Vredenburg, Liu, 2016) Below is an example showing how the
Vision Statement can be traced all the way to  measure, through different levels
of abstraction • Vision Statement: Energy security and affordability through
diversity and collaboration: establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy
sector 55 55 56 • Education, awareness and capacity building In general,
stakeholders believed that the policy should aim to provide  level playing field
to support anyone with an interest in participating in renewable and sustainable
energy activities in the energy markets The view was that with the size of the
Barbados market,  collaborative approach was likely to be more effective than
competitive one • Environmental protection and ecology, especially in connection
with public health • Innovation - developing Barbados as  centre of excellence
for research and development in renewable energy With respect to the electricity
sector in particular, it was thought that the most important aspect was to
maintain standards and reliability of production and supply for all customers in
Barbados at  reasonable price, regardless of the eventual structure of the
market and the regulatory environment It was considered essential that those
standards of production and service should be safeguarded throughout the sector
Based on the Core Values identified above, the following Vision Statement was
developed Vision Statement: “Energy security and affordability through diversity
and collaboration: Establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy sector for
Barbados”  Core Values Below is  list of some of the general core values
identified: • Stability - price, regulatory, technical • Reliability - including
continued access to energy • Efficiency in the production and consumption of all
energy resources • Diversity - reduction of vulnerability through use of
multiple sources • Ownership of business - opportunities for local investment •
Maximum use of indigenous energy resources • Entrepreneurship development •
Maximum level of collaboration • Multidisciplinary cross-cutting approach •
Systematic development of the energy sector based on renewable energy 57 The
following are potential visionary goals for Barbados emerging from the Vision
Statement and are supporting statements that reflect the general direction where
stakeholders wished the sector to go and what they wanted to see the sector
achieve These are also consistent with previous policy documents produced in
Barbados and the wider Caribbean Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers
continuous and reliable supply of energy (core value - reliability) Visionary
Goal : An energy sector that offers opportunities for development of human
capacity and collaboration (core value - capacity and collaboration) Visionary
Goal : An energy sector that offers significant opportunities for local
entrepreneurship and international investment (core value - entrepreneurship)
Visionary Goals Visionary Goal : An energy sector that minimises the
environmental impacts and contribution to global climate change (core value -
environment) Visionary Goal : An energy sector that is governed by sound
management and clear legal regulatory frameworks (core value - regulation)
Visionary Goal : An energy sector that positions Barbados as  centre of
excellence for innovation, research and development in renewable energy (core
value - innovation) Visionary Goal 10: An energy sector that provides
opportunities for all Barbadians (including the most vulnerable to the impacts
of climate change) to participate in and benefit from the transformation to 100%
RE (core value – equity) The following Overall Objectives were developed from
the Visionary Goals These objectives are not specific to any sector within the
industry but are relevant to the general energy sector: Visionary Goal : An
energy sector that offers  diversity of sustainable energy options, with
trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy by 2030 (core value - diversity)
Overall Objective : Achieving stability and predictability in energy product
prices over the long term (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective :
Achieving affordability and access to all classes of consumers in energy
products and services (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary Goal : An energy
sector where consumption and production of energy resources occur with the
maximum level of efficiency feasible (core value - efficiency) Overall Objective
: Establishing  consistent and comprehensive regulatory framework to govern
activities in various energy sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Visionary
Goal : An energy sector that offers basic energy products and services that are
affordable to local citizens (core value - affordability) 58 BNEP VISION
STATEMENT: “Energy security and affordability through diversity and
collaboration: Establishing and maintaining  sustainable energy sector for
Barbados” Figure : Summary Table of Vision Statement and Visionary Goals 59 60
Overall Objectives Overall Objective : Increasing collaboration within the
energy sub-sectors and among the cross-cutting sectors that have an impact on
energy supply or consumption (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 10:
Improving the efficiency in the production and consumption of energy products
within the various subsectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 11:
Improving the awareness and understanding of energy production and consumption,
its impacts and the associated environmental and socio-economic consequences
within all sections of the public (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective
12: Increasing the number of persons locally with qualifications and skills
relating to energy production and management of renewable and fossil fuel
sources (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 13: Reducing the
environmental impacts associated with the production and consumption of energy
resources locally (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 14: Ensuring
reliability and continuity of energy supply in the various local energy
subsectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Increasing the
amount of renewable energy sources used in the energy mix to the extent that it
can be accommodated from  technical and socio-economic perspective (related to
Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 15: Attaining the lowest price sustainable by
the local economy for various energy sources consumed in Barbados, while
maintaining environmental efficiency (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall
Objective : Increasing diversity in the types of energy sources used within the
energy sector (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 16: Establishing
effective partnerships between national and international entities for local
energy projects (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Increasing the
extent of energy resources used in Barbados that are obtained from indigenous
sources (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 17: Establishing
effective systems to support  hub for research and development in renewable
energy (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective : Encouraging local
investment in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, with  view to
increasing the number of shareholders and players in the various energy
subsectors (related to Visionary Goal ) Overall Objective 18: Maximising the use
of small scale distributed generation within the energy mix (related to
Visionary Goal 10) Overall Objective : Promoting more local entrepreneurial
activities in renewable energy and increasing fossil fuel energy development
throughout the energy sub-sectors (related to Visionary Goal ) 61 “  critical
part of the policy sets  path to the one based entirely on renewable energy” 62
SECTION  SECTOR SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES & MEASURES 63 SECTOR SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES &
MEASURES  Introduction  Energy Supply The following Sector Specific Objectives
emerged from the Overall Objectives in Section  They also reflect specific
objectives that were suggested during the interviews with members of the various
sectors identified Based on the Sector Specific Objectives, possible measures
under the various themes were identified The categorisation of the themes and
the sectors were based in part on those suggested by the Energy Task Force in
the document Policy Outline and Thematic Areas (2016) The theme of Energy Supply
focuses on both the renewable and fossil fuel energy sectors  critical part of
the policy sets  path for the necessary transition from  fossil fuel economy to
one based entirely on renewable energy Cognisant that the transition will be
rapid, Barbados has also turned its attention to exploring for hydrocarbon
resources in its Exclusive Economic Zone Indeed, the BNEP recognises that if
Barbados locates significant quantities of natural gas, this resource could play
role in assisting the country in its transition to renewable energy and in
reducing its overall carbon footprint, by choosing what some refer to as the
Norwegian model and exporting all exploited hydrocarbons (on land or offshore)
The objectives identified in this section relate to the following important
energy supply issues, and are separated into Oil and Gas, and Renewable Energy
supply sectors: • Production - renewable energy and the exploration and
production of oil and gas • Distribution and sale of energy output • Fuel and
energy diversification • Energy pricing and affordability • Energy security •
Cross-border trade in energy • Energy integration • Storage – energy and fuel 64
BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 “ if Barbados locates significant
quantities of natural gas, this resource could play  role in assisting the
country in its transition to renewable energy and in reducing its overall carbon
footprint 65 65  Oil and Gas Supply Sector Objectives ,,• Clearly defines rules
surrounding allocation of economic rent payable to government and developers The
importance of optimising the use of fossil fuel resources relates to the Overall
Objectives discussed in Section  These objectives relate to the stability of
supply, efficiency of operation, development of indigenous and human resources
in the potential new oil and gas industry, and the establishment of appropriate
regulatory and legislative frameworks • Has  system to allow for  fraction of
the revenues generated in petroleum resources to be used in advancing  renewable
energy- based economy that is self-sustaining • Has  ‘zero harm’ health, safety
and environment protocol that governs activities in the oil and gas sector
Recently, there have also been significant technological advancements in deep
water oil and gas exploration, drilling and production These advances have made
deep water basins more economic to explore Developments that improved efficiency
have occurred in areas such as compression systems, pipeline technology and
drilling equipment, making it advantageous for Barbados to continue to develop
its oil and gas resource to the greatest extent possible, while maintaining the
quality of the terrestrial and marine environment • Includes  clear retirement
strategy for generation plants owned by the utility and other regulated energy
producing entities • Has stability in as many components of energy pricing as
possible • Has well understood links between upstream and downstream processes
in the energy systems by energy providers and consumers The Specific Objectives
listed below will be important in helping the overall energy sector in attaining
the Overall Objectives The importance of sustainability in the oil and gas
sector relates to the following Visionary Goal Policy Measures - Oil and Gas
Supply In order to achieve sustainable production of oil and gas in Barbados’
Exclusive Economic Zone, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together
to: Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers significant opportunities for
local entrepreneurship and international investment • Establish regularly held
investor conferences to inform potential developers about the rules and
requirements needed to undertake activities in the oil and gas sector The
Specific Objectives will result in  sector that: • Increase the cultivation of
data relating to the geological and geophysical conditions in the offshore oil
and gas sector to aid the government in setting licence fees and determining
levels of royalties • Ensures the security of supply of oil and gas products
where economically and financially viable • Ensures  suitable legal and
administrative regime to promote the successful exploration and development of
commercial discoveries of • Develop  licensing system with clear criteria on the
ranking of various factors critical to the decision on bids This system should
be made available widely to potential bidders as well as the general public oil
and gas • Clearly identifies agencies such as the National Petroleum Corporation
(NPC) and Barbados National Oil Company (BNOC) as the implementing agencies for
government policies in various energy areas • Formulate clear legislation
governing environmental management in offshore oil and gas activities, with
provisions for removal of licences if stipulations are not met • Maximises
exploration, production and export of petroleum products 66 • Develop  capacity-
building program locally to prepare the workforce for employment in the emerging
oil and gas offshore sector “ It is expected that solar PV, solar thermal, wind,
biofuels and biogas will all form part of the mix of renewable energy • Create
an enabling environment that will empower local businesses to participate
effectively in the supply of goods and services to the offshore oil and gas
sector • Offer fiscal incentives for developers, which are tied to factors such
as the expected internal rate of return • Establish  wealth management programme
to ensure that revenues from the offshore oil and gas sector are used
effectively • Export all commercially produced oil and gas where it is
financially and economically feasible In the area of solar thermal, there is an
interest in increasing the use of solar water heaters as far as it is
financially and economically feasible The development of solar water heaters for
low income residents could be pursued under  suitable regulatory framework •
Produce legislation that identifies limits on the amount of oil and gas
resources that can be exploited in the short term • Build  defence and security
framework to protect the Exclusive Economic Zone Development of solar thermal
technology for air conditioning systems, distillation and electricity using
concentrated solar, are all areas where solar thermal could be part of long-term
sustainability solutions for Barbados The potential for these and other
innovations in renewable energy to be exported to other Caribbean markets,
offering the opportunity for further entrepreneurship in Barbados, should also
be considered If such markets were developed, Barbados could establish  goal in
the medium and long term to be  renewable energy hub for the Caribbean
Renewable Energy Supply The development of renewable energy resources available
in Barbados will be essential to maintaining and improving the overall
sustainability of the sector Barbados is proud to be seen as one of the leaders
in renewable energy in the Caribbean, particularly in the area of solar water
heaters Similarly, there is also potential for research into improving
efficiencies and designs of some of the existing solar and renewable energy
technologies The success in solar water heaters was one of the spurs for the
solar PV industry, which has expanded exponentially over the last five years,
due in part to the introduction of BL&’ Renewable Energy Rider Despite these
successes, there is still  lot that can be done to expand solar thermal and PV
technologies to their full potential, and extend the use of renewable energy
resources to include more energy generated from wind, biomass and biogas There
is  need to identify overall strategies to increase the penetration of renewable
energy technologies in the energy generation mix, while at the same time
identifying the appropriate level of development of specific renewable energy
technologies for Barbados Proposed targets for renewable energy are outlined in
Section  67 68 Renewable Energy Supply Sector Objectives The importance of the
renewable energy sector is high in the context of all sectors, especially as the
transition towards the aspirational goal of 100% renewable energy is one of the
key aspects of the energy policy, which is encapsulated in Visionary Goal ,
Overall Objective  and Overall Objective While discussing the opportunities for
further use of renewable energy within Barbados, there is  need to also explore
the potential for exporting technologies to other countries in the Caribbean and
further afield This is especially so in the area of solar thermal and solar
photovoltaic technologies It is expected that solar PV, solar thermal, wind,
biofuels and biogas will all form part of the mix of renewable energy as
described above There will also need to be development in storage technology to
increase possible off-grid applications and to improve the capacity factor for
grid-tied technologies Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers  diversity
of sustainable energy options, with  trajectory to achieve 100% Renewable Energy
by Visionary Goal : An energy sector that positions Barbados as  centre of
excellence for innovation, research and development in renewable energy (core
value - innovation) It is important to determine the activities that will be
needed to ensure that each of these technologies is developed to their full
potential As  result, some of the objectives identified will relate to renewable
energy as  whole, while others will speak to  specific technology or  subset of
technologies Overall Objective : Increasing the amount of renewable energy
sources used in the energy mix to the extent that it can be accommodated from
technical and socio-economic perspective In addition to the existing renewable
energy technologies that are currently viable in the Caribbean, there are
emerging renewable energy technologies that may become more feasible for
development over the planning horizon of the BNEP Overall Objective 17:
Establishing effective systems to support  hub for research and development in
renewable energy (related to Visionary Goal ) Technologies such as ocean
thermal, tidal, geothermal or ground source heat are  few that are not factored
in at the moment, but that may play  part in the energy portfolio before
Sustainability within the renewable energy supply side is also important for
objectives relating to stability of supply, costs and affordability of energy,
efficiency of operation, development of indigenous resources, development of
human capacity, and the establishment of appropriate regulatory and legislative
frameworks The needs which will be addressed by the transition to an economy
powered significantly by renewable energy are: • Reduced importation and
consumption of fossil fuels, which result in loss of foreign exchange • More
efficient energy producing technologies 100% 2030 • Reduced dependence on fossil
fuel • Preservation of Barbados’ natural environment Renewable Energy by 69 •
Encourages ongoing research into newer, less mature renewable energy
technologies to allow In order to increase the consumption of renewable energy,
the Specific Objectives below will ensure  renewable energy sector that: for
effective development in the long-term • Demonstrates  clear understanding of
roles • Takes into context the need for retooling the workforce to work with
newer renewable and accountability for installation and maintenance of new
renewable energy systems energy technologies • Provides strong NGO
representation, with the capacity to promote awareness • Allows for the greatest
viable number of competing players in the market, and provides significant
opportunities to generate wealth and understanding of issues in the general
community • Includes  fair, transparent and stable tariff regime to facilitate
greater integration of renewables in the electricity grid • Establishes clear
measurements of indicators and standards for various renewable energy
technologies • Shows greater involvement of smaller investors • Maximises the
amount of manufacturing or assembly of renewable energy products within the
country that is financially and in the system, playing an important role in
sector decision making economically viable • Exhibits  strong relationship
between local renewable energy projects and regional and international renewable
energy initiatives • Optimises training opportunities in the application of
established and emerging renewable energy technologies • Demonstrates clarity in
determining the long-term strategies that would be needed in order to get to
100% energy from renewable energy sources in the long-term and support economic
growth and competitiveness in the process • Offers appropriate tax incentives to
motivate investment in new renewable energy technologies that are adjusted with
the maturity of technology • Operates within  regulatory regime that •
Facilitates investments in storage technologies to make renewable energy
technologies more technically and environmentally viable incentivises investment
• Shows an increased use of renewable energy in vehicles ( biofuels and electric
vehicles) • Provides for greater access to studies conducted on the renewable
energy sector • Promotes greater use of renewable resources produced in
business for manufacture of energy within that business ( use of biogas rather
than PV for farms) • Has optimum account separation of generation from
transmission and distribution assets • Establishes  clear direction for optimum
diversification of energy resources in the renewable energy sub-sector • Offers
programme that allows for low income households to benefit from renewable energy
installations such as solar water heaters, PV and wind • Provides clarity for
the electric utility on the direction regarding the type of energy market that
is desired • Shows  high level of transparency in the granting of licenses to
players within the renewable energy sector • Engenders an effective system to
enable  hub for research and development in renewable energy 70 BARBADOS
NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 Sector Objectives Specific to Solar Energy
sector that: • Encourages technicians highly skilled in the maintenance of EVs •
Encourages greater penetration of solar water heaters as far as is financially
and economically feasible for residential customers • Contains an optimum level
of diversity in energy resources used in the renewable energy sub-sector (cost
to be balanced against the level of diversity) • Supports greater use of solar
water heaters in other commercial and industrial sectors including the hotel
sector • Provides equity for customers unable to pay for renewable energy
installations • Offers improved economic incentives for • Allows effective
collaboration and coordination of players in the renewable energy industry
installation of both solar thermal and solar PV technologies • Incorporates
programme to stimulate job creation within the renewable energy sector • Carves
out  niche for distributed generation ( householders with rooftop solar PV and
small community wind or solar systems) • Includes  clear system for end-of-life
disposal of renewable energy equipment and associated • Demonstrates significant
use of solar thermal applications beyond the use of domestic solar water heaters
( solar cooling, distillation, parabolic solar for power production)
technologies such as batteries • Provides  special arrangement to establish
community and household involvement in renewable energy • Shows greater
integration of electric installation companies into the solar PV and • Places
greater emphasis on the development of renewable energy technologies ideally
suited other renewable energy grid connected technology industries to Barbados
or Caribbean conditions 71 Sector Objectives Specific to Wind Energy  sector
that: • Makes use of economies of scale that can be gained through utility scale
solar installations, to ensure viability and sustainability • Provides specific,
clearly defined wind energy zones Sector Objectives Specific to Bio-energy
sector that: • Includes planning standards and  system for public engagement •
Shows increased use of liquid fuels prepared from local crops on unused land (
bio-diesel) to replace imported fossil fuel where feasible • Establishes an
environment conducive to joint ventures for wind energy • Requires larger farms
to install capacity on site for producing biogas for electricity production •
Promotes the removal of barriers to investment for wind energy or to replace
natural gas in the NPC distribution network • Establishes  system of investment
to facilitate transportation, cranes and construction equipment to support
large-scale • Uses streamlined systems for waste management/separation to
facilitate waste wind development to energy projects • Encourages understanding
and awareness of issues surrounding wind energy in the • Allocates an adequate
amount of agricultural land for development of bio-energy general public •
Includes the production of bio-diesel for transportation • Provides economic
incentives for setting up small wind installations for domestic/residential and
commercial purposes • Optimises land used in the production of energy from bio-
fuels Energy Storage - Renewable Energy Given the fact that many of the
renewable energy technologies are intermittent in nature, development of
technologies that enable the storage of energy from sources such as wind, solar
and tidal energy will be important This is especially so if the establishment of
off-grid renewable energy technologies is expected to become more prominent •
Supports  bio-methane industry based on fermentation technologies, and with
clearly defined markets • Articulates clearly established standards for methane
production from biogas • Provides several options to promote flexibility Even
with grid-connected renewable energy, there are limits for renewable energy
penetration The Barbados Solar and Wind Integration Study (2015) discusses this
in more detail The larger the amount of renewable energy in the energy mix, the
greater the need for spinning reserves at the electric utility in energy supply
• Provides specific regulations for the storage of bio-methane • Clearly
regulates health, safety and the environment It is clear that without investment
in energy storage, the capacity factors for renewable energy technologies will
remain low, with  far greater investment of installed capacity needed to produce
similar amounts of energy to that provided by traditional, conventional energy
sources • Provides appropriate fiscal and financial support framework for the
bio-methane industry • Accommodates strong systems to support research and
development 72 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 73 73 • Establish
capacity building program locally to prepare the workforce for employment in the
renewable energy sector Technologies using batteries, compressed air and pumped
storage have all been discussed as possibilities for energy storage in Barbados
Significant investment in research and development of energy storage technology
will be required to help satisfy the long-term vision of attaining 100% of
energy produced from renewable energy • Develop  central database containing
details on the extent of renewable energy resources available at various
locations in Barbados (solar, wind and bioenergy potential) In determining the
final targets for intermittent renewable energy technologies, there will need to
be concomitant increases and investment in energy storage technologies •
Establish legislation and regulations that provide for  transparent process in
acquiring licences for supplying electricity from renewable energy sources Below
are specific objectives in energy storage to ensure  sector that: • Provide an
enabling environment that encourages collaborative approaches to producing
renewable energy that is technically sound, and is financially, economically and
environmentally viable • Commands access to research detailing the potential for
use of various energy storage technologies such as batteries, pumped storage,
and compressed air • Establish  program of international financing and ‘in kind’
assistance that effectively supports the supply of renewable energy, and
promotes Barbados’ economic growth and competitiveness • Articulates standards
for energy storage technologies that are used in combination with renewable
energy technologies • Provides concessions and economic incentives to promote
the development of energy storage technologies that work in conjunction with
renewable energy technologies to improve stability and reliability The
establishment of an industry in Barbados for the manufacture and maintenance of
batteries for energy storage will be facilitated • Increase staffing
(secretariat) and human capacity to support local NGOs such as BREA • Develop
clear protocol for clients to follow for investigating and trouble-shooting in
new renewable energy systems with  method of recourse for clients in case of
unsatisfactory company performance • Liberalises the energy storage market to
allow for others besides the main electric utility and grid operator to provide
energy storage services (distributed and centralised) • Provide regular and
clear communication to the public on developments within the renewable energy
industry Institute efficiency standards for • manufacturing local renewable
energy products such as solar water heaters Policy Measures - Renewable Energy
Sector and Storage In order to achieve  sustainable transition to  sector more
strongly based on renewable energy, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work
together to: • Establish appropriate fiscal incentives for emerging renewable
energy and storage technologies • Diversify and optimise the renewable energy
mix that results in the maximisation of socio-economic and financial benefits to
Barbados • Promote an enabling environment that encourages local involvement in
renewable energy projects 74  Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation •
Establish  hub for innovation, research and development in renewable energy •
Create  system to ensure the protection of Energy efficiency and conservation
are critical to achieving the national desire to contain the foreign exchange
expenditure relating to the fuel import bill Changing energy use to provide more
output for less input improves both the economic and environmental performance
of any technology Looking across the planning horizon of the BNEP, it is
expected that the economy will experience growth, and potentially increase the
demand for energy In promoting energy efficiency and conservation, growth across
sectors such as manufacturing and construction should not be compromised The
indicators developed and the measures pursued should lead to improvements in the
way that energy is produced, even if there is long-term growth in overall use
intellectual property and patents for renewable energy technologies • Define
land areas for bio-energy and wind production in Barbados’ Physical Development
Plan • Establish and support infrastructure for the collection, handling, and
processing of organic material to produce energy • Establish  renewable energy
spatial licensing regime for residential and commercial producers • Provide
fiscal and financial support for One of the main strategies for attaining
sustainable energy production and consumption sector is to attain maximum
efficiency  focus on energy efficiency can improve the performance in both the
renewable energy and fossil fuel sectors research and development in renewable
energy and storage technologies and methods • Develop standards of production
for bio-methane from biogas The importance of energy efficiency is stated in
Visionary Goal  • Create standards for electricity generation efficiency in the
bio-energy, wind energy and other renewable energy sub sectors Visionary Goal :
An energy sector where consumption and production of energy resources occur with
the maximum level of efficiency that is feasible • Produce  legislative and
regulatory framework for bio-energy production, distribution, storage, and plant
decommissioning • Devise  strategy for expanding Barbados’ The importance of
energy efficiency is further emphasised in Overall Objective renewable energy
markets into the Caribbean • Establish  transparent decision protocol for
choosing between energy storage measures Overall Objective 10: Improving the
efficiency in the production and consumption of energy products within the
various sub-sectors • Create clear guidelines for integration of battery
technology in PV systems The importance of energy efficiency and its overarching
role in improving sustainability throughout the sectors, make it sufficiently
significant to merit its own policy or plan emerging from the BNEP For this
reason the development of an Energy Efficiency Plan is included among the
recommended measures below The Energy Efficiency Plan would have sub-sections to
consider areas of energy management and planning, lighting and exterior energy
efficiency activities • Implement proven storage technologies and systems that
promote renewable energy and are economically, environmentally and financially
viable • Establish  system for recycling and disposing of batteries at end of
use (cradle to cradle) 75 Policy Measures - Energy Efficiency and Conservation
To improve the efficiency of energy use in the country, all relevant entities in
Barbados shall work together to: The BNEP seeks to address and promote energy
efficiency activities through the following: • Retrofitting • Energy efficiency
management • Establish efficiency standards governing electricity production for
utility and distribution-scale operations • Energy efficiency and electricity •
Incentive development for energy efficiency and energy conservation • Develop
maximum useful life and cost/ performance ratio of operations for generation
equipment • Standards for energy efficiency and energy conservation • Create
legislation and regulations to govern movement towards greater energy efficiency
in businesses and residences in Barbados • Regulatory development • Promotion of
public awareness • Craft an energy efficiency plan as  policy guideline document
• Human resources development • Develop an energy conservation education Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Sector Specific Objectives The efficient consumption
of energy in Barbados will result in  sector that: and awareness programme that
will promote lifestyle changes among Barbadians with regard to energy
consumption • Promote energy efficiency in the productive and • Establishes
efficiency standards for manufacturing of local renewable trading sectors energy
products • Develop sectoral energy efficiency and consumption standards for
buildings, and encode them in the Town and Country • Provides energy efficiency
standards for importation of electrical and electronic equipment into Barbados
Planning Act • Establish or adopt business standards for the design of energy
efficient homes and offices • Creates an energy efficiency labelling protocol
for electric and electronic equipment • Create energy efficiency standards for •
Integrates energy efficiency activities with renewable energy, and views
renewable energy as energy efficiency with zero cost appliances and equipment
used for residential, commercial and industrial purposes • Provide equity for
households that are unable • Establishes retrofits or energy efficiency where
feasible;  replacing florescent bulbs with to pay for energy efficiency
retrofits and products LED lights • Develop  set of regulations in tandem with
all government ministries involved in the energy sector, which identifies  clear
and defined process for new applicants in energy efficiency projects • Considers
energy efficiency alongside renewable energy development in an integrated
approach to sustainability throughout the sector 76 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY
POLICY 2019 - 2030 Given that 50% of energy used in Barbados is provided by the
electricity utility, more renewable sources in the generation of electricity
will go  long way towards reaching long-term targets  Electricity Sector •
Produce  system of duties, taxes and economic incentives to promote greater use
of high-efficiency energy technologies The electricity sector is  critical
sector to be addressed in the movement towards  sustainable energy sector and
the goal of 100% renewable energy In order to obtain the maximum benefit of
renewable energy technologies, there will need to be integration of these
technologies into the existing grid • Implement standards for insulation in
buildings • Use Life Cycle Analysis to determine the best materials to be used
for buildings and other construction projects 77  utility in  single buyer
market such as Barbados requires  licence to operate  degree of certainty with
regards to licensing is important if the utility is to invest in technologies
and programmes in the long-run The resulting agreements between the electric
utility and renewable energy developers should share the risks and opportunities
appropriately The involvement of the utility is also important in promoting
demand- side management and energy efficiency within various customer classes
There may also be an opening up of the electricity market for competition or
other participation, in order to facilitate Overall Objective  Given that 50% of
energy used in Barbados is provided by the electricity utility, more renewable
sources in the generation of electricity will go  long way towards reaching
long-term targets It is important that the electric utility is clear on
government’ long- term strategy to ensure that decisions regarding technological
investments are made in support of the targets The utility should also play
part in setting the targets and establishing plans for the transition towards
grid using more renewable energy and sustainable fossil fuels One of the ways in
which transitions to renewable energy and energy efficiency technology will be
included is through the use of SMART grids, which will need to be integrated
into the existing distribution system Overall Objective : Encouraging local
investment in energy projects and programmes in Barbados, with  view to
increasing the number of shareholders and players in the various energy
subsectors The sustainability of the energy sector will be achieved through an
electricity sector that: • Provides  reliable service, minimising brownouts and
blackouts • Offers an affordable service to customers in all categories One
other significant aspect relating policy to consider is the degree to which
liberalisation of the market is possible This can be viewed in terms of
generation, transmission and distribution, but there may be other specific
services that the utility is currently responsible for that might involve  third
party These could include aspects of energy storage to facilitate greater use of
renewable energy technologies • Establishes  greater percentage of renewable
energy in the fuel mix for electricity generation (Aspirational goal of 100%) •
Expresses clear rules governing the participation of Independent Power Producers
(IPPs) in the sector • Has specific pricing for each renewable energy
Electricity Sector Specific Objectives As Barbados transitions towards
renewable energy- based economy, the production and distribution of affordable
electricity to all citizens in Barbados will be maintained, as stated in Overall
Objective  source in any pricing agreement • Establishes clear rules governing
the write- off of sunken assets by BL&, NPC, BNOC and other electricity
producing entities that may be regulated Overall Objective : Achieving stability
and predictability in energy product prices over the long term • Provides clear
rules defining investments for firm capacity and intermittent capacity Other
Objectives and Visionary goals related to efficiency and environmental quality
also speak directly to the electric utility’ ability to achieve the objectives
within the sector • Demarcates obligations for provision of universal service
between the incumbent utility and potential new renewable energy players •
Defines an optimum mix of technologies in renewable energy,  percentage to be
provided by wind, solar, biomass etc Important in considering the electricity
sector, are issues related to regulation and licensing This is because the
extent to which investments can be undertaken by the utility is determined to
some extent by the regulator, the FTC 78 • Increases the involvement of the
electricity utility in other sectors such as transport ( supply of energy for
EVs; vehicle to home and vehicle to grid technologies) • Provides guidance on
optimising the size of components of the renewable energy system (utility scale
vs distributed renewable energy) • Establishes  transparent system for •
Determines the optimum level of competition determining when to include newer
renewable technologies into long-term utility planning (OTEC, wave, etc) and
collaboration in the sector, while maintaining reliability of supply • Provides
clear and transparent rules for • Maximises the potential in using storage
dispatch of generation, with assigned roles and responsibilities technologies to
improve the dispatch of supply • Articulates clear rules on how utility planning
should be undertaken; moving away from  least cost model to an MCA sustainable
model • Offers streamlined and transparent rules determining the issue of
licenses for IPPs (could be an auctioning or RFP process by an independent body)
• Demonstrates transparency in the roles of the utility, the government ministry
and the regulator in establishing long-term planning and integration of IPPs in
the new competitive market • Establishes  market with the maximum participation
of local entrepreneurs and international partners that can be accommodated •
Prioritises reduction of carbon emissions in line with climate change, and
national and global targets 79 • Promote the use of renewable and other clean •
Develops an equitable and stable pricing regime that is consistent with social
and environmental values sources of energy to produce electricity • Develop
clear rules for determining roles and timelines for updating the Integrated •
Provides financial incentives for investors that promote renewable or more
sustainable energy sources Resource Plan • Use SMART meters as part of an
advanced communication infrastructure for distribution • Creates tariff and
pricing regimes for the management, to facilitate the use of more utility that
include consideration of the cost intermittent technologies and aid in demand-
side management of storage technologies • Includes the integration of SMART grid
technologies  Energy and Transportation • Improves efficiency of electricity
generation • Establishes efficiency in consumption practices, including the use
of demand-side management The transportation sector is  large consumer of fossil
fuel and, therefore,  significant contributor to greenhouse gas emissions in
Barbados Transportation is responsible for about 33% of energy consumed on the
local energy sector Given the ever expanding fleet of vehicles on the roads,
management within the transport sector will be vital in charting  sustainable
path for energy development Policy Measures Electricity Supply In order to
establish an electricity sector that is powered by affordable renewable energy,
all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to: • Establish electric
market structures that reduce the effects of monopolistic operations where In
addressing the transport sector, it is crucial to consider both the
technological development and issues of management and organisation within the
sector There is also  need for focus on infrastructure such as roads and
refuelling systems financially and economically feasible • Create  pricing
mechanism for electricity from renewable energy suppliers • Devise protocols for
interconnectivity between The expansion of the local fleet of electric vehicles
was identified as  principal area of development alongside other changes to
alternative fuels or improvements in overall efficiency IPPs and the utility to
supply electricity • Expand electricity regulation to include the wide ranging
aspects of the market, generation, distribution, supply, dispatch, transmission,
and electricity use within the electricity sector Enhancements in the transport
sector will play  significant role in achieving the Visionary Goals and Overall
Objectives, including the following: • Produce standards and specifications for
generation, supply, dispatch, transmission, distribution, storage and
consumption that allow the electricity sector to operate in  financially,
economically, environmentally, Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers
diversity of sustainable energy options with  trajectory to achieve 100%
Renewable Energy and technically viable manner Overall Objective : Increasing
the amount of renewable energy sources used in the energy mix to the extent that
it can be accommodated from  technical and socio-economic perspective •
Institute targets for limits on CO2 emissions in the electricity sector 80 •
Uses fewer vehicles per capita to reduce the level of traffic congestion in the
country Consequently, the BNEP seeks to provide measures to address the
following issues: • Provides more convenient and attractive public • Energy
consumption and efficiency within the transport options to consumers
transportation sector • Sensitises the public to the benefits of using mass
public transit rather than private cars • Conversion from fossil fuel use to
electricity • Transportation management • Has created  disaggregated sector plan
• Fuel switching within the transportation sector • Has defined  consistent
transportation policy that makes investment in new technologies worthwhile •
Clean energy use and emissions control within the transportation sector •
Supports  well maintained system of charging Transport Sector Specific
Objectives The transformation of the type of energy consumption within the
transportation sector will be achieved, thereby giving rise to  sector that:
stations at strategic points in the country • Owns  fleet with  greater average
performance efficiency of vehicles in Barbados • Operates with  greater
percentage of electric Policy Measures Transport Sector In order to achieve the
significant change in the consumption of energy to more efficient, clean and
renewable energy, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to:
vehicles (EVs) and hybrid vehicles in the local fleet • Utilises  skilled
workforce available to provide effective maintenance on EVs • Create biofuel
standards for wholesale and • Provides more information to customers on retail
supply of vehicles comparative operating costs of running diesel, gasoline and
EVs • Establish  transportation information system to provide data for
transportation and energy policies, strategic planning, tracking of CO2
emissions, and environmental impacts • Has  greater number of renewable energy
systems installed that can be used as charging stations for EVs (carports and
charging stations) • Introduce more renewable energy and clean energy into the
public transportation system • Reduces the duties on the importation of EVs •
Provide appropriate incentives to promote • Uses more batteries and other
storage technology to facilitate the charging of vehicles 24 hours per day
“green pumps” within service stations and on commercial properties • Remove MTBE
from gasoline and diesel, and • Offers greater concessions in infrastructural
cost to encourage more local automobile dealers to be involved in the EV market
replace it with ethanol and bio-diesel • Promote linkages with the agriculture
sector to encourage the production of agro-energy crops where financially and
economically viable • Collects more detailed information on the number of EVs,
hybrids and other alternative fuel vehicles in the country • Encourage energy
efficiency in the transportation sector • Includes the use of EVs, biofuels, and
other alternative fuels in public transport 81 82 • Create  system that includes
mobile charging stations for vehicles • Introduce ethanol rather than MTBE as an
anti-knock agent • Implement more stringent regulations on vehicles’ exhausts
and emissions • Integrate charging stations with traditional gas stations •
Construct more charging stations for EVs • Control and maintain CO2 emissions at
levels consistent with local and global climate change targets • Establish
system that facilitates the change from traditional vehicles to those powered by
renewable energy, taking transition costs into consideration • Implement
standards for streetlight efficiency • Provide cost incentives that encourage
investment in required infrastructure with charging stations etc • Acquire more
details on the number of vehicles using each fuel type • Provide tax incentives
to vehicle dealerships that train their mechanics to maintain and repair EVs •
Establish standards in charging and other renewable energy infrastructure
related to fuelling • Establish  programme for identifying • Develop  regulatory
framework for the implementation of vehicle to grid storage and supply
technology appropriate international sources of funding to facilitate and assist
the government in transitioning from fossil fuels to EVs • Remove duties and VAT
from EVs and encourage  scheduled approach to increasing their use in the
national transportation fleet, while at the same time, not harming  Energy and
the Environment government’ revenue stream It has long been observed that the
production of energy has had an impact on our natural environment through the
emission of various pollutants, and that such costs have, for many years, been
externalised from the sector, and not seen as  cost to doing business • Develop
road network that promotes energy efficiency • Establish the use of management
technology in public transit,  using smartphone apps to verify arrival times of
buses 83 • Requires (through legislation and regulation) all participants to
adhere to the principle of zero harm to people and the environment in pursuit of
energy production, transportation and distribution Given the focus on long-term
health and environmental issues related to marine life, ground water and air
quality, it is important to explore the impact of energy, the environment and
associated costs This pertains to the Visionary Goals and Overall Objectives
below: Policy Measures -Energy and the Environment To ensure that environmental
concerns and objectives are addressed fully, all relevant entities in Barbados
shall work together to establish: Visionary Goal : An energy sector that
minimises the environmental impacts and contribution to global climate change
(environment) Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental impacts
associated with the production and consumption of energy resources locally •
Standards and protocols for the safe and effective disposal of equipment and
devices in the energy sector The BNEP will establish  course of action for the
following issues: •  sustainable environmental management framework for the
upstream offshore petroleum sector • Energy’ impact on the environment, such as
air and ground water quality •  decommissioning fund for the energy sector to
facilitate the decommissioning and abandonment of energy operations and
facilities • Oil spill management • Information management and education •
Standards and protocols for energy production • Establishment and enforcement of
in the petroleum and renewable energy sub-sectors that promote and encourage the
goal of zero harm to the people and the environment environmental standards •
Clean energy • Waste and energy • Information systems and infrastructure that
promote the flow of information requiring environmental standards, Energy and
Environment Sector Objectives The achievement of  sustainable balance between
energy production, transport and consumption, and protecting the environment
will produce  sector that: best practices and legislation • Studies within the
sector that assess the correlation between carbon dioxide emissions and health
risks ( cancer and asthma) • Has  strong flow of information on the
environmental effects of various types of energy production technologies in the
energy sector and the wider society Climate Change The statement in Visionary
Goal  emphasises the importance of climate change among the environmental
factors Barbados and all SIDS are particularly vulnerable to climate change
impacts Contamination of groundwater, damage to coral reefs, destruction of
coastlines and more frequent extreme weather events are just  few of the
occurrences that could severely impact Barbados’ economy and those of other SIDS
• Provides infrastructure that allows the authorities responsible for
environmental protection to assess and monitor environmental standards in the
energy sector • Possesses the information infrastructure that would allow for
the dissemination of environmental best practices on the production,
transportation and consumption of energy 84 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019
- 2030 85 85 Human Resources and Institutions: Capacity and Development In order
for the BNEP to be effective, the institutions and human resources which service
the energy sector must be honed and applied in  meaningful way The move of the
energy industry towards  greater reliance on renewable energy represents
paradigm change in energy production and consumption It will be necessary to
ensure that the workforce is adequately prepared for the new skills that are
needed, and for institutions to be restructured to regulate and manage
activities within the new sector It is therefore in Barbados’ and other small
islands’ interest to lead the way internationally in promoting the mitigation of
climate change BNEP speaks to the following: • Climate change financing • Carbon
pricing and trading • Moving the international energy sector towards  climate
change neutrality Of extreme importance in capacity building is the education
system; especially the promotion of energy efficiency and renewable energy in
the school curriculum at primary, secondary and tertiary institutions •
Information flow Implementation of the nationally appropriate • mitigation
action Climate Change Sector Specific Objectives Climate change mitigation will
require  sector that: Visionary Goal  and Overall Objectives 11 and 12
specifically identify these key issues related to human resource development •
Contributes to the reduction of CO2 emissions by promoting the use of clean and
Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers opportunities for development of
human capacity and collaboration renewable energy • Fosters collaboration and
cooperation amongst Overall Objective 11: Improving the awareness and
understanding of energy production and consumption, its impacts and the
associated environmental and socio-economic consequences within all sections of
the public all stakeholders to reduce CO2 emissions • Works with international
investors and agencies to finance climate change mitigation initiatives •
Establishes  baseline database for the level of greenhouse gases associated with
economic and developmental activities in the various sectors Overall Objective
12: Increasing the number of persons locally with qualifications and skills
relating to energy production and management of renewable and fossil fuel
sources Policy Measures for Climate Change To achieve success in the reduction
of CO2 emissions within the energy sector, all relevant entities in Barbados
shall work together to: This section addresses and anticipates these changes and
developments needed in the area of human resources and institutional capacity
The Specific Objectives for human capacity will address issues relating to: •
Create  mechanism and infrastructure to internationally transferred mitigation
outcomes • Research and development • Establish  clear international agenda for
the acquisition of climate change • Education and skills development mitigation
funding • Energy information management 86 • Knowledge development “ • Capacity
development and institutional  skilled workforce able to fulfil the requirements
of the new renewable energy sector strengthening  Human Resource and
Institutions - Capacity Specific Objectives The development of skills and
knowledge in the energy sector will result in  sector that: • Has  skilled
workforce able to fulfil the requirements of the new renewable energy sectors •
Uses more qualified persons in conducting • Maintains standards of qualification
for energy audits all aspects of the energy sector, especially in renewable
energy • Emphasises the concept of ‘innovation’ in energy-related curricula at
various levels • Maximises information sharing between of education educational
institutions and the energy sector in establishing school curricula, and degree
and vocational programmes • Regularly uses various media to communicate with the
general public about issues relevant to energy policy and sustainable energy
development in the country • Incorporates new skills relevant to emerging,
conventional and renewable energy sectors into syllabi in tertiary institutions
such as the Barbados Community College (BCC), the Samuel Jackman Prescod
Polytechnic (SJPP), and the University of the West Indies (UWI) • Maximises the
commercialisation of new and renewable energy technologies in the country •
Offers significant internship opportunities in energy technology development in
the private sector • Offers an increased number of scholarships for persons
interested in studying new areas related to renewable energy and aspects of
sustainability in the oil and gas sector • Provides significant opportunities
for the private sector to sponsor local energy development projects • Allows for
the flow of energy information from regional institutions to the local
environment, and from local industry to regional institutions • Facilitates
financial contributions from the general public for the development of various
projects Incorporates new skills relevant to emerging, conventional and
renewable energy sectors into syllabi in tertiary institutions such as the
Barbados Community College (BCC), the Samuel Jackman Prescod Polytechnic (SJPP),
and the University of the West Indies (UWI) 87 • Develop and promote
institutional capabilities • Makes greater use of international standards and
best practices in the development of the energy sector in the energy sector
including: • Energy policy formulation, management, assessment and audit •
Legislative review and reform • Energy sector planning • Encourages the pursuit
of vocational skills that are important in building an effective renewable
energy sector through support of institutions such as the Technical Vocational
and Education • Support, promote and maintain the timely supply of data and
information to the Barbados Training (TVET) Council National Energy Information
System • Creates an environment that motivates • Establish regional and
international agendas to personal entrepreneurship in areas of small business
development in energy-related fields develop technical capacity • Implement
guidelines for the adaptation, diffusion, and transfer of energy technologies •
Provides  community teaching programme in renewable energy • Promote cooperation
in research and technological development within the energy sector • Offers
clear levels of acceptable standards of service for various energy products,
with the possibility of recourse for consumers if standards are not met •
Support research and development into smart-grid technologies Policy Measures
for Human Resources Institutions: - Capacity and Development To achieve the
objectives that will lead to  significant improvement in human resources and
capacity development, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to:
• Enable an effective system of knowledge transfer of higher order energy skills
available in international institutions to local educational and vocational
facilities • Establish an educational system that supports efforts for
entrepreneurship in the energy sector • Develop energy studies curricula for
secondary and tertiary institutions • Establish  knowledge base for the energy
sector within an appropriate institutional framework • Introduce research
programmes that illustrate the link between the development of the local energy
sector and the economy • Develop an energy workbook that makes use of an
integrated approach, including general • Create new jobs throughout the energy
industry that increase overall employment concepts in math, science, etc
opportunities in Barbados • Formulate  partnership between stakeholders within
the energy sector and the Ministry of Education • Empower  working group,
including members of educational institutions and the energy sector to ensure
the on-going relevance of education in the changing energy environment • Create
an information network between the energy and educational sectors to communicate
requirements pertaining to skills and expertise • Institute demonstration
projects that illustrate innovation and the commercialisation of energy projects
• Mobilise funding for training and development of persons employed in the
energy sector, and fields of disciplines that support it 88 BARBADOS NATIONAL
ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 “ Sustainability in agriculture will help safeguard
the sustainability of the entire energy sector in the long term  Energy and the
Cross-Cutting Sectors have  significant impact on energy production or
consumption, and/or will be impacted by energy production or consumption
practices The energy sector has  significant impact on all aspects of Barbados’
socio- economic life, touching all the critical sectors of production and
consumption It is important that this policy harmonizes with identified goals
and policy objectives of the other sectors stated below: It is possible that
along the planning horizon of the BNEP, other sectors will be added as they
become more significant in terms of their impacts on the overall energy sector
During this time, the BNEP should be modified as necessary to remain consistent
with policies in other sectors such as transport, tourism, agriculture and small
business Considering thesepolicies in  consolidated manner will ensure
synchronicity and harmony in all policies relating to the Barbados economy •
Agriculture • Tourism • Industrial sector The importance of the cross-cutting
approach is summarised in Overall Objective  • Waste management • Water Overall
Objective : Increasing collaboration within the energy subsectors and among the
cross-cutting sectors that have an impact on energy supply or consumption •
Health and safety Using the Multi Criteria Approach (MCA) means that it will
always be necessary to examine the impacts of any policy decision or strategy on
the energy sector from as wide  perspective as possible The sectors identified
above emerged from various discussions within the sector These sectors are
expected to 89 Overview of Cross Cutting Sectors - Overview and Objectives •
Incorporates biomass (possibly river tamarind) as an off-season fuel to
complement bagasse fuel production • Uses  higher percentage of bio-gas, bio-
fuels, bagasse and other biomass, such as king grass,  Agriculture to produce
greater price stability Agriculture is critical because there are potential uses
of land for crops to produce bio-fuels Animal waste from farms can also be used
for production of biogas In addition, the agricultural sector is  major consumer
of energy in the process of food cultivation and production • Uses more
electricity in services such as cooking, in order to create additional
applications for renewable energy • Includes the use of ethanol from sugar cane
in the transportation sector to replace MTBE Traditionally, the sugar cane
industry in Barbados was one of the pillars of its economy However significant
decline over the last twenty years has meant that much of the land, which was
formerly used in this productive sector, now lies idle There is considerable
interest in developing crops, which can be used for energy production on this
land In recent years, there have been investigations into the viability of using
river tamarind as  crop to complement bagasse production from sugar cane •
Establishes  virtual museum to demonstrate various aspects of the sugar industry
and linkages relating to energy and sustainability • Increases the use of
biomass, while reducing reliance on fossil fuel in the manufacture of plastics
Tourism More activity and discussions in these areas are expected Sustainability
in agriculture will help safeguard the sustainability of the entire energy
sector in the long term The tourism sector is  major contributor to the Barbados
economy The success of the industry relies, in part, on maintaining the natural
environment; specifically marine and coastal resources, and air and water
quality  programme that highlights the importance of protecting these resources
for citizens and visitors to the island will be of great benefit Energy
conservation, efficiency and promotion of renewable energy are key elements in
these activities relating to the Vision Statement and Visionary Goals of the
BNEP Agriculture Sector Specific Objectives To achieve sustainability and the
Visionary Goals, Barbados seeks to develop an agricultural sector that: •
Maximises the use of bagasse from the sugar cane industry and king grass to
generate electricity that can be used within the industry and/or sold to the
utility Sustainable tourism is also  way for Barbados to market its tourism
product more broadly, as  greater number of visitors are becoming aware of
environmental issues, and are taking them into consideration when choosing
vacation destination • Maintains efficient sugar production processes and
supports products made from sugar cane • Optimises the use of waste heat
produced in agriculture for cogeneration Although hotels have become more aware
of energy efficiency and renewable energy, there are areas where their actions
can go further For example, there is room for improvement in the area of solar
water heaters, where growth in the domestic sector has not been mirrored within
the hotel industry • Makes use of available land to maximise production using
energy technologies to improve the yields and diversity of products • Has
increased commercial viability of sugar cane and the overall agricultural
industry through efficiency improvements 90 Industry, Manufacturing and
Construction Over the last decade, the Barbados economy has expanded in the
industrial sectors, with an increase in manufacturing This expansion has
resulted in  concomitant increase in both peak demand for energy and total
energy consumption The price of energy for the industrial sector has often been
higher than the cost of service, as the electricity tariffs for domestic
customers are kept at  lower level because of social considerations The higher
cost of energy for industrial users affects the cost of production for both
manufactured goods and services This means that the prices at which goods are
sold in wholesale and retail outlets are also higher At times, this high price
affects the competitiveness of businesses from an international perspective;
especially when compared to the neighbouring twin island state of Trinidad &
Tobago, where the cost of fossil fuel based energy products is much lower Energy
policy and regulation will need to address the cost of such energy products for
the industrial sectors, to ensure that businesses remain competitive, and costs
of services to consumers remain reasonable Solar thermal energy for air
conditioning is another potential area of growth if the appropriate incentives
are implemented International environmental standards, such as “Green Globe” or
“EarthCheck,” could lead to  greater focus on renewable energy and energy
efficiency standards across the sector Integrating hotel operations with
activities in industries, such as the rental car business, can extend energy
sustainability efforts in the area of transport, which is another key energy
sector In addition, the expanding tourism sector is currently responsible for
considerable amount of the electricity demand on the island Therefore, energy
efficiency improvements in this sector, and the uptake of renewable energy, will
enhance the energy sustainability potential of the country In this regard, it
would be useful to focus on areas such as refrigeration, air conditioning,
lighting, industrial cleaning and cooking Tourism Sector Specific Objectives
sector that: Barbados has also expanded its activities in the areas of building
and construction This is one of the more energy intensive sub-sectors in the
Barbados economy and, as such, areas of sustainability and energy efficiency are
critical The attainment of international energy efficiency standards, such as
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED), can play  major part in
ensuring that standards are maintained in the long term • Integrates EVs and
other renewable energy vehicles within into the rental car business and other
tourism-related services • Develops an educational programme for hotel guests
and tourists in Barbados, emphasising the importance of energy efficiency and
environmental conservation • Allows the electric utility to invest in the
Manufacturing, Construction and Building Sector Specific ObjectiveS hotel sector
in  way that will reduce the hotels’ overall energy costs and help make them
more competitive • Allows the hotel sector to take advantage of  sector that:
fuel hedging programmes offered by the utility to help stabilise energy costs
and facilitate better cost-control planning and budgeting • Maintains
electricity tariffs at levels that encourage entrepreneurship and maintain
competitiveness • Provides further incentives to promote the use of solar water
heaters and solar cooling technology for air conditioning • Makes use of
renewable energy technologies available to improve overall sustainability •
Supports  programme to encourage hotels • Encourages and educates the sector on
to achieve international energy efficiency and environmental standards such as
“EarthCheck” potential options with respect to renewable energy and self-
generation 91 Water Protection and maintenance of  good quality supply of water
has also become  source of concern Barbados is supplied entirely by ground water
aquifers, although there have been efforts to develop additional desalination
plants The energy required to pump and distribute water across Barbados is
significant, and the Barbados Water Authority (BWA) is the customer with the
highest usage of electricity from BL& in the country As  result, the BWA has
explored renewable energy options such as solar and wind energy for generating
electricity on its premises • Provides standards for buildings and construction
that are in line with international standards such as LEED Key Policy Measures
for the Waste Management Sector In small island states such as Barbados, the
issue of waste management is also one that will need to be addressed, especially
because the availability of land for use in landfills is limited The
environmental impact of waste materials such as non-biodegradable plastics can
also be significant and, with the development of an effective waste separation
system, there is potential for more recycling efforts Alternative ways of waste
disposal, including incineration, have been considered in Barbados Options such
as these will have an impact on energy consumption, which will in turn affect
the cost of waste management It is important that within this policy, the link
between water conservation and energy efficiency is emphasised There is also
need to consider specific renewable energy technologies that could be developed
for the water sector It should be noted that there may be  regulatory impact if
the BWA decides to pursue an energy source that is separate from the grid The
loss of the BWA as  customer to BL& could result in increased tariffs for
customers that stay on the grid In this situation, BL& would still be required
to meet its cost-of-service obligations Any future policy and regulatory
measures should take this into account In addition to how waste management is
impacted by consumption, there are opportunities for using various waste
products as fuel sources Bagasse obtained from the sugar cane industry is an
example of  waste product that has been used to generate electricity Various
options using gasification of other organic waste have been considered in recent
times These waste- to-energy options could represent solutions for reducing the
amount of garbage entering the landfill and increasing the use of indigenous
energy resources in Barbados It could be beneficial for the BWA and BL& to work
together to develop energy efficiency, renewable energy and storage projects
that reduce the overall energy burden of the water system, and utilises the BWA
assets more effectively  Waste Management Sector Specific ObjectiveS Water
Sector Specific Objectives  sector that: • Uses an integrated management
approach  sector that: that promotes efficiency in the consumption and
production of this resource to the greatest extent possible • Maximises the use
of waste resources in industrial processes for the generation of electricity
within the industry and to the grid • Includes the use of renewable energy
technology to reduce the overall demand and environmental impact of energy use •
Provides  clear assessment of the potential of identified waste products in
generating electricity or producing biofuels based on availability and energy
calorific content  Health and Safety • Minimises the impacts of wastewater
production in generating electricity and other manufacturing processes Apart
from the environmental factors associated with emissions generated from fossil
fuel energy production, there are impacts that these emissions 92 • Has safety
standards for oil and gas exploration that are in line with international best
practices can have on health Nitrous and sulphur oxides associated with burning
fossil fuels for generating electricity are linked to respiratory ailments In
addition, emissions from gasoline and diesel vehicles can have  similar impact
MTBE that is used in unleaded gasoline vehicles as an anti-knock agent is also
carcinogenic It is partially for this reason that the replacement of MTBE by
ethanol or gasohol has been explored as an alternative There are also safety
considerations when it comes to interconnection of renewable energy technologies
to the grid For example, there is danger of electrocution to technicians on
lines for distributed renewable energy generation flowing back to the
centralized grid For stand-alone systems, batteries that are not properly
maintained and stored can create risks of explosion Disaster Management
Barbados, as an island state, is susceptible to natural and man-made disasters,
especially related to hurricanes and other extreme weather- related events Many
of these are associated with climate change and other impacts that affect the
environment Overall Objective 13: Reducing the environmental impacts associated
with the production and consumption of energy resources locally Consequently,
disaster management and mitigation is  very important component of any plan of
action within the energy sector The BNEP speaks to the following disaster
management issues: There are also safety concerns related to the development of
the new offshore oil and gas exploration industry It is important that safety
standards be in line with international best practices for all activities on the
rig “ Related to the issue of health and safety in the energy sector is that of
disaster management Objectives and measures related to disaster management are
also considered below There are also safety concerns related to the development
of the new offshore oil and gas exploration industry It is important that safety
standards be in line with international best practices for all activities on the
rig Health and Safety and Environment Sector Specific Objectives  sector that: •
Supports health and safety, with clear standards and protocols for establishing
and maintaining new renewable energy systems • Establishes studies that quantify
the link between energy use and various health ailments observed in Barbados 93
94 • Bolster the use of waste from the industrial, agricultural and tourism
sectors, along with other municipal sources to produce energy where feasible •
Energy and fuel reserves/stocks management • Renewable energy use as  mitigation
tool of disaster management • Establish legislation and regulations to • Oil
spill management and mitigation planning encourage the safe disposal of waste
from the energy sector • Electricity restoration management • Implement time-of-
use rates for the manufacturing sector in order to improve overall efficiency •
Petroleum fuel transport disaster mitigation • Disaster management and natural
gas distribution • Develop programmes to highlight possible uses for renewable
energy technologies in the manufacturing and other industrial sectors (grid-tied
and off-grid options) Sector Specific Objectives - Disaster Management The
development of  disaster management programme will create an energy sector that:
• Establish and implement standards of energy efficiency in manufacturing, •
Ensures the safety of renewable energy systems in the event of  natural disaster
building and construction; • Makes renewable energy resources available •
Formulate and implement  building code, to contribute to relief in the wake of
natural disaster focusing on aspects such as passive cooling, energy efficiency
and general ‘green building’ solutions • Develops capabilities and resources for
rapid disaster management • Introduce standards to ensure the safety of
renewable energy systems in the event of  natural disaster • Requires (by law)
that all participants adhere to the principle of zero harm to people and the
environment in pursuit of energy production, transportation and distribution •
Establish renewable energy resources that could provide relief in the wake of
natural disaster • Ensures that the regulations for the location of generation
plant consider vulnerability to • Develop protocols for disaster management in
service stations and charging stations with renewable energy infrastructure
natural disasters such as hurricanes, earthquakes and tsunamis Key Policy
Measures - Cross-Cutting Areas In order to achieve these multi-sector
objectives, as well as ensure safety and mitigate against disaster, all relevant
entities in Barbados shall work together to: • Create an energy sector disaster
response plan • Review legislation in the energy sector to enshrine the
principle of zero harm • Promote balanced land use for energy and • Offer
economic incentives to give hotels the opportunity to provide more energy
efficiency food production and renewable energy products • Encourage energy
efficiency for irrigation and animal production • Introduce  pilot project to
illustrate the impact of renewable energy and energy efficiency measures on the
overall economy • Support the use of fisheries and agricultural waste for bio-
energy production • Promote energy efficiency within the industrial,
agricultural and tourism sectors by employing internationally recognised
efficiency standards 95  Trade in Goods and Services within the Energy Sector
include the development and implementation of an enabling environment that
facilitates local content for: • Exploration and production of oil and gas
offshore in Barbados The continued development of the energy sector necessitates
an enabling environment that promotes the capacity of Barbadian companies to
provide goods and services competitively Although maximum growth in renewable
and sustainable energy will depend largely on the international funding
available for the technology, there will also be  significant need for local
investment and entrepreneurship The importance of investment and
entrepreneurship that relates to trade is encapsulated in Visionary Goal  •
Renewable energy operations Trade in Energy Specific Objectives The improvement
of trade in energy goods and services requires  sector that: • Addresses the
barriers restricting participation in emerging renewable energy markets
Visionary Goal : An energy sector that offers significant opportunities for
local entrepreneurship and international investment • Offers financial terms to
encourage small businesses to enter the renewable energy market Overall
Objective : Encouraging local investment in energy projects and programmes in
Barbados, with  view to increasing the number of shareholders and players in the
various energy sub-sectors • Provides local investors with opportunities to be
involved in local oil and gas exploration projects • Allows the flow of
information to empower investment and the flow of financial resources Overall
Objective : Promoting more local entrepreneurial activities in renewable energy
and increasing fossil fuel energy development throughout the energy sub-sectors
• Maintains  strong local content supporting the exploration and production of
oil and gas Policy Measures - Energy Trade To accomplish an enabling environment
that will lead to  more desirable trade environment, all relevant entities in
Barbados shall work together to: To this extent, the facilitation of business
and trade within the local energy sector is  key component of the BNEP Local
trade is also important in making sure that the industry has long-term
sustainability and that the economic benefits of development are shared in the
local business community • Strengthen networks between renewable energy
businesses to foster greater collaboration There are currently  number of local
enterprises that are supplying renewable energy products and services in
Barbados The BNEP will provide for  course of action to promote the vigorous
participation of local enterprises in all aspects of the energy sector These •
Develop  database of potential local projects in renewable and non- renewable
energy, and the investment and skills needed 96 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
2019 - 2030 • Minimise all barriers to entering the renewable energy market •
Promote the enabling infrastructure that will encourage the establishment of
financial mechanisms to fund renewable energy • Determine the needs and
readiness of local firms and suppliers of goods and services to meet the
standards of supply for the offshore oil and gas sector • Review and adjust
government’ regulatory and operational framework to allow an enabling
environment for local companies to acquire the standards of supply • Establish
legislation and regulations to govern the modes of supply for electricity from
renewable energy sources 97 97 10 Energy Access and Infrastructure • Introduce
lifeline rate for persons unable to afford the cost of basic energy services
Over the years, Barbados has successfully ensured that its population has access
to energy However, over the next twenty years, the challenge will be to provide
affordable energy, as traditional sources will become more difficult and
expensive to acquire The policy will tackle the following: 11 Energy Investment
and Financing Investment management will determine the success or failure
achieved within the sector and its growth in the future  policy that recognizes
the magnitude of investment required will establish the enabling environment
that allows investment to flow The BNEP considers  course of action to address
the following: • Affordable energy for all citizens • Access to clean and
renewable energy • Investment sources: • Private sector investment • Public
sector investment • Foreign direct investment The Visionary Goal and Overall
Objective that speaks to this are as follows: Visionary Goal : An energy sector
that offers basic energy products and services that are affordable to local
citizens • Investment Structure: • Debt • Equity • Grant Overall Objective :
Achieving affordability and access to all classes of consumers in energy
products and services • Resource requirements for energy sector development
Energy Access and infrastructure Specific Sector Objectives Barbados will ensure
that accessibility to energy is maintained and enhanced by creating  sector
that: • Information mobilization and investment • Investment scheduling •
Guarantees that access to electricity is extended and maintained for all
citizens of Barbados Investment and Financing Sector Objectives Sound energy
investment and financing will see the emergence of an energy sector that: •
Possesses  developed electricity and energy infrastructure that allows for
greater degree of distributed generation where financially and economically
feasible • Maintains an optimum level of private and public sector investment
for development of energy projects in Barbados Policy Measures for Energy Access
and Infrastructure To accomplish an enabling environment through improved energy
access and infrastructure, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together
to: • Operates with an optimum mix of foreign and local investment for
development of energy projects in Barbados Policy Measures Energy Investment and
Financing To encourage sound, practical and timely investment in the energy
sector, all relevant entities in Barbados shall work together to: • Establish an
energy mix that promotes affordable energy prices • Formulate legislative and
regulatory requirements within the energy sector to contain excessive pricing •
Establish rules to guide local and overseas developers on requirements for
investing in Barbados’ oil and gas sector • Promote market structures that
encourage transparent, competitive and stable energy pricing 98 In some cases,
legislation and regulations are in place, but there are no clear rules or
procedures to ensure implementation In other cases, there are contradictions in
the provisions of the existing legislation, and this creates  level of ambiguity
in interpretation • Create  local content programme for the upstream petroleum
sector • Develop local investment and ownership within the renewable energy sub-
sector where feasible • Promote foreign/local partnerships for investment There
are areas of current legislation which provide for changes to be made at the
discretion of the minister responsible While, it can be useful for the
government and the person in charge to have the flexibility to change the
direction of policy, it can lead to instability if such changes are made without
consideration of the multi-criteria impact on the wider stakeholder group within
the energy sector • Build  business enabling framework that allows for timely
and easy establishment of operations • Improve the flow of information within
the energy sector to ensure access to all available sources of financing
(equity, debt and grant) Moreover, when such powers of discretion exist for the
Minister, there should be  system of considerations in place to inform the
decisions to the extent that it is possible • Ensure that  process is in place
for government to facilitate the acceptance of renewable energy proposals and
the financing required to implement  project 12 Implementation, Governance and
Regulatory Framework It is apparent that despite the technological developments
and increase in business activities in new and traditional energy activities,
there is  need for clearly defined regulatory frameworks Such certainty in
regulation and decision making helps to give confidence to potential investors
and reduce the risk for all the players involved 99 The energy policy identifies
the following priority geographical areas for renewable energy development The
following types of sites are suitable for wind and solar projects  land to be
reclassified as Zone  (see Figure ) in the Draft Ground Water Protection Zone
Policy, large waste management sites and large swaths of agricultural land
Potential wind sites are highlighted in Figure  The policy encourages mixed use
of land In other instances, new legislation will be needed, but there are other
situations where modifications might be required to facilitate the policy
direction Legislation exists in some areas, but additional legal instruments and
procedural rules are needed to bring it to the point where it can be implemented
Figure : Priority geographical areas for renewable energy deployment 100 Figure
: Source: Dr Thomas Rogers,  Desktop Study into the Wind Resource in Barbados,
2017 With respect to the setbacks for renewable energy development, the Town and
Country Development Planning Office (TCDPO) is presently addressing this in the
regulations in the new Planning and Development Act • Amend existing legislation
and regulation or promulgate new ones where necessary to ensure responsible
market behaviour and industrial harmonisation • Rationalise the number of
existing acts governing Visionary Goal  and Overall Objective  point to the key
issues of focus in establishing an effective system of governance, regulation
and legislation the sector through the introduction of new industry legislation
• Review, on an ongoing basis, the existing Visionary Goal : An energy sector
that is governed by sound management of energy resources, and  clear regulatory
framework legal framework for performance, strengths, weaknesses and lessons
learnt to formulate and implement programmes of legal reform Overall Objective :
Establishing  consistent and comprehensive regulatory framework to govern
activities in various energy sub-sectors • Develop regimes for the pricing of
electricity and petroleum products that will balance requirements for
competitiveness with the long-term viability of the sector In relation to the
governance and regulatory framework, the BNEP shall speak to processes to: 101
102 Governance and Regulatory Framework Sector Specific Objectives The
Government of Barbados will seek to establish  sector that: “ • Establishes
clarity in identifying the specific all relevant entities in Barbados shall work
together to identify priority geographical areas for renewable energy
development legislation governing business activities in both the renewable, and
oil and gas sectors in Barbados • Develops and identifies the specific agencies
responsible for the governance of business activities in the renewable energy,
and oil and gas sectors • Promotes the use of multi-criteria analysis for
decision makers responsible for establishing policy measures Policy Measures -
Governance and Regulatory Framework To accomplish an enabling environment that
will lead to  more desirable governance and regulatory framework, all relevant
entities in Barbados shall work together to: • Undertake  project to establish
procedural rules to support all of the existing legislation governing the
renewable energy, and oil and gas sectors • Conduct sensitisation and awareness
programmes for all agencies involved in the enforcement of legislation and
governance of activities within the energy sector • Identify priority
geographical areas for renewable energy development 103 “ OUR approach TO
designing the targets considered the overall impact of the measures on the
economy, government and civil society 104 SECTION  POLICY TARGETS & DEVELOPMENT
OF IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 105 Policy Targets and Development of Implementation Plan
Given the objectives and measures identified in Section  and the sector targets
given in Section ,  number of associated targets are provided here The results
of this assessment will form the basis for the Implementation Plan, which will
be developed based on the BNEP The approach in designing the targets considered
the overall impact of the measures on the economy, government and civil society
This technique of assessment is consistent with the Multi-Criteria Approach
(MCA) discussed earlier In the Implementation Plan, targets will be assigned in
the sectors, wherever possible, for the measures outlined in Section  These
sector targets will then be discussed in order to determine the appropriate
measures and strategies that will be required to achieve the targets These will
be broken down into smaller, five-year time horizons In this approach, natural
gas scenarios and factors such as economic deficits, level of taxation, GDP, oil
prices and costs of tradeable and non- tradeable goods are considered Below are
the suggested Overall Energy Sector targets based on the MCA used These will
form the basis of the Sector Specific Targets Name of Indicator (Units) Baseline
(2015) 2030 Aggregate Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 324 Total Energy Consumption
per Capita (BOE/Persons) 03 Percent Share of Renewable Energy of Total Energy
(%)  CO2 Emissions/Final Consumption (kt/BOE) 0029 Total No of Persons Employed
in the Energy Sector (No) / Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) 37 Percent
Share of Renewable Energy Investment of Total GDP (%)  Table : Main Indicators
and Targets for BNEP 106 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 2019 - 2030 107 107 “
An important next step, following the development of Specific Sector Targets,
will be the implementation of an appropriate monitoring system and suitable
indicators 108 SECTION  DEVELOPMENT OF INDICATORS & MONITORING SYSTEM 109
Development of Indicators and Monitoring System Establishing the appropriate
indicators will be critical in determining an effective monitoring system that
will allow timely policy updates and revisions to ensure continuous improvement
full list of indicators is included at the end of the section An important next
step, following the development of Specific Sector Targets, will be the
implementation of an appropriate monitoring system and suitable indicators The
targets developed will need to be SMART It is important to note that the
Implementation Plan will not only develop indicators and targets, but it will
also identify more specific programmes, determine strategies, and assign roles
and responsibilities to various groups, organisations and agencies There will
also be an assessment of resources needed for various actions, and some
suggestions of funding options for consideration Specific Measurable Achievable
Relevant Time bound It is possible that the indicators identified will be used
to establish targets for the sector These may ultimately be mandatory or
voluntary Decisions on whether to implement mandatory standards will be based on
the resources needed to administer and enforce them, and whether they are likely
to reduce innovation The cultural issues related to the implementation of
mandatory standards will also need to be assessed going forward It is expected
that these indicators and targets will include economic indicators that assess
the cost related to various policy measures Indicators that relate to aspects of
energy efficiency will also be included For example, changes in ‘energy
intensity,’ overall and within individual consumption sectors, may be useful in
assessing the success of current measures Other indicators that relate to the
natural environment and social development will also be considered in the short,
medium and long term The targets will also need to be considered when forming
any legislation to support the policy and the Implementation Plan Even if the
targets are not mandatory, the Government of Barbados will need to outline  plan
of action should targets not be achieved 110 BARBADOS NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY
2019 - 2030 111 111 ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy
Sector Baseline 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy
Action 2015 454 AGGREGATE ENERGY INTENSITY (BOE/MUS$) ENERGY INTENSITY BY
ECONOMIC SECTOR Energy Intensity Agriculture (BOE/MUS$) 506 Energy Intensity
Manufacturing/Industrial (BOE/MUS$) 034 Energy Intensity Construction (BOE/MUS$)
683 Energy Intensity Transportation (BOE/MUS$) 693 Energy Intensity Commercial,
Services, Public (BOE/MUS$) 875 Percentage Of Energy From Indigenous Sources
(Primary Energy) 40% Ratio Of Energy Imports To Total Imports 185 Energy
Consumption Dependency On Energy Imports Total Energy Consumption Per capita
(BOE/Capita) 027 Share Of Renewable Energy In The Total Energy Supply (BOE) 02
Total Emissions Intensity With Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) 908 RENEWABLE ENERGY
Percentage Share Of The Renewable Energy Supply In The Total Energy Supply For
Given Period 00% Percentage Share Of The Solar Supply In The Total Energy Supply
For Given Period 30% Percentage Share Of The Biomass Supply In The Total Energy
Supply For Given Period 10% Percentage Share Of The Bio-diesel Supply In The
Total Energy Supply For Given Period Percentage Share Of The Electricity
Generated From Renewable Supply In The Total Electricity Generated For Given
Period 00% Percentage Share Of The Electricity Generated For Solar Supply In The
Total Electricity Generated For Given Period 70% Percent Share Of The
Electricity Generated For Biomass Supply In The Total Electricity Generated For
Given Period 30% 112 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy
Action Baseline 2015 454 AGGREGATE ENERGY INTENSITY (BOE/MUS$) ENERGY INTENSITY
BY ECONOMIC SECTOR Energy Intensity Agriculture (BOE/MUS$) 506 Energy Intensity
Manufacturing/Industrial (BOE/MUS$) 034 Energy Intensity Construction (BOE/MUS$)
683 Energy Intensity Transportation (BOE/MUS$) 693 Energy Intensity Commercial,
Services, Public (BOE/MUS$) 875 Percentage Of Energy From Indigenous Sources
(Primary Energy) 40% Ratio Of Energy Imports To Total Imports 185 Energy
Consumption Dependency On Energy Imports Total Energy Consumption Per capita
(BOE/Capita) 027 Share Of Renewable Energy In The Total Energy Supply (BOE) 02
Total Emissions Intensity With Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) 908 RENEWABLE ENERGY
Percentage Share Of The Renewable Energy Supply In The Total Energy Supply For
Given Period 00% Percentage Share Of The Solar Supply In The Total Energy Supply
For Given Period 30% Percentage Share Of The Biomass Supply In The Total Energy
Supply For Given Period 10% Percentage Share Of The Bio-diesel Supply In The
Total Energy Supply For Given Period Percentage Share Of The Electricity
Generated From Renewable Supply In 00% The Total Electricity Generated For Given
Period Percentage Share Of The Electricity Generated For Solar Supply In The
Total Electricity Generated For Given Period 70% Percent Share Of The
Electricity Generated For Biomass Supply In The Total Electricity Generated For
Given Period 30% 113 ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy
Sector cont’ Baseline 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in 2015
Policy Action Renewable Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 782 Bio-diesel Intensity
(BOE/MUS$) Solar Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 501 Biomass Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 282
ELECTRICITY Total Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 295 Agriculture Electricity
Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 731 Manufacturing/Industrial Electricity Intensity
(BOE/MUS$) 260 Construction Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 900 Commercial,
Services, Public Sector Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 536 Transportation
Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) Households/Residential Electricity Intensity
(BOE/MUS$) 367 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Unit Of Electricity Generated 114
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy Action Baseline 2015
Renewable Energy Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 782 Bio-diesel Intensity (BOE/MUS$) Solar
Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 501 Biomass Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 282 ELECTRICITY Total
Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 295 Agriculture Electricity Intensity
(BOE/MUS$) 731 Manufacturing/Industrial Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 260
Construction Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 900 Commercial, Services, Public
Sector Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 536 Transportation Electricity Intensity
(BOE/MUS$) Households/Residential Electricity Intensity (BOE/MUS$) 367
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Unit Of Electricity Generated 115 ENERGY POLICY
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy Sector cont’ Baseline 2022 2027
2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in 2015 Policy Action ENERGY AND
TRANSPORTATION Percentage Share Of Biofuels Of The Total Energy Supply To The
Transportation Sector Percent Share Of Electricity Of The Total Energy Supply To
The Transportation Sector Percentage Share of Hydrocarbon Of The Total Energy
Supply To The Transportation Sector The Amount of Energy Consumed By
Transportation (KBOE) Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Unit Of Energy Consumed By
The Transportation Sector ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY CONSERVATION Residential
Sector Total Energy Consumption (BOE) 271,35 Total Fuel Consumption (BOE) 499,12
Energy Consumption Per Household (BOE) 44 Electricity Consumption Per Household
(BOE) 53 Fuel Consumption Per Household (BOE) 33 Energy Consumption Per Capita
(BOE) 98 Electricity Consumption Per Capita (BOE) 72 Energy Efficiency (Energy
Consumed Per Unit of Fuel Input) 38 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Household 37
Electricity Generation Efficiency (%) ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT CO2 Emissions /
Final Consumption (Kt/BOE) 0029 CO2 Emissions Intensity (Gg/MUS$) - CARBON
DIOXIDE 0009 CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) - CARBON
DIOXIDE 094 CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) -
HYDROCARBONS 0005 116 Baseline 2015 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment
Adjustment in Policy Action ENERGY AND TRANSPORTATION Percentage Share Of
Biofuels Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation Sector Percent Share
Of Electricity Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation Sector
Percentage Share of Hydrocarbon Of The Total Energy Supply To The Transportation
Sector The Amount of Energy Consumed By Transportation (KBOE) Greenhouse Gas
Emissions Per Unit Of Energy Consumed By The Transportation Sector ENERGY
EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY CONSERVATION Residential Sector Total Energy Consumption
(BOE) 271,35 Total Fuel Consumption (BOE) 499,12 Energy Consumption Per
Household (BOE) 44 Electricity Consumption Per Household (BOE) 53 Fuel
Consumption Per Household (BOE) 33 Energy Consumption Per Capita (BOE) 98
Electricity Consumption Per Capita (BOE) 72 Energy Efficiency (Energy Consumed
Per Unit of Fuel Input) 38 Greenhouse Gas Emissions Per Household 37 Electricity
Generation Efficiency (%) ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT CO2 Emissions / Final
Consumption (Kt/BOE) 0029 CO2 Emissions Intensity (Gg/MUS$) - CARBON DIOXIDE
0009 CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) - CARBON DIOXIDE
094 CO2 Industrial Emissions/Industrial Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) - HYDROCARBONS
0005 117 ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy Sector cont’
Baseline 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy Action 2015
0001 CO2 Transport Emissions/Transport Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) - HYDROCARBONS
4504 Per Capita total CO2 Emissions (Gg/khab) - CARBON DIOXIDE 0063 Per Capita
Total CO2 Emissions (Gg/khab) - HYDROCARBONS 4083 Total Emissions Intensity With
Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) - HYDROCARBONS Percentage Increase In The Use Of
Cleaner Technologies ENERGY INVESTMENT AND FINANCING Percentage Share Of Energy
Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices) Percentage Share Of Energy Investment
Of Total Investment Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total
Energy Investment Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total GDP
(Current Prices) Percentage Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total Energy
Investment Percentage Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total GDP (Current
Prices) HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT Total No Of Persons Employed In The Energy
Sector Total No Of Persons Employed In The Renewable Energy Sector Total No Of
Persons Employed In The Energy Efficiency Sector Total No Of Persons With
Certification In Renewable Energy Total No Of Institutions OfferIng Certified
Training In Renewable Energy Total No Of Institutions OfferIng Certified
Training In Energy Efficiency 118 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment
Adjustment in Policy Action Baseline 2015 CO2 Transport Emissions/Transport
Energy Consum (Kt/BOE) - HYDROCARBONS 0001 Per Capita total CO2 Emissions
(Gg/khab) - CARBON DIOXIDE 4504 Per Capita Total CO2 Emissions (Gg/khab) -
HYDROCARBONS 0063 Total Emissions Intensity With Respect To GDP (Ton/MUS$) -
HYDROCARBONS 4083 Percentage Increase In The Use Of Cleaner Technologies ENERGY
INVESTMENT AND FINANCING Percentage Share Of Energy Investment Of Total GDP
(Current Prices) Percentage Share Of Energy Investment Of Total Investment
Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total Energy Investment
Percentage Share Of Renewable Energy Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices)
Percentage Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total Energy Investment Percentage
Share Of Hydrcarbon Investment Of Total GDP (Current Prices) HUMAN RESOURCES
DEVELOPMENT Total No Of Persons Employed In The Energy Sector Total No Of
Persons Employed In The Renewable Energy Sector Total No Of Persons Employed In
The Energy Efficiency Sector Total No Of Persons With Certification In Renewable
Energy Total No Of Institutions OfferIng Certified Training In Renewable Energy
Total No Of Institutions OfferIng Certified Training In Energy Efficiency 119
ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy Sector cont’ Baseline
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy Action 2015 CROSS-
CUTTING SECTOR AGRICULTURE  Total amount of Land Used To Produce Agro-energy
Crops  Total Amount Of Agricultural Land Used In The Production of Energy 22,57
Total Energy Used In Agricultural Production (BOE)  Percentage Of Energy From
Renewables Percentage Of Energy From Bagasse Percentage Of Energy From Bioenergy
Percentage Of Energy From Local Sources MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL 182,80 Total
Energy Used In The Manufacturing/Industrial Production (BOE) Percentage Of
Renewable Energy Used In Manufacturing/Industrial Production 27% Percentage Of
Cleaner Energy Technologies In Manufacturing/Industrial Production Percentage
Increase Use Of Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy
Technologies WATER MANAGEMENT Total Energy Used In Water Production and
Distribution Percentage Of Renewable Energy Used In Water Production and
Distribution Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies Percentage Increase Use
Of Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy Technologies 120
Baseline 2015 2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy Action
CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR AGRICULTURE Total amount of Land Used To Produce Agro-
energy Crops  Total Amount Of Agricultural Land Used In The Production of Energy
Total Energy Used In Agricultural Production (BOE) 22,57 Percentage Of Energy
From Renewables  Percentage Of Energy From Bagasse Percentage Of Energy From
Bioenergy Percentage Of Energy From Local Sources MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRIAL Total
Energy Used In The Manufacturing/Industrial Production (BOE) 182,80 Percentage
Of Renewable Energy Used In Manufacturing/Industrial Production 27% Percentage
Of Cleaner Energy Technologies In Manufacturing/Industrial Production Percentage
Increase Use Of Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy
Technologies WATER MANAGEMENT Total Energy Used In Water Production and
Distribution Percentage Of Renewable Energy Used In Water Production and
Distribution Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies Percentage Increase Use
Of Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy Technologies 121
ENERGY POLICY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS Performance of Energy Sector cont’ Baseline
2022 2027 2032 2037 Comment Assessment Adjustment in 2015 Policy Action TOURISM
Total Energy Used In Tourism Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies
Percentage Increase Use Of Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner
Energy Technologies WASTE MANAGEMENT Total Amount Of Waste Used In The
Production Of Energy (MT) ECONOMIC CONTRIBUTION AND COST Energy Contribution
Economic Output BDS$ Cost Of Energy BDS$ ($/BOE) $ 00 Cost of Electricity BDS$
($/kWh) $ 37 Average Electricity Rate - Utility ($/kWh) $ 43 AVERAGE UTILITY
RATE - INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCER ($/kWh) Wind $ 315 Solar Electric $ 416
Biomass Biogas Waste to Energy Other 122 Baseline 2015 2022 2027 2032 2037
Comment Assessment Adjustment in Policy Action TOURISM Total Energy Used In
Tourism Percentage Of Cleaner Energy Technologies Percentage Increase Use Of
Renewable Energy Percentage Increase Use Of Cleaner Energy Technologies WASTE
MANAGEMENT Total Amount Of Waste Used In The Production Of Energy (MT) ECONOMIC
CONTRIBUTION AND COST Energy Contribution Economic Output BDS$ Cost Of Energy
BDS$ ($/BOE) $ 00 Cost of Electricity BDS$ ($/kWh) $ 37 Average Electricity Rate
- Utility ($/kWh) $ 43 AVERAGE UTILITY RATE - INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCER ($/kWh)
Wind $ 315 Solar Electric $ 416 Biomass Biogas Waste to Energy Other 123
REFERENCES 124 • IADB (2010) Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados •
Alexander Ochs et al, (2015) Caribbean Sustainable Energy Roadmap and Strategy
(-SERMS): Baseline Report and Assessment (Washington, DC: Worldwatch Institute,
presented to CARICOM) • IISD (2014) Summary of the Third International
Conference on SIDS Retrieved from  iisdca/download/pdf/enb0857epdf • Antilles
Economics (2016) Investigations of Likely • Ince, Vredenburg & Liu (2015)
Drivers and Inhibitors of Renewable Energy:  qualitative and quantitative study
of the Caribbean Energy Policy, 98,  Reactions to Removal of Green Energy
Incentives • The Barbados Light & Power Company Ltd (2014) Integrated Resource
Plan • IRENA (2017) Barbados Renewable Energy Roadmap • CARICOM (2013) Caricom
Energy Policy • CARICOM (2016) Caribbean Sustainable Energy • Ministry of Energy
and Mining Jamaica (2009) Jamaica’ National Energy Policy  Roadmap and Strategy
• Department of Energy and Telecommunications • Monke   and Pearson  (1989) The
Policy Analysis Matrix for Agricultural Development, Cornell University Press
(2007) Draft National Energy Policy • Department of Energy and
Telecommunications (2017) Barbados National Energy Information System • UNEP
(2014) Emerging Issues for Small Island Developing States Retrieved from
uneporg/pdf/Emerging_issues_for_small_island_ developin g_statespdf • GE Energy
Management Energy Consulting (2015) Barbados Wind and Solar Integration Study
(Presented to Barbados Light & Power Co Ltd) • UNFCCC (2015) COP Paris Agreement
Retrieved from  decision1cp21pdf • Government of Barbados (2013) Barbados Medium
Growth and Development Strategy  •  (2016) International Energy Outlook 2016 •
Government of Barbados (2015) Barbados Economic Report – Energy Chapter 2011-
2015 Acts and Legislation • Government of Barbados (2015) Barbados Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (Presented to the UNFCC 2015) • Electric
Light & Power Act 2013 • Electric Light & Power Act Amendment 2015 • Electric
Light & Power Act Fees and Regulations • Hohmeyer  (2015)  100% renewable
Barbados and lower energy bills:  plan to change Barbados’ power supply to 100%
renewables and its possible benefits Centre for Sustainable Energy Systems
Flensburg Retrieved from   flensburgde/fileadmin/content/
abteilungen/industrial/dokumente/dow nloads/
veroeffentlichungen/diskussionsbeitraege/znes- discussionspapers-005-barbadospdf
Fair Trading Commission Act 2002 • Offshore Petroleum Act 2007 • Offshore
Petroleum Act Amendment 2012 • Offshore Petroleum Regulations • Offshore
Petroleum Taxation Act (2007) • Petroleum Winnings Operations Act Renewable
Energy Rider Agreement • Renewable Energy Rider- Requirements for Grid
Connection Storage of Petroleum Act • Sustainable Energy Framework for Barbados
2010 • Utility Regulation Act 2002 • Humpert  (2013) Barbados’ Energy Market
IADB Retrieved from  caribbean-dev-trends/barbados- energy-market/ 125 126
Barbados National Energy Policy 2019 –2030 Division of Energy Trinity Business
Complex Country Road ST MICHAEL : / :  : info@energygovbb :  128