Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DSP/CAR/  UNDP within the United Nations
Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The UNDP multi-
country office in Barbados serves 10 Eastern Caribbean countries and
territories, nine of which are part of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean
States (OECS) Classified as upper-middle-income or high-income countries by the
World Bank, these small island developing States are characterized by narrow
economic bases, high dependence on the tourism sector, declining development
financing flows, lack of economies of scale, high import-dependence, lagging
judicial sectors, limited fiscal space, high indebtedness and high vulnerability
to natural disasters and climate change Nine of these countries have identified
as their national development priorities: generating economic growth, promoting
human and social well-being and the sustainable use of natural endowments In all
countries, response to and recovery from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic is an overarching priority  Vulnerability to climate change presents
the most pervasive challenge to the region achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals National and regional efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change have
intensified, including strategic integration of climate change considerations
into sustainable development policy and planning Nonetheless, three of the seven
countries in the Eastern Caribbean are still classified as having high or
extreme climate exposure risk Climate shocks also reinforce existing
socioeconomic inequalities as marginalized groups are disproportionately
vulnerable to climate-related shocks Sustainable management, restoration and
conservation of natural resources also remain major challenges Though 90 per
cent of the region has access to electricity, nearly 90 per cent of primary
energy is sourced from imported petroleum products, leading to high and volatile
prices5 and persistently high per capita greenhouse gas emissions  Relative
development finance flows into the region have also declined, accounting for
per cent of total flows into Latin America and the Caribbean over the past 10
years, less than half the ratio of prior decades  Women face structural
inequalities regarding access to capital and other resources, persistent pay
gaps and highly unequal distribution of unpaid care work Although data are very
limited, assessments in the region point to the endemic incidence of gender-
based violence, with rates of intimate partner violence averaging 46 per cent
across reporting countries Rates of unemployment are also disparate, with higher
incidences of joblessness affecting women in many industries and contributing to
increased vulnerability of young men to gang violence, crime and incarceration12
While the limited data on vulnerability have constrained deep research on
differential needs and shock impacts, the two countries for which data are
available – Barbados and Saint Lucia – rank 56 and 90 respectively in the Gender
Equality Index, with these inequalities contributing to around 17 per cent of
the gaps in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals  UNDP acknowledges
persons with disabilities and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and
intersex (LGBTQI+) communities highlighted in the Caribbean Common Multi-country
Analysis as vulnerable populations due to the discriminatory legal 1Anguilla,
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, British Virgin Islands, Commonwealth of Dominica,
Federation of Saint Christopher (Kitts) and Nevis, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint
Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines  The Organisation of Eastern
Caribbean States is an international intergovernmental organization dedicated to
regional integration in the Eastern Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda, Commonwealth
of Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines enjoy full membership; and Anguilla, British Virgin
Islands, Martinique and Guadeloupe are associate members  Data on net official
development assistance and official aid received (World Bank) indicate that
financing flows to the region accounted for  per cent of total flows into Latin
America and the Caribbean over the past 10 years, less than half the ratio of
prior decades  Development Bank of Latin America, Vulnerability Index to climate
change in the Latin American and Caribbean region, McIntyre,  et al, ‘Caribbean
Energy: Macro-Related Challenges’, International Monetary Fund Working Paper,
March UNDP, Human and Economic Assessment of Impact report series, Data from the
Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index, /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ sociocultural
norms in the region UNDP will include the voices of persons with disabilities
and LGBTQI+ persons in consultations to implement the multi-country programme
During the previous programme, UNDP added value to the region’ development in
the areas of social protection, quality services and sustainable economic
opportunities by introducing new methods to examine poverty beyond income;
scaled up support on blue economy issues and provided technical assistance,
livelihood and health sector support in response to COVID-Climate change
adaptation, disaster risk reduction and clean and sustainable energy were
enhanced through post-hurricane recovery and reconstruction Tools and best
practices for gender-responsive early warning, planning and monitoring of
adaptation and mitigation measures were enhanced The use of renewable energy and
energy- efficient practices was advanced with energy pilot projects that
improved community resilience For natural resource and ecosystem conservation
and restoration, UNDP built community-level capacities for sustainable natural
resource management and incentivized good practices to mitigate the risk of
counterproductive behaviours Access to justice, protection, citizen security and
safety were improved through the strengthening of national capacities for data
collection for crime and the rule of law institutions and supporting the digital
recording of incidents in police stations  Over 11,000 people benefited from
UNDP South-South and triangular cooperation exchanges with Belize, China, Cuba,
India and Jamaica, including technical and financial assistance through major
post-hurricane infrastructural works and COVID19-related health system
interventions  The independent country programme evaluation found that its
extensive disaster risk management expertise positions UNDP at the forefront of
disaster prevention, response and recovery efforts through livelihood support,
small business continuity and sustainable and resilient reconstruction and
rebuilding UNDP will continue applying this unique expertise while integrating
gender equality and poverty reduction into climate change adaptation
interventions and disaster risk management  The evaluation confirmed UNDP
successes in capacity-building work across multiple development areas, including
the blue economy, disaster risk management, climate change mitigation and
adaptation, crime and violence prevention and access to justice Livelihood
support for urban and rural women, indigenous populations, the elderly, out-of-
school youth and persons with disabilities will remain  focus for UNDP The
evaluation also highlighted that greater progress could have been achieved in
leaving no one behind, the quality of services and sustainable economic
opportunities through greater technical capacities in some areas; more efficient
procurement; more pragmatic project designs; and improved baseline data and
systematic monitoring These lessons were validated by the Common Multi-country
Analysis, which underscored the climate emergency and data availability as two
of the top three issues across the subregion These issues are directly
correlated, as data gaps make it difficult to undertake robust analysis to
inform mitigation and adaptation planning Moreover, limited data undermine
decision-making across multiple areas, including disaster risk reduction, crime
prevention and poverty reduction Countries have acknowledged these challenges,
emphasizing the need for technical capacity-building, data collection and
analysis in national and sectoral development plans These plans also reflect
broad prioritization of the climate change response, including formulating
national and sectoral adaptation plans, nationally appropriate mitigation action
plans, blue economy strategies, national energy policies and plans and links to
regional plans, including the OECS Eastern Caribbean Regional Climate Change
Implementation Plan The proposed programme encapsulates the UNDP contribution to
the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNMSDCF) 2022–2026 for the Caribbean subregion The UNMSDCF was informed by the
Common Multi-country Analysis, consultation and validation with stakeholders
from Governments, civil society, the private sector and regional agencies and
reflects prioritization and aggregation of the /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ common
multidimensional development challenges facing the subregion The vision is to
attain an inclusive, sustainable and full recovery from COVID-19 while restoring
countries on  pathway to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will
contribute directly to these pillars of the framework: () economic resilience
and shared prosperity; () resilience to climate change and sustainable natural
resource management; and () safety, justice and the rule of law The programme
was developed through  triangulation of empirical data from past UNDP
assessments, reviews of government development strategy documents, an inclusive
stakeholder survey and  participatory multinational validation workshop The
programme is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan, , specifically outcome
(structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and
digital transitions); outcome  (no one left behind, centring on equitable access
to opportunities and  rights-based approach to human agency and human
development); and outcome  (resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty
and risk) UNDP will apply the lessons learned from the country programme
evaluation using an inclusive and gender-responsive approach that draws on
stakeholder consultation and the principles of leaving no one behind UNDP will
work with State and non-State actors in each phase of the project cycle This
approach will enhance buy-in and ownership of the projects UNDP will continue to
streamline internal processes and reduce bottlenecks to improve efficiency
across all operations, including procurement UNDP will support the consolidation
of the “blue economy for green islands” approach through economic
diversification, sustainable job creation and resilience The key elements will
be digital transformation within governments and the micro, small and medium-
sized enterprise (MSME) sector, deployment of alternative sources of clean
energy and the promotion of sustainable national resource management to create
resilience and shared prosperity in the Caribbean Local, grass-roots solutions
will be complemented by global exchanges on gathered insights and best emerging
development practices, all mapped within  coordinated portfolio approach To
increase available financing and leverage varied technical expertise to address
the binding constraints to growth, the multi-country office will expand
partnerships with international financial institutions (IFIs); regional agencies
such as the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), Caribbean Disaster Emergency
Management Agency (CDEMA) and the OECS; regional and international academia;
civil society organizations (CSOs); bilateral donors and the private sector UNDP
will work with the donors and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), the International Labour Organization, the United Nations
Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-
Women), the World Food Programme and other United Nations development system
partners to deploy advisory support, human or financial resources to achieve
joint programmatic results This multi-stakeholder approach lends to harmonizing
the efficient implementation of the programme in  collaborative environment II
Programme priorities and partnerships The programme’ vision focuses UNDP efforts
on: () enhancing and promoting shared prosperity and resilient recovery that
build national and community capacities to respond to and recover from shocks;
() improving the adaptive capacity of Caribbean institutions and communities for
inclusive, gender-responsive disaster risk management, climate change adaptation
and mitigation and sustainable blue economy development; and () improving good
governance systems, policies and capacities across the justice sector to support
the rule of law, reduce crime, empower survivors, women and other vulnerable
groups and enhance access to equal, reliable and timely justice  High-level
vision of the UNMSDCF as stated in its theory of change document /15
DP/DSP/CAR/ Priority area  (UNMSDCF pillar ): Economic resilience and shared
prosperity If policies and strategies are developed and implemented for
livelihood retention, small business growth, innovative pilot blue economy
solutions and expanding data-generation capacities for economic resilience and
digitally-enabled transformation, then economies will be more resilient to the
impacts of natural and other hazards UNDP will bring together regional agencies
and ministries responsible for climate change, finance, planning, blue economy,
digitalization and tourism, along with national gender machineries, United
Nations agencies and private entities, to support digitalization and economic
diversification UNDP will promote participatory development-oriented
interventions, prioritizing job retention, entrepreneurship, business growth and
innovation through the application of cutting-edge development methodologies and
approaches targeting youth- and women-owned businesses in key sectors UNDP will
prioritize support to women- led MSMEs through the provision of technical and
operational support tied to digital transformation, focusing on expanding
-commerce and digital marketing This approach will also be applied to expand
-governance and strengthen institutional capacities to create enabling
regulatory frameworks, systems and policies to facilitate national digitally-
enabled transformation Existing partnerships with universities and academia,
including the University of the West Indies, will be enhanced to support the
growth of blue economies and job retention by businesses UNDP will support
national and regional capacities for assessing and analysing economic risks in
the agriculture and tourism sectors by expanding the suite of national policies
and firm-level strategies to minimize shock impacts UNDP will continue to
support information-sharing, programme design and implementation support while
ensuring that activities are aligned with national priorities UNDP will continue
to lead pillar  of the subregional multisectoral plan for the COVID-19 pandemic
response, expanding its economic resilience work in response to emerging country
needs UNDP will draw on the expertise of learning networks and work directly
with community stakeholders to pilot and scale up inventive solutions in the
blue economy In collaboration with partners including FAO, UNEP and IFIs, UNDP
will expand the pipeline of blue economy programmes and create national and
regional mechanisms that increase the availability of technical, financial and
partnership-based assistance for blue economy programmes that promote
innovative, catalytic investments Priority area  (UNMSDCF pillar ): Resilience
to climate change and sustainable natural resources management If measures to
improve national and community-level adaptive and mitigative capacities against
hazards and the impacts of climate change are enhanced, and institutions and
systems responsible for disaster risk management are strengthened in  gender-
responsive way, then ecosystem health, biodiversity and critical infrastructure
will be preserved and the region’ overall climate resilience will be enhanced
Mobilizing resources from vertical funds and other partners and in collaboration
with various ministries responsible for climate change, disaster risk
management, environment, blue economy, natural resource management, gender,
national statistical departments, finance and economic planning, UNDP will work
with CARICOM, CDEMA and other bodies to strengthen national institutions by
mainstreaming gender-responsive disaster risk management and climate change
adaptation actions, strategies and policies Capacity- building, knowledge
management and data collection will be supported by the University of the West
Indies, including capacities for research, data collection and expert knowledge
UNDP will demonstrate its convenor mandate by facilitating dialogue and exchange
between partners and all stakeholders working to address national climate change
and natural resource management priorities /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ UNDP will promote an
integrated approach to sustainable management and restoration/conservation of
natural resources and ecosystems, mainstreaming gender equality and prioritizing
the most vulnerable These actions will include coral reef regeneration,
biodiversity conservation, protected area management, water resource management
and land, coastal and marine restoration UNDP will promote an inclusive and
integrated approach to ensure that long-term adaptation strategies are inclusive
and nationally and community owned UNDP will work closely with national
authorities and CSOs to increase the representation of women, youth, indigenous
people and other vulnerable groups in climate change and natural resource
management decision-making bodies UNDP will continue the well-regarded Global
Environment Facility Small Grants Programme with its crucial focus on community-
based environmental initiatives UNDP will promote efficient knowledge management
and capacity-building UNDP will work closely with ministries responsible for
climate change, environment and natural resource management, finance, economic
planning and community development, and with IFIs, to strengthen government
capacities to align climate resilience goals with financing flows and to
mobilize new resources through the private sector, public-private partnerships,
derisking activities and blended finance, to expand the use of clean, affordable
and sustainable energy, promote climate-smart agricultural and sustainable
natural resource utilization This will ensure that objectives for the blue and
green economy are implemented and effectively managed to enhance the resilience
of people and communities UNDP will support the development and revision of
legislation to support the just transition from the use of fossil fuels in
collaboration with national Governments and climate change champions The
programme will assist countries in revising their nationally determined
contributions to include blue economy considerations and reflect targets
showcasing added greenhouse gas emissions and sectors in support of greater
ambition aligned with the Paris Agreement Implementation plans for defining
nationally determined contributions will include  combination of increased
adaptation mechanisms and areas of co-mitigation to improve national and
regional resilience to climate change These plans will be supported by financing
and investment mechanisms strategically designed to leverage funding from the
private sector and international sources The programme will assist in closing
the energy gap by working with agencies, including the International Renewable
Energy Agency, to support increased renewable energy ambition as part of low-
carbon energy transitions and  green recovery from COVID-In collaboration with
development agencies, national partners and regional bodies, UNDP will support
countries in adapting and implementing disaster risk management systems in line
with national, regional and international strategies/frameworks This will
include investments in critical components of preparedness, recovery and
resilience such as hazard assessments, recovery planning and resilience-
building; facilitating the development of holistic and innovative disaster risk
management programmes that emphasize out-of-the- box thinking, new ways of
working and increased knowledge and planning capacity Disaster risk management
and gender-responsive programmes will be central to activities under this
priority area, with planned initiatives continuing to strengthen the linkages
between the disaster risk management and climate change adaptation agendas,
nationally and regionally  participatory, gender-responsive, rights-based
approach will be used, placing special value on collectively gathering the
insights of the most vulnerable Priority area  (UNMSCDF pillar ): Safety,
justice and rule of law If good governance and the rule-of-law systems are
enhanced, together with improvements to regional, national and local technical
capacities to manage incidences of crime across the justice sector, then rates
of crime – including intimate partner violence and other forms of violent crimes
– will be reduced and victims, survivors and perpetrators of the crimes will
have improved access to justice /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ UNDP will leverage its
expertise in building systems and enhancing capacities for police forces across
the region, and its experience convening regional stakeholders, to bring
together ministries of justice, offices of public prosecution,
magistrates/judges and court personnel, commissioners of police and police
officers, prison officers, probation departments, bar associations, statistical
departments, CSOs and development partners to support and promote the rule of
law, digitalization of case management and evaluation systems, with  focus on
reducing administrative and technical bottlenecks UNDP will apply lessons
learned and good practices via South-South knowledge exchange and policy
innovation via its offer for small island developing States and the Global
Policy Network UNDP will deepen collaborative partnerships with national gender
machineries, CSOs, UNICEF, UN-Women, regional organizations, academia and other
development partners to increase national and community-level capacities for in-
person and technological data collection and analysis UNDP will work with these
stakeholders to strengthen national policy frameworks and action plans for
prevention of and response to gender-based violence and support effective,
inclusive, gender-responsive and accountable governance Based on the findings
and recommendations of  review of the justice sector, the programme will take an
exploratory, gender-responsive approach to crime response, helping countries to
develop, prioritize and pilot new ways of working, including expanding the use
of alternative, non-custodial crime-response measures that reduce incarceration
rates, emphasize rehabilitation and reduce recidivism In collaboration with the
OECS, the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court and other regional partners, UNDP will
help countries to identify successful national and community-level diversion
interventions that can be replicated to reduce the burden on the formal judicial
system and improve access to justice III Programme and risk management The
multi-country office anticipates environmental, social, financial, human
resource and COVID-19-related risks to programme implementation The office will
apply the UNDP enterprise risk management policy and system to ensure that its
work upholds the principles of leaving no one behind, human rights, gender
equality and women’ empowerment, sustainability and resilience and
accountability across the programme The risk of projects stalling due to natural
disasters is  reality in the Caribbean Socioeconomic risks associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic are significant and present new challenges for achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly given the disproportionate impacts
on livelihoods for women and other vulnerable groups These risks also create
opportunities for UNDP to leverage its role as convenor, bringing together
national and regional partners to explore new, innovative financing strategies
and whole systems approaches to address multiple risks simultaneously UNDP will
continue to act as an integrator within the United Nations subregional team,
including monitoring the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19, leading the economic
response of the United Nations development system and providing technical inputs
for the design of national recovery activities UNDP will apply  participatory,
systems approach to its project development processes, engaging communities,
vulnerable groups and key development partners during all stages of the project
cycle, including working with civil society to strengthen the benefits of
innovative interventions An inclusive stakeholder communication strategy will be
applied Grievances as  social risk in project implementation cannot be
underestimated UNDP will ensure that  stakeholder response mechanism is in
place, informed by  comprehensive stakeholder analysis and  transparent
engagement plan To address adverse social and environmental grievances with
institutions, communities and beneficiaries, UNDP, together with its national
counterparts, will establish grievance  UNDP, Caribbean justice:  needs
assessment of the judicial system in nine countries, /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ redress
mechanisms to address concerns The multi-country office will continue to
incorporate UNDP standard operating procedures on social and environmental
standards as its risk mitigation management and “do no harm” principles UNDP
acknowledges limited human resource capacities as  risk that can hinder
countries’ progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals As such, the
multi-country office will support national counterparts with capacity-building
and technical resource persons where feasible, partnering with the regional
academic institutions to support national offices The downturn of the global
economy due to the COVID-19 pandemic presents  risk to resource mobilization for
high- and middle-income countries UNDP will mitigate this challenge by
strengthening existing donor partnerships, establishing new South-South and
triangular cooperation initiatives and strategically engaging the private sector
Some communities are hesitant about innovative interventions To minimize the
risk of protracted delays in programme efforts, UNDP will partner with
government ministries responsible for planning, digital transformation and
digitalization and innovation Together with CSOs, UNDP will facilitate dialogues
and empowerment interventions, sensitizing key stakeholders on the added value,
benefits and opportunities that digitalization and innovation can contribute to
their sectors The transition to virtual spaces as demonstrated by the pandemic
reduces this risk To ensure national ownership, mutual accountability and
participation, the governance mechanism to be applied at the national level will
include building on existing systems include the United Nations country team and
regional agencies Joint project boards with national counterparts, multi-
stakeholder steering committees and national coordinating committees (where
relevant) will have implementation oversight This programme document outlines
the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources
assigned to the programme at country level Accountabilities of managers at all
levels with respect to the programme are prescribed in the organization’
programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework
The programme will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may
be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable
response to force majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used
in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial
risks Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects IV Monitoring and
evaluation UNDP will employ rights-based, participatory approaches to monitoring
and evaluation The frameworks developed at the national level will be aligned to
the UNMSDCF monitoring and evaluation plan The programme’ monitoring and
evaluation plan will include gender- disaggregated data with quantitative and
qualitative indicators to capture structural changes The plan will include
quarterly reviews to track progress, at least an annual review of data and
evidence and midterm and terminal evaluations Evaluations will be gender-
responsive to measure the differential impacts of interventions on women and men
Impact evaluations will help the multi-country office to assess project
implementation results The implementation of the plan will be monitored by the
monitoring and evaluation team and project teams to ensure that lessons learned
are incorporated back into project implementation UNDP will support national
institutions, including central statistical offices, ministries of planning and
line ministries, to generate and manage data by coordinating and providing
training in data collection and analysis for monitoring and evaluation Through
its dedicated /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ monitoring and evaluation function, UNDP will
support training, where relevant, for both Governments and CSOs to effectively
and regularly use data for results-based monitoring, focusing on the integration
of cross-cutting issues including gender and poverty reduction UNDP will rely
heavily on cloud-based workflows, linking work planning processes and budgets to
monthly and quarterly progress reporting and quality assurance For joint
programming and other co-implementation initiatives with development partners
and the United Nations development system, UNDP will support data collection and
collation and collaboration to reduce duplication and promote synergies and
complementarity Emerging and best practices in data gathering and dissemination
will be applied, including enabling inclusive and real-time analytics, decision-
making and co-validation /15  DP/DSP/CAR/ Annex Results and resources framework
for Barbados and the Eastern Caribbean () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic
Resilience and Shared Prosperity (SDG ) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP : UNMSDCF  The Caribbean has fully transitioned to  more diversified and
sustainable economy that supports inclusive and resilient economic growth
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Structural transformation Cooperation
Framework outcome indicator(), baselines, target() Data source and frequency of
data collection, and responsibilities Indicative multi-country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines targets) Major partners / partnerships
frameworks Estimated cost by outcome ($) Data sources: UNDP National statistical
digests and periodic statistical releases UNMSDCF  Proportion of informal
employment in non- agriculture employment by sex Baseline: To be determined
(TBD) Target: TBD Regular: $520,000 Chamber of commerce, ministries responsible
for small business and entrepreneurship, farmer and fisher groups central budget
offices University of the West Indies UN-Women UNICEF ILO National and community
women’ groups CSOs Chambers of commerce and private sector firms OECS Output :
Small businesses and Governments have enhanced capacities and access to
sustainable financing for shock-responsive digital transformation and blue
economy development Other: 13,000,000 Indicator : Number of businesses receiving
direct cash-flow support, disaggregated by ownership (women or men) Baseline: 44
(26 females males) (2020) Target: 500 (250 females males) Source: UNDP
Frequency: Annual Frequency Annual Signature solution  People and institutions
equipped with strengthened digital capabilities and opportunities to contribute
to and benefit from inclusive digital societies Data source: National labour
force surveys and census data Indicator : Number of jobs retained for at least
one year in businesses benefiting from economic resilience and recovery
packages, disaggregated by sex Baseline:  (2021) Target: 60 Source: Ministries
of labour, national statistics departments Frequency: Annual Frequency: Annual
UNDP IRRF10 outcome , indicator  Labour force participation rate for persons
aged 15+, by gender (and race/ethnicity where available) Indicator : Number of
new mechanisms in place for technical assistance and financing of blue economy
interventions Satisfaction rate of business with capacity- building initiatives
Baseline:  (2021) Target:  10 IRRF = UNDP integrated results and resources
framework 10  DP/DSP/CAR/ Baseline: TBD Target: TBD Source: UNDP Frequency:
Annual Output : Government line ministries have enhanced capacities for
sustainable development planning and data generation for inclusive economic
growth and recovery Indicator : Number of country development plans submitted
for government approval inclusive of yearly action plans which promote
sustainability Baseline:  (2021) Target: 10 Source: Ministries of finance,
planning and economic development Frequency: Annual Indicator : Percentage of
government personnel with enhanced skills in planning and data generation
incorporating these into new processes Baseline:  (2021) Target: 50 Source: UNDP
Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Resilience to Climate Change and
Natural Resources Management (SDG 13) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING
UNDP : UNMSDCF  Caribbean people, communities and institutions have enhanced
their adaptive capacity for inclusive, gender-responsive disaster risk
management and climate change adaptation and mitigation RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome  – Building resilience UNMSDCF Indicator  Number of countries
that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction strategies in line
with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD Data sources UNDP National recovery strategies Output : National and
regional disaster risk management agents have improved capacities for gender-
responsive and risk-informed disaster recovery planning and intervention
Regular: $55,000 Other: 63,500,000 Community organizations CSOs National
disaster offices and national meteorological services Private sector
organizations (telecommunications providers, insurance companies) Ministries of
planning, housing and finance Youth and gender groups Statistical offices,
CDEMA, Frequency Annual Indicator : Number of persons in key sectors with
updated skills to implement recovery strategies, disaggregated by sex (/) and
age Baseline: 70 (30) 2020 Target: 320 (160) Source: UNDP Frequency: Annual 11
DP/DSP/CAR/ Signature solution indicator  Capacities for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding strengthened at regional, national and subnational levels and
across borders Indicator : Number of countries with gender- responsive recovery
strategies developed and submitted for Cabinet approval Baseline:  (2021)
Target:  Source: Ministries of home affairs, national disaster management
agencies Frequency: Annual UNDP IRRF outcome , indicator  Number of countries
that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction strategies in line
with the Sendai Framework Baseline: TBD Target: TBD Output : National agencies
and community groups have access to enhanced integrated, gender-responsive
disaster preparedness systems Indicator : Number of new and updated risk-
informed and gender-responsive national mechanisms to prepare for and recover
from disaster events Baseline:  (2021) Target: 20 Source: Ministries of home
affairs, national disaster management agencies Frequency: annual Source:
National disaster risk reduction reports and UNDP reports Frequency: Annual
Indicator : Percentage of target groups or communities adopting new disaster
risk reduction measures Baseline:  (2021) Target: 40 Source: national disaster
management agencies Frequency: annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Resilience to
Climate Change and Natural Resources Management (SDG 13) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK
OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF  Caribbean countries manage natural resources
and ecosystems strengthening their resilience and enhancing the resilience and
prosperity of the people and communities that depend on them RELATED STRATEGIC
PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Building resilience UNMSDCF Indicator  Number of
countries that have communicated the establishment or operationalization of an
integrated policy, strategy or plan which increases their ability to adapt to
the adverse impacts of climate change and foster Sources: National gazettes
National communications to UNFCCC UNDP Output : Populations, including the most
vulnerable, have enhanced access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy
Global Environment Regular: $939,000 Facility, Green Climate Fund Other:
$18,000,000 Caribbean Development Indicator : Number of megawatts generated from
new solar photovoltaic, bioenergy or other renewable energy system installations
Baseline: (2021)  Bank World Bank Regional organizations Frequency: Annual 12
2117639 DP/DSP/CAR/ climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions
development in  manner that does not threaten food production (including
national adaptation plan, nationally determined contribution, national
communication, biennial update report or other) Baseline: TBD Target: TBD
Target:  MW Source: Ministries of energy Frequency: Annual (CDEMA, OECS,
Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology) Indicator : Number of new
financing mechanisms in place to support the implementation of efficient energy
and renewable energy transitions Baseline: TBD Target: TBD Source: Ministry
publications, national gazettes, Frequency: Annual Regional development partners
CARICOM Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre Caribbean Centre for Renewable
Energy and Energy Efficiency UNMSDCF  Percentage regional coverage of protected
areas in relation to marine areas Percentage regional coverage of protected
areas in relation to terrestrial areas Baseline: % protected marine area (13
countries) 06% protected terrestrial area (13 countries) (2021 with individual
country data from ) Target: TBD Output : National agencies and community
organizations have strengthened capacities for natural resource planning, data
collection, analysis and management Ministries responsible for climate change,
energy, environment, blue economy and natural resource management, finance and
economic planning Indicator : Number of nationally determined contributions,
integrated natural resource management policies, legal and regulatory frameworks
developed or revised to meet international standards and accompanied by national
implementation plans Baseline:  Target: Data Source: Ministry publications,
National gazettes, UNFCCC communications Frequency: Annual Ministries of
planning, housing and finance National disaster offices and national
meteorological services Private sector organizations (Telecommunications
providers, insurance companies) UNDP IRRF Outcome  Indicator  Number of
vulnerable people covered by disaster and climate risk insurance Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD Source: National Insurance Companies Indicator : Number of
nationally determined contributions plans implemented to incorporate new sectors
and greenhouse gases Baseline:  Target:  Source: Ministry publications, national
gazettes, UNFCCC communications Frequency: Annual University of the West Indies
Frequency: Annually NGOs, CSOs Community-based organizations, Youth
organizations, National statistical departments Indicator : Percentage of
legally gazetted terrestrial protected areas created or under improved
management for conservation and sustainable use Baseline: TBD Target: 20% Data
source: Ministry Assessments Frequency: Annual Local community leaders Youth and
gender groups Statistical offices 13  DP/DSP/CAR/ Output : Governments and
communities have increased capacities to adapt to and mitigate the impacts of
climate change National Climate Change Committee Indigenous groups Indicator :
Number of risk-informed gender-responsive climate change adaptation actions
implemented in sectors identified in the national adaptation plans Baseline:
Target: 12 Source: Ministries of sustainable development and climate change
Indicator : Number of risk-informed gender-responsive climate change mitigation
actions implemented in specific sectors identified in the nationally appropriate
mitigation actions Baseline:  Target: 12 Source: Ministry publications, National
gazettes, UNFCCC communications NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Safety, Justice and
Rule of Law (SDG 16) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF
Regional and national laws, policies, systems and institutions improve access to
justice and promote peace, social cohesion and security RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome  – Structural transformation UNMSDCF Indicator  unsentenced
detainees as  proportion of the overall prison population Baseline: TBD Target:
TBD Sources: National gazettes UNDP project reports, Ministries of justice
reports Output  National and regional actors have enhanced capacity for improved
governance, crime data management, crime-response management and coordination
Ministries of justice Offices of the directors Regular: $410,000 of public
prosecutions Other: $14,000,000 magistrates or judges and court personnel
Indicator  Number of countries with new data and case management systems and
coordination mechanisms for the management of criminal cases Source: Police,
directors of public prosecutions, prisons Frequency: Annual Commissioners of
police and police officers Frequency: Annual UNDP IRRF outcome , Indicator 7c
Proportion of gender-sensitive policy measures in total policy measures enacted
in response to COVID-19, which address: violence against women Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD Prison officers Probation departments Bar associations Statistical
departments CSOs and NGOs OECS (Eastern Source: National gender bureaux
Indicator  Number of countries using UNODC-approved disaggregated and globally
comparable data on violence against women and girls Baseline: TBD Target: TBD
Source: Police, directors of public prosecutions, prisons Frequency: Annual
Frequency: Annual Caribbean Supreme Court) 14 2117639 DP/DSP/CAR/ CARICOM
(Caribbean Indicator  Number of countries producing crime data disaggregated by
sex and age Baseline: TBD Target: TBD Source: Police, directors of public
prosecutions, prisons Frequency: Annual Court of Justice) European Union
Indicator  State of implementation of criminal procedures in Barbados, Dominica,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Sain Vincent and the Grenadines  – None
developed  – Draft procedures completed  – Procedures approved and in use
Baseline: : Target:  Source: National gazettes, UNDP project reports, data from
ministries of justice Frequency: Annual 15