Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/LAO/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The Lao People' Democratic
Republic is  landlocked country with  population of  million and has been among
the fastest growing economies in Southeast Asia with an average growth rate of
per cent between 2006-Poverty rates have fallen from 46 per cent () to per cent
() However, income inequality has risen, with the Gini index increasing from to
between 2012 and While the country’ population of is young, youth unemployment
is high and increasing as the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the service sectors
in which they are employed The country remains vulnerable to climate change,
environmental shocks and natural disasters Frequent floods, landslides and
droughts impact crop production and increase the risk of food insecurity and
agriculture losses Resilience in communities is low due to the prevalence of
monoculture, lack of diversity in livelihoods, limited infrastructure and
connectivity of human settlements Moreover, the presence of unexploded ordnance
from the Indochina conflict () continues to destroy lives and limit agricultural
production There is  strong correlation between unexploded ordnance
contamination and the prevalence of poverty, with 42 of the 46 poorest districts
affected by unexploded ordnance Over the last 20 years, UNDP has been the main
international organization in the country developing and supporting national
capacity on mine action and it continues to play  key role in the unexploded
ordnance sector  The Lao People’ Democratic Republic faces challenges in
improving governance to ensure effective service delivery to its population, and
inclusive and accountable processes, and to foster  stable, transparent,
predictable environment for investment The National Assembly and the Provincial
People’ Assemblies need increased support to fulfil their oversight function and
improve engagement with citizens Access to justice for ethnic groups, women and
children at risk, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender/transsexual, intersex and
questioning/queer (LGBTIQ), persons with disabilities, among others, remains
challenge The capacity of key justice agencies remains low, creating challenges
to fully translate legal policies, international commitments and reforms into
concrete results Gender inequality remains high, especially in rural areas and
among ethnic groups Many women lack equal access to economic opportunities,
resources and decision-making institutions  The Ninth National Socioeconomic
Development Plan (NSEDP, ) is central to the country’ economic restructuring and
places greater emphasis on economic diversification, innovation, skills and
knowledge, the green economy and resilience Current development finance
situation is challenging The country is experiencing  severe debt crisis that
threatens to leave  vastly shrunken resource base to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and the Ninth NSEDP High levels of external debt and
low domestic revenues continue to limit investments in human capital The lack of
disaggregated data by province, ethnicity, age, gender and disability status
hampers evidence-based policy-making and the ability of government policies and
programmes to assess different groups It also runs contrary to the principle of
leaving no one behind The COVID-19 pandemic caused economic growth to decline by
per cent in 2020  and has exacerbated existing macroeconomic vulnerabilities In
February 2021, the United Nations Committee for Development Policy recommended
that the Lao People’ Democratic Republic be granted an extended five-year
preparatory period, effectively setting least developed country (LDC) graduation
for 2026 (assuming  positive and continued trajectory)  UNDP has  long history
working in Lao People’ Democratic Republic The UNDP comparative advantage has
been its ability to work closely with  very broad range of government and local-
level institutions at all levels UNDP was at the forefront of support to the
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) and Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA)
to integrate the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the SDGs and other
international development aspirations (such as LDC graduation) into the national
planning process UNDP has acted as  critical integrator by assisting the
Government in enhancing partnerships for  Eighth NSEDP mid-term review 2018,
World Bank, Lao People’ Democratic Republic poverty profile and poverty
assessment Ibid  World Bank economic monitoring report, /14  DP/DCP/LAO/
effective development cooperation through the round table process, including
sector working groups, collaborating with development partners and other
stakeholders in civil society, private sector and academia   critical lesson
from the last country programme document (CPD) evaluation is the challenging
development financing landscape for the country in general and UNDP specifically
Linkages between interventions were not as strong as they should have been,
resulting in missed opportunities for synergies and greater overall impact Focus
was sometimes too much on developing new laws and policies at the central level,
while insufficient attention was paid to implementation on the ground and impact
on people’ lives In the new CPD, UNDP will focus on  limited number of critical
and targeted interventions, based on  theory of change grounded in the need to
ensure policies and legislation are supported with local financing and clear
follow through and implementation In  change from the previous cycle, the new
CPD will be implemented through fewer but larger individual projects targeting
the same groups and the same areas, where possible  Moving forward, UNDP will
support key areas of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework (UNSDCF) such as inclusive prosperity, governance and environment UNDP
will build on its comparative advantage, for instance, in governance where UNDP
remains  key partner of the Government which relies on UNDP thematic expertise
and convening power to engage with  broad range of stakeholders The CPD will
support United Nations system-wide efforts led by the Resident Coordinator In
line with its integrator role, UNDP will contribute to  consolidated United
Nations response by promoting and contributing to joint analysis to complex
development challenges which require coordinated interventions from several
United Nations organizations, in areas such as youth, gender-based violence and
disaster-risk response UNDP will continue to leverage its innovation expertise
through its accelerator lab and explore innovative solutions to local issues to
introduce more experimentation, accelerate learning, adapt programming and adopt
portfolio approach to system change UNDP will invest in developing its
capabilities for this transition, including on foresight II Programme priorities
and partnerships  In line with the Ninth NSEDP and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the new UNDP CPD will focus on ensuring that by 2026
people living in the Lao People’ Democratic Republic benefit from sustainable
and inclusive growth and are increasingly resilient to the risks of climate
change, natural disasters and unexploded ordnance while state institutions are
more transparent, inclusive and accountable to the people The programme is
anchored in the long-term UNDP partnership with the Government spanning more
than three decades The new CPD builds on the achievements of the previous CPD
that saw the incorporation of the SDGs into the national planning architecture
It will aim to support the country as it recovers from the economic and social
impacts of COVID-19 and continues its transition from LDC status, with
particular emphasis on supporting inclusive growth and reducing inequality The
CPD is aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan, , and the new UNSDCF, and UNDP will
contribute to three of the four outcome areas The CPD was developed in
consultation with national partners through  series of workshops on the UNSDCF
and the CPD between January and May  In additional to local expertise, the new
CPD is supported by  regional and international network of experience and
expertise UNDP will build on  wide range of partnerships with government, civil
society, private sector, academia and development partners Emphasis will be
placed on policy coherence and subnational implementation, especially in the
post-COVID era where financing will be uncertain, requiring careful management
of the resource envelope This will include supporting the Government to ensure
effective use of development finance and new funding sources, especially for
environment and climate change, and to reap the benefits from regional
integration which remains  government priority UNDP will partner with United
Nations organizations and international financial institutions such as the World
Bank and the Asian Development Bank In particular, UNDP will work with UNFPA,
the United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF), the International Labour
Organization (ILO) and the World Food Programme (WFP) on social protection,
justice and gender-based violence; with the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations  /14 DP/DCP/LAO/ Environment
Programme (UNEP) and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNDRR) on environment, climate change and resilience; and with United Nations
Volunteers (UNV) to tap into  global community and grassroots volunteer
expertise UNDP will continue to explore opportunities for South-South
cooperation, including on digitalization and the COVID-19 response  The
programme will consist of three interrelated pillars brought together by
focusing on the most vulnerable in society, including women, young people,
ethnic groups and persons with disabilities, and through an area-based
integrated approach focused on  select number of provinces/districts Particular
emphasis has been given to the adoption of human rights- based approach
principles across all three pillars, with results focused on strengthening the
enabling environment and developing the capacities of duty bearers and rights
holders to promote greater synergies and economies of scale across the programme
Inclusive prosperity The focus of UNDP work under this pillar has evolved to
better reflect the significant economic progress in the Lao People’ Democratic
Republic over the last twenty years While poverty rates have fallen, there are
still significant pockets of deprivation across population groups and
geographies that speaks to the need to develop policies that increasingly
promote inclusive growth UNDP work is informed by the need to ensure  mutually
reinforcing link between policies and programmes based on concrete evidence of
what works at scale If there is improved macro-fiscal management, evidence-based
and territorial development planning and prioritization of public investments in
social and green sectors, the country will shift to  more inclusive and more
environmentally responsible, climate-resilient development pathway Resilient and
gender-responsive social protection systems will protect people from falling
back into poverty and ensure development progress, even if disasters and shocks
hit This translates into the CPD outcome: By 2026, people, especially the most
vulnerable and marginalized, will benefit from more inclusive, resilient,
transformative, and sustainable socioeconomic and demographic opportunities to
reduce poverty and inequalities UNDP will strengthen national capacities for the
development, financing and implementation of pro-poor/green growth policies,
including  comprehensive social protection system, thereby contributing to
COVID-19 recovery UNDP will build on capacity development of MOFA and MPI to
incorporate the SDGs into the NSEDP UNDP will leverage its signature solutions
on keeping people out of poverty, environment and gender equality to ensure pro-
poor and inclusive growth strategies, including in COVID-19 recovery plans The
focus of support will shift to critical technical policy advice on strengthening
the links between planning and budgetary processes and developing an integrated
national financing framework to achieve NSEDP goals and inclusive recovery, in
cooperation with the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) and others
UNDP will continue to promote green growth policies that encourage shifts
towards sustainable consumption and integrate circular economy principles UNDP
will continue support to the unexploded ordnance sector, especially the National
Regulatory Agency (NRA), and help increase the sector’ contribution to  broader
inclusive growth strategy with  particular focus on the country’ poorest
districts UNDP will support select ministries and local authorities in targeted
provinces to develop, implement and report on sectoral and local development
plans that integrate the SDGs, including Goal 18 on mine action UNDP will
complement its support to national policy development and evidence-based
planning by leveraging relationships with sectoral ministries and provincial
authorities to address planning and implementation bottlenecks UNDP will help
select ministries establish regular and quality reporting on SDG implementation,
including on SDG indicators UNDP will explore innovative solutions, including
digital, to rally different actors to improve synergies in sectoral and local
plans It gives particular attention to ensuring that Goal 18 targets are fully
reflected and tracked in local plans and reports UNDP will support vulnerable
groups – women, young people, persons with disabilities, ethnic groups and those
impacted by unexploded ordnance – in the poorest districts to gain increased
access to vocational training (TVET), jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities,
with  particular focus on innovation and technology UNDP will work with mass
organizations, /13  DP/DCP/LAO/ including the Lao Front for National
Development, the Lao Women’ Union and the Lao Youth Union This will be
complemented by support to the Government to continue to clear unexploded
ordnance from agricultural lands and other areas for productive use, following
more thorough prioritization exercise UNDP will work closely with the private
sector, including start-ups, employers in key sectors, including tourism, and
civil society organizations to reflect on the future of work and identify which
skills are needed Environment, climate change and resilience The country’
environment and climate change programme leverages UNDP signature solutions on
building resilience and  sustainable planet and directly supports the
complementary UNSDCF pillars on environment and prosperity UNDP will support the
Government to implement and conduct  successful, low-carbon, socially inclusive
green growth strategy in urban and rural areas It aims to place the Lao People’
Democratic Republic on  trajectory that will reduce current and future
environmental damage and losses and shift the growth path to more sustainable
use and management of natural resources for future generations Resilient
communities and strengthened institutions are critical to cope with and recover
from climate change and disaster impacts Therefore, if there is improved
sustainable use of ecosystems and biodiversity resources, greater community
engagement in use of common property resources, and increased resilience to
natural hazards-induced disasters and climate change and reduced damage and
losses, then by 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized,
and institutions will be better able to sustainably access, manage, preserve and
benefit from natural resources and promote green growth that is risk- informed,
disaster and climate-resilient UNDP will focus on capacity development of State
authorities at the central level to develop policies and guidelines that improve
national resources management, disaster risk management and resilience to
climate change UNDP will leverage partnerships with the Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment (MONRE), the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
(MAF), the Ministry of Mines and Energy, the Ministry of Finance, and the
Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare and MPI to strengthen the overall policy
environment and the critical interlinkages between natural resource management,
disaster risk reduction and sustainable development In line with the UNDP
commitment to sustainable management and financing for natural resources, the
CPD will work with the Government and international and regional experts on
innovative approaches to financing interventions for natural resources
management and climate change mitigation and adaptation This will include
payment for ecosystem services, debt swap, and use of carbon credits while
continuing to engage with multilateral financing mechanisms such as the Green
Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility UNDP will leverage its work
with  broad range of local authorities to enhance their capacities to implement
integrated natural resources management systems, focused on forest and water
resources, and establish early warning systems and climate change mitigation and
anticipatory measures for emergencies UNDP will seek to improve coordination and
implementation of strategies with an emphasis on innovation and replication The
programme will promote enhanced risk informed information for decision-makers by
institutionalizing  damage-and-loss database (LaoDi) to track disaster and
climate risks and help improve flood and weather forecasting and early warning
systems UNDP will work with local partners to identify alternative livelihood
and community-managed solutions (such as ecotourism) in the provinces, which are
most vulnerable to flooding and drought, and support local governments to adopt,
finance and implement sustainable natural resource and waste management
strategies in line with national priorities UNDP will work with vulnerable rural
communities to further create opportunities and incentives for their greater
participation in protected area management and conservation of ecosystems and
wildlife and increase their resilience to natural hazards-induced disasters and
climate change This will enable communities to benefit more from sustainable
natural resource management practices and programmes, including integrated
resource management, ecosystem-based adaptation, climate resilient food systems
and local infrastructure  /14 DP/DCP/LAO/ Governance and rule of law The Ninth
NSEDP underscores the critical importance of governance reform to the
achievement of the SDGs State institutions struggle to deliver public services
to the most vulnerable and mitigate the impact of climate change while economic
growth is not inclusive Government agencies have limited capacities, data and
information for long-term planning and decision-making Moreover, they are faced
with overlapping mandates, inadequate resources, and lack of effective follow
through at all levels The programme is predicated on the belief that public
institutions that are responsive and accountable to the public are  necessary
precondition for progress It argues that the best means to reinforce
accountability is to strengthen local-level institutions by creating systems
that capture the experiences of citizens and translate them into local
government reform() and capacity building Accountability will be advanced
through strengthened rule of law, focusing on building the capacity of key
judicial bodies and ensuring the justice system is inclusive by increasing
access to justice for marginalized and vulnerable groups This is captured in the
CPD outcome: By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized,
will be better served by public institutions at all levels in  transparent and
inclusive manner, able to exercise their rights and obligations, and the
institutions shall be strengthened and more accountable while the rule of law
and international human rights commitments made by the Lao People’ Democratic
Republic are upheld UNDP will develop the capacity of State and non-state actors
to put in place transparent and participatory evidence-based policy and
decision-making processes to further strengthen human rights protection and
accountability The lack of data and information has been one of the country’
major governance bottlenecks UNDP will work with relevant ministries to support
efforts to promote digital governance at national and local levels and enhance
data collection and management and user-centred -services As civil society
continues to develop, UNDP will support the development of platforms for
engagement on governance and justice- related issues between government and non-
profit associations/civil society organizations Efforts will be made to support
the Government to build trust and accountability, including strengthening anti-
corruption efforts and increased policy coherence Equally crucial will be
creating  business environment that promotes responsible practices, transparency
and sustainability, including support for direct private investment in the SDGs
UNDP will support efforts to enhance the capacities, including digital, of
ministries (in particular the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Home Affairs,
the Supreme People’ Court, the Office of the Supreme People’ Prosecutor, the Lao
Bar Association, legal aid providers and universities, National Assembly and
Provincial People’ Assemblies, courts and local government bodies) for more
transparent and effective law and policy design, implementation and monitoring
UNDP will continue to work with authorities at all levels to clarify
responsibilities, strengthen capacities to implement decentralization policies,
and ensure better inter-sectoral coordination and policy coherence Efforts to
improve service delivery will focus on the operations of one-door service
centres and by using data collected through citizens surveys, in partnership
with MOHA This will complement support to the Ministry of Technologies and
Communications to increase the proportion of essential public services provided
online UNDP will help build the capacity of the National Assembly and Provincial
People’ Assemblies delegates to effectively represent constituents, engaging
citizens (building on UNDP community radios) and using evidence to fulfil
oversight responsibilities Reform of the justice sector will focus on building
the capacity of key institutions in advancing the rule of law and ensuring
access to justice for marginalized and vulnerable groups UNDP will support
people, including vulnerable groups, to have greater awareness and opportunities
to exercise their rights, provide feedback and participate in decision-making
processes that affect them, and secure remedies when their rights are violated
UNDP will continue to work with MOHA on strengthening and deploying the
citizens’ accountability framework as  vehicle for citizens’ feedback on
provision of basic services Efforts will be made to make legal aid services more
accessible to vulnerable groups through increased legal dissemination, digital
platforms, and services more adapted to people’ needs UNDP will work with local
organizations, including organizations for people with disabilities UNDP will
support elected female delegates to effectively represent the interests of their
constituents and ensure increased women’ participation in political processes In
partnership with UNFPA, /13  DP/DCP/LAO/ UNDP will implement  joint initiative
that brings together the social, justice and police sectors in  systems approach
to preventing and responding to gender-based violence III Programme and risk
management This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results
alignment and resources assigned to the country programme Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to the
country programme is prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations
policies and procedures and internal control framework The programme will be
nationally executed Where necessary, national execution may be replaced by
direct execution for part or all of the programme The harmonized approach to
cash transfers will be used in  coordinated fashion with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial, operational and programmatic risks Cost
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will
be charged to the concerned projects The CPD was developed based  theory of
change process that identified several important risks to successful programme
delivery The most significant is an uncertain development financing landscape in
Lao People’ Democratic Republic that has both direct and indirect consequences
for UNDP The continued impact of COVID-19 on national finances will limit the
Government’ ability to fully meet its obligations under the Ninth NSEDP and in
support of the SDGs, let alone take on new obligations UNDP will attempt to
mitigate these risks by supporting government planning and budgeting to better
target the poor and vulnerable and explore  diverse range of partners Two trends
– the increased use of bilateral cooperation by development partners and the
emergence of the private sector and NGOs as service providers – will require
close coordination based on clearly understood comparative advantages to ensure
synergies in approaches and efforts with national counterparts This suggests
need to improve UNDP positioning among development actors to become  partner of
choice UNDP will focus on high-level technical and policy advice that leverages
its international network of expertise and regional specialists to develop
innovative solutions to emerging challenges The challenge posed by capacity
shortfalls among implementing partners remains  significant risk This will be
mitigated by an overall reduction in the number of projects in the new portfolio
and an emphasis on depth over breadth This will enable UNDP to provide timely
and meaningful technical support and promote long-term training and
implementation capacities As recommended in the CPD evaluation,  robust
mechanism for measuring changes in partner capacities will be set up with clear
baselines and targets Periodic portfolio ‘sense making’ will be undertaken to
ensure alignment of projects and programmes with stated CPD objectives and
priorities and to adapt to emerging development challenges UNDP will ensure that
risks are identified for each project at the design stage and reviewed
throughout the project life cycle in line with the UNDP social and environmental
standards and accountability mechanism On  regular basis, UNDP will undertake
monitoring activities, including monitoring visits, project monthly meetings,
project board meetings and grievance mechanisms, to identify any significant
change in circumstances that may require intervention IV Monitoring and
evaluation Together with UNICEF and other United Nations organizations, UNDP is
supporting the Government to develop the results and resources framework for the
Ninth NSEDP, including robust monitoring, financing and costing frameworks CPD
indicators at both outcome and output levels have been aligned with existing SDG
and national indicators and data sources UNDP will continue to advocate for the
strengthening of the Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB) and other government
institutions and their ability to track progress against the 238 national SDG
indicators endorsed by the Government in June UNDP is supporting the Government
to monitor, mainstream, coordinate and report on the SDGs, including the
voluntary national review process In particular, UNDP will work with specific
government agencies responsible for specific SDGs, for instance the NRA for Goal
18 on mine action, to improve their system  /14 DP/DCP/LAO/ to collect and
analyse data through their information management system and field surveys The
new programme builds on  robust theory of change and individual problem trees to
allow for  clear line of accountability Programmes will be tracked at both
outcome and output levels in parallel to activity monitoring and spot checks for
individual projects As recommended by the CPD evaluation, UNDP will invest in
monitoring capacities and systems to ensure adaptive evidence-based management
of projects The office will allocate  to  per cent of its budget for monitoring
activities The UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor programme expenditures
and improve planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality is well
integrated into programmes UNDP will synchronize its reporting to the UNSDCF
cycle and aim to embed programme reviews within the overall monitoring
architecture of the Government UNDP will explore tools and mobile innovative
monitoring methods, applications, to allow for more regular and even real-time
tracking of progress UNDP will seek to engage with Government, vulnerable groups
and other relevant stakeholders on  regular basis, including through
consultations, to ensure the programme remains relevant to their needs including
use of digital UNDP will utilize recommendations and lessons learned from
independent evaluations to strengthen the project design and make course
corrections UNDP will work closely with government partners to collect high-
quality data disaggregated by province, ethnicity, age, gender and disability
status UNDP will ensure the CPD evaluation plan follows Independent Evaluation
Office guidelines (in terms of project budget and duration) and ensure each
evaluation is funded /13  DP/DCP/LAO/ Annex Results and resources framework for
the Lao People’ Democratic Republic () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP
outcomes  (economic growth),  (people’ well-being) and  (regional and
international integration) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and
marginalized, will benefit from more inclusive, resilient, transformative and
sustainable socioeconomic and demographic opportunities to reduce poverty and
inequalities RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Advance poverty
eradication in all its forms and dimensions ESTIMATED COST BY OUTCOME (United
States dollars) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INDICATOR(), BASELINES, TARGET()
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF DATA COLLECTION, AND RESPONSIBILITIES INDICATIVE
COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets) MAJOR
PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS Regular: $,864,000 Other: $22,960,000
Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA)
MoLSW/National Regulatory Authority (NRA), ILO, UNICEF and Ministry of
Information, Culture and Tourism (MICT) Proportion of population living below
national poverty line Baseline: 60% (2020) Target: 90% (2026) Data source: Lao
Consumption and Expenditure Survey Frequency: Lao Statistics Bureau (LSB)
Frequency: Every five years Output  Development, financing and implementation of
pro-poor/ green growth (COVID-19 recovery) policies, including  comprehensive
social protection system, is strengthened  Ninth and Tenth NSEDP with monitoring
and evaluation framework and fully costed with financing strategy prepared
Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2026) Source: MPI/Project report Frequency: Annual
Share of population covered by the National Social Security System Baseline: %
(2019) Target: % (2025) Data source: MoLSW Frequency: Every five years
Responsibility: MoLSW Other partners: World Bank Asian Development Bank (ADB)
United Nations organizations and the private sector  Ten-year fully costed
strategy plan and monitoring and evaluation framework developed for unexploded
ordnance sector Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: NRA Frequency: Annual
Youth unemployment Baseline: Female: % (2017) Male: % Target: 15% (2025) Output
Select ministries and local authorities in targeted provinces develop, implement
and report on sectoral and local development plans that integrate SDGs
(including Goal 18) MPI, MOFA, Sectoral ministries, MLSW/NRA, Lao National
Unexploded Ordnance Programme (UXO Lao) Number of reported unexploded ordnance
casualties (link to ) Baseline: 33 (2020) Target: less than 15 (2026) Data
Source: NRA Frequency: Annual Responsibility: NRA  Number of provincial plans
that integrate SDGs Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MPI/Project report
Frequency: Annual  Number of annual SDG reports produced by sectoral ministries
Baseline:  (2021) Target: 50 (2026) Source: MPI/ Project report Frequency:
Annual  Number of NRA central and provincial offices that integrate Goal 18
targets into local development plan Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source:
NRA/Project report  /13 DP/DCP/LAO/ Frequency: Annual NRA UXO Lao Lao Women’
Union (LWU) Lao Youth Union (LYU) MICT Private sector Output  Vulnerable groups,
especially women, young people, persons with disabilities, ethnic groups and
those impacted by unexploded ordnance, have increased access to vocational
training (TVET), employment and entrepreneurship opportunities  Percentage of
trainees with increased income six months after training (disaggregated by sex,
age and ethnicity) Baseline: % (2021) Target: 30% (2026) Source: LWU and LYU/
Project reports Frequency: Annual  Number of people living in areas cleared of
unexploded ordnance with UNDP support (disaggregated by sex, age and ethnicity)
Baseline: ,537 (2020) Target: 20,000 (2026) Source: NRA Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP outcome  (Environmental protection and
natural disaster risk reduction) COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, people, especially the most vulnerable and
marginalized, and institutions will be better able to sustainably access,
manage, preserve and benefit from natural resources and promote green growth
that is risk- informed and disaster and climate-resilient RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: Outcome  – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable
development Data source: Ministry of Natural Resource and Environment (MONRE)
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MONRE Output  State authorities develop
policies and guidelines that improve natural resources management, disaster risk
management and resilience to climate change MONRE, MAF, MPI, Ministry of Finance
(MOF) and MLSW (Department of Social Welfare – National Disaster Management
Office) Regular: $,700,000 Other: $37,765,000 Number of local governments that
adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies disaggregated
by () province, () district and () village Baseline:  provinces  district
village (2020) Target: 10 provinces, 15 districts 50 villages (2026) (link to )
Number of financing solutions for conservation implemented Percentage increase
in financing amount for conservation Baseline:  (2020) Target:  (2026) Source:
MONRE and MLSW/Project reports Frequency: Annual UNEP, FAO, UNDRR, UNCDF
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) ADB, World Bank  Number of
functioning and linked early warning systems at national and provincial level in
target provinces Baseline:  (2021) Target: 10 (2026) Source: MONRE and
MLSW/Project reports Frequency: Annual Number of weather stations Baseline: 51
(TBC) Target: 101 (2026) Data Source: MONRE Frequency: Annual Responsibility:
MONRE PM2 air pollution, mean annual exposure (micrograms per cubic meter)
Baseline: 11 micrograms per cm (2017) 10  DP/DCP/LAO/ Target: 10 micrograms per
cm (2026) Environmental performance index (EPI) Baseline: (2020) Target: TBC
(2026) Forest area as percentage of total land area Baseline: % (2020) Target:
70% (2025) Data Source: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) Frequency:
Annual Responsibility: MAF Output  Local authorities have enhanced capacities to
implement integrated natural resources management and DRR systems MLSW MAF MONRE
Local government UNDRR FAO UNEP  Disaster loss database established and
operational Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: MLSW Frequency: Annual
Number of local governments that adopt and implement local natural resource
management strategies, disaggregated by () province, () district, and () village
Baseline : (2021) Target: (2026) () province =, () district 15 and () village 50
Source: UNDP/MAF/ MONRE Frequency: Annual Output  Vulnerable rural communities
participate in protected area management and conservation of ecosystems and
wildlife and increase resilience to natural hazards-induced disasters and
climate change MAF MONRE CSOs UNDRR UNEP FAO  Number of vulnerable communities
in selected provinces participating in protected area management and
conservation of ecosystem and wildlife Baseline: 16 (2021) Target: 32 (2026)
Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE Frequency: Annual  Percentage of women in vulnerable
communities benefiting from assisted sustainable management of natural
resources, forests, ecosystem services Baseline: 15% (2021) Target: 33% women
(2026) Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE/Project report Frequency: Annual  11
DP/DCP/LAO/  Percentage of women in vulnerable communities benefiting from
disaster resilience initiatives Baseline: 15% (2021) Target: 33% women (2026)
Source: UNDP, MAF and MONRE/Project report Frequency: Annual NATIONAL PRIORITY
OR GOAL: Ninth NSEDP outcome  (Governance and the rule of law) COOPERATION
FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : By 2026, people, especially
the most vulnerable and marginalized, will be better served by public
institutions at all levels in  transparent and inclusive manner, able to
exercise their rights and obligations, and the institutions shall be
strengthened and more accountable while the rule of law and international human
rights commitments made by the Lao People’ Democratic Republic are upheld
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Accelerate structural transformations
for sustainable development Corruption perception index Baseline: Index 29
(2019) Target: more than 40 (2026) Data source: Transparency International
Frequency: Annual Responsibility: Transparency International Output  Transparent
and participatory evidence-based policy and decision-making processes further
strengthen human rights protection and accountability GSWG, Ministry of Home
Affairs (MOHA), MoJ MTC Regular: $,700,000 Other: $18,570,000  Proportion of
public sector entities using digital data at central and subnational level
Baseline: TBD (2022) Target: 80% (2026) Source: Ministry of Technologies and
Communications (MTC) and NSEDP Frequency: Annual Number of people using legal
aid services (link to ) Baseline: 1059 (2019) Target: 35,000 (2026) Data source:
Ministry of Justice (MOJ) Frequency: Annual Responsibility: MOJ effectiveness
Government index Baseline: Index -78 (2019) Target: <- (2026) Data Source: World
Bank Frequency: Annual Responsibility: World Bank  Multi-stakeholder engagement
platform established (number of institutions using platform disaggregated by
type) Baseline:  (2021) Target:  (2026) Source: Governance Sector Working Group
(GSWG) Frequency: Annual Voice and accountability index Baseline: Index - (2019)
Target: <- (2026)  Number of women running for National Assembly and Provincial
People’ Assemblies seats Baseline: 22% (2021) Target: 30% (2026) Source: United
States Agency for International Development (USAID) STEPS project Frequency:
Annually Data Source: United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA) Frequency: Annual -government index Baseline: Index 3288 (2020) Target:
>55 (2026) Responsibility: UNDESA Output  Government bodies have enhanced
capacities for more transparent and effective law design, implementation and
monitoring MOPT, MOJ, MOHA, National Assembly and Provincial People' Assemblies,
Supreme People’ Court, Office of Supreme People’ Prosecutor, courts, local
government  Number of people accessing essential public services online (-
service) Baseline: TBD (2022) Target: 50% of all government services (2026)
Source: MCT and NSEDP Frequency: Annual 12  DP/DCP/LAO/  Number of citizen-
engagement and outreach mechanisms conducted by delegates Baseline: % (TBC)
Target: 80% (2026) Source: USAID STEPS project Frequency: Annual  Number and
utilization rates of one-stop service centres by women and ethnic groups at: ()
district level, and () province level Baseline: 44 (TBC) Target: 74 (50% of
public services provided at ODSC) Source: MOHA and NSEDP Frequency: Annual
Number of justice and police officials trained on gender- sensitive legal aid
service provisions and policing Baseline:  Target: 250 (2026) (50 legal aid
service providers police officers) Source: MOJ and Ministry of Public Security
Frequency: Annual Output  People, including vulnerable groups, have greater
access to basic and accountable services MOHA, MOJ CSOs Academia  Number of
target districts that adopt accountability framework Baseline:  (2020) Target:
40 Districts (2026) Source: MOHA and NSEDP Frequency: Annual  Percentage of
citizens who attended the survey satisfied with public services received
Baseline: 17 (2019) Target: 80% (2026) Source: MOHA/SUFS Frequency: Annual
Regular: $,264,000 Other: $79,295,000 Total: $87,559,000 Total 13