   DRAFT NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN      DECEMBER 2011 Prepared by the
Department of Sustainable Development of the General Secretariat of the
Organization of American States through the Global Sustainable Energy Islands
Initiative Consortium, and the expert advice of the Independent Consultant Mr
Basil Sutherland, and Castalia LLC under the European Union funded initiative
“Caribbean Sustainable Energy Program (CSEP)” The views expressed herein are
presented for informational purposes only and do not represent the opinions or
official positions of the Global Sustainable Energy Islands Initiative
Consortium, the European Union, the Organization of American States, its General
Secretariat, or any of its member States                        –        TABLE
OF CONTENTS ACRONYMS ii  INTRODUCTION   SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN
FOSSIL FUELS MANAGEMENT   Bulk Storage   Fuel Quality Standards   Least Cost
Fossil Fuel Supply   ELECTRICITY SUPPLY 11  Electricity Distribution and
Transmission Efficiency Targets   Electricity Generation Efficiency
Electricity for Very Poor or Remote Communities   Renewable Distributed
Generation   Public Awareness and Education Campaign   Specific Renewable
Resource Development   ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION 19  Energy
Conservation  Encourage Uptake of Energy Efficient Appliances   Improve Energy
Efficiency in New Buildings   Report Energy Efficiency and Conservation Progress
END-USE SECTORS   Transport Sector    Agricultural Sector   Industrial and
Commercial Sector   Domestic Sector  Tourism and Hospitality Sector
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FUNDING   Incorporate Sustainable Energy in
Energy Unit   Institutional Responsibilities of the Energy Unit   Funding the
Sustainable Energy Plan           ACRONYMS DOMLEC Dominica Electric Company
EPTDEstablishment, Personnel and Training Department IRC Independent Regulatory
Commission MAFMinistry of Agriculture and Forestry MEHRD Ministry of Education
and Human Resources Development MENRPPF Ministry of Environment, Natural
Resources, Physical Planning and Fisheries METIDA Ministry of Employment, Trade,
Industry, and Diaspora Affairs  MF Ministry of Finance MFA Ministry of Foreign
Affairs MITCEMinistry of Information, Telecoms, and Constituency Empowerment
MSSCDGA Ministry of Social Services, Community Development and Gender Affairs
MTLA Ministry of Tourism and Legal Affairs ii                        –
1INTRODUCTION THIS DOCUMENT ESTABLISHES THE NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN (the
Plan) of Dominica The Plan addresses the growing concerns about the predominance
of imported fossil fuels in the country’ energy sector The goal of the Plan is
to increase the efficiency and sustainability of energy supply and demand,
wherever it is economically feasible Dominica’ primary energy requirements are
met almost entirely through the use of fossil fuels, all of which are imported
Oil-derived products make up 90 percent of the total energy supply Liquid
Petroleum Gas (LPG) contributes  further six percent to the total primary energy
requirement Hydropower facilities—which are ageing and need revitalization— make
up the remaining four percent The cost of fuel imports is  concern at the
macroeconomic level, and for individuals Lack of diversity in energy sources,
exposes the country to the volatility of fossil fuel prices, and instability in
supply if fuel shipments are delayed The Government of Dominica is concerned
about the effects of using fossil fuels on local and global environmental
sustainability In addition to global concern about carbon dioxide emissions,
using fossil fuels leads to direct pollution effects on Dominica’ natural
environ- ment, which is  vital economic resource for the country, particularly
for the tourism industry The Plan sets out how the Government intends to
implement the National Energy Policy (the Policy) The Plan follows the layout of
the Policy, providing detail for the specific policies that are in the Policy
The main components of the Plan are:  Summary of the National Energy Action Plan
– Summary of the actions and sub-actions of the Plan, and the time scale and
implementing body for the actions;  Plan for Fossil Fuels Management – This
compo- nent covers the Government’ plan to use the most economically efficient
fuels and to use them as efficiently as possible;  Plan for Electricity Supply –
This component  covers the Government’ plan to provide efficient electricity
supply, integrating renewable energy where economically feasible;  Plan for
Energy Efficiency and Conservation – This component covers the Government’ plan
to encourage energy efficiency and conservation as it applies to Dominican
society as  whole;  Plan for End-Use Sectors – This component covers policies
for sustainable energy that are specific to individual economic sectors, and are
not covered in previous sections;  Plan for Institutional Strengthening and
Funding – This component covers the administrative and institutional
requirements to implement the Plan It also provides guidance on potential
funding sources   2SUMMARY THE TABLE BELOW SUMMARIZES HOW THE GOVERNMENT
PROPOSES TO implement each component of the Policy, showing the: OF NATIONAL
Actions and sub-actions that correspond to specific policies from the Policy,
The body that will be responsible for the actions and sub-actions This ENERGY
means conducting the actions, gathering together additional actors that will
participate in carrying out the action, and/or contracting outside consultants
to carry out parts of the Plan, and ACTION PLAN  The time-scale for carrying out
the actions Table : Summary of National Energy Action Plan Policy # Action #
Sub-Action Timescale Body Responsi- ble Immediate- Term MPWEP, METIDA Work with
the private sector to develop better forecasting systems based on the collection
of detailed end-use information for petroleum demand Rationalising bulk stor-
age facilities and provid- ing adequate incentives and develop the neces- sary
framework and re- forms for fossil fuel storage capacity to allow for
emergencies and late shipments Policy for Fossil Fuel Management POLICY: It is
the Government’ policy to provide safe, reliable, competi- tive, and affordable
fossil fuel supply, and promote its clean handling and use This will re- sult in
cost re- duction and greater efficiency   Study best approach to achieve
efficient storage capacity, including  cost/bene- fit analysis and considering
whether to build new facilities or better regulate ex- isting facilities
Immediate- Term  MPWEP Revise existing regulations, or submit for consideration
new legislation to Parlia- ment, that will ensure adequate inventory levels and
cushion effects of supply disruptions METIDA, MPWEP Short-Term  Immediate- Term
Conduct  study of best practices for fuel efficiency standards in the Caribbean
context, including  cost/benefit analysis of requiring that higher quality fuel
be imported MPWEP Setting national stan- dards for fuel quality and seeking
regional harmo- nization throughout the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
Work with the importers and other OECS standards institutions to revise existing
regulations, or submit for consideration new legislation to Parliament, in order
to ensure that minimum quality standards are developed for fuels imported into
Dominica Short-Term MPWEP, METIDA  Immediate- Term Seek donor assistance to
undertake  study of supply logistics for petroleum products within the sub-
region  METIDA Ensuring that competi- tion to supply fossil fuels guarantees the
lowest price possible for petro- leum products  Prepare regulations to ensure
that as far as possible, fossil fuels are procured competitively to ensure that,
as far as the supply logistics will allow, supplies of petroleum products are
the lowest price possible This can include national com- bined purchasing METIDA
Short-Term  Policy for Elec- tricity Supply POLICY: It is the Government’ policy
to foster  safe, efficient, af- fordable, and low-carbon na- tional electricity
supply that meets interna- tional quality standards by pro- moting efficient use
of imported fossils fuels, and Dominica’ do- mestic renewable energy resources
Through negotiations with DOMLEC, design  system based on regional bench-
marking that will ensure that line losses in excess of reasonable levels that
re- sult in more fuel than necessary being used are not passed on to the
consumer in the fuel surcharge, but remain as  cost to DOMLEC  Conduct  tariff
optimization study that will provide  blue print for rearranging the tariff
structure so that it will incentivize off-peak energy use, account for power
factor, and encourage all customers, particularly large customers, to re- main
on the grid Providing incentives to electricity generators, transmitters, and
distrib- utors to improve effi- ciency Immediate- Term  IRC  Establish an
overall heat rate target for diesel engine generation efficiency and ensure that
generating plants are dispatched in the most economical way to meet the system
loads This means using the available mix of hydropower, con- ventional
generation, and new renewable energy sources to provide reliable power at least
cost  Require DOMLEC to demonstrate that its expansion planning is least cost
and based on best practices in expansion planning  The IRC will develop
Standard Offer Contract for Independent Power Producers  (continued)   In this
column Immediate-term means less than one year, Short-term means less than five
years, and Medium-term means less than 10 years and long term means more than 10
years Policy # Action # Sub-Action Timescale Body Responsi- ble Adequately train
IRC’ staff in the use of the appropriate system planning soft- ware and ensure
that its planning software is kept up to date with program en- hancements and
updates  Require DOMLEC to install fuel meters and also implement  protocol for
the periodic recalibration of these meters Immediate- Term METIDA , MPWEP
Continue to ensure that electricity consumption under 100 kWh in the residen-
tial consumer tariff category receives  subsidy which is paid for by the con-
sumption of larger amounts of electricity by other customers Immediate- Term IRC
Extending electricity sup- plies to unserved com- munities and remote, off-grid
communities through grid access or microgeneration   Conduct studies to identify
communities without access to grid power and then conduct  cost/benefit analysis
to determine what the most economic technol- ogy is to deliver power to them
This should include consideration of grid con- nection, cooperative generation,
or individual generation Immediate- Term  MSSCDGA Provide financial assistance
to fund training the staff of cooperative organiza- tions to manage, operate and
maintain the facilities, and the setting up of the accounting functions that
will be required  Short-Term MSSCDGA Providing the appropriate standards,
guidelines and regulatory system for the integration of renewable energy to the
national electricity system Immediate- Term Continue to develop appropriate
standards to facilitate the interconnection of renewable energy systems to the
DOMLEC grid IRC, DOMLEC   Ensuring the develop- ment of local expertise to
install, operate, man- age, and maintain re- newable distributed generation
systems Cooperate with local technical institutes and international training
institutes to design and implement  curriculum for training Dominicans to
install, operate, manage, and maintain renewable distributed generation systems
Immediate- Term MEHRD   MPWEP, METIDA, MF, MSS- CDGA, IRC Continue to promote
the development of economically viable, renewable distrib- uted generation
capacity and co-generation by conducting cost/benefit analyses of incentives to
inform the design of  program that will offer: fiscal incentives, procedures and
standards for system interconnection, stable and fair feed-in tar- iffs, and
streamlined approval processes To do this, Dominica will draw off the experience
of Barbados and other similar countries Promoting the develop- ment of
economically vi- able small renewable distributed generation capacity Immediate-
Term   Design and pass necessary regulations and allocate necessary resources to
im- plement the program of incentives, procedures, and standards MF, MPWEP
Short-Term  Develop curriculums in schools to increase the awareness of students
about re- newable energy and the need for the country to reduce its energy costs
through energy efficiency and renewable energy Designing and imple- menting
national pro- gramme of education and awareness in renew- able energy MPWEP,
MEHRD   Immediate- Term Develop renewable energy awareness programmes for the
employees of Gov- ernment by way of short in-house programmes and seminars MPWEP
Develop and implement short programmes of radio and television advertising
informing Dominicans about energy efficiency and renewable energy MPWEP, MITCE
MPWEP, DOMLEC, DOWASCO Review and check existing data on hydropower capacity and
pilot the imple- mentation of resource assessments for hydroelectric potential
by establishing  stream gauging programme throughout Dominica Undertake
preliminary estimates of the costs of implementing micro hydro schemes at
suitable locations and undertake preliminary analyses to rank the cost/benefit
of these potential developments to determine their economic po- tential to
supply energy for various uses Promoting Hydropower Short-Term 10 MPWEP Maintain
database of hydro resources which, along with preliminary estimates of costs,
will be updated on  regular basis This data should be included in the renewable
energy database (continued)  SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN Policy #
Action # Sub-Action Timescale Body Responsi- ble Drill test wells and continue
the exploration of geothermal potential, including addressing concerns about
reliability of geothermal and impacts on hot springs by “proving” the viability
of the heat source under load MPWEP Drill and cap  commercial production well
Commission and implement the required environmental impact assessment studies to
ensure that the geothermal developments are implemented in an en- vironmentally
friendly manner, and that whatever mitigation measures are needed, are carried
out with dispatch Develop and draft appropriate agreements with developers,
financiers, electricity purchasers, and other relevant stakeholder for
developing the plant, and selling and transporting the electricity produced at
the plant See GAANT Chart (Table ) Carry out an interconnection economic
feasibility study to determine the parameters required for the commercial
exploitation of the geothermal resource Promoting Geothermal Power 11 Develop
and implement training programmes for geothermal technicians Carry out
technical feasibility study to determine the technical boundaries for
interconnecting with the electricity systems on Dominica, as well as with the
systems on Martinique and Guadeloupe MPWEP Negotiate commercial agreements with
DOMLEC Facilitate the construction and operation of  -10 MW plant to connect
with the DOMLEC system Prepare bidding documents and conduct an international,
competitive auction to select the company to develop and build  large-scale
geothermal plant 10 Negotiate  power off-take agreement with Martinique and
Guadeloupe 11 Facilitate the construction, financing and operation of  large-
scale geothermal plant by  competitively-selected, qualified private company 12
Immediate- Term Develop  list of government-owned facilities and institutions
which have criti- cal loads such as in hospitals and schools which could be
powered by photo- voltaic sources and carry out an initial pilot project to test
these installations MPWEP 12 Promoting Solar Power Carry out an initial pilot
project to test installation of solar water heaters in pub- lic buildings}
Short-Term Pilot the implementation of resource assessments for wind energy at
sites which are thought to have good wind regimes and seek funding from
appropriate agencies to undertake these resource assessments Immediate- Term
MPWEP Promoting Wind Power 13 Maintain  database of wind data and wind maps,
along with preliminary esti- mates of costs for establishing wind turbines,
which will be updated on  regular basis MPWEP and DOMLEC Energy Efficiency and
Conservation POLICY: It is the Government’ policy to rational- ize the country’
overall rate of en- ergy consumption while increasing its economic growth by
adopt- ing best practices in energy effi- ciency and con- servation Commission
study of energy consumption patterns in all the major sectors of the Dominican
economy and identify areas for improvement Immediate- Term Developing public
educa- tion programmes on im- proved consumption patterns and consumer behaviour
in the end-use sectors Immediate- Term Design and implement  public information
campaign that will promote energy conserving and energy efficient practices
MITCE 14 Conduct  study of best practices, drawing on the experience of
Barbados, for how to incentivize customers to purchase commercially and
economically viable energy efficient appliances Immediate- Term MPWEP Convene
stakeholders from the Government, the banking sector, and the retail sector to
discuss the findings of the study and decide what kinds of incentives to offer
Immediate- Term Encouraging the use of energy-efficient appli- ances and
technology by consumers MPWEP Provide fiscal incentives to businesses and
individuals that will encourage them to purchase commercially and economically
viable energy efficiency technology Short-Term METIDA (continued)  SUMMARY OF
NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN Policy # Action # Sub-Action Timescale Body
Responsi- ble Bureau of Standards Immediate- Term Conduct quality standards
testing to determine which appliances are most ap- propriate for the Dominican
context, taking onto account efficiency, durability, performance, and added cost
as well as other applicable environmental and safety standards Encouraging
appliance suppliers to import reli- able, energy efficient ap- pliances 15
Conduct cost/benefit analysis of offering tariff incentives for economically
viable energy efficient appliances that meet established standards or import
restric- tions on appliances that fail to meet efficiency standards Immediate-
Term METIDA Design an appropriate labeling scheme that will alert Dominicans to
the poten- tial benefits of energy efficient appliances and require that
retailers display them on products Immediate- Term Requiring retailers to label
energy efficient ap- pliances, and to inform customers about the en- ergy
efficiency and the energy consumption of appliances MPWEP 16 Conduct  public
education campaign to make people aware of the labels and their significance and
how they relate to fiscal incentives that promote purchas- ing energy efficient
equipment MITCE Short-Term Conduct research on best practices for energy
efficient buildings in the Caribbean environment and maintain awareness on any
regional or sub-re- gional studies that could benefit Dominica Immediate- Term
17 Establishing standards for energy efficiency in buildings MENRPPF Convene
stakeholders, including government officials, representatives of the
construction industry, and property owners to weigh benefits and costs and de-
termine appropriate building standards for Dominica based on the best practices
study Immediate- Term Implement building standards and lead by example by
ensuring that govern- ment buildings meet or are striving towards meeting
standards Short-Term Study best practices in encouraging energy audits in all
sectors of the economy and recommend incentives MPWEP Immediate- Term 18
Encouraging energy au- dits, especially hotels and households Provide
appropriate fiscal and financial incentives to encourage individuals and
businesses to conduct audits MF Conduct  cost/best analysis of best practices
for how to incentivize individuals and companies to retrofit their building with
commercially and economically vi- able energy efficiency technologies MENRPPF
Immediate- Term Encouraging retrofitting homes and buildings in the private
sector with energy efficient equipment 19 Convene stakeholders in the
Government, private sector, and NGO representa- tives to present the findings of
the study and decide which incentives are appro- priate to encourage energy
efficiency retrofits MENRPPF Offer fiscal and financial incentives through the
commercial banking sector as well as through tax incentives for retrofits in the
domestic and commercial sec- tor Medium- Term MF Short-Term Conduct energy
audits to determine which public buildings have the highest po- tential for
energy savings from an energy efficiency retrofit MENRPPF Developing  plan to
retrofit public buildings with energy efficient equipment 20 Carry out the
energy efficiency retrofits in the buildings identified in the energy audits
MPWEP Medium- Term Convene stakeholders from within the Government to determine
what efficiency indicators are most appropriate to report Immediate- Term
Reporting progress on energy efficiency in na- tional economic reports 21 MITCE
Gather information on efficiency gains from DOMLEC, the MAF, and the MITCE to
calculate the indicators and publish them in national reports Short-Term
(continued)  SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN Policy # Action # Sub-Action
Timescale Body Responsi- ble The MPWEP will conduct cost/benefit analyses to
estimate the overall impact on the economy of using the various types of
vehicles, crafts and fuels for different transport duties and make
recommendations as to the types of vehicles and crafts that should be encouraged
in the transport fleet This will include analysis of diesel, biodiesel, and
electric power (including potential partnerships with electric vehicle makers)
Analysis of different types of vehicles and crafts should include the analysis
of the required infrastructure to support them Analysis will also include
studying the potential of producing biofuels and E10 and statistics Conducting
research into producing alternative fuels to ensure that vehi- cles and crafts
in Do- minica are powered by the most efficient energy mix possible Transport
Sector POLICY: It is the Government’ policy to pro- mote efficient ve- hicles,
crafts, and  strong inte- grated public transport sector strategy 22 Immediate-
Term 22 MPWEP Consult on possible changes in fuel and fleet mix based on the
study If war- ranted by the results of the study, the METIDA and MF will
collaborate to design and implement  tariff regime that offers reduced
importation tariffs based on the fuel efficiency of the vehicle or craft The
tariff regime should be progressive and give the largest tariff reductions to
the most efficient vehicles and crafts Additionally, if appropriate, they will
provide economically efficient incentives for domestic production of biofuels or
E10 METIDA, MF Short-Term 23 Optimizing efficiency of transport fleet and fuel
mix Organize courses on defensive driving that will be offered in secondary
schools, to the Taxi Drivers Association, and to the general public through
public informa- tion campaigns Immediate- Term MEHRD, MITCE Immediate- Term
Conduct study of best practices in organizing public transport, this should in-
clude  cost/benefit analysis of investing in public transport for Dominica
Convene stakeholders including government officials, Taxi Drivers Association
members, and NGO representatives, discuss potential trade-offs, and decide on
course of action Immediate- Term 24 Organizing  regulated and rational public
sec- tor transit system MPWEP Implement the Plan to create  regulated and
rational public transport sector Short-Term Immediate- Term Agricultural Sector
Conduct studies on best practices for energy efficient agricultural practices,
in- cluding building standards, in the Caribbean MAF Encouraging the use of
sustainable practices in agriculture, which will provide economic bene- fits and
environmental benefits 25 Design and implement  targeted educational campaign
coordinated with agri- cultural cooperatives to promote best practices in energy
efficient agriculture and inform farmers of the benefits available to them under
the Electricity Supply and Energy Efficiency and Conservation plans Short-Term
Design and implement  targeted educational campaign coordinated with in- dustry
and commercial representatives to promote best practices in energy effi- ciency
and inform factory owners and shop owners of the benefits available to them
under the Electricity Supply and Energy Efficiency and Conservation plans
Industrial and Commercial Sector POLICY: encour- age sustainable methods of pro-
duction which will include re- ducing waste, re- cycling and reuse of materials
Immediate- Term Offering tax breaks for companies meeting the energy efficiency
stan- dards set by Govern- ment, including for using “green buildings” and green
production meth- ods for their operations METIDA 26 Conduct industry specific
studies of energy efficiency in industrial and commer- cial buildings This will
be done in collaboration with local business organization and representatives
Immediate- Term MPWEP Provide tax incentives for companies that meet industrial
and commercial en- ergy efficient building standards scaled to the projected
benefits measured in the cost/benefit analysis Immediate- Term MF Provide tax
incentives to use economical, energy efficient manufacturing tech- nology scaled
to the projected benefits measured in the cost/benefit analysis Immediate- Term
MF Encouraging businesses to implement sustainable energy practices specific to
their sectors Design and implement  targeted educational campaign coordinated
with in- dustry representatives to promote best practices in energy efficiency
and inform factory owners of the benefits available to them under the
Electricity Supply and Energy Efficiency and Conservation plans METIDA, MITCE
Immediate- Term (continued)  SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN Policy #
Action # Sub-Action Body Responsi- ble Timescale Immediate- Term MSSCDGA Conduct
research on best practices for energy efficiency in households including
research on usage patterns and energy efficient behavior Developing and imple-
menting educational and action-oriented pro- grammes to promote household energy
effi- ciency and conservation Domestic Sector POLICY: It is the Government’
policy that the domestic sector will have  diver- sified supply of energy
services, energy efficient appliances, and the option to produce electric- ity
27 Conduct  public information campaign aimed at persuading households to adopt
energy efficient behaviors that will reduce usage as well as inform them of the
way that the Energy Efficiency and Conservation and Electricity Supply Policies
apply to them Immediate- Term MITCE Conduct research on best practices for
providing incentives for households to overcome barriers to adopting solar water
heaters drawing on the experience of Barbados Immediate- Term Providing fiscal
incen- tives to promote the use of solar water heating in new and existing homes
MSSCDGA Provide  program of incentives and information that will help overcome
barri- ers to adopting solar water heaters MSSCDGA MITCE Short-Term Develop and
implement  programme to ensure that LPG could be ac- cessed by all persons in
society, especially the most needy; Conduct  cost/benefit analysis to examine
the cost implications of subsidizing access to LPG for the neediest members of
society in Dominica Immediate- Term MSSCDGA Prepare  programme of assistance to
aid its neediest citizens in the procure- ment of their LPG supplies for cooking
MSSCDGA Short-Term Immediate- Term Reducing tax rates on energy saving
hospitality devices and appliances Incentivizing energy effi- ciency retrofits
Tourism and Hospitality Sector POLICY: It is the Government’ policy that the
sector will be- come part the national green approach to busi- ness Conduct
cost/benefit analysis of hospitality and tourism machines, devices, and
appliances in consultation with representatives from the hospitality industry
MTLA Allow cost-recovery of retrofitting hotels through  tax rebate over  five
year period Immediate- Term 28 MF Develop  special regime of recognition and
promotion of the greening efforts of hotels MTLA Short-Term Incentivizing hotels
to become Earth Check certified Creating and Energy Unit within the Ministry of
Public Work, Energy and Ports Policy Imple- mentation Approach POLICY: It is the
Government’ policy to inte- grate the capac- ity to ensure that government ac-
tions are in line with sustainable development ob- jectives into an Energy Unit
within the Min- istry of Public Works, Energy and Ports Immediate- Term Create
transparent legal framework that will provide the institutional, legisla- tive,
and financial support required for the effective implementation of the Pol- icy
29 Immediate- Term Undertake the necessary administrative actions to give effect
to its policy priori- ties and needs, including hiring required staff with
suitable skills sets MPWEP, EPTD Provide the public sector institutional
capacity to monitor and analyze cross-sec- torial energy efficiency and
conservation issues and performance Immediate- Term Ensure that government’ tax
revenues streams are not unreasonably compro- mised when developing and offering
new tax incentives, rebates, and relief through cost/benefit analysis Conducting
careful eco- nomic assessments of the fiscal and economic measures required for
the successful implemen- tation of the Policy 30 Ongoing MF 30 (continued)
SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ENERGY ACTION PLAN Policy # Action # Sub-Action Timescale
Body Responsi- ble Immediate- Term EPTD Conduct study of best practices in
Environmental Impact Assessments, Social Im- pact Assessments, and Strategic
Environmental Assessments Requiring project devel- opers to conduct Envi-
ronmental Impact Assessments, Social Im- pact Assessments, and Strategic
Environmental Assessments that are in line with Environmental and Planning
Regula- tions, as part of the plan- ning and assessment process preceding the
approval and implemen- tation of major national projects in the energy sector 31
Conduct training of employees in the Bureau of Standards to guarantee that they
will be able to develop standards, regulations and, policies in coordination
with other government agencies Ensure that they will also be able to gather data
necessary for monitoring and evaluation, enforce compliance Immediate- Term EPTD
Develop and maintain an up-to-date national energy database containing all en-
ergy sector data required for energy planning purposes Short-Term MPWEP Conduct
Environmental Impact Assessments, Social Impact Assessments, and Strategic
Environmental Assessments on all energy projects Ongoing MPWEP Immediate- Term
Seeking appropriate funding to implement the Policy domestically and
internationally MF Conduct review of which involved agencies have resources
available to support policy actions for sustainable energy 32 Conduct research
into available international funding sources for sustainable energy This review
should include, but not be limited to, the World Bank (includ- ing through
support provided to the Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Au- thority), the
Inter-American Development Bank, Organization of American States, the Global
Environmental Facility It should also, include developing  Nationally
Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMA) strategy, with the goal of using the
“Funded NAMA” mechanism Immediate- Term MPWEP, MFA Design applications and terms
of reference for projects that require support from international funding
sources MPWEP Short-Term 3FOSSIL FUELS IT IS THE GOVERNMENT’ POLICY TO PROVIDE
SAFE, RELIABLE, competitive, and affordable fossil fuel supply, and promote its
clean handling and use This will result in cost reduction and greater efficiency
Being able to properly manage the uncertainty in fuel availability and pricing
is critical to optimize energy usage and minimizing delivered energy costs
MANAGE- MENT The Plan will take into account information on:  Supply and demand
factors;  The supply chain and stockholdings of various fuels;  Industry actions
to maintain supply reliability;  Supply disruptions and industry management;
Government responses to  liquid fuel emergency Government will cooperate with
the wholesalers and retailers of petroleum products to continuously review their
demand forecasts and impress on them and their customers the importance of
collecting accurate and detailed information to facilitate this It will also
ensure that petroleum product wholesalers and retailers take account of the
logistics of moving vessels bringing petroleum supplies to Dominica in making
their plans for importing supplies                         –        FOSSIL FUELS
MANAGEMENT Bulk Storage  Under the Plan, Government will consider the
rationalization of bulk storage facilities for all types of fossil fuels used in
the island This may lead to consolidation into one modern terminal, subject to
consultation with suppliers and current storage facility owners Petroleum
reserve storage—unexpected oil supply disruptions due to national or interna-
tional events, such as natural disasters, geopolitical instability, or acts of
terrorism, must be mitigated This is because  gap in petroleum supply deliveries
which resulted from the diversion of one or two supply tankers because of any of
the above incidents could well deprive the island of its regular petroleum
supplies for  protracted period Under the Plan, Government in consultation with
DOMLEC, will carry out  cost/benefit analysis to determine the level of fuel
supplies that should be maintained by DOMLEC’ fuel supplier This study will take
account of the costs of:  Carrying the inventory of fuel;  Loss of electricity
supplies to the economy in terms of lost production;  The economic loss from
shortage of transportation fuel;  The loss of welfare benefits to the citizens
The study will make recommendations for the minimum storage of diesel fuel that
should be maintained in Dominica The Plan will also implement measures to ensure
that adequate stocks of LPG are kept in storage at locations which are
sufficiently dispersed geographically to ensure that  natu- ral disaster would
not result in the entire storage being lost ACTIONS: 1The METIDA together with
MPWEP will work with the private sector to study better 2The MPWEP will study
best approach to achieve efficient storage capacity in consulta- 3The METIDA
with MPWEP will revise existing regulations, or submit for consideration
forecasting systems based on the collection of detailed end-use information for
petroleum demand tion with the private sector, including  cost/benefit analysis
and considering whether to build new facilities or better regulate existing
facilities  new legislation to Parliament, in order to ensure adequate inventory
levels and meas- ures that will cushion effects of supply disruptions on fossil
fuels as described above Time-scale: - Immediate-Term,  Short-Term Fuel Quality
Standards  Government will require that fuels imported into Dominica achieve
certain minimum tech- nical quality standards This will ensure that customers
receive the calorific value that fuels of the specified description should
yield, and also that impurities will not cause undue maintenance problems for
the users However, Government also recognizes that regional supply logistics may
require that these standards are tailored to what is generally avail- able in
the regional market place, because insisting on tighter standards may result in
un- warranted additional costs  Government will therefore require its
institutions involved in setting national standards to develop national
standards for fuel quality to be imported into Dominica, and being mind- ful of
the regional logistics of tanker borne fuel supplies, will seek to harmonize
these   standards with similar standards throughout the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States       FOSSIL FUELS MANAGEMENT The minimum quality standards for
liquid fuels will specify the allowable limits for:          Density Kinematic
Viscosity Flash Point Gross Calorific Value Water content Sediment Ash content
Sulphur content Vanadium Content Sodium content Asphaltene content Hydrogen
Sulphide ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will conduct  study of best practices for fuel
standards in the Caribbean 2The METIDA and the MPWEP will work with the
importers and other OECS standards context, including  cost/benefit analysis of
requiring that higher quality fuel be im- ported institutions to revise existing
regulations, or submit for consideration new legislation to Parliament, in order
to ensure that minimum quality standards, for at least the parameters described
above, are developed for fuels imported into Dominica  Time-scale:  Immediate-
Term,  Short-Term  It is Government policy to ensure that competition to supply
fossil fuels guarantees the lowest price possible for petroleum products Least
Cost Fossil Fuel Supply Cost reduction may be aided by improved bulk storage as
mentioned above, and in addi- tion the Government will consider seeking reduced
costs through the following measures:  Changing regulation to promote
competition;  Purchasing fuel through national combined purchasing ;
Cooperation with other OECS member states to investigate the potential for any
supply synergies among the states, such as pooling of volumes so that reduced
prices can be obtained through larger volume purchases These measures are aimed
at leveraging private sector competition and economies of scale to reduce the
costs of fuel in Dominica ACTIONS: 1Government will direct the METIDA to seek
donor assistance to undertake  study of 2If appropriate, the METIDA will prepare
regulations to ensure that as far as possible, supply logistics for petroleum
products within the sub-region fossil fuels are procured competitively to ensure
that, as far as the supply logistics will allow, supplies of petroleum products
are the lowest price possible This can include national combined purchasing
Time-scale: Immediate-Term 10                        –        4ELECTRICITY IT IS
THE GOVERNMENT’ POLICY TO FOSTER  SAFE, EFFICIENT, affordable, and low-carbon
national electricity supply that meets international quality standards by
promoting efficient use of imported fossils fuels, and the development of
Dominica’ domestic renewable energy resources To achieve these policy goals it
will be necessary for Government to: SUPPLY  Ensure that the energy resources
available to the island are fully assessed in terms of their potential to
economically contribute to the island’ electricity supplies;  Evaluate the
effect of their exploitation for electricity production on the local environment
and on the island’ carbon footprint ;  Maintain an inventory of the available
resources which show potential to contribute to the country’ electricity demand
and update this inventory at regular intervals in line with changing economic
conditions;  Ensure the implementation of demand-side-management (DSM)
programmes to reduce the long-term demand for increased generating capacity;
Ensure that electricity supplies are generated and used as efficiently as
possible and that losses are reduced to an economic minimum Electricity
Distribution and Transmission Efficiency Targets  Government will ensure that
the regulatory framework provides incentives that will improve the efficiency of
electricity transmission, and distribution and will lower costs for all
customers The IRC will establish initial overall line loss targets through
negotiations with DOMLEC The loss targets should be based on benchmarking
against other similar utilities in the region and elsewhere as well as the
achievements of DOMLEC over the last several years The IRC will seek donor
funding for  tariff optimization study that will provide advice to discourage
electricity usage during peak hours and incentivize large customers to return to
the grid Currently, the tariff structure in Dominica, does not provide
incentives for customers to reduce consumption during peak hours This means that
peak demand will climb more quickly than it might otherwise, requiring further
investment in peak capacity The cost of that investment will ultimately be paid
by all customers through higher tariffs Additionally, high tariffs in Dominica
have led several large consumers to leave the grid and self-produce electricity
This means that DOMLEC has lost some of its best customers This ultimately
results in higher tariffs for customers who remain on the grid, because they
must cover the costs of all investments by the utility without the contribution
of larger customers  ACTIONS: 1Through negotiations with DOMLEC, the IRC will
design  system based on regional benchmarking that will ensure that line losses
in excess of reasonable levels that result in more fuel than necessary being
used are not passed on to the consumer in the fuel surcharge, but remain as
cost to DOMLEC 2he IRC will conduct  tariff optimization study that will provide
blue print for rear-  ranging the tariff structure so that it will incentivize
off-peak energy use, account for power factor, and encourage all customers,
particularly large customers, to remain on the grid Time-scale: Immediate-Term
11 AELECTRICITY       Electricity Generation Efficiency  Government through the
IRC will establish an overall heat rate target for diesel engine generation
efficiency This target will set overall efficiency targets for the portion of
electricity that is generated by diesel fuel SUPPLY It will also ensure that
generating plants are dispatched in the most economical way to meet the system
loads This means using the available mix of hydropower, conventional generation,
and new renewable energy sources to provide reliable power at least cost
Government will ensure that generation planning is such that it will use the
principles of integrated resource planning to deliver the required generating
capacity at least cost The planning will take account of all the available
energy resources—including geothermal, hydro, diesel and other utility-scale
renewable resources such as wind—as well as the most cost effective way to
exploit those resources If system generation expansion is not properly planned,
fuel costs will not be optimized and feasible fuel saving options, such as use
of renewables, cogeneration and efficiency improvement measures, may be
overlooked Effective capacity planning requires  good load forecast combined
with appropriate use of computer-based capacity planning model programme such as
the Wein Automated System Planning (WASP) computer model or the Super OLADE
Power System Generation and Inter-Connection Planning Model which are used for
multi-year electricity system planning studies, making it possible to simulate,
and optimize hydro and thermal power system expansion plans These models are
used by several developing country utilities, including some in the Caribbean
region, to determine the least costly expansion path that will adequately meet
the demand for electric power, subject to user-defined constraints  The IRC will
develop  pre-approved standard offer contract to streamline the process of
adding inexpensive capacity from IPPs This will ensure that Independent Power
Producers that can produce power below DOMLEC’ proposed least cost are easily
able to integrate into the grid Next, minimizing the total system costs of
electricity also requires timely and efficient implementation of the selected
capacity expansion path Undue delays in planned imple- mentation may result in
the need to implement emergency additions which are more costly over the long-
term and the excessive use of peaking units which are less efficient In addition
to improvements in capacity planning and dispatch, fuel is such  large propor-
tion of electricity costs that it would improve transparency to directly measure
the fuel used at each power station, and by each diesel engine Therefore the
Government will require DOMLEC to also measure the fuel used by the individual
engines This will require DOMLEC to:  Install fuel meters on all receiving
connections for fuel into each tank in each power station;  Install individual
fuel meters on each unit The fuel metering should be such that fuel efficiency
can be continuously monitored on-line or verified on  daily basis and  regular
programme for calibrating and the certification of calibration of such meters
should be developed Government will develop formal protocols for the inspection
and testing of fuel meters as this is required to develop and maintain consumer
confidence in the readings recorded by these meters Government will also require
that there is periodic re-calibration and certification of the meters which will
be carried out by an independent authority 12                        –
Government will require that the accuracy of meters should be at least to the
PMP7 guide, published by the Institute of Petroleum (IP) which recommends
system accuracy of  percent in normal operation ELECTRICITY SUPPLY ACTIONS: 1The
IRC will establish (and review on  regular basis) an overall heat rate target
for the diesel engines used to generate electricity This will ensure that
electricity that is gener- ated from diesel fuel is generated as efficiently as
possible The system will be designed to ensure that any fuel usage which results
from poor efficiency cannot be passed on to consumers in the fuel surcharge
However, it will remain  cost to DOMLEC 2The IRC will adequately train its staff
in the use of the appropriate system planning 3The IRC will require DOMLEC to
demonstrate that its expansion planning is 4The IRC will develop  Standard Offer
Contract for Independent 5The METIDA and the MPWEP and the IRC will also require
DOMLEC to install software and ensure that its planning software is kept up to
date with program en- hancements and updates least cost and based on best
practices in expansion planning Power Producers fuel meters as described above
and also implement  protocol for the periodic recalibration of these meters
Time-scale: Immediate-Term Electricity for Very Poor or Remote Communities  In
order to ensure that communities which are very poor or very remote also have
access to electricity supplies, Government will provide subsidies for those that
can be reached economically from the grid, and consider encourage remote
communities to consider off- grid small and medium scale micro-generation This
can include micro hydro and or wind systems using diesel backup In instances
where these off-grid connected supplies are indicated, Government can promote
the establishment of cooperative organizations by assisting with the training
for operating and maintenance and in the setting up small and medium scale
generation  ACTIONS: 1The IRC will continue to ensure that electricity
consumption under 100 kWh in the 2The MSSCDGA will conduct studies to identify
communities without access to grid residential consumer tariff category receives
subsidy which is paid for by the con- sumption of larger amounts of electricity
by other customers power and then carry out cost/benefit analyses to determine
the most economic tech- nology to be used to deliver power to them These
analyses will include considerations of grid connection, cooperative generation,
or individual generation If  study shows that in any given situation, the most
economical mode of supply is an alternative that is not grid-connected, it will
go on to recommend ways in which Government should promote the establishment of
local cooperatives that have the ability to organize remote villages to invest
in and maintain micro-generation units 3The MSSCDGA will provide financial
assistance to fund training staff of cooperative  organizations to manage,
operate and maintain the facilities, and the setting up of the accounting
functions that will be required Time-Scale: - Immediate-Term,  Short-Term 13
AELECTRICITY       Renewable Distributed Generation  Dominica has significant
renewable energy resources, some of which can be exploited at the distributed
scale Distributed generation is defined as electricity generation that is con-
nected to the distribution network This definition implies that DG is: () grid-
connected, and not off-grid generation; (ii) located at customer premises, or
close to the load being served; and (iii) implemented on  smaller scale than
that of utility scale plants connected to  transmission grid SUPPLY The island
appears to have the potential for the replacement of  significant proportion of
the country’ fossil fuel imports, particularly for electricity generation
Surveys and analysis suggest that geothermal, hydro, solar/photovoltaic, wind,
biofuels and biomass are all pos- sible sources of renewable energy in Dominica
Among those, hydro, solar, and wind are potential sources of distributed scale
renewable generation Recognizing this potential, the Government and DOMLEC have
worked together to take significant steps in encouraging distributed generation
These steps have included creating an interconnection agreement The
interconnection agreement provides the technical details of how distributed
generators can connect to the distribution grid ACTIONS: To ensure that the
issues identified are resolved satisfactorily and ensure that reasonable
electricity transmission and distribution efficiency targets are established and
maintained, and that electricity generation efficiency targets are established
and maintained the Plan calls for:  1The IRC and DOMLEC will continue to develop
appropriate standards to facilitate the 2The MEHRD will cooperate with local
technical institutes and international training 3The MPWEP, the MF, the MSSCDGA,
and the IRC will continue to promote the interconnection of renewable energy
systems to the DOMLEC grid institutes to design and implement  curriculum for
training Dominicans to install, operate, manage, and maintain renewable
distributed generation systems development of economically viable, renewable
distributed generation capacity and co-generation by conducting cost/benefit
analyses of incentives to inform the design of  program that will offer: fiscal
incentives, procedures and standards for system in- terconnection, stable and
fair feed-in tariffs, and streamlined approval processes To do this, Dominica
will draw off the experience of Barbados and other similar countries 4The MF and
the MWPEP will design and pass necessary regulations and allocate necessary
resources to implement the program of incentives, procedures, and standards
Time-scale: - Immediate-Term,  Short-Term 14                        –
Public Awareness and Education Campaign  To complement its efforts to develop
the RE potential of Dominica, Government will need to sensitize the public as to
the potential and need to develop renewable energy This will be done by
designing and implementing  national programme of education and aware- ness in
renewable energy This programme will be targeted at both the “internal” public—
government staff in the ministries—as well as the general public ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY ACTIONS: 1The MEHRD in collaboration with the MPWEP will develop
programmes in schools to 2The MPWEP will develop renewable energy awareness
programmes among the 3The MPWEP in collaboration with the MITCE will develop and
implement short increase the awareness of students about renewable energy and
the need for the country to reduce its carbon footprint employees of Government
by way of short in-house programmes and seminars programmes of radio and
television advertising informing Dominicans about energy efficiency and
renewable energy Time-scale: Immediate-Term Specific Renewable Resource
Development  It is the Government’ policy to promote the use of Dominica’
domestic renewable energy resources for the production of electricity wherever
economically viable To achieve this Policy objective, the Plan sets out
proposals for the development of renewable energy in Dominica as follows: Hydro
– Government will continue the assessment of hydropower resources throughout
Dominica These efforts will be coordinated with those of the MAF, DOMLEC, and
DOWASCO Government will encourage and facilitate new hydropower projects
wherever economically feasible ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will collaborate with DOWASCO
and DOMLEC to review and check exist- ing data on hydropower capacity and pilot
the implementation of resource assess- ments for hydroelectric potential by
establishing  stream gauging programme throughout Dominica  2The MPWEP, in
coordination with DOMLEC, will undertake preliminary estimates of the costs of
implementing micro hydro schemes at suitable locations and undertake prelim-
inary analyses to rank the cost/benefit of these potential developments to
determine their economic potential to supply energy for various uses 3The MPWEP
will maintain  database of hydro resources which, along with preliminary
estimates of costs, will be updated on  regular basis This data should be
included in the renewable energy database Time-scale: Short-Term  15  Geothermal
– Government will continue the ongoing explorations of the island’
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY geothermal potential and the implementation of appropriate
agreements with developers, financiers and other stakeholders  Geothermal
Resources Development Bill has been prepared for submission to Parliament This
Bill, when enacted into law, will provide for the regulation of geothermal
resources with the objective of ensuring the sustainable develop- ment of the
resource, and ensuring its allocation to the uses that are most economically
beneficial to Dominica It creates  complete, integrated regulatory framework and
establishes institutions and rules specific to geothermal resource development,
designed to complement the existing regulatory framework, contained in the
Physical Planning Act, 2002 and the Electricity Supply Act, When the Bill is
enacted, the legal framework for the orderly development of the island’
geothermal resources will be complete and facilitate the investments required to
develop the projects It is expected that the projects will comprise the
development in phases of  geothermal generating capacity of approximately 120 MW
The first phase of the development is ex- pected to supply DOMLEC with between
MW and 10 MW, and ultimately it is expected that it will supply the neighboring
islands of Guadeloupe and Martinique with  MW of electricity each by way of
undersea transmission and interconnection facilities ACTIONS: To achieve the
foregoing, the Ministry of Public Works, Energy and Ports will undertake the
following specific actions: 1Drill test wells and continue the exploration of
geothermal potential, 2Drill and cap  commercial 3Commission and implement the
required environmental impact assessment 4Whatever mitigation measures are
needed, are carried out 5Develop and draft appropriate agreements with
developers, financiers, 6Carry out an interconnection economic feasibility study
to determine the 7Develop and implement training programmes for 8Carry out
technical feasibility study to determine the technical boundaries 9Negotiate
commercial agreements including addressing concerns about reliability of
geothermal and impacts on hot springs by “proving” the viability of the heat
source under load  production well studies to ensure that the geothermal
developments are implemented in an environmentally friendly manner, and that
with dispatch electricity purchasers, and other relevant stakeholder for
developing the plant, and selling and transporting the electricity produced at
the plant parameters required for the commercial exploitation of the geothermal
resource geothermal technicians for interconnecting with the electricity systems
on Dominica, as well as with the systems on Martinique and Guadeloupe with
DOMLEC 16                        –        10Facilitate the construction and
operation of  -10 MW plant to connect 11Prepare bidding documents and conduct an
international, competitive auction to 12Negotiate  power off-take agreement with
Martinique 13Facilitate the construction, financing and operation of  large-
scale geothermal ELECTRICITY SUPPLY with the DOMLEC system select the company to
develop and build  large-scale geothermal plant and Guadeloupe plant by
competitively-selected, suitably qualified private company Time-scale: In
accordance with the Gant Chart below Table : Timeline for Implementation of
Geothermal Plan Solar – Government will encourage the installation of solar
water heaters on all new public sector buildings, commercial buildings, and
residences Offering fiscal incentives has been shown in several Caribbean
countries to be critical for the large scale adoption of solar water heating at
the residential level and this initiative will be explored by Government  The
Government will also facilitate the development of programmes to use
photovoltaic systems where feasible to power security lights or critical loads
following natural disasters ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will develop  list of
government-owned facilities and institutions which 2The MPWEP will carry out an
initial pilot project to test installation of solar water have critical loads
such as in hospitals and schools which could be powered by photo- voltaic
sources and carry out an initial pilot project to test these installations
heaters in public buildings  Time-scale:  Immediate-Term,  Short-Term 17  Wind –
Because of the mountainous nature of the island, it is not expected that there
is       ELECTRICITY SUPPLY large wind potential in Dominica However, it is
thought that good wind resources can exist at some sites which benefit from wind
enhancing ground effects These effects will occur at several points on the
island, particularly along the east coast Government will continue efforts to
assess the wind resources at these sites to produce information and data which
could be used to justify the development of wind power turbines at these sites
ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will pilot the implementation of resource assessments for
wind energy 2The MPWEP will maintain  database of wind data and wind maps, along
with at sites which are thought to have good wind regimes and will seek funding
from appropriate agencies to undertake these resource assessments preliminary
estimates of costs for establishing wind turbines, which will be updated on
regular basis Time-scale: Immediate-Term  Crompton Point from CREDP/GIZ wind
energy assessment report 18                        –        5ENERGY IT IS THE
GOVERNMENT’ POLICY TO RATIONALIZE DOMINICA’ overall rate of energy consumption
while increasing its economic growth by adopting best practices in energy
efficiency and conservation To do this, the Government will: EFFICIENCY AND
Incentivize Dominicans to adopt energy saving behaviors and consumption habits;
CONSERVATION  Ensure that energy efficient appliances are available in local
markets;  Improve the energy efficiency of buildings in Dominica;  Report the
progress that Dominica makes on energy efficiency Technical analysis of
potential energy efficiency gains in markets similar to Dominica, for example
Barbados, has demonstrated that there is  great potential to reduce energy costs
and greenhouse gas emissions through improving the way that energy is used
Energy efficiency and conservation, is often referred to as the “low hanging
fruit,” because it is possible to reduce costs and emissions through efficiency
and conservation gains for  much lower cost than by producing energy with
renewable energy There are many opportunities to save electricity through
behavioral change that leads to conservation Using highly efficient technologies
such as energy efficient refrigerators and lighting will reduce energy usage,
because these appliances perform the same action more efficiently; additionally,
building codes that lower costs of cooling and lighting through better design,
conserve energy Energy Conservation  There are many practices that can be
improved to reduce energy usage The most obvious ones are things like turning
out the light when you leave the room However, there are many others that may
not be so obvious For example, using 120v appliances can be inefficient because
it requires  converter which uses wastes electricity and leaving appliances
plugged in when they are not in use leads to “ghost consumption” Examples such
as this will be studied and presented to the public in an educational campaign
aimed at improving energy efficiency and conservation practices ACTIONS:  1The
MPWEP will collaborate with DOMLEC to commission  study of energy consump- 2The
MITCE will design and implement  public information campaign that will promote
tion patterns in all the major sectors of the Dominican economy and identify
areas for improvement in conservation and efficiency energy conservation and
energy efficient practices Time Scale: Immediate-Term  19 AENERGY
Encourage Uptake of Energy Efficient Appliances  It is the Government’ policy to
provide fiscal incentives (designed to include the banking sector) to encourage
the use of energy-efficient appliances and technology by consumers Additionally,
the Government plans to provide incentives, guidelines, and quality standards
appropriate for Dominica that will encourage appliance suppliers to import
reliable, energy efficient appliances Finally, Government policy will require
retailers to label energy effi- cient appliances and to inform customers about
the energy efficiency and the energy con- sumption of appliances EFFICIENCY AND
CONSER- VATION Economically viable energy efficient appliances can save money
and lower emissions; however, uptake of energy efficient appliances is not as
high as it could be This is because in  small economy like Dominica there are
barriers to uptake:  Limited access to capital –Many consumers would need to
borrow to install the efficient technologies, and cannot find financiers willing
to lend to them— or are charged prohibitive interest rates;  Limited and
uncompetitive equipment supply –There is  chicken and egg problem; given limited
uptake of many technologies in Dominica, they can be hard to purchase on the
island, or are sold only at uncompetitive prices Limited availability and high
costs in turn retard uptake;  Incomplete information –Where  technology is not
widely used, people may be unaware of its benefits, again creating  chicken and
egg problem;  Agency problems –These take place when the person who should
invest in the equipment is not the same person who uses it—this happens in the
public sector, in the development of new construction, and in leased buildings
These barriers to have limited uptake of energy efficient technology in Dominica
However, the actions of the National Energy Action Plan will overcome these
barriers ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will conduct  study of best practices, drawing on
the experience of 2The Bureau of Standards within the METIDA will conduct
quality standards testing to Barbados, for how to incentivize customers to
purchase commercially and economically viable energy efficient appliances
determine which appliances are most appropriate for the Dominican context,
taking onto account efficiency, durability, performance, and added cost as well
as other applicable environmental and safety standards 3The MPWEP will conduct
cost/benefit analysis of offering tariff incentives for 4The MPWEP will convene
stakeholders from the Government, the banking sector, and 5The MPWEP will design
an appropriate labeling scheme that will alert Dominicans to economically viable
energy efficient appliances that meet established standards or import
restrictions on appliances that fail to meet efficiency standards the retail
sector to discuss the findings of the study and decide what kinds of incentives
to offer the potential benefits of energy efficient appliances and require that
retailers display them on products 20                        –        ENERGY
EFFICIENCY AND CONSER- VATION 6The METIDA will provide fiscal incentives to
businesses and individuals that will en- 7The MITCE will conduct  public
education campaign to make people aware of the la- courage them to purchase
commercially and economically viable energy efficiency technology bels and their
significance and how they relate to fiscal incentives that promote pur- chasing
energy efficient equipment Time Scale: - Immediate-Term, - Short-Term Improve
Energy Efficiency in New Buildings  The same barriers that have prevented uptake
of energy efficient appliances affect buildings Therefore, Government has
three-pronged policy approach to improve the energy efficiency of new and
existing buildings in Dominica First, for new buildings, Government policy is to
establish standards for energy efficiency in buildings, where they don’
currently exist, that will govern the design and construction of buildings in
Dominica Second, for existing buildings, Government policy is to provide fiscal
and other incentives to encourage energy audits for businesses, especially
hotels, and households Third, Government will incentivize energy efficiency
retrofits for existing buildings Government intends to be  leader in energy
efficiency retrofits by conducting energy audits and then developing  plan to
retrofit public buildings with energy efficient equipment For the domestic and
commercial sector, Government policy calls for providing incentives for
preferential financing by the commercial banking sector for retrofitting homes
and buildings in the private sector with energy efficient equipment Together
these policies provide  holistic approach to improving the energy efficiency of
buildings in Dominica New buildings will be constructed with energy efficiency
standards that are recognized as best practice and existing building will be
audited to determine potential energy efficiency gains and then financial
incentives will encourage energy efficiency retrofits The following actions
provide the details of how these policies will be put into action ACTIONS: 1The
MENRPPF will conduct research on best practices for energy efficient buildings
in 2The MENRPPF will convene stakeholders, including government officials,
representa-  the Caribbean environment and maintain awareness on any regional or
sub-regional studies that could benefit Dominica tives of the construction
industry, and property owners to weigh benefits and costs, and determine
appropriate building standards for Dominica based on the best practices study
3The MENRPPF will implement building standards and lead by example by ensuring
that 4The MPWEP will study best practices in encouraging energy audits in all
sectors of the 5The MF will provide appropriate fiscal and financial incentives
to encourage individuals 6The MENRPPF will conduct energy audits to determine
which public buildings have the government buildings meet or are striving
towards meeting standards economy and recommend proposed incentives and
businesses to conduct audits  highest potential for energy savings from an
energy efficiency retrofit 21  7The MENRPPF will conduct  cost/benefit analysis
of best practices for how to       ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSER- VATION
incentivize individuals and companies to retrofit their buildings with
commercially and economically viable energy efficiency technologies 8The MENRPPF
will convene stakeholders in the Government, private sector, and 9The MPWEP will
carry out the energy efficiency retrofits in public buildings 10The Ministry of
Finance will offer fiscal and financial incentives through the NGO
representatives to present the findings of the study and decide which incentives
are appropriate to encourage energy efficiency retrofits identified in the
energy audits commercial banking sector as well as through tax incentives for
retrofits in the domestic and commercial sector Time Frame: - Immediate-Term, -
Short-Term, -10 Medium-Term Report Energy Efficiency and Conservation Progress
It is Government policy to report progress on energy efficiency in macroeconomic
reports The purpose of this is to provide  public benchmark on efficiency gains
that have been made or not made Reporting will provide an important check to
ensure that efforts to reduce energy consumption are having their proposed
benefits For example, indicators should be able to demonstrate that the same or
more economic activity is taking place per unit of energy expenditure If this is
not happening, it is important to be aware of it and discover why proposed
benefits are not being realized and if necessary, to eliminate programs that are
not providing benefits  ACTIONS: 1The MITCE will convene stakeholders from
within the Government to determine what 2The MITCE will gather information on
efficiency gains from DOMLEC, the MAF, and the efficiency indicators are most
appropriate to report MF to calculate the indicators and publish them in
national reports Time-Scale:  Immediate-Term,  Short-Term 22
–        6END-USE THE POLICY CONTAINS TAILORED POLICIES FOR END-USE SECTORS that
are large energy consumers, and this section sets out the Plan to achieve sector
specific goals The sectors included are: SECTORS  Transport Sector  Agricultural
Sector  Industrial Sector  Domestic Sector  Tourism and Hospitality Sector Of
course, all of these end-use sectors will benefit from incentives and
regulations that affect Dominica as  whole, such as interconnection agreements
for distributed scale renewable energy generation and incentive for using energy
efficient buildings Transport Sector  It is the Government’ policy to promote
efficient vehicles and  strong integrated public transport sector strategy The
transportation sector is the largest user of fossil fuels, representing 47
percent of total fuel consumption The Government intends to improve the
efficiency of fossil fuel use in transportation (thereby reducing fossil fuel
consumption for transportation), including:  Organizing Public Transportation –
This means providing public transport that uses efficient vehicles and uses
efficient routes;  Improving efficiency of motorized transportation of private
citizens and businesses – This means encouraging private citizens to use
efficient vehicles;  Optimizing the fuel mix – This means ensuring that the
transport fleet in Dominica utilizes the most economically efficient mixture of
available fuel types Government support for efficient use of fossil fuels in
transportation will be based on the economic viability of individual
interventions Public Transport  It is Government policy to organize  regulated
and rational public transport system The public transport system in Dominica is
inefficiently organized; this leads to inefficient use of energy as well as
higher cost of transport Further, the unorganized nature of trans- port subjects
the population to unreliable transport services and leads to increased traffic
congestion Therefore the Government will take action to remedy the situation
ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will conduct  study of best practices in organizing public
transport 2The MPWEP will convene stakeholders including government officials,
Taxi Drivers 3The MPWEP will implement the resulting plan to create an orderly
and rational public and  cost/benefit analysis of investing in public transport
for Dominica Association members, and NGO representatives, discuss potential
trade-offs, and decide on  course of action transport sector  Time-Scale: -
Immediate-Term,  Short-Term 23   Optimize Fuel Efficiency and of Vehicle Fleet
and Fuel Mix       END-USE SECTORS Government wishes to encourage the use
alternative fuels for transportation, such as diesel, biodiesel, E102, or the
use of electric vehicles, wherever their use is economically feasible and more
environmentally friendly than the current fuel mix ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will
conduct cost/benefit analyses to estimate the overall impact on the economy of
using the various types of vehicles, crafts, and fuels for different transport
duties and make recommendations as to the types of vehicles and crafts that
should be encouraged in the transport fleet This will include analysis of
diesel, biodiesel, and electric power (including potential partnerships with
electric vehicle makers) Analysis of different types of vehicles and crafts
should include the analysis of the required infrastructure to support them
Analysis will also include studying the potential of producing biofuels and E10
2The METIDA and MF will consult on possible changes in fuel and fleet mix based
on the study If warranted by the results of the study, the METIDA and MF will
collaborate to design and implement  tariff regime that offers reduced
importation tariffs based on the fuel efficiency of the vehicle or craft The
tariff regime should be progressive and give the largest tariff reductions to
the most efficient vehicles and crafts Additionally, if appropriate, they will
provide economically efficient incentives for domestic production of biofuels or
E10 3The MEHRD and MITCE will organize courses on defensive driving that will be
offered in secondary schools, to the Taxi Drivers Association, and to the
general public through public information campaigns  Time Scale: , Immediate-
Term,  Short-Term Agricultural Sector  In the agricultural sector3 it is the
Government’ policy to encourage the use of sustainable practices in agriculture,
which will provide economic benefits and environmental benefits To best
understand how the agricultural sector can reduce its energy usage, the Plan
first calls for studying what is already known about energy saving practices in
the Caribbean context After that, educational campaigns will encourage farms to
achieve the greatest economically efficient reduction of energy usage possible
The agricultural sector is  significant consumer of energy; therefore gains in
energy efficiency will make  large contribution to promoting sustainability in
Dominica ACTIONS: 1The MAF will conduct studies on best practices for energy
efficient agricultural 2The MAF will design and implement  targeted educational
campaign coordinated practices, including building standards, in the Caribbean
with agricultural cooperatives to promote best practices in energy efficient
agriculture and inform farmers of the benefits available to them under the
Electricity Supply and Energy Efficiency and Conservation plans Time-Scale:
Immediate-Term   mixture of 10 percent ethanol and 90 percent gasoline  By
Agricultural Sector we do not mean Agribusiness which involves industrial
processing plants These are dealt with on the section on the Industrial Sector
24                        –        END-USE SECTORS Industrial and Commercial
Sector  In the industrial sector, Government policy is to encourage sustainable
methods of industry and commerce which will include reducing waste, recycling
and reuse of materials, electricity production from renewable energy sources,
and the incorporation of sustainable energy practices into business practices
The commercial sector consumes  large percentage of energy in Dominica Addition-
ally, industrial processes consume large amounts of energy Therefore, best
practices in energy efficiency can reduce costs significantly In Dominica, the
industrial sector consumes little energy, because the industrial sector is small
However, this is partially because energy is expensive Therefore, more efficient
energy practices and lower energy costs could promote industry, helping the
Dominican economy and the environment simultaneously ACTIONS: 1The METIDA in
collaboration with the MITCE will design and implement  targeted educational
campaign coordinated with industry and commercial representatives to promote
best practices in energy efficiency and inform factory owners and shop owners of
the benefits available to them under the Electricity Supply and Energy
Efficiency and Conservation plans 2The METIDA will conduct cost/benefit analysis
of available energy efficient manu- facturing technology and building standards
that are applicable to the Dominican context This will be done in collaboration
with local business organizations and representatives 3The METIDA will conduct
industry specific studies of energy efficiency in industrial 4The MF will
provide tax incentives for companies that meet industrial and 5The MF will
provide tax incentives to use economical, energy efficient and commercial
buildings This will be done in collaboration with local business organization
and representatives commercial energy efficient building standards scaled to the
projected benefits measured in the cost/benefit analysis manufacturing
technology scaled to the projected benefits measured in the cost/benefit
analysis  Time-Scale: Immediate-Term Domestic Sector  It is the Government’
policy that the domestic sector will have  diversified supply of energy
services, energy efficient appliances, and the option to produce electricity It
will ensure its policy is met through  public awareness campaign targeted at
households and through providing subsidized cooking gas for the poorest  25
END-USE SECTORS Public Information Campaign to Inform Households about
Sustainable Energy An information and education campaign that is targeted at
households and delivers information specific to households is required In
addition to the public information campaign, it is the Government’ policy to
provide fiscal incentives to promote the use of solar water heating in new and
existing homes This is  highly efficient way to reduce energy costs ACTIONS:
1The MSSCDGA will conduct research on best practices for energy efficiency in
2The MITCE will conduct  public information campaign aimed at persuading house-
households including research on usage patterns and energy efficient behavior
holds to adopt energy efficient behaviors that will reduce usage as well as
inform them of the way that the Energy Efficiency and Conservation and
Electricity Supply Policies apply to them 3The MSSCDGA will conduct research on
best practices for providing incentives for 4The MSSCDGA and the MITCE will
provide  program of incentives and information households to overcome barriers
to adopting solar water heaters drawing on the experience of Barbados that will
help overcome barriers to adopting solar water heaters Time-Scale: - Immediate-
Term,  Short-Term  Access to Cooking Gas for the Neediest in Dominica In 2006
Government prepared Dominica’ Growth and Social Protection Strategy (GSPS) which
articulated  short-term strategy for growth and poverty reduction over  five-
year period Arising from this strategy, Dominica’ plan for developing the energy
sector places universal access to energy supplies as an important priority
Although LPG for cooking is generally available throughout the island, some
people are unable to afford their supplies and sometimes resort to charcoal and
fuel wood for cooking The use of fuel wood should not be encouraged because
excessive use could ultimately result in deforestation and the undesirable
consequences which result from that as well as cause health problems Government
is therefore anxious to ensure that the population is able to afford its energy
supplies to be used for cooking so that it does not have to resort to charcoal
or fuel wood ACTIONS: 1The MSSCDGA conduct  cost/benefit analysis to examine the
cost implications of 2Based on the outcome of these surveys and studies, the
MSSCDGA will prepare  subsidizing access to LPG for the neediest members of
society in Dominica programme of assistance to aid its neediest citizens in the
procurement of their LPG supplies for cooking Time-Scale:  Immediate-Term,
Short-Term 26                        –        END-USE SECTORS Tourism and
Hospitality Sector  It is the Government’ policy that the tourism and
hospitality sector will become part the national green approach to business and
become  significant contributor to the reduction of Dominica’ carbon footprint
over time The Plan will enable the hotel and tourism industry to benefit from
the Plan by including energy efficient technology relevant to the industry in
incentive schemes Additionally, the Plan will offer incentives and promotion for
hotels to become energy efficient and, achieve appropriate certification
ACTIONS: 1The MTLA will conduct cost/benefit analysis of energy efficiency
options in hospitality 2The MF will allow cost-recovery of retrofitting hotels
through  tax rebate over  3The MTLA will develop  special regime of recognition
and promotion of the greening and tourism, in consultation with representatives
from the industry five-year period efforts of hotels Time-Scale: - Immediate-
Term,  Short-Term 7INSTITUTIONAL THE PLAN LAYS OUT AN AMBITIOUS STRATEGY TO
IMPROVE sustainability in Dominica To implement the Plan, the Government will
have to set aside resources from its own capacity and funding as well as seek
out assistance from interna- tional funding sources STRENGTH- ENING AND
Incorporate Sustainable Energy in Energy Unit  It is the Government’ policy to
integrate the capacity to ensure that government regula- tion is in line with
sustainable development objectives into an energy unit within the MPWEP This
means undertaking the necessary administrative actions to give effect to its
policy priorities and needs This will include working with the Establishment,
Personnel and Training Department (EPTD) to hire required staff with suitable
skills sets and provide the public sector institutional capacity to monitor and
analyze cross-sectorial energy efficiency and conservation issues and
performance FUNDING  ACTIONS: 1The MPWEP will create  transparent legal
framework that will provide the institu- 2The MPWEP in collaboration with the
EPTD will undertake the necessary administrative 3The MPWEP in collaboration
with the EPTD will provide the public sector institutional tional, legislative,
and financial support required for the effective implementation of the Policy
and Plan actions to give effect to its policy priorities and needs, including
hiring required staff with suitable skills sets capacity to monitor and analyze
cross-sectorial energy efficiency and conservation issues and performance Time-
Scale: Immediate-Term  27         INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FUNDING
Institutional Responsibilities of the Energy Unit Aside from contributing to the
actions identified in the previous section, the Energy Unit will be responsible
for measuring the impact of the National Energy Action Plan It is Government
policy that:  The Energy Unit will conduct careful economic assessments of the
fiscal and economic measures required for the successful implementation of the
Policy The Energy Unit will ensure that government’ tax revenues streams are not
unreasonably compromised when developing and offering new tax incentives,
rebates, and relief;  The Energy Unit will develop regulations and policies in
coordination with other government agencies;  The Energy Unit will retain
outside experts to conduct Environmental Impact Assessments, Social Impact
Assessments, and Strategic Environmental Assess- ments, as part of the planning
and assessment process preceding the approval and implementation of major
national projects in the energy sector;  Maintain database of relevant energy
indicators to facilitate monitoring and evaluation of policies and projects
ACTIONS: 1The EPTD will conduct study of best practices in Environmental Impact
Assessments, 2The EPTD will conduct training of employees in the Bureau of
Standards to guarantee Social Impact Assessments, and Strategic Environmental
Assessments that they will be able to develop standards, regulations and,
policies in coordination with other government agencies Ensure that they will
also be able to gather data necessary for monitoring and evaluation, enforce
compliance  3The MPWEP will develop and maintain an up-to-date national energy
database con- 4The MF will ensure that government’ tax revenues streams are not
unreasonably 5The MPWEP will require project developers to conduct Environmental
Impact Assess- taining all energy sector data required for energy planning
purposes, this will include  map of the country’ renewable energy resources
compromised when developing and offering new tax incentives, rebates, and relief
through cost/benefit analysis ments, Social Impact Assessments, and Strategic
Environmental Assessments that are in line with Environmental and Planning
Regulations, as part of the planning and assess- ment process preceding the
approval and implementation of major national projects in the energy sector
Time-Scale: - Immediate-Term,  Short-Term, - Ongoing 28                        –
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FUNDING Funding the National Energy Action Plan
It is the Government’ policy to seek appropriate funding to implement the Policy
domesti- cally and internationally Many of the actions specified in this Policy
will require realigning existing personnel and resource allocations within the
Government Likewise, some actions will require outside consultants and funding
from outside sources This means that the Government will also look for funding
sources outside of Dominica ACTIONS: 1The MF will conduct review of which
involved agencies have resources available to 2The MPWEP and MFA will conduct
research into available international funding support policy actions for
sustainable energy sources for sustainable energy This review should include,
but not be limited to, the World Bank (including through support provided to the
Eastern Caribbean Energy Regulatory Authority), the Inter-American Development
Bank, Organization of American States, and the Global Environmental Facility It
should also, include developing  Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
(NAMA) strategy, with the goal of using the “Funded NAMA” mechanism 3Design
applications and terms of reference for projects that require support from
international funding sources Time-Scale: - Immediate-Term,  Continuous
NOTES  30