             RENEWABLE ENERGY PROSPECTS:     :  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
November 2016 © IRENA 2016 Unless otherwise stated, this publication and
material featured herein are the property of the International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA) and are subject to copyright by IRENA Material in this
publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or
stored, provided that all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA Material
contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to
third-party copyright and separate terms of use and restrictions, including
restrictions in relation to any commercial use ISBN -- (print) ISBN -- (PDF)
About IRENA The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an
intergovernmental organisation that supports countries in their transition to
sustainable energy future and serves as the principal platform for international
co-operation,  centre of excellence, and  repository of policy, technology,
resource and  nancial knowledge on renewable energy IRENA promotes the
widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy,
including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in
the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-
carbon economic growth and prosperity About CNE The National Energy Commission
(CNE) is the institution responsible of the formulation of the National Energy
Plan with  holistic approach, that covers all energy sources to promote an
environmentally sustainable and economically sound development, and contributes
to national energy policy development CNE promotes investments according to the
strategies deﬁ ned by the energy plan and the Law , to promote investments in
renewable energy technologies Acknowledgements This report has beneﬁ ted from
valuable comments and guidance provided by the National Energy Commission of the
Dominican Republic (CNE), with special thanks to Juan Rodríguez for supporting
the realization of the study and to Joan Genao because of his expert input and
his kind and dedicated support along the development of the country report
Special thanks are due to Amer El Kadi (Embassy of the Dominican Republic in the
United Arab Emirates) to coordinate the engagement between IRENA and the
Dominican Republic during the preparation of the study Additional contributions
during the analysis and review were provided by other CNE staff (Francisco Cruz,
Francisco Mariano, Manuel Capriles, Angela González, Yderlisa Castillo,
Francisco Gómez, Deury Ogando, Lenny Alcántara and Hipólito Núñez) and from the
Coordinator of the National Interconnected Electrical System, OC-SENI (Andrés
Manzueta, Alexis Vásquez and Peter Santana) The report beneﬁ ted signiﬁ cantly
from input and comments provided by external expert review by Paul Deane
(University College Cork), George Reinoso (Expert Advisor) and César Santos
(Pontiﬁ cal Catholic University Mother and Teacher) There were also valuable
inputs from Carlos Janáriz (RENSA and the local Energy Effi ciency and Renewable
Energy Association) and Paul Cárdenas (Solair World International) Valuable
comments were provided by IRENA colleagues Rubén Contreras, Ghislaine Kieff er,
Álvaro López-Peña, Emanuele Taibi and Dennis Volk Authors: Dolf Gielen, Deger
Saygin, Francisco Gáfaro, Isaac Portugal, Laura Gutiérrez and Tomás Jil (IRENA)
Report citation: IRENA (2016), Renewable Energy Prospects: Dominican Republic,
REmap 2030, International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi,  For
further information or to provide feedback, please contact the REmap team:
REmap@irenaorg Disclaimer This publication and the material featured herein are
provided “as is”, for informational purposes All reasonable precautions have
been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability of the material featured in this
publication Neither IRENA nor any of its offi cials, agents, data or other
third-party content providers or licensors provides any warranty, including as
to the accuracy, completeness, or  tness for  particular purpose or use of such
material, or regarding the non-infringement of third-party rights, and they
accept no responsibility or liability with regard to the use of this publication
and the material featured therein The information contained herein does not
necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an
endorsement of any project, product or service provider The designations
employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of
any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region,
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the
delimitation of frontiers or boundaries FOREWORD FROM IRENA The Dominican
Republic, like many island nations, is grappling with  number of challenges,
such as fuel import dependence, exposure to oil price volatility and uncertain
energy supplies that constrain its economic development Although one of the
largest and most diverse economies in the Caribbean, it still relies on imported
fossil fuels for nearly all of its energy needs However, the Dominican Republic
has set out to tackle these challenges by scaling up its renewable energy
resources, which can help meet energy demand while delivering significant socio-
economic benefits It aims to use 25% more renewable power by Accelerated
deployment of renewables in the Dominican Republic would cut energy costs for
consumers, create new employment opportunities, stimulate economic activity and
help meet international climate commitments, in line with the Paris agreement In
addition, it would reduce local pollution, improve public health and strengthen
energy security The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) supports
countries in achieving their sustainable energy transition through realistic,
achievable technology and resource options REmap – IRENA’ global renewable
energy roadmap – offers valuable insights on the opportunities and challenges
ahead The Dominican Republic should establish an enabling institutional and
regulatory framework for renewables, along with adequate financial incentives to
attract investment With the right measures in place, variable sources like solar
and wind can be smoothly integrated into the grid, and the country can tap into
its vast potential for renewables in the heating, cooling and transport sectors
The key actions outlined in this report can help accelerate the energy
transition Moreover, the experience of the Dominican Republic can provide useful
lessons for other island nations seeking to achieve sustainable energy future
Adnan  Amin Director-General International Renewable Energy Agency  FOREWORD
FROM CNE The Dominican Republic is one of the ten most vulnerable countries to
the effects of climate change At the same time, our country needs to treat the
specific contributions pledged under the Paris Agreement extremely seriously For
our part, we fully recognise that achieving the objectives of those accords
depends on the fulfilment of our own commitments These mainly involve renewable
energy development, as well as improving energy efficiency across the board This
roadmap, therefore, is vitally important to the Dominican Republic reinforcing
political decisions and identifying the main challenges to be faced in pursuit
of our objectives Along with adopting specific commitments, such analysis is
essential to enable us to meet our goals This report on the Dominican Republic
should be the first of many opportunities for collaboration through the National
Energy Commission (CNE) and IRENA, with the aim of putting us on course for the
development of renewable energy projects, especially in the electricity sector,
and to ensure that by 2030 we have reliable, efficient, environmentally
sustainable energy Juan Rodríguez Nina Executive Director National Energy
Commission, Dominican Republic ii CONTENTS FOREWORD FROM IRENA  FOREWORD FROM
CNE II LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS   LIST OF FIGURES VII LIST OF TABLESIX EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY  HIGHLIGHTS  12  REMAP PROGRAMME AND REMAP DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 14 IRENA’
REmap programme14   REmap approach  15 Metrics for assessing REmap Options 16
Main sources of information and assumptions in REmap Dominican Republic 18
CURRENT PICTURE – ENERGY AND RENEWABLES DEVELOPMENT IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 19
Renewable energy drivers 19  Renewable energy policies 19 Recent trends in total
final energy consumption 20   Power sector  22 Institutional and regulatory
framework  23 Main actors and activities in the power sector 24 Current
renewable energy status by sector 39 Renewable energy in the power sector 39
Direct uses of renewables in heating, cooling and transport 42   RENEWABLES
POTENTIAL BY 2030 ACCORDING TO NATIONAL ENERGY PROJECTIONS AND REMAP 43
Renewable energy resource potential 43  Reference Case 2030 44  REmap 45 Power
sector and potential for higher renewable energy uptake 45 Direct uses of
renewable energy in industry and buildings 49 Role of renewables in the
transport sector 50 Summary of REmap Options  51 iii  WHAT IS NEEDED TO FULFIL
REMAP POTENTIAL? 54  Power sector 54 Institutional and economic challenges 54
The technical challenges 56  End-use sectors 69 Industry 69 Transport  71
Buildings  72 Key action areas for renewable energy use in end-use sectors  72
Bioenergy market development  75   RENEWABLES COSTS AND SAVINGS IN REMAP
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  78 Investment needs  78   Costs of renewables in the
Dominican Republic  78  Benefits of REmap Options 80  SUGGESTIONS FOR
ACCELERATING RENEWABLE ENERGY UPTAKE 84 REFERENCES 86 ANNEXES ANNEX : SUMMARY OF
RESULTS  90 ANNEX : COMMODITY PRICE PROJECTIONS 91 ANNEX : TECHNOLOGY COST AND
PERFORMANCE IN THE DOMINICAN POWER SECTOR IN 2030 92 ANNEX : RESOURCE MAPS FROM
IRENA’ GLOBAL ATLAS 93 ANNEX : EXISTING POWER GENERATION PLANTS AND TRANSMISSION
INFRASCTRUCTURE FROM CNE MAPS 95 ANNEX : GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS ON INDICATORS FOR
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 96 iv LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS degrees Celsius distributed
generation ° DG French National Geological Survey (Bureau de Recherches
Géologiques et Minières) BRGM Electricity distribution company (Empresa
distribuidora de electricidad) EDE Energy Efficiency EE Electricity Company of
Bayahibe CEB Dominican hydropower generation company (Empresa de Generación
Hidroeléctrica Dominicana) EGEHID Energy Control Center CEC Punta Cana-Macao
Electricity Consortium (Consorcio Eléctrico Punta Cana-Macao) CEPM Electric
Reliability Council of Texas ERCOT Dominican Power Transmission Company (Empresa
de Transmisión Eléctrica Dominicana) ETED combined cycle gas turbine CCGT carbon
capture and storage CCS EUROSTAT Statistical Office of the European Union
Dominican Electric Company (Corporación Dominicana de Electricidad) CDE electric
vehicle EV excluding excl Dominican Corporation of State Electrical Companies
(Corporación Dominicana de Empresas Eléctricas Estatales) CDEEE Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FAO gross domestic product GDP
methane CH4 greenhouse gas GHG combined heat and power CHP gigajoule GJ National
Energy Commission of the Dominican Republic (Comisión Nacional de Energía) CNE
gigawatt GW Gigawatt-hour GWh carbon dioxide CO2 heating and cooling & 21st
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change COP21 hr hour International Energy Agency IEA cash
recovery index CRI including incl concentrated solar power CSP Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution INDC concentrated solar thermal CST Punta
Cana Touristic Services Corporation (Corporación Servicios Turisticos Punta
Cana) CSTPC Ingenieros  Economistas Consultores INECON International Renewable
Energy Agency IRENA  plug-in hybrid electric kilometre PHEV km square kilometres
petajoule km2 PJ thousand tonnes of oil equivalent passenger kilometre ktoe -km
kilovolt parts per million kV ppm kilowatt photovoltaic kW PV kilowatt-hour kWh
renewable energy RE levelised cost of energy LCOE Sustainable Energy for All
SE4All liquefied petroleum gas LPG National Interconnected Electrical System
(Sistema Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado) SENI metre  square metres m2 Small
Island Developing State SIDS cubic metres m3 Superintendence of Electricity
(Superintendencia de Electricidad) SIE Ministry of Energy and Mines (Ministerio
de Energía  Minas) MEM solar water air conditioning SWAC mile mi transmission
and distribution & megajoule MJ total final energy consumption TFEC megatonne Mt
tonne of oil equivalent toe megavolt amperes MVA total primary energy supply
TPES megawatt MW traditional trad megawatt-hour MWh terawatt-hour TWh megawatt-
thermal MWth Ultra High-Voltage Direct Current -HVDC not available/applicable NA
United Nations UN no date  United Nations Environmental Programme UNEP
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFCCC National grid Coordinating entity
(Organismo Coordinador del Sistema Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado) OC-SENI
United States US United States dollar USD Latin American Energy Organisation
(Organización Latinoamericana de Energía) (OLADE) OLADE variable renewable
energy VRE watt  Domincan Republic’ National Energy Plan PEN year yr   List of
Figures Figure ES1: Dominican Republic final energy mix, 2014  Figure ES2:
Modern renewable energy share, 2010–2030  Figure ES3: Modern final renewable
energy use in Dominican Republic according to Reference Case and REmap in 2030
Figure ES4: Location of renewable power generation capacity in 2030 under REmap
Figure ES5: CO2 emissions from energy use, 2010–2030  Figure ES6: Installed
power generation capacity,    Figure : Breakdown of TFEC by sector, 2014  21
Figure : Breakdown of Dominican Republic’ final energy mix, 2014  21 Figure :
Share of modern renewable energy use by sector, 2010 and  22 Figure : Breakdown
of renewable energy use by sector and application, 2014  23 Figure : Main
institutional and legislation developments in the Dominican Republic power
sector  25 Figure : Institutional structure in the Dominican power market 26
Figure : Electricity demand by sector and total generation,   27 Figure : SENI
hourly demand profiles for 201522 28 Figure : Total installed generation
capacity in SENI by technology in Dominican Republic,  29 Figure 10: Breakdown
of annual electricity generation in SENI by fuel type in Dominican Republic,  29
Figure 11: Overview of current transmission system  31 Figure 12: Peak power
demand by transmission area  32 Figure 13: Map of the three state-owned
distribution companies EDESUR, EDENORTE, and EDEESTE and the larger off-grid
systems  33 Figure 14: Electricity distributed by each state-owned distribution
company 34 Figure 15: Energy losses and energy billed in the electricity
distribution system,   35 Figure 16: Annual energy measured by SENI for selected
years ()  37 Figure 17: Breakdown of monthly energy traded by OC-SENI, 2014  37
Figure 18: Monthly average price at which EDEs purchased electricity between
2014 and mid-2015 38 Figure 19: Renewable energy generation and share in SENI,
39 Figure 20: Hydropower installed capacity and annual generation,   40 Figure
21: Hydropower resource availability and average capacity factor 41 vii Figure
22: Wind power installed capacity and annual generation,  41 Figure 23: Monthly
capacity factor for wind farms () and hydropower () 42 Figure 24: Installed
power generation capacity and annual demand,  45 Figure 25: Location of
renewable power generation capacity in 2030 under REmap 46 Figure 26: Final
renewable energy use in the Reference Case and REmap, 2030  52 Figure 27:
Renewable energy share in TFEC, power generation and end-use sectors (including
electricity and excluding traditional biomass use)  52 Figure 28: Summary of VRE
characteristics and impacts in system planning and operation 56 Figure 29: Power
demand projections to 2030 (left) and load duration curves (right)  57 Figure
30: Simulated wind and solar PV generation, projected demand, residual demand
(left) and load duration curve (right) 59 Figure 31: Instant VRE penetration
duration curve under the REmap scenario 62 Figure 32: Ramp duration curve for
2015 and 2030 with REmap VRE 64 Figure 33: Average ramp rate envelopes for 2015
and 2030 64 Figure 34: Potential locations for wind projects and main load
centres 66 Figure 35: Local net load for the most critical nodes in 2030 67
Figure 36: Local net load for South region 68 Figure 37: Rooftop area covered by
renewable energy technology in REmap in 2030  74 Figure 38: Breakdown of primary
bioenergy use in Dominican Republic, 2030  75 Figure 39: Bioenergy supply
potential in Dominican Republic for primary biomass, 2030  76 Figure 40: Average
annual investment needs for renewable energy technologies,   79 Figure 41:
Renewable energy cost-supply curve by renewable energy resource, business
perspective, 2030 80 Figure 42: Renewable energy cost-supply curve by renewable
energy resource, government perspective, 2030 81 Figure 43: Total primary energy
supply in Dominican Republic,   82 Figure 44: Energy-related CO2 emissions,  83
iii List of Tables Table : Generation expansion plans, projects with final
concessions by technology and owner 30 Table : Transmission system capacity and
lines  31 Table : Transmission capacity of the system (towards the Central zone)
32 Table : Transmission expansion plan  33 Table : Characteristics of the state-
owned electricity distribution companies 34 Table : Off-grid system
characteristics38 Table : Bioenergy supply potential and costs in Dominican
Republic, 2030 44 Table : Summary of results by technology for the base year,
Reference Case and REmap – power sector 48 Table : Summary of results by
technology for the base year, Reference Case and REmap – direct uses in
buildings and Industry 50 Table 10: Summary of results by technology for the
base year, Reference Case and REmap – transport sector  51 Table 11: Solar PV
and wind plant sizing for the REmap Options 58 Table 12: Share of VRE and
dispatchable plants, 2030 59 Table 13: Distribution of projects and their
associated transmission node 67 Table 14: REmap findings on direct uses of
renewables in industry, 2030 69 Table 15: REmap findings on direct uses of
renewables in transport, 2030 70 Table 16: REmap findings on direct uses of
renewables in buildings, 2030  71 Table 17: Average annual investment needs for
renewable energy capacity by sector,   78 Table 18: Average substitution costs
of REmap Options by sector, 2030  79 Table 19: Financial indicators for
renewable energy use in Dominican Republic, government perspective 83 ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY International Renewable Energy Agency REmap programme By 2014,
renewable energy use amounted to 18% of global total final energy consumption
(TFEC) If existing and proposed energy plans and targets of countries are
aggregated, the global renewable energy share by 2030 would increase to 21% This
represents  continuation of past growth trends in renewable energy share The
International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) REmap programme shows it is
possible to actually double the global share of renewable energy by 2030
compared to Such accelerated growth helps fulfil the Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) for affordable and clean energy, and contributes to climate change
mitigation REmap is  roadmap based on close cooperation and consultation with
experts (energy statisticians, energy modellers and energy policy experts)
nominated by governments It is an analysis of the potential, costs and savings
of renewable energy technology options REmap provides  perspective on the
technology options available at the sector level that represent the realistic
potential of renewables beyond national energy targets and plans These
technology options are aggregated to build technology cost curves As of July
2016, REmap works with more than 40 countries responsible for over 80% of
current global energy demand Context The Dominican Republic is one of the
largest and most diverse economies in the Caribbean region, and its energy
consumption is growing rapidly The country relies heavily on fossil fuel
imports, which account for nearly all of its primary energy supply at present
The Dominican Republic has set ambitious targets to reduce its per capita
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions Another objective is to reduce import dependency
and the local and global impacts of fossil fuel combustion on the environment,
including those associated with climate change The target is to reduce GHG
emissions by 25% by 2030 compared to Realising this target will require  shift
in the country’ energy mix Renewable energy can play  key role in achieving the
climate policy objectives as well as energy supply diversification Moreover,
accelerated renewable energy deployment can reduce energy cost for consumers and
reduce the fuel imports bill In 2014, renewable energy share in total final
energy of the Dominican Republic stood at % (% modern renewables and %
traditional biomass use, Figure ES2) The power sector is key for an increase in
the share of renewable energy At the moment power generation is predominantly
based on hydrocarbons, as shown in Figure ES1 In recent years the sector has
gone through  series of reforms to ensure secure and affordable electricity
supply to consumers This has been met with mixed success so far As part of these
reforms, Law  sets specific targets for the power sector to increase its share
of renewables in the power generation mix to 25% by To achieve this target,
number of policy instruments have been introduced, including tax incentives and
feed-in tariffs  rural electrification programme also supports the deployment of
renewable off-grid projects, and the country is extending its grid
infrastructure to ensure universal electricity access Furthermore,  blackout
reduction programme aims to improve the quality of the power supply service to
the population  Renewable energy includes bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower,
ocean, solar and wind energy  Law  of  May 2007 on Renewable Sources of Energy
Incentives and its Special Regimes  Figure ES1: Dominican Republic final energy
mix, 2014 TFEC in 2014 - 227 PJ Solar PV % Bioenergy % % Solar thermal Wind
onshore % % Hydropower % Natural gas 14% Bioenergy* Coal 12% 60% Oil products
Natural gas 24% 76% Direct uses of energy for heat, cooking and transport 24%
Electricity Oil products 52% *including % traditional biomass use Source: IRENA
estimates based on national energy balances Note:  kilotonne of oil equivalent
(ktoe) = 868 megajoules (MJ) In this evolving environment characterised by
increasing electricity demand, the pipeline of new power generation projects
amounts to  gigawatts (GW) Of this total, 66% is renewable energy capacity –
mainly onshore wind and hydropower The country has significant additional
renewable energy potential to go beyond what is being planned This relates not
only to power but also to direct uses of renewables for residential and
commercial buildings, industry and transport This roadmap was developed in close
co-operation with the National Energy Commission (Comisión Nacional de Energía
or CNE) It quantifies what can realistically be achieved by 2030 in the
Dominican Republic’ total energy system in terms of renewable energy technology
potential, cost and savings CNE has provided the background energy and economic
data for the analysis, and the potential has been worked out by IRENA with CNE’
experts This is the first report prepared for the Dominican Republic covering
its entire energy system As described in this roadmap, each sector has  number
of specific challenges relating to the accelerated deployment of renewable
energy technologies With the right policy framework and technical solutions, the
Dominican Republic can be  key country in the region attracting significant
investment in renewable energy  rapidly developing power system The Dominican
Republic power sector is developing rapidly The reforms that started in the late
1990s have shaped its current structure As  result of these reforms, activities
across the power supply chain have been unbundled, and private sector
participation has increased The national interconnected system (Sistema
Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado de la República Dominicana or SENI) supplies
87% of all the electricity consumed in the country The high voltage transmission
network belongs to  single, state-owned company (Empresa de Transmisión
Eléctrica Dominicana or ETED) Three public sector companies distribute 78% of
all the electricity consumed, with concessions in three different geographical
zones Seven smaller, mostly privately owned companies, generate and distribute
electricity  in noninterconnected zones High electricity losses, at the
distribution level in the three main concessions, currently affect the power
system This situation is being addressed by the government because it
jeopardises the economic viability of the system Total national demand for
electricity has experienced  rapid growth of approximately 45% over the past
decade Electricity generation reached 18 terawatt-hours (TWh) in 2014 from
total installed power generation capacity of around  GW (including SENI, off-
grid installations and autoproducers) More than 60% of the installed capacity
runs on oil products, mainly heavy fuel oil which is especially polluting
Renewable energy technologies account for 15% of total installed capacity The
national share of renewable energy in the power sector is about % of total
electricity generation This consists of % hydropower, % onshore wind and %
bioenergy The remaining % is met by solar photovoltaic (PV) This is displayed in
Figure ES1 Installed capacity and generation from renewables is rising at the
same rate as demand for electricity The renewables share in non-power sectors is
thus far limited to bioenergy for industrial heating (amounting to 27% of direct
uses of energy in industry) as well as cooking and water heating in buildings
(representing 41% of traditional biomass plus % of modern bioenergy use, in the
non-power energy demand in this sector) Deployment in these sectors has been
mainly driven by private initiatives No policy directed at these sectors exist
yet REmap analysis: renewable energy prospects for the Dominican Republic The
Dominican Republic’ total demand for final energy will grow by % per year
between now and 2030, reaching  677 ktoe per year These figures are based on the
preliminary results of the CNE energy demand Figure ES2: Modern renewable energy
share, 2010–2030 50% 2010 2014 Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030 45%
40% 35% 30% 25% 20% 15% 10% % % TFEC Power generation Transport Buildings
Industry End-use sectors Note: End-use sectors include renewable energy
consumption from direct uses and electricity  From the total installed capacity
in this year, the SENI accounts for  GW and the autoproducers and off-grid
installations represented about  GW and  GW respectively  Figure ES3: Modern
final renewable energy use in Dominican Republic according to Reference Case and
REmap in 2030 Reference Case total renewable energy use – 52 PJ/yr REmap total
renewable energy use – 87 PJ/yr Liquid biofuels- transport Liquid biofuels-
transport % % 25% Bioenergy for Hydropower 22% Hydropower 14% process heat-
industry 22% Bioenergy for % Transport % Transport process heat-industry 54%
Heat and other direct uses 44% Power 54% Power 39% Heat and other direct uses
Onshore wind 21% % Modern bioenergy- Onshore wind 14% buildings 20% Traditional
% Solar energy for cooling-industry Bioenergy power % bioenergy-buildings
Bioenergy power % Solar PV 10% % Solar energy for process heat-industry Solar PV
% Solar energy for water heating- buildings % Solar energy Solar energy for
water heating-buildings % % Modern bioenergy-buildings % for cooling-buildings
projections for , worked out with Fundación Bariloche, which form the basis of
the Reference Case (or business as usual) In the Reference Case, the share of
modern renewable energy would be 13% of the total final energy mix by 2030,
compared to % in 2014 (excluding traditional uses of bioenergy) The Dominican
Republic has abundant solar and wind resources Several sources of small
hydropower are not utilised Agricultural residue and waste are the predominant
potential sources of bioenergy supply These can be used to meet growing demand
and raise the share of renewables beyond the Reference Case Meanwhile, the
renewable energy share of total electricity generation in the Reference Case
rises from around 12% in 2014 to 21% by 2030 if all renewable energy projects in
the pipeline come online This would imply that the target of 25% of renewable
electricity generation by 2025 set in Law  might be missed in the Reference
Case, thus there is  need for additional policies According to the Reference
Case, the share of renewable energy in end-use sectors experiences  slight
increase between 2014 and 2030, from 21% to 23% in industry, % to 16% in
buildings and % to % in transport This is displayed in Figure ES2 Implementing
the potential additional renewable energy technology options identified in REmap
would increase the renewable energy share to 27% by 2030 in the Dominican
Republic’ total final energy mix Industry and the power sector could have the
highest renewable energy share, estimated at 43% and 44% respectively This would
be followed by buildings and transport at 40% and % each Under REmap, final
renewable energy use could double to  080 ktoe per year by 2030 compared to the
Reference Case Bioenergy would be the largest source of renewable energy
accounting for almost half of total final renewable energy use in This is
explained by its various uses across all energy sectors, including power
generation Solar energy for power generation, heating and cooling would account
for 20% Finally, wind and hydropower would represent 21% and 14% of the total
final renewable energy use, respectively Wind and solar lead renewable power
generation Under REmap, 54% of all final renewable energy use is related to the
consumption of power from renewables in 2030 as shown in Figure ES3 Data
provided by CNE and IRENA estimates show that the Dominican Republic could
generate 16 TWh of electricity from renewables by This would be produced from
renewable power generation capacity of  GW (from  total installed capacity of 10
GW, including non- renewable technologies) Renewable electricity generation
under REmap is higher than current levels by  factor of eight and significantly
higher than the country’ planned expansion in the Reference Case ( TWh  Figure
ES4: Location of renewable power generation capacity in 2030 under REmap
SSoollaarr PPVV 557766 MMWW 448800 MMWW WWiinndd oonnsshhoorree
BBiiooeenneerrggyy ppoowweerr 6600 MMWW ((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 115533 MMWW
334422 MMWW ((DDGG)) 553388 MMWW ((uuttiilliittyy)) 119922 MMWW 112200 MMWW
((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 7700 MMWW ((bbaaggaassssee)) 5544 MMWW
((bbaaggaassssee)) 334422 MMWW ((DDGG)) 553388 MMWW ((uuttiilliittyy)) 4400 MMWW
((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 7700 MMWW ((ccoo--ffiirriinngg)) 442233 MMWW 2244
MMWW ((bbaaggaassssee)) 448800 MMWW Not shown on map: 119 MW small hydro;  174
MW large hydro;  MW biogas; 102 MW off-grid solar systems DG: distributed
generation; km: kilometre; mi: mile mainly from hydropower and onshore wind) To
realise the potential identified in Remap, the country’ major onshore wind and
solar resources need to be utilised These are also among the most cost-effective
options in the mix Onshore wind would be the single largest source of renewable
power producing  TWh electricity per year The total wind capacity if all REmap
Options are implemented is  GW in This translates into the construction of about
45 wind farms between now and Wind projects would be spread across the northern,
eastern and southern parts of the country as shown in Figure ES4 Solar PV could
contribute  TWh from  total of  GW capacity under REmap by This potential
includes both on-grid (utility-scale and decentralised) and off-grid capacity
About 60% of this potential is related to utility-scale plants, which would
require an average annual installation rate of about 77 megawatts (MW) between
now and Decentralised on-grid generation comprises 685 MW capacity by 2030 for
residential and commercial systems that would cover about % of all electricity
demand in buildings According to REmap, these solar projects would be split
between the two major demand centres of Santo Domingo and Santiago as shown in
Figure ES4 Solar home systems totalling 102 MW of installed capacity would
supply electricity to % of the population, which will still lack access in 2030
(about 70 000 units) Bioenergy and waste constitute other important source of
renewable power generation There is potential to increase total bioenergy
capacity from landfill gas, bagasse and biogas, as well as through co-firing By
2030, total installed capacity could reach 448 MW under REmap This is divided
into four sources Firstly, landfill gas from the large Duquese and the other
major landfills could supply 220 MW The four largest sugar mills in the country
could reach 148 MW bagasse based combined heat and power Finally, animal manure
could supply  MW in biogas and co-firing of biomass in coal fired power plants
could supply another 70 MW Most bioenergy projects would be in the southern
parts of the country  Key role of end-use sectors The other half of final
renewable energy use under REmap, besides renewable power, comes from the direct
use of renewables in end-use sectors However, until now the national energy
plans of the Dominican Republic do not make use of this potential Renewables for
industrial heating offers the greatest potential among all end-use applications
Medium- temperature process heat can be generated from industrial combined heat
and power based on bagasse Likewise, solar thermal systems can be employed to
deliver low-temperature heat and cold Under REmap, 100 heating and about 85
cooling installations can be implemented in the industry plants by 2030,
representing  total capacity of 125 MW In buildings, solar water heating
capacity could reach  GW to deliver half of all energy demand for water heating
in residential and commercial buildings – mainly hotels, under REmap Demand for
cooling has increased considerably The main drivers for cooling are increased
income, growing population and the hospitality sector Solar cooling and seawater
cooling systems can cover 20% and % of the total space cooling demand of the
buildings respectively Hostelries generate significant amounts of organic waste
among others, from cooking and from collected waste food that can be reconverted
into biogas, using anaerobic digestion, usable as an energy source for cooking
About 100 such digesters can be installed by 2030 into hotels in the Dominican
Republic, supplying the equivalent of 10% of the energy used for cooking in
hostelry Under current policies, only limited growth is forecast for renewable
energy in transport, which only includes biodiesel usage Ethanol and electric
mobility provide significant additional potential This would be an important
step for  sector that represents the largest share of total final energy demand
in the Dominican Republic Thousands hectares of land were previously used for
sugar cane production  share of now fallow arable land can once again be used
for sugar cane production for ethanol By 2030, more than 170 million litres of
conventional ethanol could be produced, allowing  blending rate of 15%, which
requires flex-fuel vehicles For biodiesel,  blending rate of % is estimated, for
total consumption of 50 million litres The production of conventional liquid
biofuels must be derived from sustainable sources and not compete with resources
required for food production The number of four-wheel electric vehicles by 2030
could reach 220 000, representing 15% of the total passenger car stock Two and
three-wheeled electric vehicles have major potential, especially in congested
parts of cities and in tourist resorts Realistically, 500 000 such vehicles can
be deployed by In summary these are opportunities to combine electric mobility
with renewable power supply The energy storage offered by all types of electric
vehicles represent  total capacity of  gigawatt-hours This can provide
significant flexibility to facilitate the management of the variability from
wind and solar generation Significant savings to renewable energy mix in 2030
Increasing the Dominican Republic’ renewable energy share to 27% of its final
energy mix would result in financial savings In the REmap analysis, the cost and
savings of renewables are estimated from both business and government
perspectives The business perspective is based on national energy prices which
include local taxes and subsidies and uses  national discount rate of 12% The
government perspective is based on standard international commodity prices and
fixed 10% discount rate The cost analysis in this roadmap is based on 2030
capital cost projections for energy technologies It assumes an average increase
of 40% in local fossil fuel prices between 2010 and 2030 (in real terms) and
also no change to present energy  pricing schemes Assessment excludes the costs
for infrastructure ( additional generation or transmission capacity) and
enabling technology costs ( grid integration) Under REmap, more than 80% of all
renewable energy technology options could be deployed with financial savings
when compared with the non-renewable technology counterparts they replace From
the business perspective, the mix of renewable energy technologies identified on
top of the Reference Case translates into savings across all sectors of USD 62
per megawatt-hour of final renewable energy (or USD 17 per gigajoule – GJ) From
government perspective, this results in savings of USD 68 per megawatt-hour of
final renewable energy (or USD 19/ GJ) This translates into total annual savings
of USD  billion in the Dominican Republic energy system  small proportion of the
technologies will incur additional costs and will require total investment
support of about USD 160 million per year Savings are also achieved due to
reduced externalities from avoided carbon dioxide (CO2) and air pollutant
emissions as estimated in this roadmap When accounting for these reduced
externalities, additional annual savings could range from USD - billion by This
would result in total savings of USD  billion- billion per year The health
savings are estimated on the basis of the unit external costs of the five major
outdoor air pollutant emissions caused by fossil fuel combustion in power
generation, heating and transport Traditional bioenergy use in households for
cooking and water heating also results in indoor air pollution These unit
external costs are specifically applied to the case of the Dominican Republic by
accounting for the expected Figure ES5: CO2 emissions from energy use, 2010–2030
40 Reference Case emissions 35 Mt           35 23% reduction  Mt 30 25 )   /   (
-       20 15 10   2010 REmap 2030 Reduction in 2030 due to REmap Options CO2
emissions  The costs of renewables have been compared with the non-renewable
energy technologies assuming  relatively high growth in crude oil prices to 2030
and the assessment of externalities has been carried out based on  set of
standard parameters that may overestimate the savings in the context of islands
Therefore,  sensitivity analysis of these findings is provided in the full
report  The five air pollutants assessed include: ammonia, mono-nitrogen oxides,
particulate matter, sulphur dioxide and volatile organic compounds  developments
in its gross domestic product by In addition, the calculation assumed  price
range of USD 17–80 per tonne of CO2 with the same range applied to all other
countries in the REmap programme In addition to these savings, the replacement
of non-renewable technologies by renewables in REmap cuts fossil fuel demand by
almost  170 ktoe by 2030 compared to business as usual Much of this reduced
demand is imported fossil fuel that lowers the annual energy bill by USD
billion in Total investments in renewable energy technologies needed to attain
the 27% renewable energy share would require USD 566 million in investment per
year Of this, USD 337 million would come from the REmap Options and USD 229
million from investments taking place in the Reference Case Lower fossil fuel
combustion reduces CO2 emissions by around  megatonnes (Mt) per year of CO2 by
This amounts to  23% cut compared to the Reference Case in These reductions
would be an important step for the country to realise GHG emission reduction
targets in its Nationally Determined Contribution Around 70% of that total
mitigation potential comes from the power sector Challenges to accelerated
renewable energy growth If renewable energy use is to grow rapidly along the
lines suggested in this report,  number of challenges need to be overcome
Consultation with CNE and other stakeholders in the Dominican Republic energy
sector has identified barriers to rapid growth of renewable energy technologies
The independent power system operator, project developers and equipment
manufacturers were some of the institutions involved in the consultation These
challenges relate specifically to the national circumstances of the Dominican
Republic today In the case of the power sector, the main challenges are related
to current institutional and regulatory framework and whether the required
investment can be attractive to realise the REmap Options In addition, there are
technical challenges associated with integrating large amounts of variable
renewables that have to be overcome Challenges in the power sector Institutional
and economic challenges It is important to acknowledge that  long-term vision
needs to emerge with intermediate renewable energy targets and necessary
incentives to realise the potential according to the REmap Options This means
maintaining consistency between the national energy plan and national
development strategies to bring legitimacy Strong institutional and regulatory
frameworks need to be adopted to provide  stable and attractive environment for
the required investments The regulatory framework needs to allow the
implementation of the changes required in the planning and operational
procedures of the power sector, including the electricity market The purpose of
these changes should be to integrate  high share of variable renewables
Technical challenges associated with high share of variable renewables
Generation adequacy and flexibility: to fulfil the potential identified in REmap
at least  GW of dispatchable generation (both renewable and non-renewable) would
be required to cover peak power demand in 2030 in periods of low variable
renewable energy generation Long-term generation expansion plans with
corresponding intermediate targets will be essential to achieve this condition
They will need to take the requirements for flexibility and firm dispatchable
generation capacity into consideration Appropriate financial mechanisms are
required in order to guarantee that the firm capacity, alongside flexibility
services  from certain thermal plants, are available when necessary The
financial mechanisms should consider the new reduced utilisation conditions
imposed by increasing shares wind and solar energy Adequate electricity grid
development: Santiago and Santo Domingo are the two major load centres Both are
at  considerable distance from the rich resource areas of wind in the North,
West and Southwest of the country Fulfilling the potential under REmap would
require transmission capacity expansion to avoid uneconomic wind power
curtailment Planning for this expansion will require co-ordinated action with
the development of renewable energy capacity targets Long-term transmission
plans and annual operational restriction studies may need to incorporate the new
renewable energy projects and the evaluation of alternative local balancing
options Long-term plans may need to look beyond transmission capacity expansion
in order to find optimal ways of managing potential congestion in the
transmission grid The definition of clearer and attractive rules for financing
the connection of new renewable generation and required reinforcements in the
transmission system should also be considered Management of variability and
limited predictability of variable renewable power: the operational procedures
of the power system may need to be reviewed and adapted to the new conditions
imposed by the variability and limited predictability of variable renewables The
adaptation of the power system operation and the corresponding market procedures
should be in line with the mid-term generation expansion targets and the
implementation of new renewable energy projects Benefiting from advanced
forecasting tools to reduce system operation costs would require an increased
frequency in generation scheduling updates and the use of available flexibility
options to respond to the updated schedules Adapting the operational and market
procedures may mean extending the existing grid codes At the same time,
incentives would be needed to implement flexibility options (outside
generation), flexible generation and better forecasts of variable renewables to
make them more predictable Management of instantaneous penetration levels for
variable renewable power: in the isolated power system of the Dominican
Republic, very high instantaneous penetration levels of variable renewables can
create challenges to the security and stability of the electricity supply This
assessment suggests that under REmap, Figure ES6: Installed power generation
capacity,  12 000 10 000 )   (                   000  000  000  000  2010 2014
Reference Case REmap Historical 2030 Bioenergy Solar PV Onshore wind Coal
Natural Gas Hydropower Oil products  up to 10% of total electricity generated by
renewables by 2030 may need to be curtailed to guarantee system security This
assumes current state-of-the art technologies and operational procedures not
currently implemented in the Dominican Republic The use of the most up-to-date
technologies and operational practices in the future may help reduce curtailment
to less than % This ratio was calculated taking the specific characteristics of
SENI into consideration as far as possible but is largely based on parameters in
line with international experience Future developments in SENI’ characteristics
and economics may change these estimates Hence, there is  need to understand and
identify the maximum penetration levels for different system configurations The
necessary measures to efficiently manage possible curtailments need to be
defined in line with the mid- and long-term generation expansion targets
Challenges in end-use sectors Buildings:  wide range of renewable heating and
cooling technologies exists to replace fossil fuels for households, commercial
buildings and hotels Even when externalities are not considered, REmap suggests
that solar thermal technologies are cost-effective although investment support
may be required for low- income families There is  need to raise more awareness
among consumers of the opportunities offered by renewables For example, the
waste generated in the hostelry sector is  valuable resource that can be turned
into biogas for in-house consumption Current energy plans overlook this
potential in both existing as well as expanding building stock Industry: this is
still the largest renewable energy user in the country to generate process heat
This is due the availability of waste and residues utilised for heat generation
by the plant owners There is  further potential to supply low- and medium
temperature process heat from solar thermal and bioenergy However, to maintain
cost competitiveness and security of operation, the fuel supply needs to be
affordable and continuous This poses  specific challenge to seasonal residual
biomass feedstocks Solar thermal systems will also require additional storage
capacity Moreover, not all industrial plants are designed to be retrofitted with
solar thermal, which requires advanced planning for space and necessary process
modifications Transport: this sector consumes the most energy in the Dominican
Republic yet national energy plans do not consider renewables deployment for the
sector Liquid biofuels could replace gasoline and diesel but no market exists
Demand needs to be created by setting targets Planning for the major potential
from the sugar industry will also be essential but food security and
sustainability concerns will need to be resolved The major potential and reduced
externalities (specifically related to air pollution) achievable by implementing
the various forms of electric mobility identified in REmap need to be considered
Planning is required to work out the related infrastructure, how this can be
financed and its potential implications for the power sector Challenges to
bioenergy deployment Under REmap, bioenergy is  key technology for power
generation, heating and transport However, the supply potential and range of
arable feedstocks is limited There is thus  need to prioritise the most
resource- efficient and cost-effective uses of bioenergy across different
sectors On the supply side, waste and residues will be the key feedstocks as
they do not compete with resources required for food production Efficient and
environmentally friendly feedstock collection systems will be essential to
mobilise their availability Large areas of arable land once used by the sugar
cane industry is also available Provided that sustainability and resource
concerns are addressed, the potential offered by this land is achievable
Agricultural yields could reach the level set by the international best
practice, particularly for ethanol production for transport   Policy suggestions
The full REmap Dominican Republic report covers the country’ policy landscape in
detail and includes specific suggestions by sector In this summary, these
suggestions are outlined for each challenge identified in the previous section:
Taking into consideration the vision set in REmap, establish clear and
consistent renewable energy targets Ensure they are consistent with other
national energy strategies and  stable institutional and regulatory framework
with the right financial incentives to attract renewables investments Ensure
enough dispatchable generation is available to provide the firm capacity and
flexibility required by the power system Design appropriate incentives for this
purpose supported by updated generation expansion plan with intermediate targets
Align transmission planning with renewable energy targets and assess the cost
and benefits of grid expansion and other local balancing measures to efficiently
manage possible grid congestion Define measures in line with planning for
renewable energy deployment and transmission capacity to guarantee economic
levels of curtailment Explore the feasibility of flexibility measures to manage
it efficiently Devise and introduce appropriate incentives and market mechanisms
to promote  flexible power system able to deal with the new operational
conditions imposed by the expected high share of variable renewables Define
codes and standards for buildings construction and renovation that consider
renewables, such as solar water heating and cooling Integrate renewables into
energy and urban planning to accelerate its uptake by ensuring cost-effective
supply of energy to the population Plan and develop  strategy for renewables use
in industry by paying particular attention to the technical/ economic design,
operational hours and temperature levels of industrial processes Create  market
for liquid biofuels in transport and promote electric mobility in congested
urban areas and touristic parts of the country This market also needs to make
use of synergies with the power sector and plan for related infrastructure and
financing needs Set targets for bioenergy use in applications lacking any other
renewable energy alternative and where bioenergy creates added value to the
system Promote the uses of its most resource-efficient and cost-effective
pathways to ensure sustainability » » » » » » » » This roadmap provides
detailed overview of the realistic potential of renewables in the Dominican
Republic by Realising REmap Options by 2030 will require significant efforts to
plan the intermediate targets and measures to achieve them, particularly in the
power sector The findings of this roadmap thus need to be complemented by
detailed technical and economic studies focusing on operating and planning the
interconnected systems containing  high share of variable renewables Upon
request, IRENA can further support the Dominican Republic government by
producing the necessary in-depth technical/ economic studies supporting the
accelerated deployment of solar and wind power as outlined in this analysis
HIGHLIGHTS ● The Dominican Republic’ energy system largely relies on fossil
fuels imports, which amount to around USD  billion per annum This accounts for
approximately % of the country’ gross domestic product (GDP) and 90% of its
primary source of energy ● Total installed renewable electricity generation
capacity in 2014 reached 795 MW to generate  TWh per year of renewable
electricity This included 613 MW of hydropower, 85 MW of onshore wind, 70 MW of
bioenergy and 27 MW of solar PV (including autoproducers) About two-thirds of
planned new generation capacity is based on renewable energy, which includes 588
MW of hydropower plants over 10 MW, 715 MW of onshore wind, 175 MW of solar PV
and  MW of mini-hydropower ● The country’ Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) sets an ambitious national target to reduce the country’ GHG
emissions by 25% by 2030 compared to the 2010 level Renewable energy and energy
efficiency could play an important role in realising these targets ● Compared to
the promising developments in the power sector, end-use sectors are lagging
behind in renewable energy deployment Current use of renewable energy is mainly
concentrated in households in the form of traditional bioenergy for water
heating and cooking ● Law  of Renewable Energy Incentives and Special Regimes is
the country’ main legislative instrument promoting renewable energy, including
number of measures across all energy sectors, particularly the power sector The
law set  target of 25% of electricity from renewable energy sources by ● This
roadmap shows that the Dominican Republic has the potential to raise its
renewable energy share to 27% by 2030 in the whole energy mix This would result
in an annual consumption of  080 ktoe (87 PJ) of final renewable energy in that
same year This compares with the share of 13% if the Dominican Republic merely
follows its current plans and targets for renewable energy ● Total demand for
energy across the country has been growing at about % per year for more than
decade Total final energy demand reached  433 ktoe (227 petajoules/PJ) per year
by Fossil fuels meet 62% of this demand Traditional and modern forms of
bioenergy provide 14%, and electricity 24% – of which only % is renewable energy
(mainly hydropower) On average, % of the country’ total final energy demand is
covered by modern renewables ● If the potential of technologies in REmap is
realised, the renewable energy share in the power sector reaches 44% This is
significantly higher than the 25% target in Law 57-● The structure of the power
sector is the result of  reform process that started in the late 1990s This
process unbundled the activities within the power supply chain, enabling private
sector participation The Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM), formed in 2013, is
responsible of formulating and managing energy policies CNE, established in
2001, contributes to national energy policy development, including national
energy planning ● Total installed capacity of solar PV and onshore wind
increases to  and  GW in 2030 respectively Solar PV capacity is split between
rooftop and utility-scale, and it is expected to be located mainly in Santo
Domingo and Santiago provinces Wind would be developed in the regions with the
highest wind potential – the northern, southern and eastern provinces ● In end-
use sectors, renewable energy share reaches 43% in buildings, 41% in industry
and % in transport in The key renewable   energy technology options are
bioenergy for industry, solar water heaters for buildings and  mix of electric
mobility (including two- and three-wheelers) and biofuels for transport ● If
renewable energy use is to grow rapidly along the lines suggested in this
report,  number of challenges need to be overcome  consultation with CNE and
other stakeholders in the Dominican Republic energy sector has shed light on
barriers to rapid growth of renewable energy technologies and the challenges
ahead In addition, this REmap report has further analysed the technical
challenges for the integration of variable renewable energy technologies in the
power sector ● Under REmap, more than 80% of all renewable energy technology
options could be deployed with financial savings when compared with the non-
renewable technology they replace Savings are also achieved as  result of
reduced externalities from avoided CO2 and air pollutant emissions When
accounting for these, total savings reach USD  billion- billion per year ● High-
level suggestions are provided for dealing with the identified challenges,
including the institutional and regulatory perspective, energy planning,
technical challenges in the power sector, bioenergy market and specific measures
to promote the use of renewables in end-use sectors ● Total annual average
investment needed in renewable energy technology deployment in  amounts to USD
695 million USD 245 million is required each year to fulfil the Reference Case,
and an extra USD 450 million per year is needed to implement the REmap Options
REMAP PROGRAMME AND REMAP DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  IRENA’ REmap programme case)
suggests that under current conditions and policy approaches the global share of
renewables only increases to 21% by This indicates  15 percentage- point
shortfall in relation to the target to double the global renewables share by
2030 (IRENA, 2016a) As one of the largest energy users in the Caribbean, the
Dominican Republic plays  critical role in transforming the region’ energy
consumption REmap aims at paving the way to promote accelerated renewable energy
development through  series of activities, including global, regional and
country studies REmap analysis and activity also informs IRENA publications on
specific renewable technologies or energy sectors The REmap programme
collaborates closely with governmental bodies and other institutions responsible
for energy planning and renewable energy development The analysis relies on
broad consultations with energy experts and stakeholders from numerous countries
around the world The Dominican Republic has implemented institutional and
operational changes in its energy sector, including the formation of the
Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) in One of its mandates is to formulate and
manage the country’ energy policy Classified by the UN as  Small Island
Developing State (SIDS), the country faces several economic and environmental
challenges ranging from climate change to high dependency on imported fossil
fuels As  consequence, the government and policy makers have been directing more
attention to the extended deployment of renewable energy for electricity
generation and in direct uses, such as cooling or transport Raising awareness of
the socioeconomic, environmental, and energy security benefits of renewables
contributes to this effort Improving energy efficiency and power sector
operations are also core measures supporting the transition to more sustainable
and affordable energy in the Dominican Republic At its inception, REmap emerged
as IRENA’ proposal for  pathway to support the United Nations’ (UN) Sustainable
Energy for All (SE4All) initiative, in its objective to double the global share
of renewable energy from 18% in 2010 to 36% by 2030 (UN and World Bank, 2016)
Since then, the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP 21) adopted the Paris
Agreement in 2015 with  target to minimise the earth’ temperature increase to
below  degrees Celsius (°) by The widespread development of renewables is
critical lever to fulfilling this objective To double the renewable energy share
across the world, REmap takes  bottom-up approach Country-level assessments are
carried out to determine the potential contributions that each of them could
make to the overall renewable energy share The first global REmap report,
published in 2014, included  detailed analysis of 26 major energy-consuming
countries representing around 75% of global energy demand The REmap programme
has since expanded to 40 countries accounting for 80% of world energy use The
Dominican Republic joined the programme in In January 2016, the government of
the Dominican Republic represented by the National Energy Commission of the
Dominican Republic (Comisión Nacional de Energía), CNE, requested  REmap study
from IRENA Its aim was to explore the potential difference renewables could make
to achieving the country’ energy policy and objectives to 2030 and beyond The
government asked IRENA to examine the following areas: () The REmap evaluation
of the national plans of 40 countries (which could be considered the business-
as-usual case, referred in this study as the reference Role of renewables for
heating, cooling, and transport, as well as electrification to provide energy
services in end-use sectors;   (ii) Further potential for increasing the share
of variable renewables in the power sector; where relevant The country then
provides its latest national energy plans and targets for renewables and fossil
fuels, collated to produce  business-as-usual perspective of the energy system
This is referred to as the Reference Case This TFEC for each end-use sector
(buildings, industry and transport) It distinguishes between power, district
heating, and direct uses of energy6 with  breakdown by energy carrier for
2010-(iii) Cost and benefits of renewables; and (iv) Identification of
challenges to raising the renewables share in the power sector and high- level
suggestions about how to overcome them This report presents the detailed REmap
analysis carried out for the Dominican Republic REmap elaborates on the
renewable technology options the country could deploy further to raise the
renewables share by To fulfil this aim, the Dominican Republic has the
opportunity to extract more out of its wind, solar, and biomass potential in
particular Once the Reference Case is ready, the additional renewable energy
potential by technology is investigated for each sector The potential of these
technologies is described as REmap Options Each REmap Option replaces  non-
renewable energy technology8 to deliver the same energy service The resulting
case when all these options are aggregated is called REmap  REmap approach
Throughout this study the renewable energy share is estimated in relation to
TFEC Modern renewable energy excludes traditional uses of bioenergy10 The share
of modern renewable energy in TFEC is equal to total modern renewable energy
consumption in end-use sectors (including consumption of renewable electricity
and district heat, and direct uses of renewables), divided by TFEC The share of
renewables in power generation is also calculated The renewable energy share can
be also expressed in terms of the direct uses of renewables only The renewable
energy use by end-use sector covers the areas described below This section
explains the REmap methodology and summarises the background data used for the
Dominican Republic analysis The annexes provide more detailed information REmap
is  roadmap of technology options to increase the global share of renewables It
is  bottom-up, iterative analysis By March 2016, IRENA’ REmap programme had
assessed the renewables potential of 40 countries in 2030, which accounts for
80% of total global energy demand These are Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, Cyprus, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Iran, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Poland, Republic
of Korea, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, Tonga,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United
States, and Uruguay  Final energy use/consumption from direct uses excludes
electricity and district heat consumption  An approach based on options rather
than scenarios is deliberate REmap 2030 is an exploratory study and not  target-
setting exercise  Non-renewable technologies encompass fossil fuels, non-
sustainable uses of bioenergy (referred to here as traditional bioenergy) and
nuclear power As  supplement to this report’ annexes,  detailed list of these
technologies and related background data are provided on the REmap website  TFEC
is the energy delivered to consumers as electricity, heat or fuels that can be
used directly as  source of energy This consumption is usually subdivided into
transport, industry, residential, commercial and public buildings, and
agriculture It excludes non-energy uses of fuels REmap identifies the realistic
potential for accelerating renewable energy deployment This can be fulfilled
with existing technologies and is economically practical and achievable by 10
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN defines traditional biomass use
as woodfuels, agricultural by-products, and dung burned for cooking and heating
purposes” In developing countries, traditional biomass is still widely harvested
and used in an unsustainable, inefficient and unsafe way It is mostly traded
informally and non-commercially Modern biomass, by contrast, is produced in
sustainable manner from solid wastes and residues from agriculture and forestry
and relies on more efficient methods (IEA and World Bank, 2015) It starts by
building  country’ energy balance, using 2010 as the base year built on national
data and, in the case of the Dominican Republic, CNE statistics To the extent
data availability allows, information for more recent years ( 2013 and 2014) is
provided   ● Buildings include the residential, commercial and public sectors
Renewable energy is used in direct applications for heating, cooling or cooking
purposes or as renewable electricity service The cost of each REmap Option is
represented by its substitution cost:12 13 Cost of substituted conventional
technology USD/year in 2030 Cost of REmap Options USD/year in 2030 –
Substitution cost USD/GJ ● Industry includes the manufacturing and mining
sectors, in which renewable energy is consumed in direct use applications (
process heat or refrigeration) and electricity from renewable sources in 2030 =
Energy substituted by REmap Options GJ/year in 2030 ● Transport sector, which
can make direct use of renewables through the consumption of liquid and gaseous
biofuels or through electricity generated using renewable energy technologies
This indicator provides  comparable metric for all renewable energy technologies
identified in each sector Substitution costs are the key indicators for
assessing the economic viability of REmap Options They depend on the type of
conventional technology substituted, energy prices and the characteristics of
the REmap Option The cost can be positive (additional) or negative (savings)
because many renewable energy technologies are or could by 2030 be more cost-
effective than conventional technologies Metrics for assessing REmap Options To
assess the costs of REmap Options, substitution costs are calculated This report
also discusses the costs and savings of renewable energy (RE) deployment and
related externalities due to climate change and air pollution Experts devised
four main indicators These are substitution costs, system costs, total
investment needs and needs for renewable energy investment support System costs
On the basis of the substitution cost, inferences can be made as to the effect
on system costs This indicator is the sum of the differences between the total
capital and operating expenditures of all energy technologies based on their
deployment in REmap and the Reference Case in Substitution cost Each renewable
and non-renewable technology has its own individual cost relative to the non-
renewable energy it replaces This is explained in detail in the REmap
methodology (IRENA, 2014a) and is depicted in the following equation:11 REmap
Options All technologies GJ/year in 2030 Substitution cost: government
perspective All technologies USD/GJ in 2030 System costs USD/year in 2030 =
Cost of Technology/ REmap Options USD/year in 2030 Equivalent annual capital
expenditure USD/year in 2030 Operating expenditure USD/year in 2030 Fuel cost
USD/year in 2030 = + + Investment needs Investment needs for renewable energy
capacity can also be assessed The total investment needs of technologies in
REmap are higher than in the Reference Case due to the increased share of
renewables On average, these have greater investment needs than For each REmap
Option, the analysis considers the cost of substituting  non-renewable energy
technology to deliver an identical amount of heat, electricity or energy 12
Substitution cost is the difference between the annualised cost of the REmap
Option and the annualised cost of the substituted non-renewable technology used
to produce the same amount of energy This is divided by the total renewable
energy use substituted by the Remap Option 13  gigajoule (GJ) = 0238 tonnes of
oil equivalent (toe) = 238 gigacalories = 278 kilowatt-hours (kWh);  USD was on
average equivalent to 37 Dominican pesos in 11 USD = United States (US) dollar
Government and business perspectives the non-renewable energy technology
equivalent The capital investment cost in USD per kilowatt (kW) of installed
capacity in each year is multiplied with the deployment in that year to arrive
at total annual investment costs The capital investment costs of each year are
then added up for the period 2016-Net incremental investment needs are the sum
of the differences between the total investment costs for all renewable and non-
renewable energy technologies in power generation and stationary applications in
REmap and the Reference Case in the period  for each year This total was then
turned into an annual average for the period Based on the substitution cost and
the potential of each REmap Option, country cost-supply curves are developed for
2030 from two perspectives: government and business ● Government perspective:
cost estimates exclude energy taxes and subsidies In the latest global REmap
study (IRENA, 2016a),  standard 10% (for non-OECD member countries) or % (for
OECD member countries) discount rate was used This approach allows  comparison
across countries and  country cost-benefit analysis; it shows the cost of the
transition as governments would calculate it Renewable capacity installed
Average capital expenditure  Average investment needs Total GW 2016–2030 USD/GW
2016–2030 = ● Business perspective: this considers national prices (including,
for example, energy taxes, subsidies and the cost of capital) in order to
generate  localised cost curve This approach shows the cost of the transition as
businesses or investors would calculate it  discount rate of 12% is assumed in
the case of the Dominican Republic USD/year 2016–2030 15 Number of years
2016–2030 Renewable investment support Renewable investment support needs can
also be approximated on the basis of the REmap tool Total requirements for
renewable investment support in all sectors are estimated as the difference in
the delivered energy service cost ( in USD/kWh or USD/GJ from  government
perspective) for the renewable option against the dominant incumbent in This
difference is multiplied by the deployment for that option in that year to
arrive at an investment support total for that technology The differences for
all REmap Options are added together to provide an annual investment support
requirement for renewables The renewable option is not subtracted from the total
if it has  lower delivered energy service cost than the incumbent option By
2030, this is an increasing trend ● By estimating the costs from two
perspectives, the analysis shows the effects of accounting for energy taxes and
subsidies while all other parameters are kept the same The assessment of all
additional costs related to complementary infrastructure are excluded from this
report ( grid reinforcements, fuel stations) IRENA analysis suggests that these
would be of secondary importance to countries only just embarking on their
energy system transformation Externality analysis Several externality reductions
obtained through REmap Options are considered They include health effects from
outdoor or indoor exposure to pollution in the case of traditional bioenergy, as
well as effects on agricultural yields In addition, the external costs
associated with the social and economic impacts of carbon dioxide (CO2) are
estimated (IRENA, 2016b) Substitution cost: government perspective REmap Options
Investment support for RE  = Technologies with positive substitution cost
Technologies with positive substitution cost USD/year in 2030 GJ/year in 2030
USD/GJ in 2030 Further documentation and  detailed description of the REmap
methodology can be found at  Further details on metrics for   assessing REmap
Options can be consulted in the appendix of the 2016 global report (IRENA,
2016c) balances provided by the Dominican Republic government up to the year 14
For the REmap analysis, all end-use demand is broken down into the following
three sectors: industry15, transport and buildings Units Energy supply and
demand numbers in this report are generally provided in petajoules (PJ),
gigajoules (GJ) and terawatt-hour (TWh) In the Dominican Republic, commonly used
units are tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) The relevant conversion factors are
listed below: ● Reference Case: this is based on the data provided by CNE in its
preliminary results of energy demand projections for  prepared in collaboration
with Fundación Bariloche(CNE, 2014a) For the power sector, other data
complemented these projections, mainly based on estimates provided by CNE ● ● ●
● ● ● ●  GJ = 0238 tonnes of oil equivalent (toe)  GJ = 78 kilowatt-hour (kWh)
PJ = 88 kilotonne of oil equivalent (ktoe)  PJ = 78 gigawatt-hour (GWh)  PJ =
000 000 GJ  ktoe =  000 toe  TWh =  000 GWh =  000 000 MWh =  000 000 000 kWh ●
REmap: this is based on IRENA’ analysis (details of sources and assumptions can
be found in Chapter  and in the annexes) combined with the data provided in CNE’
alternative scenario (escenario alternativo) This covers  higher penetration of
certain renewable technologies  Main sources of information and assumptions in
REmap Dominican Republic This report is structured as follows: Chapter
introduces the overall energy and power sector context in the Dominican Republic
and presents the main renewable energy developments so far Chapter  describes
the renewable energy developments in the Reference Case and in REmap Chapter
discusses how the renewable energy potential identified in the REmap case could
be fulfilled Chapter  describes in detail the costs and benefits of realising
this REmap potential Finally, Chapter  includes key recommendations for larger
renewable energy uptake The main sources and assumptions from background data
and literature used to prepare REmap Dominican Republic are summarised below for
each case: ● Base year 2010: the starting point of the analysis is Dominican
Republic’ energy balances for The data are based on the national energy 14
Original data expressed in higher heating values (gross calorific value) were
converted to lower heating values (net calorific value) to be consistent with
the REmap methodology 15 The boundaries of REmap analysis typically include
agriculture, fishery and all primary sector activities in  separate category
However, the Dominican Republic aggregates energy demand for agriculture with
mining and construction sectors so all these have been included in the energy
consumption of industry    CURRENT PICTURE – ENERGY AND RENEWABLES DEVELOPMENT
IN THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  Renewable energy drivers the economy at the same time
Renewable energy technologies offer  cost-effective path for the future Wind and
solar resources are abundant in the Dominican Republic According to several
estimates, wind power potential is around 30 GW while solar potential is similar
to the southwestern US The average global horizontal irradiance (GHI) amounts to
- kWh per square metre per day (kWh/m2/day), and in some regions this can rise
to  kWh/m2/day (Worldwatch Institute, 2015) Renewable energy technologies can
also play an important role in providing electricity to the low share of
households which lack access so far This is less than % of the total (Cruz
Castillo, 2014) The Dominican Republic is one of the largest and most diverse
economies in the Caribbean region Its Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) sets an ambitious national target to reduce its GHG
emissions by 25% by 2030 compared to the 2010 per capita level of  tonnes of CO2
equivalent (CO2e) (UNFCCC, 2015) Reaching this target depends on whether the
Dominican Republic can wean itself off unsustainable energy sources It currently
relies on expensive fossil fuel imports while demand for energy is growing
rapidly There is no doubt that improvements in infrastructure will be required
in the years ahead to meet the country’ growing energy demand The Dominican
Republic government has demonstrated its commitment towards renewable energy
technologies, particularly for the power sector Article 21 of Law , enacted in
2007, set  non-binding target of 10% and 25% of electricity consumed in 2015 and
2025 respectively to be supplied from renewable energy sources This would imply
that 25% of the electricity purchased by the distribution and retail companies
should be sourced from renewable energy Since not enough renewable power
generation was available to meet the ambitious 2015 goal, the country is
committed to increase its efforts to set itself on the path to meet the 2025
target This REmap study prepared in close collaboration with CNE is one of the
tasks aimed at achieving this goal Fossil fuel imports now amount to around USD
billion per annum, which accounts for approximately % of country’ GDP Fossil
fuel imports account for 90% of the country’ primary source of energy (Central
Bank of the Dominican Republic, 2016; Killeen, 2015) Electricity generation is
very much dependent on fossil fuel imports so operating costs are high Oil
products, natural gas and coal account for about 50%, 27% and 15% of electricity
generation respectively (CNE, 2016a) The high cost of electricity production is
not reflected in the electricity tariffs because government-led pre-tax
subsidies, amounting to USD  billion per annum, help keep tariffs relatively low
These subsidies account for about % of the Dominican Republic’ GDP16 About % is
applied to the fuels while the remaining % is directly applied to the
electricity tariffs (Di Bella et al, 2015)  Renewable energy policies
Diversifying the electricity generation portfolio could be key to reducing the
country’ dependence on fuel imports and improving its energy supply security in
light of its growing energy demand It would be decarbonising The main
legislative instrument promoting renewable energy in the Dominican Republic is
Law  on Renewable Energy Incentives and Special Regimes, enacted in This
includes some provisions for renewable energy technologies across all energy
sectors, particularly the power sector 16 Fuel tax exemption for the fuel used
for power generation is not included in the public budget    Recent trends in
total final energy consumption  number of measures are included in Law 57-It
provides  broad range of tax incentives, including  100% exemption for renewable
energy technologies from import taxes and taxes on the Transfer of
Industrialised Goods and Services17 It also gives  tax reduction on external
financing and  40% tax credit to autoproducers, which are defined as systems
smaller than  MW18 In addition, it enables low interest loans for community
projects, which cover up to 75% of the cost of equipment for small-scale
installations (less than 500 kW) Finally, the law establishes  reference tariff
for the remuneration of grid-connected renewable energy installations and sets
the basis to have  remuneration scheme for the excess energy of autoproducers
The law is supplemented by the Regulation for the Implementation of the
Renewable Energy Incentives and Special Regimes Law, enacted on More details on
the law are provided in the description of the institutional and regulatory
framework in section  The average total final energy demand of the Dominican
Republic has grown by % per year between 2000 and 2014, reaching 227 PJ ( 433
ktoe) The growth was notable in the industry, commercial and services sector,
whose annual growth rate rose to almost % per year over the period By
comparison, transport sector demand has remained about the same with  slight
decline Residential sector demand increased by approximately % per year (CNE,
2014b) Transport is the largest consumer of final energy, representing 40% of
the country’ total energy demand in This is followed by buildings, which
accounted for  third of total final energy use in that year Finally, industry
demand accounted for  quarter of the total Agriculture and fisheries also use
energy, especially for pumps and transport but this is less than % of the
country’ total energy demand (CNE, 2014b) In addition to the renewable energy
law,  net-metering programme was devised in 2011 for residential wind or solar
PV installations (the latter applicable to installations smaller than 25 kW and
commercial facilities under  MW) This makes them eligible to receive credits for
excess power exported to the grid Under this programme,  002 customers had
connected MW of solar PV to the grid by December 2015 (CNE, 2016b) In 2014,
about 62% of the country’ total final energy demand was supplied by fossil
fuels, mostly in the form of oil products, while electricity accounted for 24%
of final energy use Direct uses of renewables reached around 14% (mostly from
wood fuel for cooking and water heating in the residential sector, and bagasse
for process heat in the industry sector) (CNE, 2014b) The use of renewable
energy technologies for electricity generation has also expanded through energy
access efforts In 2009, the government launched  rural electrification programme
with renewable energy sources that was operational during four years Small
hydropower and PV installations were deployed for off-grid electrification
(SE4All, ) Some of these were run by CNE, which is subject to  government goal
to install 500 PV systems in households not connected to the grid The grid has
also been extended in certain places throughout the Dominican Republic The
national level of electrification is now around 96%, and around 120 000 (CNE,
2014a) households lack electricity access Nearly all of these are in rural
areas, and only  minimal number are in suburban zones In terms of total primary
energy supply, the country reached  219 ktoe (344 PJ) in Since most energy needs
are covered by fossil fuels, and the country lacks local fossil resources, more
than 90% of the country’ total primary energy supply is based on imports Peak
electricity demand reached 63 GW in 2015, and about  quarter of the total final
energy demand is related to electricity This rate is higher than the average in
the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean However, consumption across the
various regions of the country varies significantly For example, per capita
consumption in Punta Cana – one of the touristic regions – differs from the rest
of the country by almost  factor of ten The difference is higher when compared
with the demand of the population in isolated areas 17 Impuesto sobre
Transferencia de Bienes Industrializados  Servicios (ITBIS) Industry has an
exceptionally high ratio of electricity use to total energy consumption,
amounting to 38% in By contrast, the share is less than % in transport 18 This
rate applicable today had been previously modified by Law  (law to reinforce the
tax collection capacity of the State for Fiscal sustainability and sustainable
development)   Figure : Breakdown of TFEC by sector, 2014 Commercial 15 PJ Other
PJ Total Transport 93 PJ Industry 55 PJ 227 PJ/yr Residential 59 PJ Based on CNE
(2014b) Note: the commercial sector includes services and the public sector;
other includes agriculture, fishing and mining Figure : Breakdown of Dominican
Republic’ final energy mix, 2014 TFEC in 2014 - 227 PJ Solar PV % Bioenergy % %
Solar thermal Wind onshore % % Hydropower % Natural gas 14% Bioenergy* Coal 12%
60% Oil products Natural gas 24% 76% Direct uses of energy for heat, cooking and
transport 24% Electricity Oil products 52% *including % traditional biomass use
– the lowest consumer of all sectors (CNE, 2014b) Within the buildings sector
these proportions differ greatly In the residential sector, the share amounts to
around 30% whereas the commercial and services sector has  share of more than
80% The potential for increasing electrification rates in some of these sectors
is an important factor when considering the further deployment of renewable
electricity   Figure : Share of modern renewable energy use by sector, 2010 and
2014 25% 2010 2014                           20% 15% 10% % % TFEC Power
generation Transport Buildings Industry End-use sectors Note: the share of
renewable energy in end-use sectors includes electricity from renewable sources
total electricity generation in 2014, mostly based on hydropower The share of
modern renewable energy in the Dominican Republic’ TFEC amounted to % in 2014,
as shown in Figure  (if traditional uses of bioenergy are included, this
increases to %) (CNE, 2014b) The largest contributors are biomass in the
residential and industry sectors while solar thermal energy in buildings and
liquid biofuels in transport make  very small contribution Most renewable energy
consumed is used for heating in industry and buildings  low share of renewable
energy use corresponds to energy consumed through renewable electricity coming
mostly from hydropower The buildings sector meets % of its direct fuel demand
from modern renewable energy; if traditional uses of bioenergy are included,
this share rises to 48% This is mostly bioenergy with  minor contribution from
solar thermal Around % of total sector energy demand (including electricity) is
met with modern renewables Transport has the lowest share at just %, coming
entirely from biodiesel in The industry sector has the greatest renewable energy
share of all sectors at 21% (including electricity sourced from renewables) If
electricity consumption is excluded, 27% of renewable energy consumption arises
from the direct use of fuels in the industry sector, all based on bioenergy
Power sector In 2014, electricity accounted for nearly  quarter of the Dominican
Republic’ TFEC About 10% of the electricity was generated with renewable energy
technologies (including hydropower plants over  MW) The share of renewable
energy in the power sector is likely to increase, and every day its deployment
is attracting more attention from the national policy makers The power sector
has the second highest share of renewable energy in the Dominican Republic
Renewable energy technologies accounted for 12% of   Figure : Breakdown of
renewable energy use by sector and application, 2014 25 RE electricity RE direct
uses )   /   (      20 15     10        Residential Industry Commercial Other
Transport Based on CNE (2014b) data The following sections briefly describe the
institutional and regulatory framework as well as roles and activities of the
main stakeholders within the power sector in the Dominican Republic These
sections are descriptive and aim to facilitate the understanding of the local
context driven by political interests, non-delivered electricity and operational
inefficiency (CNE, 2008) As part of this process, the MEM was created in The aim
was to formulate and manage policies for the entire exploitation of the national
energy and mining resources under the principles of transparency and
sustainability The reform process unbundled activities within the power supply
chain, enabling private sector participation and producing the following set-up:
Institutional and regulatory framework The structure of the power sector in the
Dominican Republic is the result of  reform process that started in the late
1990s Until then, the state- owned Dominican Electric Company (Corporación
Dominicana de Electricidad) (CDE) was in charge of electricity generation,
transmission, distribution and retail Only  few private companies participated
in the generation business through Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) ● Generation
activity is structured within  competitive wholesale market (mercado eléctrico
mayorista) with participation from privately owned and public-private
partnership generation companies ● The transmission grid, hydropower generation
and most of the distribution system assets remain under the ownership of the
Dominican Republic government  general reform in state-owned companies was
implemented through the enactment of Law  on the Reform of Public Enterprises
adopted in June 1997, which sets the basis for allowing private companies to
participate in power sector activities Later, the general electricity Law
adopted in July 2001 and its application rules defined the regulatory framework
for the activities in the power sector The reform aimed to address issues
related to high electricity costs, tariffs ● Three distribution concessions have
been granted three different state-owned companies, which deliver the
electricity to the consumers connected at distribution level The same companies
are in charge of the electricity retail activities for their regulated customers
to   ● Through CNE, the government is in charge of preparing indicative long-
term planning of the generation, transmission and distribution systems The
indicative planning aims to provide appropriate signals to stakeholders in order
to promote adequate investments in and development of the sector Autoproducers
also have the right to be paid for their excess generation at  regulated price
Five types of power plants are currently subject to this special regime They
include: ) wind power installations with an initial installed capacity of less
than 50 MW; ) hydropower installations of less than  MW; ) all types and sizes
of solar PV as well as ) concentrated solar power (CSP) systems lower than 120
MW; and ) power plants using bioenergy as main fuel for at least 60% of their
fuel supply and with  maximum installed capacity of 80 MW The installation size
limits applicable for some technologies can be duplicated provided that the
projects have been developed at least at 50% of the initial planned capacity The
details of plant size limits and possible project expansion are described in
Article  of the renewable energy Law 57-● Operation of the interconnected power
system – the operation of the National Interconnected Electrical System (Sistema
Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado), SENI – is planned and co- ordinated by the
independent co-ordination entity OC-SENI the It also administers transactions in
the wholesale power market ● Real-time operation of the national interconnected
system, SENI, is carried out by the Energy Control Centre (Centro de Control de
Energía) (CCE),  division of the Dominican Electric Transmission Company
(Empresa de Transmisión Eléctrica Dominicana) ETED, in co- ordination with OC-
SENI In addition to this incentive, favourable conditions encourage system entry
and market participation, namely priority of interconnection and dispatch, and
fiscal incentives These are described in section  as part of renewable energy
policies ● Energy transactions in the wholesale electricity market are made
through over-the-counter long-term contracts between producers and large
consumers ( distribution companies and non-regulated consumers) or through the
spot market Besides the legislation and main regulatory conditions,  set of
technical rules developed by CNE, the Electricity Superintendency
(Superintendencia de Electricidad) (SIE) and OC-SENI are enforced to allow the
secure and efficient operation of the interconnected system These technical
rules include the connection code for generators, distribution systems and non-
regulated consumers and the rules for the connection of distributed generation19
Law  and its application rules defined the regulatory framework to promote
investment and generation of energy with renewable sources, including provisions
for power sector technologies The law set  target for  renewable power share of
10% and 25% of total electricity produced in the Dominican Republic by 2015 and
2025 respectively However, this target is not binding but does demonstrate the
government’ commitment to renewable energy technologies Figure  summarises the
timeline for the main institutional and legislation changes in the power sector
of the Dominican Republic up to 20 Main actors and activities in the power
sector The main stakeholders within the institutional framework of the power
sector in the Dominican Republic include (CNE, ): As stated above, Law  also
defined  special regime for renewable energy production, aiming to foster its
deployment across the country The grid-connected renewable energy installations
in this regime (plantas de régimen especial) have the right to  ten-year feed-in
tariff until 2018, which adds  premium payment to the wholesale electricity
price The feed-in tariff incentive levels (defined in US dollars but paid in
Dominican pesos) are differentiated by technology and system size 19 Or
Reglamento para la Interconexión de la Generación Distribuida in Spanish 20
After this year no other major legislation or reform has been implemented, apart
from some adjustments to the existing regulation   Figure : Main institutional
and legislation developments in the Dominican Republic power sector Law  General
law of electricity Law  General law of the Public Company reform Law  Incentive
to the renewable energy development 100% State Vertical Integration Law  modiﬁes
Law  Incentive to the national energy development SEIC Resolutions 235, 236 and
237 Net metering program 1997 1998 2007 2001 2011 1990 • Generation •
Transmission • Distribution • Retail • Generation • Distribution • Retail
Public-private partnership CDE • Generation • Transmission • Distribution CDE
Privates • Generation IPP • Generation • Hydroelectricity • Transmission CDEEE
Based on CNE (2015) Note: each of the agents in the figure above are described
below ● Ministry of Energy and Mines – MEM: this was created by Law  adopted in
July MEM is in charge of the energy and mines sector and responsible for
developing the related energy policies ● SENI Co-ordination Unit (Organismo
Coordinador del Sistema Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado) – OC-SENI: formally
established through Law  in 2001, OC-SENI plans and co-ordinates the operation
of the interconnected system as well as co-ordinating and supervising commercial
transactions between agents in the wholesale power market ● National Energy
Commission – CNE: this was created by Law  in Amongst its other functions, the
commission contributes to national energy policy development For this purpose,
CNE develops and updates  national energy plan It is CNE’ responsibility to
promote investments according to the strategies defined by the plan In the power
sector, CNE is in charge of the development and update of long-term indicative
(non-binding) expansion plans for the generation, transmission and distribution
systems It also administers Law  to promote the investment of renewable energy
technologies ● Dominican Corporation of Public Electrical Companies (Corporación
Dominicana de Empresas Eléctricas Estatales) – CDEEE: this is the umbrella
company responsible for co-ordinating the strategies, objectives and actions of
all the electricity companies owned or controlled by the government
Additionally, CDEEE is responsible for the government’ rural electrification
programmes and the administration of existing PPAs with independent power
producers ● ● Electricity Superintendency (Superintendencia de Electricidad) –
SIE: Created through Law  in 2001, it is the regulatory body in charge of the
economic and technical norms related to the generation, transmission,
distribution and retail of electricity Dominican Electric Transmission Company
(Empresa Eléctrica Dominicana) – ETED: ETED is the state-owned company
responsible for operating, maintaining and administering the high-voltage
transmission network ( kilovolts – kV) de Transmisión   Figure : Institutional
structure in the Dominican power market Ministry of Energy and Mines (Policies)
CNE (Planning) SIE (Regulation and control) Wholesale power market • Long-term
contracts • Spot market • Payment for ﬁrm capacity Generation Transmission
Distribution Consumers Non regulated consumers Thermal generation Special regime
generation Transmission company ETED EDENorte Regulated consumers EDEEste IPP
EDESur EGEHID CDEEE Administrator of state-owned companies OC-SENI Operation and
dispatch coordinator Autoproducers Off-grid Systems : Electricity ﬂow :
Coordination Based on OLADE (2013) ● (Empresa de Generación Hidroeléctrica
Dominicana) (EGEHID) Two independent power producers, Compañía de Electricidad
de San Pedro de Macorís and Generadora San Felipe, deliver power under PPAs
administered by CDEEE The remaining 13 companies own the thermal power plants
and participate with the Dominican Hydroelectric Generation Corporation, EGEHID,
in the wholesale market through energy and power transactions Distribution
companies – EDENORTE, EDESUR and EDEESTE: the distribution of electricity within
SENI is carried out by three state-owned companies which administer three
different concessions across the national territory, as shown in Figure The
distribution companies also control the retail of electricity for regulated
customers ● Generation companies: as of December 2014, 16 power generation
companies were associated with OC-SENI All the major hydropower generation
assets belong to the state-owned Dominican Hydroelectric Generation Corporation
● Consumers: these are classified as regulated or non-regulated Regulated
consumers are represented in the wholesale market by the   Figure : Electricity
demand by sector and total generation,  18 16 )   /    (            14 12 10
Industry Residential Agriculture/forestry Transport Commercial and public
services Total electricity generation Based on IEA (2015) distribution companies
Electricity retail for regulated consumers is carried out by the distribution
companies according to the tariff regime and rules established by the regulator,
SIE Consumers with demand of more than  MW can cover their electricity needs
through direct transactions with generators in the wholesale market total is
used in the industry sector The remaining 60% is consumed in buildings and is
split into 35% for residential and 25% for commercial buildings Demand for
electricity has grown by % per year on average in the past decade The power
demand profile changes according to days of the week and climate conditions
Typically, peak demand for power occurs in the evenings during the warmer months
of the year In 2015, the peak demand of the interconnected system reached 63 GW
(OC- SENI, 2015a)21 Figure  shows significant values for the demand profiles in
The orange curve shows the percentile 99 of the demand profile for 2015, the
blue one shows the percentile  and the grey curve shows the average22 Figure
summarises the roles and the interactions between these agents of the power
sector of the Dominican Republic and the following sections describe the
activities carried out by them Before describing the activities,  brief
discussion is presented on electricity demand to provide the context ●
Electricity and power demand 21 This figure includes projections of power demand
not delivered Demand for electricity reached 15 TWh in 2014, with annual
generation approaching 18 TWh in the same year (including autoproduction)
Roughly 40% of this due to programmed customer disconnections 22 Considering the
hourly electricity demand as the generation plus power outage reported for SENI
Figure : SENI hourly demand profiles for 201522  000  500 )   (             000
500  000 500            10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 Hour of the
day Percentile % Percentile 99% Average Based on OC-SENI (2015b) Generation to
the state-owned hydropower company EGEHID Public-private partnerships such as
Haina and Itabo own also significant shares of the installed capacity (CNE,
2015) The total installed generation capacity in the country, including
autoproducers and off-grid installations, was  GW in 2014 (CNE, 2016c, 2014b;
CNE and Fundación Bariloche, 2014; IRENA, 2016d) SENI contributed about  GW to
this total The evolution of generation capacity for SENI is presented in Figure
The annual average growth of installed capacity within SENI in the last five
years has been around % (OC-SENI, 2014a) Of the 18 TWh of electricity generated
in 2014, TWh (about 79% of the total) was produced within SENI (OC- SENI, 2014a)
Oil products make up the largest share of fuel in electricity production within
SENI, amounting to %23 Natural gas and coal accounted for % and % of the total
respectively Renewable resources had  share of % and % for hydropower and wind
power respectively (OC-SENI, 2014a) Figure 10 shows the breakdown of electricity
generation in SENI by fuel type for 2010-The variability in hydropower
production is explained by the effects of the El Niño- Southern Oscillation
phenomenon which periodically affects the rainfall in the country As shown in
the figure, the growth in installed capacity in SENI in the last few years has
been dominated by internal combustion engine technologies Most of these power
plants can be operated with both oil products and natural gas Due to lower fuel
prices, internal combustion engine generators were up until 2015 operated with
oil products, mainly fuel oil and diesel In response to the fast growing demand,
several new generation projects have been planned and received  development
concession from the government Currently, 65% of the generation capacity within
SENI is owned and operated by private companies The largest market participant
in terms of installed capacity is the privately owned AES Dominicana, with
share of 21% (815 MW) All the major hydropower generation assets, with  share of
16% of the total installed capacity, belong 23  number of dual fuel power plants
exist in the country These can either use liquefied natural gas or oil The
generation from these power plants was aggregated according to the fuel
consumption breakdown of each plant provided by SENI (OC-SENI, )   Figure :
Total installed generation capacity in SENI by technology in Dominican Republic,
000 )   (  500  000                   500  000  500  000 500
Steam turbines Gas turbines Combined cycle Internal combustion engines
Hydropower Wind Based on OC-SENI (2012, 2014a) Figure 10: Breakdown of annual
electricity generation in SENI by fuel type in Dominican Republic,  16 000 )   /
(                 14 000 12 000 10 000  000  000  000  000  2010 2011 2012 2013
2014 Oil Natural Gas Coal Hydropower Wind Based on OC-SENI (2010, 2011, 2012,
2013, 2014a) data Given that construction has not yet started on all the
projects with final concessions, it cannot be said that all this planned
capacity will be realised However, this still reflects the interest in expanding
the generation capacity The combined capacity of the projects with  final
concession totals  385 MW (CNE, 2016c, 2015,    16) About  quarter of this
capacity is expected to be developed by state-owned companies, and 64%
corresponds to renewable energy technologies, with wind, large hydropower and
solar PV having the largest share Table  provides an overview of the projects
with final concession The transmission system mainly has  radial configuration
in the most remote zones in the North, South and East of the country These zones
are connected with each other at 138 kV and 69 kV The two main electricity
consumption centres, Santo Domingo and Santiago, are supplied through 138 kV
rings and are interconnected through 345 kV and 138 kV circuits Transmission For
planning operations, the system is divided into four areas: Central, East, South
and North  diagram of the transmission system and its operational areas and sub-
areas is provided in Figure The Central area, which includes the capital city
Santo Domingo, has the greatest power demand Its peak load represents around 47%
of the national peak load This is followed by ETED is responsible for operating
and maintaining the high-voltage transmission grid in the SENI Up to 2014, more
than 85% of total electricity demand in the Dominican Republic was met through
SENI based on the ETED transmission network Table  provides details about the
existing infrastructure Table : Generation expansion plans, projects with final
concessions by technology and owner Owner Technology Total capacity Total non-
renewable capacity CDEEE 866 MW 752 MW –  project Coal AES Dominicana Combined
cycle 114 MW – expansion (2017) Total renewable capacity  489 MW Bioenergy
capacity Koar Energy Dominicana  MW  MW –  project (Monseñor Nouel) Bioenergy
Hydropower capacity EGEHID 599 MW 590 MW –  projects Hydropower Evyp Caribe
Small hydropower  MW –  project (La Vega) Shanti Investment Small hydropower  MW
–  project (Monseñor Nouel) Solar PV capacity Isofotón 175 MW 50 MW –  project
(Santo Domingo Norte) Solar PV Montecristi Solar Solar PV 58 MW –  project
(Monte Cristi) Phinie Corp & Co Development Solar PV 17 MW –  project (Azua) WCG
Energy Solar PV 50 MW –  project (Santo Domingo Norte) Wind capacity Compañía de
Electricidad de Perto Plata 715 MW 50 MW –  project (Puerto Plata) Wind
Dominican Renovables Wind 50 MW –  project (Puerto Plata) EGE Haina Wind 50 MW –
project (2017, Pedernales) Generación Eólica Internacional Wind 100 MW –
projects (one in Peravia) Grupo Eólico Dominicanar Wind 50 MW –  project (Monte
Cristi) Jasper Caribbean Windpower Wind 115 MW –  project (Puerto Plata) Los
Cuatro Vientos Wind 50 MW –  project (Puerto Plata) Parque Eólico del Caribe
Wind 50 MW –  project (Monte Cristi) Poseidón Energías Renovables Wind 200 MW –
projects Note: In the column of total capacity, year expected for start of
operation and location details have been provided when available, further
details by project can be found in the CNE website   Table : Transmission system
capacity and lines Transmission lines (km)  699  668 275 260  903 Transformers
installed capacity (MVA) -  996 250  100  346 Voltage level (kV) 69 138 230 345
TOTAL Source: CNE (2015) MVA – megavolt amperes the North area, which includes
the city of Santiago, with  32% share in the peak load The energy losses at the
transmission level are currently around % of the total generation feed-in In co-
ordination with ETED Energy Control Centre, each year OC-SENI analyses and
determines the restrictions in the transmission system for the medium term (one
year) and long term (four years) These assessments identify Figure 11: Overview
of current transmission system North Area Puerto Plata Noroeste Nordeste
Santiago Central Area Nordeste Cercano La Vega East Area Installed Capacity 996
MW Palamara VM JS Santo Domingo Oriental Boca Chica Punta Caucedo South Area
Este SPM Itabo- Haina Sur Medio Sur Cercano Metro Installed Capacity 772 MW
Installed Capacity 1013 MW Installed Capacity 560 MW Este Profundo Sur Profundo
Transmission system 69 kV Transmission system 138 kV Transmission system 345 kV
Source: OC-SENI (2015c) Note: the diagram does not show  geographical
representation of the grid, to see that in detail see CNE maps in annexes
Figure 12: Peak power demand by transmission area  000  500  000 )   (  500
000  500  000 500  2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 East South North Central Based on
ETED (2013) data power demand growth forecasts in each area, ETED worked out
master plan for expanding the transmission system for  (ETED, 2013) That plan is
currently under implementation The main expansion projects are in the North area
and summarised in the table below The order of implementation is defined
according to system needs and priorities identified by OC-SENI and ETED
Interconnections with the neighbouring country of Haiti are not planned for the
moment the security limits for transferring power between the systems’ areas and
sub-areas The mid-term analysis is based on the present system topology The
long-term analysis includes transmission projects expected for the time horizon
of the study according to existing Transmission Expansion Plans The limits for
maximum power transfer between operational areas according to the latest study
are summarised in Table  In 2014, there were 51 hours of congestion in the
transmission system mainly related to scheduled maintenance works After taking
into consideration existing restrictions, planned generation projects and The
transmission infrastructure and ETED operation are financed through  regulated
transmission fee ETED is obliged by law to allow third-party access (generators,
major consumers and distributors) to its high-voltage network According to the
current regulation, the generator initially bears the costs of connecting new
generation and the corresponding reinforcements required in the existing grid
ETED compensates for these generator costs throughout the lifetime of the
project Table : Transmission capacity of the system (towards the Central zone)
Transmission between areas South  Central East  Central North  Central Maximum
transmission at peak load (MW) Distribution As of 2014, around 78% of all
electricity demand in the country was distributed by the three state-owned Based
on OC-SENI (2015c) data   Table : Transmission expansion plan Km of transmission
line Capacity of transformers (MVA) 345 kV 138 kV 69 kV Components 221 911 134
035 TOTAL Percentage of the total No of substations  19% % % Central 49% 46% 83%
35 North 32% 26% % 12 South % 23% %  East Based on ETED (2013) data companies,
EDESUR, EDENORTE and EDEESTE, which are connected to SENI In addition to the
three main concessions are seven main non-interconnected zones Figure 13 shows
the jurisdictions of each distribution concession and table  summarises key data
for the three distribution companies connected to SENI Figure 13: Map of the
three state-owned distribution companies EDESUR, EDENORTE, and EDEESTE and the
larger off-grid systems Progreso delLimón Las Galeras EdeNorte Luz  Fuerza CEPM
EdeEste EdeSur CSTPC Cap Cana Costasur Bayahibe 40 km 20 mi Source: CNE (2015);
background map from -maps () CEPM – Punta Cana-Macao Electricity Consortium
(Consorcio Eléctrico Punta Cana-Macao); CSTPC – Punta Cana Touristic Services
Corporation (Corporación Servicios Turisticos Punta Cana)   Table :
Characteristics of the state-owned electricity distribution companies Company
Concession surface (km2) 16 274 17 943 11 700 Transforma- tion capacity (MVA)
336  300  300 Km of medium voltage lines (- kV) 11 170  629  930 Provinces/
municipalities Clients Circuits Substations EDENORTE EDESUR EDEESTE 805 107 610
055 625 097 14 / 67 11 / 63  / 26 192 194 164 79 50 43 Source: CDEEE (2015),
OLADE (2013) and Ingenieros  Economistas Consultores (INECON) (2016) EDENORTE
and EDEESTE have been distributing fairly equal amounts of electricity in recent
years In 2014, each supplied around  TWh of electricity The National District
and Santo Domingo province, which accounts for the most demand in the Dominican
Republic, is supplied by EDESUR (for the municipalities of Santo Domingo West)
and EDEESTE (for the municipality of Santo Domingo North and East) EDENORTE,
EDEESTE and EDESUR are also in charge of the electricity retail for regulated
costumers in their jurisdictions Figure 14 shows the evolution of annual
electricity distributed by the three main distribution companies for
2009-Delivered electricity in each jurisdiction in Figure 14 does not correspond
exactly to electricity demand because some of it has not been supplied due to
programmed disconnections The high electricity losses at the distribution level
explain one of the challenges faced by the Dominican Republic power sector As
reforms were introduced, the three main distribution companies were acquired by
foreign electricity firms In , the government repurchased the shares of the
three companies due to financial difficulties associated with tariff collection
and high levels of non-technical losses According to CDEEE estimates, the total
annual losses in the distribution system are around % of the Figure 14:
Electricity distributed by each state-owned distribution company EDENORTE EDESUR
EDEESTE  000 )   /    (                   000  000  000  000  2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 Based on CDEEE and EDEs (2015) data   Independent system operation
electricity purchased by the EDEs This value includes electricity purchased by
the distribution companies but not billed, as well as billed electricity with an
uncollected tariff Total losses in the Dominican Republic are well above
regional levels, as in other countries these are around 15% (CDEEE and EDEs,
2015) OC-SENI is in charge of planning and co-ordinating the operation of the
interconnected system in the Dominican Republic The operation aims to deliver
electricity at  minimal economic cost, fulfilling the reliability and quality
criteria set in the regulation The process involves five stages with different
time horizons: The majority of losses at distribution level are non- technical
This has affected the capacity of the distribution companies to recover their
operational costs through tariffs This situation poses  risk to the long-term
future of the country’ entire power supply chain and has resulted in  number of
supply interruptions ● Long-term operation planning (four years ahead, updated
every year) Outage scheduling for major maintenances (one year ahead, updated
every year) Mid-term operation planning (one year ahead, updated every month)
Short-term operation planning (generation scheduling, day and week ahead)
Redispatch of daily operation in co-ordination with the real-time operator
(intraday) ● ● Figure 15 shows  breakdown of total distributed electricity for
with  breakdown of tariffs collected and uncollected as well as the volume of
losses The share of collected electricity has been increasing The distribution
company losses have decreased slightly In addition, uncollected electricity has
shown  slight fall over the same period ● ● The long- and mid-term operational
plans assess the availability of generation resources to guarantee Figure 15:
Energy losses and energy billed in the electricity distribution system,  12 000
10 000 )   /    (        000  000  000  000  2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Losses
Collected Uncollected Based on CDEEE and EDEs (2015) data   enough power and
energy to cover demand at minimum operational costs in the corresponding time
horizons Additionally, OC-SENI makes annual updates of the assessment of the
transmission capacity in co- ordination with ETED They identify secure limits
for the transfer of power between the different operational areas of the
transmission system This includes generation outages or changes in the
availability of special regime or run-of-river renewable generators Currently %
of expected scheduled generation is allocated for primary and % for secondary
reserves Unless previously agreed, all the units in SENI are obliged to provide
primary reserve services Secondary reserve is provided only by selected units
The long- and mid-term plan results, as well as the updated information on
network restrictions, power plant availability and operational costs, are used
by OC- SENI for weekly and day-ahead generation scheduling Generation is
scheduled on  merit order basis with hourly resolution This means the bids of
available thermal plants with the lowest-declared variable operational costs are
used to cover forecast hourly demand24 The resulting hourly marginal cost, the
marginal short-term cost of energy, is used to value energy transactions in the
spot market Wholesale power market Electricity in the Dominican Republic
interconnected system is traded between generators and large consumers through
the wholesale power market Large consumers include the non-regulated users and
the distribution companies Electricity is traded through long-term bilateral
contracts or the spot market The amount, price and conditions of the long-term
contracts are bilaterally agreed between generators and consumers The spot
market settles differences between contracted, produced (according to merit
order) and consumed electricity According to present regulation, at least 20% of
total energy must be traded through the spot market Renewable energy resources
included in the special regime of Law , as well as run-of-river hydropower
plants, take priority in the merit order They are dispatched according to their
declared availability Hydropower plants with reservoir regulation are scheduled
by OC-SENI according to the available weekly energy declared by EGEHID According
to current regulation, OC-SENI aims to use the available energy from the
hydropower reservoirs during peak hours or when they can provide operational
reserves or security-constrained generation The operational costs of hydropower
reservoirs are assumed at zero Figure 16 shows  breakdown of the amount of the
electricity taken by distribution companies, non- regulated consumers connected
at transmission level and losses in the transmission network Figure 17 shows
monthly energy traded through long-term contracts and spot market in Due to
security constraints in the system, out-of-merit order generation can be
scheduled by OC-SENI In these cases, generation is compensated with the declared
variable operational costs as long as it is below the indexed price cap (costo
marginal tope) defined by the regulator SIE In December 2015, the indexed price
cap stood at USD 56 per megawatt-hour (MWh) (OC-SENI, 2016) Figure 18 shows the
monthly average price paid by the EDEs for an energy unit in 2014-According to
Martínez (2013), major factors influencing spot market behaviour include
availability of thermal units, fuel costs, long-term contract prices, demand
evolution, reservoir levels and water inflows Generators in the market are also
remunerated for the firm power generation capacity they provide to the system
This is done through power transactions (transacciones de potencia) in
proportion to firm power the generators can contribute to cover peak demand
every month As of 2014, the monthly payment for firm power was around USD /kW
(OC-SENI, 2015d) According to the definition in Law  and its application rules,
non-dispatchable renewable During real-time operation, the day-ahead programme
is rescheduled in case of grid contingencies or major deviations from forecast
generation or demand 24 Hydropower availability is declared weekly by EGEHID,
and power is dispatched by OC-SENI to minimise operational costs according to
available energy   Figure 16: Annual energy measured by SENI for selected years
() 14 000 )   /    (               12 000 10 000  000  000  000        000  2002
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Losses Distribution companies (EDEs) Non-regulated
clients Others Based on OC-SENI (2014a) data Figure 17: Breakdown of monthly
energy traded by OC-SENI, 2014  250 )      /    (              000 750 500 250
Long-term contracts Spot market Based on OC-SENI (2014b) data   Figure 18:
Monthly average price at which EDEs purchased electricity between 2014 and
mid-2015 24 )    /        (      21 18 15 12
2014 2015 Long-term contracts Spot market Average price Based on CDEEE (2015)
data energy generation is not considered as firm power and therefore does not
participate in the power transactions by private companies Total installed
generation capacity in the isolated areas is around 270 MW at the moment – close
to % of the country’ installed capacity The net electricity generated in these
seven areas is estimated at around  TWh, representing approximately % of total
national demand Table  provides basic information about the largest off-grid
systems in the whole country: Off-grid systems25 There are seven large off-grid
systems in the Dominican Republic (see Table ) These are mainly located in
touristic areas Most are owned and operated 25 Table : Off-grid system
characteristics Installed capacity (MW) 113 (18125) 23 19 Net generation (GWh)
362 (85425) 49 50 Region Company responsible Type of company CEPM Cap Cana CTSPC
Electricity Company of Bayahibe (CEB) EGE Haina (generation), EDESUR
(distribution Luz  Fuerza Costasur Private Private Private Punta Cana Bayahibe
Private 24 15 Pedernales State-owned  16 Las Galeras Costasur Private Private 19
NA 21 NA Source: CNE (2016d) 25 Total installed capacity and annual generation
taking into consideration the interconnection with Sultana del Este (EGE Haina)
in San Pedro de Macoris   The off-grid system in the touristic area of Punta
Cana, owned by the private company CEPM, is the largest in the country The total
installed capacity, mainly fossil fuels (heavy and light fuel oil), is around
181 MW, and annual electricity generation close to 855 GWh CEPM provides
electricity from its own generation resources and through  PPA with EGEHAIANA
which injects power from the Sultana del Este power plant through  dedicated
transmission line In the course of January to July 2016, 50 MW of wind power
(Larimar ) and 30 MW of solar PV (Monte Plata) have been commissioned In
addition, 30 MW of bagasse cogeneration is expected to be online by the end of
According to projects with  final concession (see Table ), about two-thirds of
generation expansion capacity is based on renewable energy resources The planned
projects include 588 MW of hydropower plants over 10 MW, 715 MW of onshore wind,
175 MW of solar PV and  MW of mini-hydropower (CNE, 2016c, forthcoming)  Current
renewable energy status by sector As previously discussed, renewable energy
resources have priority in the order of dispatch determining the power system
daily operation The use of these resources for power generation thus mainly
depends on their availability In 2015, electricity generated from renewable
resources in SENI was  217 GWh, representing % of the SENI total Despite the
increase in both total installed capacity and wind power production, the total
share of renewables has not grown constantly over the last four years (see
Figure 19) This has been attributed to the severe droughts of 2014 and 2015 (El
Dinero, 2015) Renewable energy in the power sector In 2014, total renewable
generation installed capacity amounted to 795 MW The installed renewable
capacity in SENI was 717 MW – about % of the total installed capacity in SENI
This included 613 MW of hydropower (66 MW of small-scale plants with capacity
below 10 MW), 85 MW of onshore wind, 27 MW of solar PV (including autoproducers)
and 70 MW of bioenergy (including residues and waste) (CNE, 2016c; IRENA, 2016d;
Worldwatch Institute, 2011) Figure 19: Renewable energy generation and share in
SENI,   500 100% )   /    (              000 80%       500 60%          000 40%
500 20%  %                                 RE generation RE share Based on OC-
SENI data (2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2015a)   Figure 20:
Hydropower installed capacity and annual generation,  700  000 )   /    (
600 )   (                   600 500  200 400 300 800 200 400 100
Installed capacity Energy generation Based on OC-SENI data (OC-SENI, 2008, 2009,
2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2015a) As shown in Figure 20, electricity
generation from hydropower plants has decreased considerably over the last two
years While electricity production has fallen, installed capacity has increased
from 2011 to  This is mainly due to 90 MW commissioned from the Tavera, Valdesia
and Palomino plants in benefited from this, and 665 kW micro-hydropower plants
were have been installed (Liu et al, 2013) Installed wind power capacity is
currently 135 MW (as of mid-2016) It consists of four power plants: Los Cocos
and II, Quilvio Cabrera and Larimar , the plant commissioned in 2016 (CNE,
2016c; IRENA, 2016d) All the existing wind power plants are in the southwest of
the country (CNE, forthcoming) Figure 22 details the evolution of installed wind
power capacity and annual wind power generation in the Dominican Republic In
2015, total wind power generation was 284 GWh, representing % of total
electricity production in SENI (OC-SENI, 2015a) The annual average capacity
factor has amounted to around 34% over the last three years of operation (OC-
SENI, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2015a) Figure 21 presents the statistics
for the monthly incoming flow of five of the country’ main dams (ACQ  Asociados,
) and the hydropower figures reported by OC-SENI (OC-SENI, 2008, 2009, 2010,
2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2015a) These were used to observe the seasonality of
the hydropower resource availability and operation The blue bars show the
incoming flow times in relation to the annual average with  99% confidence level
while the red line shows the average monthly capacity factor in 2008-Figure 23
shows operational seasonality over the last few years () of the main renewable
energy resources, wind and hydropower The wind capacity factors are over 30%
most of the months and at their in December- January and June-July maximum In
2010, there were 26 small hydropower plants of less than  MW with  total
capacity of MW More than nine micro-hydropower plants have been built within the
past two years, benefiting more than  000 families and ten schools In total,
more than 15 300 people   Figure 21: Hydropower resource availability and
average capacity factor  Incoming ﬂow (99% of conﬁdence level) Average capacity
factor ()
Based on ACQ  Asociados () and OC-SENI (2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013,
2014a, 2015a) data Figure 22: Wind power installed capacity and annual
generation,  100 300 )   /    (                 )   (                  80 240 60
180 120 40 60 20                           Installed capacity Energy generation
Based on OC-SENI data (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a, 2015a)   Figure 23:
Monthly capacity factor for wind farms () and hydropower () 50% 40%
30% 20% 10% %
Hydropower () Wind () Based on OC-SENI data (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014a,
2015a) However,  steep decline can be observed in September- October The
hydropower capacity factor and resource availability experiences one of its
peaks during this period of low wind energy production This behaviour suggests
that the complementarity between both resources could be subject to more
detailed analysis in future Santo Domingo metro is planned If renewables could
meet the demand for new electricity, the transport sector’ renewables share
would increase accordingly Biomethane is another potential technology option in
the Dominican Republic transport system but no production has taken place yet
Today, more than 15 000 natural gas vehicles refuel at 27 service stations These
figures are expected to increase and can increasingly be replaced with
biomethane produced from various waste streams if cost-competitiveness allows
(Institute of Americas, 2015) Direct uses of renewables in heating, cooling and
transport There have been as yet no major deployment in the use of renewables as
direct fuel for heating or transport Biodiesel or biogasoline (referring mainly
to ethanol produced from biomass feedstocks) is hardly used at all for transport
(biodiesel only represented around % in 2014) However, the country is developing
biodiesel from vegetable oil At least 11 pilot projects are growing the
necessary feedstock crops, and two bioethanol projects are using sugar cane and
sweet sorghum as feedstock (National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2015) To date,
they have not reached commercial scale Demand for heating (mainly for cooking
and hot water) in Dominican Republic residential and commercials buildings is
low, representing less than 20% of the total Cooking and cooling account for the
majority of the total energy use in residential buildings, which compares with
significant demand for cooling and lighting in commercial buildings, notably
hotels There is still no market for cooling systems based on solar water heating
and renewables By comparison, other countries in the area, such as Barbados,
have made important advances in deploying for instance solar thermal
technologies for water heating thanks to long- term policies Despite the low
growth in renewables use for transport, there are electrification plans
Expansion of the existing    RENEWABLES POTENTIAL BY 2030 ACCORDING TO NATIONAL
ENERGY PROJECTIONS AND REMAP This section first describes the potential for
renewable energy resources in the Dominican Republic (Section ) This is followed
by the Reference Case with  view on the renewable energy prospects assumed in
the Dominican Republic’ national energy planning (Section ) By contrast, REmap
proposes  more optimistic view of renewables, investigating the source of
additional renewables potential and how it could be fulfilled This takes into
consideration the associated costs and savings arising from an accelerated
renewable energy uptake (Section ) The findings to 2030 for both cases are
explained throughout this section and Santiago de los Caballeros (Centre-North)
average over  kWh/m2/day throughout the year This provides favourable conditions
for rooftop solar PV systems Likewise, most tourist areas have at least the same
level of resource availability for similar rooftop and/ or off-grid systems to
completely or partly replace diesel-based systems Solar system deployment for
heating and cooling in buildings and industry are another avenue because the
Dominican Republic also experiences strong direct normal irradiance Wind
potential in this country is also large  zone- by-zone analysis of wind
potential shows that around half the nearly 500 grid points assessed has
capacity factor of at least 20% Meanwhile, 120 and 78 points have capacity
factors of at least 25% and 30% respectively (Worldwatch Institute, 2011)
Renewable energy resource potential The Dominican Republic has abundant solar
and wind resources 26 Micro-hydropower also offers some remaining potential in
certain parts of the country Bioenergy potential is limited to several specific
feedstocks but could benefit both from vast experience of sugar cane plantation
and unexploited land without facing land use change or forestry resource
concerns Much of the country’ large hydropower potential has already been
utilised Potential exists to use this capacity more efficiently, thereby
increasing individual plant capacity factors that are today limited by water
dispatch regulation to prioritise water use for drinking and agriculture By
comparison, there is potential generation capacity from smaller hydropower
plants amounting to tens or hundreds of kW, especially in the northern parts of
the country Solar potential is particularly large, with GHI levels at -
kWh/m2/day across most parts of the country (Worldwatch Institute, 2015)27
Irradiance is consistent throughout the year, offering  particular advantage
(with the maximum difference in irradiation reaching  kWh/m2/day between
December and July) For example, the irradiation levels in the two largest cities
in the country, Santo Domingo in the South IRENA’ analysis of the bioenergy
supply potential in 2030 and the related supply costs according to feedstock is
displayed in Table  Waste from the agriculture sector provides the greatest
potential, as well as animal manure and household waste for biogas Typical
sources of agricultural waste include sugar cane, rice, coffee, banana and cocoa
plantations Apart from harvesting residues that require additional collection
costs, these feedstocks come at affordable costs of USD -/GJ There is some
potential for woody biomass (both fuel wood and forestry residues) However, this
is low and its costs are significant (IRENA, 2014b) 26 Further details on the
distribution of renewable resources in Dominican Republic can be found online in
IRENA’ Global Atlas tool One of the maps available can be consulted in the next
link:  with GHI and wind speeds are also provided in the annexes of this report
27 This is double the GHI levels observed in Germany, which are around
kWh/m2/day   Table : Bioenergy supply potential and costs in Dominican Republic,
203028 Bioenergy supply potential Supply costs Low High (PJ per year) 10 (PJ per
year) 25 (USD/GJ)  Harvesting residue Agro-processing residue  18  Animal manure
& post-consumer household waste 18 32  Energy crop from forest land   17 Wood
logging and processing residue   17 Wood construction, demolition and furniture
waste   17 Total 38 84 - The country benefits from low- to high-temperature
geothermal resources too but more studies are needed to determine the technical
potential To that end, MEM and the French National Geological Survey (BRGM) have
signed an agreement to assess this in an initiative funded by the Inter-American
Development Bank (DominicanToday, 2016) No data are yet available to work out
the potential deployable geothermal capacity so this has not been not considered
in the REmap Options assessment28 more recently for the period 2016-These were
provided by CNE30 The Reference Case indicates the Dominican Republic’ demand
for energy will increase by 41% between 2010 (the base year for IRENA’ REmap
analysis) and 2030 from 220 PJ ( 254 ktoe) to 320 PJ ( 685 ktoe) This represents
growth of % per year in the same period Fuel consumption in transport increases
by just under 45%, continuing to make it the country’ largest energy- consuming
sector with  total energy demand of 135 PJ ( 224 ktoe) in In industry, demand
increases from 56 PJ ( 337 ktoe) in 2010 to 100 PJ ( 388 ktoe) in For those
years, buildings sector energy demand increases from 68 PJ ( 624 ktoe) to 86 PJ
( 054 ktoe) Demand growth in buildings is significantly lower than for the
transport and industry sectors This is explained by the substitution of
traditional uses of bioenergy for cooking and heating with more efficient fuels
such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)/kerosene or modern bioenergy  Reference
Case 2030 As mentioned in section , the Reference Case for the Dominican
Republic was prepared on the basis of the preliminary results of the energy
demand projections between 2013 and 2030 calculated by CNE and Fundación
Bariloche (CNE, 2014a) They used the baseline scenario (escenario tendencial)29
The electricity demand and generation projections were scaled up to match total
demand and supply estimated Total power generation also sees  significant
increase Annual generation doubles from 16 TWh to 35 TWh in  (taking into
consideration the whole power system  SENI, off-grid systems and grid-connected
autoproducers) Electricity consumption grows at  similar rate, resulting in
rise in annual demand from 28 In addition, land suitable for sustainable sugar
cane harvesting is available  without affecting sugar cane for food production
This is estimated at around 100 000 hectares and also offers additional energy
crop potential For further details on supply potential and costs estimations,
please refer to the IRENA paper on biofuels (IRENA, 2014b) 30 The projections
provided were based on generator technology so the following assumption was
made: all power generation capacity reported under the ‘dual’ category was
considered  petroleum product (applies to power generation with combustion
engine, combined cycle, open cycle etc) However, this includes small volumes of
natural gas during some generation periods 29 For bioenergy use in buildings, it
was assumed that all woody bioenergy consumed in the residential sector
corresponds to traditional uses of bioenergy However, the minor amount of
charcoal consumed was considered to be for modern uses This assumption is
maintained for the entire  period   Figure 24: Installed power generation
capacity and annual demand,  12 000 10 000 )   (                   000  000  000
000  2010 2014 Reference Case REmap Historical 2030 Bioenergy Solar PV Onshore
wind Coal Natural Gas Hydropower Oil products about 14 TWh in 2010 to 31 TWh
over the same period The share of electricity consumption in the country’ total
energy demand grows from 22% in 2010 to 34% in It amounts to about  quarter of
total energy demand today of solar thermal for buildings and liquid biofuels for
transport, amounting to  PJ (14 ktoe) and  PJ (19 ktoe) respectively The
renewable energy share in the power sector rises from 10% to 21% The Reference
Case sees an increase in hydropower generation ( TWh), onshore wind ( TWh) and
bioenergy (almost  TWh) which combined amounts to less than the increase in
conventional generation of almost TWh In the Reference Case, coal generation
would by 2030 reach 10 TWh, oil generation would reach TWh (mainly fuel oil and
diesel), and natural gas generation would reach  TWh31 In the Reference Case,
the share of modern renewable energy in TFEC (excluding traditional uses of
bioenergy) increases only slightly from % in 2010 to 13% in The renewable energy
share shows only minor growth in the entire period but this does not mean
renewables use does not grow Instead, this is an outcome of the major increase
in the country’ total energy consumption, which rises as fast as renewables
demand When including traditional uses of bioenergy, the share of renewables in
the total energy mix remains almost the same at around 16% throughout the period
to This is because traditional uses of bioenergy are replaced by modern forms as
well as other modern fuels such as LPG or kerosene These tend to show higher
technical efficiencies for cooking or water heating, thereby utilising less fuel
REmap Power sector and potential for higher renewable energy uptake The
Reference Case projections indicate electricity demand growth will be
increasingly covered by petroleum products, coal and natural gas generation
capacity REmap instead shows that  share of this new demand can actually by
supplied by hydropower, onshore wind, solar PV and bioenergy In the case of
Renewables experience only limited additional direct use applications for
heating and transport The main development is for bioenergy in the industry
sector, with additions of around  PJ (96 ktoe) for process heating This comes to
13 PJ of bioenergy and represents 13% of energy demand in this sector There are
minor additions 31 Values for the base year 2010 are given in this section,
being this year the base for the REmap analysis, nevertheless values for 2014 or
2015 when available have been provided in summary tables of results and annexes
petroleum products, some existing generation capacity that would be
decommissioned by 2030 could also be substituted with renewables provides the
remaining potential, that is defined in the current Dominican Republic renewable
energy law as plants with capacity lower than  MW The 90 MW REmap addition
implies building around than 20 small hydropower plants Hydropower resources are
spread across the country thus providing several opportunities where it is more
environmental and economically feasible and where demand exists Coal generation
is the highest power capacity addition observed in the Reference Case and is
estimated at four times higher than today The renewables potential identified in
REmap substitutes almost half of this additional capacity with small hydropower,
utility-scale solar PV and landfill gas power generation Moreover, all new
petroleum-based generation capacity is substituted with onshore wind and solar
PV ● Onshore wind: if the 50 MW limit for wind power capacity (explained above
in section ) is used as  reference, the total addition of REmap capacity of  GW
translates to around 45 wind farms to be built between now and If each of the 78
points identified by the Worldwatch Institute (2011) can host  50 MW wind farm,
it would have  capacity factor exceeding 30% Figure 25 depicts the location of
the main solar PV, onshore wind and bioenergy power capacity that would be in
place in 2030 under the REmap case The detailed assumptions and findings are
presented by technology The power generation sector capacity and generation mix
are summarised below in Table  ● Bagasse based combined heat and power (CHP):
the country’ sugar cane production is expected to increase by around 40% by 2024
(US Department of Agriculture, 2014) The main energy by-product from this
industry is bagasse, ● Hydropower: up to 90% of all potential hydropower
resources for large hydropower plants have already been exploited (Worldwatch
Institute, 2015) Small hydropower therefore Figure 25: Location of renewable
power generation capacity in 2030 under REmap SSoollaarr PPVV 557766 MMWW 448800
MMWW WWiinndd oonnsshhoorree BBiiooeenneerrggyy ppoowweerr 6600 MMWW
((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 115533 MMWW 334422 MMWW ((DDGG)) 553388 MMWW
((uuttiilliittyy)) 119922 MMWW 112200 MMWW ((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 7700 MMWW
((bbaaggaassssee)) 5544 MMWW ((bbaaggaassssee)) 334422 MMWW ((DDGG)) 553388 MMWW
((uuttiilliittyy)) 4400 MMWW ((llaannddffiillll ggaass)) 7700 MMWW ((ccoo--
ffiirriinngg)) 442233 MMWW 2244 MMWW ((bbaaggaassssee)) 448800 MMWW Not shown on
map: 119 MW small hydro;  174 MW large hydro;  MW biogas; 102 MW off-grid solar
systems Background map from -maps ()   which is today combusted to supply power
and heat to the sugar mills There is major potential to increase combustion
efficiency Combined with growing production and improved efficiency, resulting
additional bagasse-based the cogeneration capacity is estimated at 48 MW This
would be installed in three of the largest four sugar mills across the country,
namely Cristóbal Colón, Barahona and Porvenir As there is some CHP capacity
already existing or planned in the Reference Case, the total power generation
capacity in sugar mills reaches 148 MW in REmap This would be spread across the
sugar mills as follows: 10 MW in Porvenir, 24 MW in Barahona, 54 MW in Central
Romana and 60 MW in Cristóbal Colón32 It is assumed that the sugar mills would
cogenerate electricity and heat mainly to prioritise their own energy needs,
especially during the sugar cane harvest, which can last up to 200 days Surplus
electricity could be sold to the system (OPD, 2015) In the Reference Case,
landfill gas generation includes the planned power generation project based on
landfill gas at the Rafey site This 80 MW power plant (40 MW biogas and 40 MW
natural gas) is due to operate  combined cycle gas turbine and  steam turbine
based on the gasification of municipal solid waste The project is estimated to
consume  500 tonnes of waste per day (SIE, 2016) REmap assumes the construction
of an 80 MW landfill gas-powered plant for the Duquesa landfill site This plant
would utilise around  000 tonnes of waste each day (assuming its design were
similar to the planned Rafey landfill, which will have  gasifier) More than 350
landfills have been identified across the country (Ferreras, 2015) If the 10
major and formal ones are considered, it could be possible to deploy the
potential for around 60 MW in capacity on top of the one proposed for Duqesa
landfill, increasing the total to 220 MW (assuming around 80 MW are deployed in
the Reference Case, including the capacity in Rafey landfill) ● Biomass co-
firing for power generation: agriculture and small amounts of forestry residues
can be used in co-firing plants, increasing installed capacity to 70 MW in REmap
by ● Solar PV utility-scale: there is an addition of 871 MW for on-grid utility-
scale solar PV As shown in Figure 25, it is assumed that this will be located
close to the main demand centres, namely in the provinces of Santiago and Santo
Domingo Considering the developments expected in the Reference Case, total
installed capacity would be above  GW in REmap in Biogas for power generation:
in the Reference Case, no growth is assumed from existing biogas power
generation capacity Hence, under the Reference Case, 2030 continues to see an
installed capacity of around 790 kW from nine installations REmap shows
realistic potential of  MW by 2030, implying around 60 farms in the country
using biogas for power generation integrated with anaerobic digesters fed from
animal manure ● ● Solar PV decentralised (on-grid): the alternative scenario in
CNE demand projections considers 250 MW of installed decentralised solar PV
capacity This has been taken into account and further expanded to include  665
MW REmap Option comprising on-grid installations for residential and commercial
use added to the Reference Case This can be split into rooftop and ground-
mounted systems, and the resulting generation would cover around 25% of
buildings electricity demand Assuming all of this is for rooftop systems,
million m2 in roof area is required for residential installations This would
represent about % of the available household rooftop area Likewise, around
million m2 would be used for commercial installations, Landfill gas for power
generation: there is major potential for waste-to-energy from municipal solid
waste, especially from the country’ large landfills Total daily urban solid
waste amounts to around  000 tonnes, with the largest landfill (Duquesa)
receiving more than  750 tonnes ● 32 The sugar mills have the following existing
power generation capacity to supply their own energy needs, according to the
Worldwatch Institute (Worldwatch Institute, 2011):  MW in Porvenir,  MW in
Barahona and 54 MW in Central Romana In addition, the sugar mill Cristóbal Colón
is commissioning  30 MW plant   representing around % of available rooftop area
for this type of building includes residential and public off-grid PV
installations with electric batteries (equivalent to 400 MWh of energy storage)
which would increase the Dominican Republic electrification rate for remote
rural areas It is assumed that some of the decentralised PV capacity will be
integrated with battery electric storage The corresponding energy storage
capacity for this in REmap is 440 MWh, and 17% of decentralised PV installations
are built This is an average  kWh/kW in energy storage The electrification rate
today stands around 96% According to CNE (2014a), this will reach 98% in 2030
under the assumption that energy access programmes have greater coverage in the
coming years It identifies  solar PV potential of 102 MW for household
electrification assuming that universal electricity access is achieved in 2030
around 70 000 installations of  kilowatt-peak For public and commercial
applications,  MW are added in ● Solar PV for off-grid rural electrification:
energy access is enhanced by the addition of off-grid PV for rural
electrification In developing countries, PV with storage is becoming
increasingly common to provide electricity to rural regions lacking access to
transmission or distribution networks (IRENA, 2016a) This Table : Summary of
results by technology for the base year, Reference Case and REmap – power sector
Reference Case 2030  156  473  202 28  174 850 181 100   80 240 205 35    683
30%      REmap 2030  913  817  293 119  174  304 449 148 70  220  772 989 681
112 102  096 59%     Unit 2010 2014 MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW MW
MW MW % TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh TWh Total installed power generation capacity
Renewable capacity Hydropower  538 608 530 15 515  70 70          930 17%
995 795 613 15 598 85 70 70    27  27    200 16%      Small hydropower (< 5MW)
Large hydropower (>  MW)                                 Onshore wind Bioenergy
(solid, liquid, gaseous) Autoproducers, CHP (bagasse) Biomass co-firing
Autoproducers, anaerobic digester Landfill gas Solar PV PV utility scale PV
decentralised (on-grid) PV decentralised with storage PV rural electrification
(off-grid) Non-renewable capacity Renewable energy share in total capacity Total
electricity generation Renewable generation                      Hydropower Wind
onshore Bioenergy (solid, liquid, gaseous) Solar PV Non-renewable generation
Renewable energy share in electricity generation % % % % %   Direct uses of
renewable energy in industry and buildings the country’ manufacturing plants
This provides over  PJ of heat in the form of hot water and steam, which would
cover 15% of the energy required for low-temperature process heat generation
(below 150 °) In addition to the power generation sector potential, there is
major potential for renewables in direct use applications for heating and
cooling This has so far been overlooked in the Dominican Republic energy
projections used for the Reference Case REmap identifies opportunities for
direct renewables use for heating, cooling and cooking in buildings and for
heating and cooling processes in the industry sector Table  provides the results
of the Reference Case and REmap mix, and further details by technology and
sector are discussed below: ● Solar energy for cooling in industry: this REmap
Option, amounting to 40 MW, is equivalent to around 85 solar cooling
installations in the country’ food sector, which is one of its largest energy
consumers ● Anaerobic digester biogas for cooking in hospitality sector: this
REmap Option is calculated for the hospitality sector, in which organic waste
from food and cooking can generate biogas reused for cooking This REmap Option
would imply around 100 installations of this type ● Solar water heaters (SWH) in
buildings: the REmap Options estimate residential and commercial solar water
heating potential of  PJ This is equivalent to adding  million m2 (around 960
megawatt-thermal – MWth) of solar collector capacity that would replace water
heating boilers based on LPG or electricity This is less than % of rooftop area
available in 2030 or around  600 commercial installations and 328 000 household
installations Around 60% of the capacity is dedicated to installations in the
commercial sector This REmap Option concentrates on supplying 30% of energy
demand for water heating in the residential and 35% in the commercial sector
(nearly all to hotels) ● Seawater air conditioning (SWAC): this REmap Option
would provide  440 tonnes of cooling mainly for the hospitality sector The
potential identified means introducing seawater cooling in the touristic zone of
Puerto Plata The Remap Option of  PJ covers % of cooling demand in buildings ●
Modern solid biomass for cooking: the amount of traditional bioenergy used today
in the residential sector (mainly for cooking and to some extent water heating)
is almost  quarter of buildings energy use According to  CNE study (Cruz
Castillo, 2014), around 12% of Dominican Republic households still lack modern
energy access for cooking, relying mainly on wood fuel and charcoal Although
demand for traditional forms of bioenergy declines significantly, the Reference
Case also indicates it persists in Its share decreases to just above 10% of
total energy use in buildings In REmap, all traditional bioenergy use replaced
by modern bioenergy divides into 40% biogas and 60% solid biofuels33 Each of
these is two or three times more efficient ● Solar energy for cooling in
buildings: the REmap Option of  PJ for solar cooling would cover around 20% of
the electricity demand used for space cooling in buildings in This 350 MW
addition equates to  km2 of thermal collectors or around 71 000 installations
Less than % of rooftop area available in 2030 is required to install the
collectors In that year, energy demand for cooling is estimated to amount to 20%
of buildings total energy demand ● Solar energy for process heat in industry:
this REmap Option would represent an additional 85 MW in solar energy for
industrial process heat About half the capacity is based on flat plate solar and
the rest on concentrated solar thermal (CST) collectors This would imply around
77 and 16 installations respectively in different sites in 33 The REmap
methodology does not allow for the replacement of traditional biomass by fossil
fuels such as LPG However, this replacement is assumed to have occurred in the
Reference Case because traditional biomass use declines by about 25%, and oil
product use increases by around 75%   Table : Summary of results by technology
for the base year, Reference Case and REmap – direct uses in buildings and
Industry Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030 Unit 2010 2014 Total direct uses of
energy Electricity consumption – buildings PJ TWh 79  83  96 96 Electricity
consumption – industry TWh   Direct uses of renewable energy PJ 31 31 28 34
Solar energy for water heating – buildings PJ     Solar energy for space cooling
– buildings PJ     Solar energy for process heat – industry PJ     Solar energy
for cooling – industry PJ     Seawater air conditioning – buildings PJ
Modern biomass – buildings PJ     Cooking biogas (anaerobic digester) – hostelry
PJ NA NA NA  Cooking biogas (anaerobic digester) – residential PJ NA NA NA
Cooking solid biomass – residential PJ NA NA NA  Not specified PJ     PJ 18 10
Traditional biomass – buildings34 Bioenergy for process heat – industry PJ  13
19 Non-renewable – buildings PJ 21 22 29 26 Non-renewable – industry PJ 24 28 36
29 biofuels – both liquid biofuels and biomethane The resulting number of
battery electric passenger road vehicles (60 000) in REmap would represent
around % of total passenger road vehicle stock in Likewise, 160 000 plug-in
hybrid electric (PHEV) passenger road vehicles would make up around 11% of the
total34 ● Anaerobic digester biogas in the residential sector – this REmap
Option concerns modern energy access in the residential sector This means
substituting traditional uses of solid biomass for cooking in the Reference Case
with biogas derived from anaerobic digesters for households Solid biomass for
cooking (modern) – this REmap Option concerns modern energy access in the
residential sector This means substituting traditional uses of solid biomass for
cooking in the Reference Case with efficient biomass cook stoves in REmap The
electrification of public transport has also been considered as an option which
adds around  100 battery electric buses This represents around % of public
transport bus stock estimated for In addition, 375 000 two- and three-wheelers
are estimated, raising the share of electric vehicles in the passenger road
vehicle stock to 30% ● Not specified – includes all modern biomass for cooking
and heating purposes which is part of Reference Case, with no technology
specified ● There is potential to deploy biogasoline from sugar cane
(conventional ethanol) as well as from bagasse (advanced ethanol) Hundreds of
thousands of hectares of land previously used for sugar cane production are no
longer harvested so  fraction of this arable land Role of renewables in the
transport sector The main results and related indicators for the REmap case in
the transport sector are presented in Table The two main options for transport
based on renewables are electrification sourced with renewable power and 34 All
traditional uses of biomass projected in the Reference Case are substituted with
modern forms of biomass in REmap 2030 (40% with biogas and 60% with modern
biomass cook stoves)   Table 10: Summary of results by technology for the base
year, Reference Case and REmap – transport sector Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030
Unit 2010 2014 TFEC in transport (including electricity) PJ 96 93 135 133
Electricity consumption (road vehicles, railway etc) TWh 03 05   Total number of
electric vehicles Units NA NA NA 721 100 Electric vehicles – passenger road
Units - - - 60 000 Plug-in hybrid electric vehicles – passenger road Units - - -
160 000          Battery electric public transport buses Units - - -  100
Two/three-wheelers Units - - - 500 000 Liquid biofuels PJ     Biogasoline –
conventional PJ     Biogasoline – advanced PJ     Biodiesel PJ     Non-renewable
fuels (excl electricity) PJ 95 93 134 125 could be used for ethanol production
An initial estimate of 40 000 hectares for ethanol production yields
conventional ethanol production of 173 million litres per year in This would
mean  volumetric blend of 14% with gasoline35 In addition, 20 million litres of
advanced ethanol from the remaining quantities of bagasse has been estimated for
Finally, additional biodiesel potential in 2030 equating to 20 million litres
per year and added to the 30 million litres in the Reference Case raises the
blend to % in REmap36 Section ) This depends on the share and mix of variable
renewable energy (VRE) (Ueckerdt et al, 2015) The energy storage offered by
electric vehicles can be deployed under  range of schemes It could provide
services and flexibility measures for load shedding and dispatch to the power
system It could reduce curtailment in hours where renewables generation exceeds
maximum penetration of VRE allowed in the system According to REmap findings,
electricity storage capacity from two- and three-wheelers, passenger road
vehicles and electric buses for urban transportation could provide   GWh in
energy storage The increased use of electric vehicles provides  significant new
potential source of mobile storage This is one flexibility option for the
Dominican Republic power sector, which will increasingly be required to
accommodate  higher share of variable renewables because renewable electricity
generation does not always match demand In the Dominican Republic, this is
particularly important given that the demand profile is rather flat (as shown in
Figure  in Chapter ) and is somewhat higher during the evening Since PV
generation reaches its peak at midday,  significant increase in electricity
produced from this technology would change the residual load duration curve (see
Summary of REmap Options In the Reference Case, final renewable energy use is
forecast to slightly increase from 37 PJ in 2010 and 38 in 2014 to 52 PJ in 2030
( 234 ktoe, Figure 26) Bioenergy in 2010 accounted for 83% of total final
renewable energy use and continues to dominate the mix in 2030 although its
share is expected to decrease to 77% in The hydropower portion falls from % to %
because of wind power growth, which rises from negligible use to % of total
final renewable energy use In the electricity sector, hydropower and wind
account for most total renewable power production, followed by bioenergy In the
Reference Case, bioenergy remains the main heating and transport sector source
With 35 This is in line with the CNE alternative scenario projection for energy
36 This addition is based on the CNE alternative scenario projection for demand
Figure 26: Final renewable energy use in the Reference Case and REmap, 2030
Reference Case total renewable energy use – 52 PJ/yr REmap total renewable
energy use – 87 PJ/yr Liquid biofuels- transport Liquid biofuels- transport % %
25% Bioenergy for Hydropower 22% Hydropower 14% process heat-industry 22%
Bioenergy for % Transport % Transport process heat-industry 54% Heat and other
direct uses 44% Power 54% Power 39% Heat and other direct uses Onshore wind 21%
% Modern bioenergy- Onshore wind 14% buildings 20% Traditional % Solar energy
for cooling-industry Bioenergy power % bioenergy-buildings Bioenergy power %
Solar PV 10% % Solar energy for process heat-industry Solar PV % Solar energy
for water heating- buildings % Solar energy Solar energy for water heating-
buildings % % Modern bioenergy-buildings % for cooling-buildings these
developments, the power sector would account for nearly 30% of total final
renewables use in 2030 under the Reference Case compared to 17% in 2010 at the
expense of the heating/cooling sector This sees its share of total final
renewables use falling from 83% to 69% in the same period Republic TFEC would
reach 27% in REmap compared to % between 2010 and 2014 and 13% in the Reference
Case in Installed renewable power generation capacity would rise from  GW in the
Reference Case to  GW in REmap The increase comes mainly from wind (an
additional  453 MW), solar PV ( 532 MW) and biomass power (268 MW) With all
REmap Options implemented, total renewable energy use in the Dominican Republic
TFEC would reach 87 PJ ( 080 ktoe) in REmap, double the 2010 level More than 60%
of this would be renewable power (57 PJ) and the remainder heating, cooling and
transport fuels (30 PJ) Modern renewable energy use in the Dominican Figure 27
shows renewable energy developments by sector in 2010-Compared to their TFEC,
buildings and industry would have the biggest renewable energy share in REmap,
at 43% and 41% respectively, not including renewable electricity and district
heating When Figure 27: Renewable energy share in TFEC, power generation and
end-use sectors (including electricity and excluding traditional biomass use)
50% 2010 2014 Reference Case 2030 REmap 2030 45%                     40% 35% 30%
25% 20% 15% 10% % % TFEC Power generation Transport Buildings Industry End-use
sectors   these are accounted for, each sector’ renewable energy share is
estimated at 45% and 44% respectively as shown in the figure below The transport
renewable energy share would rise to % in REmap from around % in In power
generation, the renewable energy share increases to 44% in REmap from almost 10%
in 2010 (12% in 2014) or from 21% in the Reference Case in 22% respectively The
share of hydropower compared to total renewable electricity would fall from more
than 90% today to 26% by This is explained by the substantial growth in all
other renewable energy sources in 2010-This section has focused entirely on the
role of renewables in the Dominican Republic However, demand for energy is
growing rapidly so the renewables potential needs to be complemented by energy
efficiency to reduce demand growth This will enable  higher share of renewables
and avoid energy-related CO2 emissions and air pollution (see below in Section )
Biomass would remain an important source of renewables in the Dominican
Republic, accounting for about half the total final renewable energy use in
REmap However, this is still significantly lower than the 83% in Solar and wind
would account for 15% and    WHAT IS NEEDED TO FULFIL REMAP POTENTIAL? The
Dominican Republic has several main objectives for its energy future It wishes
to supply growing demand for energy securely and affordably, ensure actors
involved in the power sector make  profit, meet power supply quality standards
and shift to  lower-carbon system However, like any other developing economy it
could encounter  number of challenges while coping with growing energy demand
stakeholders in the power supply chain and have required government intervention
to support the sector with different incentive schemes According to the 2010
National Energy Plan (PEN 2010) (CNE, 2010), the main challenges to the sector
more than  decade after the reform included (CNE, 2010): ● ● financial
sustainability high dependency on oil products and vulnerability to price
volatility loss of confidence by private investors loss of consumer confidence
in the sector’ ability to provide  reliable, sustainable and cost- effective
service lack of engagement of private investors in the electricity distribution
sector This chapter provides more detail on the potential difficulties the
Dominican Republic may face as its renewable energy share under REmap grows to
27% by 2030 in the total energy mix It starts with the obstacles in the power
sector (Section ) by paying particular attention to institutional, regulatory,
economic and technical issues Potential concerns affecting end-use by buildings,
industry and transport follow (Section ) Given bioenergy is  cross-cutting
resource offering potential for all sectors, its challenges are discussed
separately ● ● ● According to CNE (2010, 2008) the main reasons for the problems
are as follows: high dependency on fossil fuels coupled with increasing
international oil prices; political difficulties in passing increased production
costs onto the tariff; and difficulties in reducing non- technical electricity
losses and increasing tariff revenue collection Each main concern is matched
with several suggestions for policy makers and other stakeholders to consider
The objective of this chapter is not to provide policy makers with  microscopic
examination of challenges and potential solutions Rather, it identifies and
draws attention to the most significant areas affecting the delivery of  higher
share of renewables  detailed evaluation of each challenge would require further
in-depth investigation, which is beyond the scope of this study The purpose of
this section is not to replace  detailed power or energy system analysis; the
purpose of raising awareness of these challenges is to assist high-level
decision-making The Organic Law on National Development Strategy of the
Dominican Republic 2030 enacted in 2012 establishes  reliable, efficient and
sustainable energy supply as one of its general objectives (Ministry of Economy,
Planning and Development, 2012) One specific aim is to ensure  reliable
electricity supply with competitive prices and conditions for financial and
environmental sustainability To achieve this, six lines of action address the
challenges currently experienced by the power sector to open up new
opportunities for deploying renewables The lines of action include:  Power
sector ) Promote the diversification of the generation mix, focusing on the
deployment of renewable and clean sources like solar and wind Institutional and
economic challenges Since the first reform in the late 1990s, the power sector
in the Dominican Republic has gone through  number of difficulties These have
affected all the ) Strengthen the power sector institutional and regulatory
framework to ensure competitive   tariffs and promote the investments for sector
development section does not provide  complete overview of all barriers Its aim
is to inform the reader of the view of stakeholders directly involved in day-to-
day renewables implementation in the Dominican Republic’ power system: ) Plan
and promote the development of the transmission and distribution generation,
infrastructure to operate the power system with the quality and reliability
criteria set by the standards ● Stability of the regulatory framework Law 57- 07
amended in 2012 is in the process of being amended again to revise the
provisions relating to fiscal incentives The incentives work as income tax
credits that are equivalent to  share of the total investment to be redeemed in
three years The share of investment eligible to receive credits was cut from 75%
to 40% This modification has, on one hand, decreased renewables investment
attractiveness to autoproducers, and on the other created uncertainty in the
regulatory framework and in governmental decisions ) Promote the application of
strong environmental regulation in power generation to adopt sustainable
practices and mitigate climate change ) Develop the right culture to promote
energy efficiency ) Promote  civic and private sector culture aiming for energy
efficiency by introducing rational energy practices and encourage the usage of
processes and equipment allowing more efficient use of energy ● Co-ordination
and  common vision among the different national institutions is needed if they
deal directly or indirectly with renewable energy regulation, implementation etc
This concerns the effective implementation of the existing legislation and
incentives, as well as administrative procedures37 In addition to this, the law
on national development strategy foresees the completion of  pact between all
stakeholders (known as Pacto Eléctrico) to solve the crisis that has affected
the power sector The pact was drafted in 2015, and discussions are ongoing ● to
implement Human capacity-building effective for renewables deployment This needs
to be expanded and improved in relation to renewable energy technology and
potential and the use of modern fuels, especially for decision-makers or policy
makers defining laws, regulations and planning Policy makers and key decision-
makers in the energy sector should also pursue  holistic vision of the needs and
challenges arising in the energy system as  whole when renewables are included
regulation and planning This step forward is one of several indicating progress
towards achieving the established targets Measurable changes like reduced fuel
oil consumption for power generation, the increase in the distribution company
Cash Recovery Index (CRI) and reduced debt to the generation companies can be
similarly interpreted However, there is  long way to go yet Fulfilling the
potential in REmap may not pose particularly great challenges from an
institutional or regulatory perspective in relation to current experience and
the Reference Case for However, the creation of an enabling environment for
realising this potential will still be important 37 One example of the lack of
co-ordination and common view among government institutions is the change to Law
on fiscal incentives for renewable investments Some government bodies may be
erroneously perceiving  decrease in tax collected due to  high fiscal incentive
This perception also relates to the approach used to estimate taxation For
example, an autoproducer decreasing its expenses with  lower energy bill earns
higher income and thus pays higher income taxes in the long term Taking  more
systemic approach, the reduction in the industry energy bill also stimulates its
competitiveness, yielding accompanying economic benefits for the Dominican
Republic These are overlooked when discussing suitable incentives for renewables
consultation with experts from the power sector has shed some light on the main
barriers obstructing the development of renewables today This consultation goes
beyond reports performed by the government and other organisations Some of these
findings are presented below as perceived by stakeholders This   ●
implementation This is essential to ensure the sector functions correctly, and
to incentivise private sector participation in future developments Effective
implementation of existing and future regulation Law  established  good
regulatory framework with general guidelines, yet there have been some
limitations to effective implementation of its provisions Coupled with  somewhat
immature renewable energy sector, this has resulted in some less effective or
efficient results than foreseen Deploying renewable resources in the Dominican
Republic power system will mean overcoming existing and future institutional and
technical challenges As well as attaining the strategic targets in the energy
plans to overcome current institutional difficulties,  new comprehensive action
plan is needed This should deal with potential future grid operation issues
arising from  high share of VRE like wind and solar PV This especially if VRE
are to play  major role in the total national electricity production ●
Development of regulations that fit the national context When drafting and
implementing the renewable energy laws and its secondary legislation, some
provisions are based on international practice and often benchmarked with
developed countries, which successfully pioneered renewable energy This approach
is  good start to constructing the necessary frameworks but over the long term
may not be effective because these frameworks need to adjust to national
circumstances The technical challenges VRE resources have different physical
characteristics and are usually operated differently from conventional power
generation plants Depending on the share of VRE and the power system features,
these differences may prompt changes in the way the systems are planned and
operated to guarantee  reliable electricity supply In general, stakeholders
believe that the Dominican Republic needs to guarantee  stable regulatory
framework and better co-ordination between the different governmental entities
involved with renewable energy at all angles This needs to start with policy and
planning and continue all the way through to Figure 28 summarises the
characteristics of VRE technologies, and how these could impact the operation of
the power systems Figure 28: Summary of VRE characteristics and impacts in
system planning and operation Impacts VRE PROPERTIES Seconds Grid operation &
Security planning Stability, Voltage & Frequency response Non-synchronous
Unit commitment & Reserve allocation Uncertainty System operation Ramp
capability requirements & Cycling (start-ups) Generation adequacy planning
Variability Dispatchable capacity utilisation Years & Grid adequacy planning
Power ﬂows Location & modularity  Voltage & – Transmission and distribution
The REmap Options include high amounts of VRE generation resources Their into
the electricity system of the Dominican Republic would make an impact at the
technical level System planners and operators should be aware of these impacts
and be prepared to implement the required measures to guarantee the reliable and
economic supply of electricity uncertainty associated with the amount of
generation that these technologies could provide, and on the amount of installed
capacity required integration According to the country’ projections, peak power
demand within SENI is to increase from about 63 GW in 2015 to about  GW in
Figure 29 shows the projected demand growth for two scenarios and the
corresponding hourly load duration curve The 2030 medium- and low-growth
scenarios were obtained by scaling 2015 demand according to the expected growth
rate Only the medium-growth case is analysed below, which looks at the expected
production of power from VRE resources and the residual load duration curves for
2030 with Remap options  qualitative and simple description of the main
technical challenges to be expected from the integration of the VRE REmap
Options in the power system of the Dominican Republic is given in the sections
below This description is not intended to replace  detailed power system
simulation studies It aims to provide  reference to identify potential issues
that may require the attention of the sector planners, policy-makers, and
operators The installed capacity under the REmap case for the power sector
reaches  GW and  GW of grid- connected onshore wind and solar PV developments
respectively The location and size of the developments is summarised in Table
Both solar and wind developments were located using  resource assessment
Institute study carried out by the Worldwatch (Worldwatch Institute, 2015) These
figures represent the installed capacity for the regions rather than the
installed capacity of individual power plants For instance, the reported wind
capacity for La Altagracia means 192 MW of wind could be installed in the region
through one or more power plants Detailed grid integration studies are
recommended to assess the challenges described below and identify their
potential impact and appropriate measures to overcome them This should precede
any steps to implement high amounts of variable renewables The challenges
identified are explained further below Challenge : Generation adequacy and
utilisation of conventional generation fleet One potential problem is whether
enough energy and power would be available to meet growing demand for
electricity at any given time The variability of the resources leads to low VRE
firm capacity This creates The performance of the solar PV power plants was
modelled using PVLIB, an open source modelling tool developed by the PV
Performance Modelling Figure 29: Power demand projections to 2030 (left) and
load duration curves (right) 5000 5000 2015 Base Case 2030 Medium Growth 2030
Low Growth Medium Growth Low Growth 4500 4000 4000 3500 ) )   (   ( 3000 3000
2500 2000 2000 1500 1000 1000  500 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030  20
40 60 80 100 Year Percent of hours of the year (%, sorted)   Table 11: Solar PV
and wind plant sizing for the REmap Options Grid-connected solar PV Grid-
connected wind Capacity (MW) 538 538  761 Capacity (MW) 153 192 423 480 480 576
304 Location Type Location Distributed Utility-scale Distributed Utility-scale
Samaná La Altagracia Bani Pedernales Montecristi Puerto Plata Total Santo
Domingo Santiago Total Collaborative (Holmgren et al, 2015; Holmgren and
Groenendyk, ; PV Performance Modelling Collaborative, 2014) Solar radiation,
wind speed and ambient temperatures reported by the Worldwatch Institute were
the inputs for the tool In both Santiago and Santo Domingo, the utility-scale
resources were modelled by ten power plants with 54 MW of installed capacity
Similarly, grid connected distributed generation was assumed to only occur in
Santiago and Santo Domingo These encompassed the aggregated modelling of 114 667
individual power plants with  kW nameplate capacity The line represented by red
dashes corresponds to the expected installed capacity without hydropower and
without VRE in As can be seen, non-VRE installed capacity without hydropower is
higher than peak demand This in turn means that enough capacity would exist to
cover demand at any given time even when no VRE resources are available However,
appropriate financial mechanisms need to guarantee that this firm capacity
exists in If hydropower is taken into account, the system would have larger
reserve margins Nonetheless,  detailed generation adequacy study is strongly
recommended to validate and strengthen these conclusions The performance of the
wind developments was taken from the Worldwatch Institute report (Worldwatch
Institute, 2011) This shows the aggregated performance of different power plants
in six different regions based on hourly synthetically generated data This
performance is assumed to continue, and only installed capacity for each region
was escalated The share of installed capacity for each region was also retained
The area below the line represented by blue dashes in Figure 30 illustrates the
amount of energy consumed in 2015, and generated with dispatchable power plants
Wind generation exists but its contribution to generation is very low, and
therefore, not considered in this analysis The amount of energy required by
dispatchable plants in 2030 depends on the level of VRE curtailment imposed In
this analysis, it is assumed that the level of curtailment is defined by VRE
maximum instantaneous power penetration restrictions, which associated with the
system stability These restrictions are further discussed in the next challenge
For this analysis, three possibilities were evaluated: curtailment at 55% and
75% instantaneous penetration levels, and no curtailment Table 12 condenses the
results of the three scenarios PV and wind production for the entire year were
then modelled and compared to projected power demand This allowed the
calculation of load duration and residual load duration curves for the year
Figure 30 shows the resulting curves, and compares them with the 2015 load
duration curve Figure 30 shows that the residual peak demand is high when
compared to peak demand – 95 GW and 55 GW respectively This means there at least
95 GW of dispatchable generation capacity is needed to cover demand for
electricity when production from VRE is available This requirement increases to
the full 55 GW when no production from VRE is available Under the no curtailment
scenario, the amount of energy required from dispatchable (non-VRE) sources
would be represented by the two yellow areas in Figure 30, while the energy
generated from VRE would be the sum of the green and the two orange areas Under
this scenario, the share of VRE in electricity production would amount   Figure
30: Simulated wind and solar PV generation, projected demand, residual demand
(left) and load duration curve (right) 5000 Peak Demand 4000 Peak Residual
Demand 3000 Wind + Solar PV )   ( 2000      Min Demand 2030 Dispatchable plants
1000  Min Residual Demand 2030 Curtailment at 55% instant penetration limit
Curtailment at 75% instant penetration limit –1000 20 40 60 80 100 120  Percent
of hours of the year (%, sorted) Load Duration Curve in 2030 Residual Load
Duaration Curve in 2030 Load Duration Curve in 2015 Dispatchable capacity (no
hydro) Min - minimum Table 12: Share of VRE and dispatchable plants, 2030 VRE
curtailed energy Energy from dispatchable plants Share Instantaneous penetration
limit (as % of ‘no limit’ scenario) (as % of 2015) Dispatchable VRE (%) (%) (%)
(%) 55% 59 82 80 41 75% 56 67 -56 44 No limit 55 00 -86 45   to 45% while the
total energy produced by dispatchable plants would amount to 86% less than that
produced in The dark yellow area at the left represents the energy that has to
be generated by dispatchable power plants and not required in That area could be
viewed as the required “growth” for dispatchable power plants The height of this
area represents the required installed capacity while the  axis dimension
represents the amount of time this capacity would be required The  axis is the
percentage of hours in  year up to % of possible VRE generation is curtailed
This curtailment could decrease the profitability of VRE projects but increase
the profitability of dispatchable (non-VRE) projects Electricity generation by
dispatchable plants would be % higher than in This simplified assessment of firm
capacity requirements and conventional generation utilisation draws out the
following conclusions: ● The energy required from dispatchable power plants
depends on the production and need for VRE technology curtailment Forecast
models for long- and mid-term planning are thus essential and must be accurate
This could help size the amount of fuel required by thermal and hydropower
plants, which in turn, could lead to better economic decisions in terms of when
and how much fuel to buy Long- and mid-term forecasts could also allow better
reserve planning over that timeframe All this signals two important conclusions
for the energy mix Firstly, less energy from dispatchable plants is required
This means these plants would sell less energy, thus affecting their
profitability or at least the revenue from sales of energy This is even more
accentuated if considering new thermal power plants planned or under
construction The profitability of these plants could also be affected by their
low utilisation factors (as required by the system) Low utilisation factors
could signify more frequent plant and engine start-ups, which can increase plant
operating costs, and accelerate its degradation Plant operating costs increases
due to the need of running the power plants at sub-optimal efficiency operating
points (Edmundus et al, 2015; Trüby, 2014) ● At the level of penetration
proposed in REmap relating to installed capacity, VRE could provide 41%-45% of
electricity consumed in the Dominican Republic, depending on VRE curtailment The
latter is another important parameter because it could make  negative impact on
VRE project profitability Diminishing the amount of energy required by
dispatchable power plants could also affect their profitability as well as
reducing their utilisation factor, increasing cycling or requiring more frequent
start-ups The ‘no limit’ scenario is more illustrative than realistic Even power
systems with the most advanced operational practices impose instantaneous
penetration limits to non-synchronous generation The amount of energy supplied
by VRE under the 75% instantaneous penetration limit would equal the green plus
the light orange area The energy required from dispatchable plants would be
represented by the two yellow areas added to the dark orange area (see Figure
30) Under this scenario, the total production of VRE would amount to about 44%
of total electricity generated, while about % of the VRE generation would have
to be curtailed This curtailment is relatively small and would probably not
jeopardise project development The share of dispatchable plants under this
scenario is 56% lower than the share in Again, this could affect the
profitability of these power plants ● The study suggests there could be enough
installed dispatchable power plant capacity for 2030 under this scenario (REmap)
The installed capacity of hydropower would probably mean some of the older non-
hydro power plants could be decommissioned without affecting the system’ supply
security (see Figure 30) The previous conclusions require detailed generation
adequacy studies in which seasonality, volatility of primary energy prices and
other variables are stochastically managed This type of study could strengthen
the conclusions drawn here Generation adequacy studies could also serve to size
reserve allocation and assess the need for new generation scheduling practices
The last scenario analysed is within  55% instantaneous penetration limit Under
this scenario, the share of electricity generated by VRE would be 41% There is
less VRE participation in electricity generation because   Challenge : Managing
high instantaneous VRE penetration levels or nearly isolated power systems, such
as Ireland, limit instant penetration to about 55% of demand (EIRGRID and SONI,
2016a) mainly because of grid stability issues The limit to instantaneous VRE
penetration in the system may result in VRE power curtailment This means not all
the potential available variable renewable electricity is utilised Regardless of
the presence or share of VRE in  power system, balance between power generation
and demand has to be achieved Power imbalances may lead to system frequency
diversions from its nominal value If improperly handled, these could result in
serious operational and stability problems, or even complete system blackouts
VRE curtailment is not necessarily unacceptable in  power system When  large
share of VRE is planned in  system, possible changes in infrastructure,
regulation, market design and system operation are needed Curtailment could then
provide  temporary solution in anticipation of further adaptations to the system
(NREL, 2013) These may include acquiring the necessary technical skill to manage
system with low inertia Traditionally, balancing activities have been supported
by large, fully controlled synchronous generators such as diesel and other
thermal power plants These generators provide inertia and governor response to
the system, which help to manage contingency events without major impacts
Renewable energy curtailment in the Dominican Republic could rise to as much as
10% if instant penetration is limited to 55% of demand If instantaneous
penetration is allowed to reach 75% of the demand, VRE curtailment could fall
below % with REmap options The 55% and 75% represent the current and future
targeted instantaneous penetration limits in poorly connected front runner power
systems (EIRGRID and SONI, 2016a, 2016b)  system containing  high level of VRE
would displace some of these conventional synchronous generators, thus lowering
the rotating inertia In turn, this means that the more VRE are in  system, the
bigger and faster frequency excursions could occur This especially critical in
isolated power systems like in the Dominican Republic, and even more in the
event of contingencies Measures to overcome this challenge exists, including,
fast frequency response electricity storage, VRE production interconnection with
neighbouring power systems, designating must-run power plants for system
reliability, or the requirement for VRE to support balancing activities The
latter is  requirement included in the most advanced grid codes (IRENA, 2016e)
The most appropriate solution depends the country’ particular grid
characteristics, costs and economic projections Figure 31 shows that  55%
instantaneous penetration limit would require VRE curtailment up to % of the
time in  given year The corresponding number for 75% instantaneous penetration
is % curtailment, This simplified assessment reveals the important message (non-
synchronous generation) could impose  technical challenge on the operation of
the system VRE power curtailment could act as  countermeasure to allow
infrastructural, regulatory, operational and market design changes ushering in
reliable system at higher instantaneous VRE penetration levels As with the
previous challenge, in-depth analysis of the system and especially of its
stability would disclose the actual limits to instantaneous penetration of non-
synchronous generation and the consequent curtailment expected The 55% and 75%
limits used in this simplified analysis assume that state-of-the-art
infrastructure, regulatory, market and operational measures are embedded in the
Dominican Republic All these measures have to be co-ordinated and built in line
with the same vision of the sector, matching technical grid code specifications
that instant VRE penetration The scale of the potential problem in the Dominican
Republic under the REmap case was assessed by estimating the expected
instantaneous penetration level of VRE (non-synchronous generation) This was
achieved by dividing expected VRE generation by expected demand for each hour of
the year in 2030, both calculated in the previous section Figure 31 depicts the
estimated instantaneous penetration of VRE (non-synchronous generation) in 2030
under the REmap case The figure shows an instantaneous VRE penetration range of
%-% of demand Current practice in the most advanced isolated   Figure 31:
Instant VRE penetration duration curve under the REmap scenario No curtailment
75% limit 55% limit 120 100 ) % (                   80 60 40 20   20 40 60 80
100 Percent of hours of the year (%, sorted) std - standard; dev - deviation; hr
- hour with market incentives, regulatory framework and operational needs is key
scheduling, they rely on forecasts Deviations between forecast and actual demand
are resolved by adjusting the output of some generation units that are able to
rapidly do so (or changing the demand by adjusting the load, which is often
known as demand-side response) When demand exceeds the forecasts, balance is
guaranteed by means of the so-called, operational reserves The operational
reserves are composed of power generation capacity that can be deployed within
short timeframe (shorter than the dispatch periods) Typically, the generation
scheduling programmes are completed one day ahead with intervals that range
between 15 minutes and one hour Challenge : Flexibility requirements due to
change in the system net load and management of different and more uncertain
ramp rates In general terms, challenges associated with the balance between
power demand and power generation within  timeframe of seconds and milliseconds
are related with the instantaneous penetration levels of VRE These challenges
have been discussed above Power balance (demand plus losses minus generation)
within longer timeframes is managed through forward generation scheduling, which
is planned ahead This generation scheduling ensures that enough power can be
generated to cover all demand In building the generation scheduling programmes,
system operators take into account several factors, including: the overall cost
of power production of each generation unit and each unit’ ability to change its
power output (the speed at which  unit is able to change its power output
depends on the particular technology and equipment used); previously committed
System operators do not know the exact demand ahead of time Thus, in order to
create the generation   power plants due to contracts; planned equipment
maintenance; criteria for system reliability (probability of losing any
equipment in the system due to unforeseen events); and uncertainty associated
with the demand forecasts and VRE generation forecasts scenario, the required
ramps by the system in 2015 were calculated and compared to those required in
Figure 30 shows the comparison The 2015 ramps were obtained by analysing real
operational data with one-hour resolution without demand-side management
measures Extreme events, such as blackouts were excluded from the analysis by
applying  ±  standard deviation filter The 2030 scenarios were constructed by
analysing the estimated net load with REmap options and without new VRE
generation – again with no demand-side management measures In an ideal scenario
there would be no unforeseen events (such as plant outages), and no uncertainty
in demand and generation, including the power produced by VRE In reality, events
do happen, and demand and VRE generation prediction models are not 100% accurate
Scheduling and dispatch practices therefore need to be reviewed to account for
new uncertainties arising from the introduction of VRE Within the timeframe of
the dispatch intervals, the uncertainty and risks accompanying these
technologies must be mitigated through operational reserves, or other means This
would compensate for potential differences between planned output generation and
actual power demand The maximum one-hour ramp requirement by the system changes
from about 296 MW per hour in 2015 to about 514 MW per hour in This is
substantial increase in ramp requirements, but only represent the estimated
changes in the demand profile The big ramping requirement change can be
explained by the expected growth of the demand (peak demand passes from 63 GW in
2015 to about  GW in 2030) The maximum one-hour ramp requirement by the system
in 2030 with the REmap scenario is about 695 MW per hour, which represents about
35% increase in ramping needs due to the introduction of VRE (comparing the two
2030 scenarios) The increased need for ramping capabilities to cover the
forecasted demand for power is another challenge related to the incorporation of
VRE into  power system This also affects the generation scheduling programmes
The ramp of  power generating unit is defined as its ability to increase or
decrease its power output within  certain amount of time  power system with no
VRE would still have ramping requirements However, these requirements would only
be  function of power demand (the extent to which power demand changes from one
dispatch period to the next) The 35% increase in ramp requirements in nominal
terms (MW per hour) seems big However, if the requirement is compared to as
percentage of the peak demand in the system, the increase in ramp requirement
due to the introduction of VRE in the system is not as big In 2015, the ramp
requirements of the system are about % of the peak demand (296 MW per hour
divided by 63 GW) Similarly, the ramp requirements by the system in 2030 is %
and % of the peak demand without and with REmap Options (514 MW per hour divided
by  GW, and 695 MW per hour divided by  GW) VRE power output can experience
rapid, unexpected and steep changes Thus, the ramping requirements of  system
with  large share of VRE can be larger and more uncertain The increased ramping
requirement from dispatchable units caused by the presence of VRE can be
explained by the speed of change of VRE power output For instance, it is
logically expected that at sunset the power generated from all PV power plants
would decrease At those times, dispatchable units would have to ramp up or
increase their power production to account for the power that is no longer
produced by the PV power plants The uncertainty and variability of VRE power
generation leads to higher and more uncertain ramping capabilities needs The
green line in Figure 30, representing the system in 2030 with REmap Options, is
steeper in the middle region when compared with the other scenarios (from about
20% to 80% of the hours of the year) This suggests ramp requirements would be
more variable The variability of ramp requirements should be assessed because of
the implications on measures that the system operator would have to take The
green line is also much steeper than the blue one at around %-20% of the time,
which suggests that steeper ramp requirements would be needed under the REmap
scenario In turn, this means that the high ramping capacity would be To assess
whether the Dominican Republic could easily handle ramping requirements under
the REmap   Figure 32: Ramp duration curve for 2015 and 2030 with REmap VRE 800
1000 Ramps in 2015 Ramps in 2030 without VRE Ramps in REmap 2030 with VRE 2015
Ramps mean +/-  std dev )   /   ( 600 )   /   ( 500 400                 200
–500 –200 –400 –1000 –600 –1500 –800  1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
9000 % 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Time of the year (hr) Percent of hours of the year
(sorted) std - standard; dev - deviation; hr - hour Figure 33: Average ramp rate
envelopes for 2015 and 2030 3000 2000 Flexibility required due to VRE ) 1000   (
–1000 –2000 2015 Load (% percentile) 2030 Load (% percentile) 2030 with REmap
option (99% percentile) –3000        Time step (hr)   utilised for only very
short periods of time This should also be assessed in order to ensure that
appropriate regulatory measures are taken to ensure the ramping capacity exists
when needed 871 MW of utility-scale PV, 665 MW of distributed on-grid PV, 91 MW
of small hydropower, 149 MW of biogas and landfill gas, 49 MW of bagasse-based
power generation and 70 MW of biomass co-firing The effects of VRE introduction
in the Dominican Republic can also be assessed through ramp envelopes in Figure
These envelope curves indicate the ramp requirements of the system in  multi-
hour timeframe The multi-hour ramps are useful when allocating operational
reserves and when designing the generation scheduling programmes The line
represented by magenta dashes in Figure 31 symbolises the ramping requirements
of the system in 2030 due to the load This is much wider than that of the 2015
envelope (solid blue line) Both of this lines, only represent how fast the load
or demand for power changes in the system The solid green line in Figure 31
shows the ramp requirements of the system in 2030 with VRE This envelope is
notably wider the other two This means that under the REmap scenario, the power
system would require much higher flexibility than that under the current system
or in  future system with no VRE According to the Worldwatch Institute (2011)
resource assessment, the locations with the highest potential for wind power are
in the northern, southern and eastern provinces of the country (see map in
Figure 34) These regions, with high wind resources, are  significant distance
from the main load centres, which are located in the central region and in
Santiago Harnessing energy from remote locations may require the construction of
new transmission lines and reinforcements in other parts of the transmission
system This new infrastructure or reinforcements have to be carefully planned to
maximise the utilisation and intrinsic benefits of renewable energy technologies
The expansion and reinforcements in the transmission network also have to take
into account increasing demand and the reliability and power quality criteria
defined in the country’ legislation National and international experience has
demonstrated that expanding transmission networks could take several years (in
average around  to 10 years) It is therefore important to plan and start
expanding the network before it is actually fully required Anticipating sites
for development (grid expansion) when no committed projects exist has its risks
It is beyond the scope of this report to try to asses these risks in the
Dominican Republic However, different solutions around the world exist One
example is the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT), which decided to
invest in grid expansion to achieve high wind potential ERCOT expects the
private sector to invest and build wind farms on these sites (ERCOT, 2008) Three
important conclusions can be drawn from this analysis First, system operators
and system planners need to take into account the following key elements: system
has to be flexible enough to handle larger and more uncertain ramps; advanced
forecasting algorithms are needed to reduce uncertainty in VRE power generation
Second, reserves are not the only means to add flexibility to the system Storage
units, fast ramping power plants and demand-side management are other options
already commercially available Future technologies may also emerge, and they
need to be considered too Third,  detailed and dedicated study to assess the
flexibility of the system and the reserves allocation is advised  simplified
assessment of the power transfer capacities required to evacuate potential wind
and solar generation was conducted for this report This illustrates the
potential impact of the REmap Options on transmission system utilisation and
needs The assessment concentrated on the required transmission capacity and did
not include  detailed representation of the electricity network It excluded
different voltage levels in the system and potential stability problems The
intention of this study is not to replace  detailed power system simulation but
rather to identify potential Challenge : Adequacy of the transmission network
The optimal location in terms of availability of wind and solar resources does
not necessarily coincide with high demand centres This means that large-scale
VRE projects may bring changes in the amount and direction of power flows within
the transmission system The REmap Options for the power sector include additions
of  453 MW of onshore wind power capacity,   Figure 34: Potential locations for
wind projects and main load centres Haiti Main wind potential zones Main load
centres Based on Worldwatch Institute data (2015); background map from -maps ()
requirements to increase the capacity of electricity transmission within the
country In previous sections, curtailment has been considered only in relation
to instantaneous VRE penetration at  system level In this section, curtailment
of VRE is assumed to be caused by network congestion or limitations Curtailment
under these circumstances competes with the cost of expanding the grid Full
cost- benefit analysis methodologies should be employed to find the optimal
solution This simple transmission system adequacy analysis identifies maximum
capacities that may be required by the system in 2030, in order to be able
transport all wind and solar generation to the load centres, with acceptable
levels of curtailment due to congestions To carry out the analysis, the
transmission system was aggregated according to current operational areas and
sub-areas Each node of the aggregated network represents  sub-area of the system
(as in Figure 11) Trough load duration curves of the net load for each sub-area
(projected to 2030 according to expected regional load growth and generation
expansion), statistical significant, possible exchanges of power between areas
and required transmission capacities were identified along with potential
curtailment The location of the renewable energy projects in the REmap scenario
originated from  Worldwatch Institute study which detected sites with most wind
and solar potential (2011) All these projects were allocated in an electrical
node on the aggregated transmission network Table 13 shows where the projects
are located geographically and electrically (see also Figure 34) After locating
the projects and allocating them an electrical sub-area, the local residual
demand for each   Table 13: Distribution of projects and their associated
transmission node Technology Region Samaná System sub-area Norte Nordeste
Capacity (MW) 153 La Altagracia Este_Profundo 192 Bani Sur_Cercano 423 Wind (
304 MW) Pedernales Sur_Profundo 480 Montecristi Norte Noroeste 480 Puerto Plata
Norte  Plata 576 Central_Metropolitana 440 Santo Domingo Solar PV ( 761 MW)
Central_Santo Domingo Oriental 440 Santiago Norte Santiago 881 node (sub-area)
was obtained Figure 35 shows the net load of the four outermost sub-areas in the
country (in terms of distance to the load centres) As seen in the figure, the
sub-areas are characterised by low local demand and high VRE generation Positive
numbers in the plot represent excess power while negative numbers signify  need
to import power into the node Excess local VRE generation translates to  need to
export power to another region or node It occurs about 70% of the time for Sur
Profundo and over 90% of the time for the Norte Noroeste and Norte  Plata sub-
areas This means that the sub-areas would essentially need to evacuate most of
their power production The expansion of the network or required capacity has to
Figure 35: Local net load for the most critical nodes in 2030 Sur Profundo Norte
Noroeste 300 400 250 300 200 )   ( 200 150 100      100  50 –100  –50 –200 Norte
Plata Este Profundo 100 350 300 50 250 )   ( 200  150      –50 100 50 –100  –50
–150 20   40 60 80 100 20 40 60 80 100 Percent of hours of year (% sorted)
Percent of hours of year (% sorted) Inverted local net load Local electricity
surplus Note: critical nodes are defined as those furthest away from the load
centres and with high installed VRE capacity The blue shaded area represents the
electricity that would have to be transmitted or evacuated from the node   be
assessed by comparing the cost of VRE curtailment against the cost of expanding
the network However, this cost comparison is beyond the scope of the present
analysis The South area was also further analysed (see Figure 36) This area can
currently transfer  maximum 345 MW to the Central region (OC-SENI, 2015c) At
current power transfer limits, VRE would have to be curtailed about % of the
time even without considering that other power plants might be needed for
reliability and other reasons Again, this signals the requirement to expand the
overall capacity to transfer power from the South area to the Central sub-area,
the location predicted for most electricity consumption in As an illustration,
the Sur Profundo sub-area (Figure 35 top left) is further analysed According to
the current transmission restriction analysis from OC-SENI, the sub-area
transmission capacity is 45 MW (EIRGRID and SONI, 2016a) This means that under
the REmap scenario and with no expanded network transmission capacity, VRE
curtailment locally would be in the order of 55% This would mean 730 GWh of
clean power could not be utilised in the system This level of curtailment would
take place even if no other power plants were running This is an optimistic
scenario because conventional power plants may be required for reliability
(instantaneous penetration) and local voltage regulation This analysis clearly
reveals the need to expand the grid in three of the four sub-areas analysed This
simple assessment demonstrates the need to expand the electrical transmission
network to accommodate and transfer power from the sites with the highest
potential to demand centres The South area, together with the Sur Profundo,
Norte Noroeste, and Norte  Plata sub-areas have been identified as locations for
possible transmission capacity expansion Current transmission expansion plans
are based on the scenario from If REmap options were to be realised, it may be
necessary to update these expansion plans Figure 36: Local net load for South
region 600 Inverted local net load Local electricity surplus Current
transmission limit 400 200 )   (       –200 –400 –600 % 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Percent of hours of year (% sorted) Note: Curtailment of VRE power can occur due
to several reasons (including technical, and regulatory factors) These reasons
could co-exist at the same time (  limit due to network congestion, another due
to instantaneous penetration, the existence of long-term contracts) In the
assessment of these technical challenges, only two reasons for VRE curtailment
were considered The first is due to the maximum instantaneous penetration level
of non-synchronous generation, which is related to the stability of the gird,
and the presence of fast frequency balance technologies The second, is the
presence of congestions at the transmission electrical network There are
technical solutions to both these limiting factors ( state-of-the-art operating
practices, strict and forward-looking grid codes, incentivising thermal plants
to work as must-run or back-up power plants, and electrical network expansion)
The optimal solution is system specific requires in-depth analysis and dedicated
studies    End-use sectors The rest of this section describes the main
opportunities and key action areas for the successful deployment of renewables
in end-use applications In the Reference Case, much renewable energy is deployed
in the power sector although direct uses of renewables for heating, cooling and
cooking also present interesting opportunities to replace non-renewable energy
carriers The biggest challenge is to make policy makers and users aware of the
renewables potential in end-use sectors and to implement appropriate solutions
and policies that realise this potential Industry Industry in the Dominican
Republic is dominated by industrial processes based on low-temperature steam,
mainly in the food and beverage industry Industry is also populated by  large
number of micro and Table 14: REmap findings on direct uses of renewables in
industry, 2030 REmap findings Action areas  Feedstock storage ● Bioenergy
(including renewable waste) can provide industrial process heat at all
temperatures and scales but is not  straightforward option In the case of the
Dominican Republic, bioenergy can be easily integrated to the production
processes of food, chemicals, and other small and medium scale industries that
require low to medium process heat temperatures In that respect, CHP can be
favourable option to produce also on-site electricity to meet auxiliary and
motor drive needs Its use in other sectors mean there is competing demand for
this limited resource Sufficient onsite storage is required as biomass
feedstocks are seasonal, as is the case of bagasse to ensure continuous daytime
and harvest- time supply           Increase sugar cane agricultural yield ● The
sugar cane production yield is around 40 tonnes per hectare, which is half the
global best practice achieved in Brazil today Improvements in agricultural
yields can make  significant contribution to feedstock availability, both
considering the direct use of the feedstock ( to produce conventional ethanol)
or its residues ( taking advantage of the higher amount of bagasse after sugar
cane production)  National awareness on the opportunities for renewables in
industry ● As in many other countries, industry solar thermal energy use is not
part of the national energy plans for REmap estimates that solar thermal energy
can provide around 10%-15% of the low- (< 200°) and medium- temperature
(200°-450°) process heat use in This equates to  total installed capacity of 85
MW supplying around 16 ktoe ( PJ) of heat with conventional and CST
installations  Energy planning and strategy that includes solar thermal energy ●
Given the continuous demand for heat, the design of the installations will need
to include appropriate storage capacity Hybrid solutions with fossil fuels can
be another option           Optimise techno- economic design that that includes
the need for thermal storage ● Many industrial processes require large amounts
of heat, and many plants have limited space This might create  problem for
installing collectors covering  wide area An alternative is to install them on
the roof Existing buildings would not usually accommodate this but it is
consideration for new buildings design and construction Alternatively, CST is an
option to optimise the use of available space as well as to raise process heat
temperatures REmap considers  46 MW option for CST Organised industry regions
can create symbiosis between different plants within them, and this can to some
extent resolve the space problem  Deploy CST in enterprises with limited space
and for higher-temperature process heat   small enterprises (OMG, ), creating
significant opportunities for deployment of renewables plants and less energy-
intensive industries like food and beverages, textile or some chemical
installations Most enterprises in the Dominican Republic fall under these
categories  share of the energy used for heat generation in many of the low-
temperature processes in REmap is therefore easily supplied by solar and
bioenergy Energy costs are  substantial part of the industry sector’ overall
expenditure This is an issue in particular for small businesses with low
operating budgets beyond the energy-intensive sectors There is major potential
for solar thermal and bioenergy systems in small-scale Table 15: REmap findings
on direct uses of renewables in transport, 2030 REmap findings Action areas
National awareness ● Around 100 000 hectares of appropriate land are available
for sustainable sugar cane harvesting and could be dedicated to liquid biofuel
production ( without affecting sugar cane for food production) This represents
less than 30% of the total arable land for sugar cane production Given that
enough land is available, ethanol uptake is  potential consideration and could
supply  significant share of transport energy demand Current national plans do
not yet take this into account of renewables opportunities in transport  Energy
planning and strategy that considers the biofuels use             ● In REmap,
conventional ethanol use in road transport reaches 173 million litres in
Assuming that production yields remain at today’ levels, this would imply
cultivating around 50 000 hectares of land for sugar cane production –
equivalent to half the suitable land available for this purpose  market for both
biofuels demand and supply should be created to incentivise production
Reactivation of sugar  cane land not cultivated for sugar production   Liquid
biofuel blending mandates  Accelerate production and research and development
for advanced liquid biofuels ● Bagasse remaining after industrial processes
provides  significant opportunity for advanced biofuel production for the
benefit both of local businesses and technology development REmap estimates that
at least 19 million litres of advanced ethanol could be produced per year from
bagasse  Long-term energy ● With growing urbanisation and demand for mobility,
large market for electric mobility could open up, especially in major cities
such as Santo Domingo, Santiago de los Caballeros, La Romana National energy
projections do not include electric mobility estimates for road transport REmap
proposes electric mobility penetration amounting to % of road vehicle energy
demand in terms of distance This represents  billion passenger-kilometres
planning and strategy taking into consideration  major role for electric
mobility  Promote electric      vehicles by simultaneously incentivising vehicle
sales and investment in charging stations            ● Battery electric and
plug-in-hybrid electric car estimates in REmap would replace cars fuelled by
petrol This would amount to around % and 10% of total vehicle stock in 2030
respectively (220 000 vehicles) ● There is an opportunity for the early
introduction of two- and three- wheelers in major urban areas and beyond This is
motivated in particular by short distances, which means less need to recharge
than for four- wheeled electric vehicles This is also an attractive tourism
option REmap considers 375 000 two- and three-wheelers on the road in ● REmap
suggests that battery electric buses used for urban public transportation could
form  fleet of  100 out of 19 000 units in Transport In transport, biofuels are
the key technology for raising the sector’ renewable energy share The right
policies are needed to incentivise demand and create  market while ensuring
affordable and sustainable feedstock supply to meet this growing demand The
sustainable Table 16: REmap findings on direct uses of renewables in buildings,
2030 REmap findings Action areas  Raise governmental ● Solar energy use in the
Dominican Republic’ residential sector today covers around 12% of energy demand
for water heating In the Reference Case this would increase to 17% in Given that
solar water heaters are already cost-effective their actual potential is largely
overlooked ● Water heating accounts for one-fifth of energy demand in the
commercial, public and service sectors This stays stable in the period to The
Reference Case includes 10% of this demand supplied with solar water heaters in
2030 but there is potential to exceed this proportion REmap proposes to replace
LPG meeting 35% of energy demand for hot water in This would imply deploying
around 775 000 m2 of solar water heater capacity and public awareness of
renewables opportunities in buildings  Include direct use of renewables in
energy projections and planning              Urban planning  Building codes
Educate and raise awareness among end-users ● The economic development
expectations in the Dominican Republic are reflected in building stock expansion
To fulfil the additional potential for residential solar water heating in REmap
in 2030, it suffices to install solar water heaters in 35% of new households
constructed in 2017-This is three times current levels       Optimal use of
buildings space ● Solar water heating is particularly competitive in middle- and
high- income households given that they desire more hot water than low- income
households They also find this more affordable By contrast, low-income
households may need financial support to adopt this technology  Government
support  Facilitation of financing schemes  Raise governmental ● Solar space
cooling has been overlooked in energy projections in most countries across the
world yet some technologies could already offer competitive alternatives to
electricity use for air conditioning Cooling energy demand represents 25% of
energy use in urban households and more than 45% in commercial buildings and
public awareness of renewables opportunities              Energy planning and
strategies ● The Reference Case ignores renewable cooling Under REmap, 20% of
cooling demand in buildings would be supplied by solar thermal cooling
installations These would cover around 500 000 m2  Optimal use of available
buildings space ● REmap estimates that % of cooling demand is equivalent to more
than 200 000 PV rooftop installations  Raise governmental ● Tourism is growing
in the Dominican Republic so there is an opportunity to develop waste-to-energy
technologies for different applications REmap proposes  minor option to make use
of organic waste arising from the hospitality sector to produce biogas in
anaerobic digesters ● REmap considers the integration of 100 biogas systems in
hotels ( cubic meters – m3 – size) It is assumed that the biogas produced is
used for cooking but it could also be used for other purposes  for water heating
business case exists for such applications However, limited experience of the
technology means the hospitality sector needs to improve its understanding of
the opportunity and benefits of biogas                      and public awareness
of renewables opportunities  Energy planning and strategies  Building codes and
design   potential of energy crops (such as sugar cane) is limited so the
appropriate pathways need to be moulded to avoid interfering with land and water
use for food and feed production Based on the findings of each of the sectors
described above and considering the additional potential identified in REmap,
the key areas for government and policy maker attention are explained in further
detail below Some of them are relevant for more than one end-use sector, while
others are sector-specific This will provide  platform for the major adoption of
direct uses of renewables The alternative to biofuels is electric mobility
sourced with renewable power This requires  policy effort for both electric
vehicle deployment and modal shift, thereby changing consumer behaviour as well
as investing in infrastructure Electric two- and three- wheelers present an
early opportunity for major urban areas in the Dominican Republic and beyond
This is because distances are short, and the need to recharge is lower than for
four-wheeled electric vehicles Cross-sectoral ● More ambitious representation of
renewable technology options in end-use sector energy planning It is necessary
to include realistic but ambitious estimates in the projections of renewable
energy use in all end-use sectors This means the strategies accompanying energy
plans can be shaped with the aim of achieving  higher share of renewables The
establishment of targets is  possible complementary measure Buildings Although
energy plans currently include some renewables development, the vast potential
of direct renewables use in buildings is not fully integrated in the long-term
vision This omission could become  major issue considering that most renewable
technologies that can be used for heating, cooling or cooking are more
sustainable and cost-effective than non-renewable alternatives ● Improve public
education and awareness of the economics and direct uses of renewable
technologies Many end-users and local industry stakeholders currently have
limited awareness of the benefits and economics of renewables Yet the building
sector is the largest energy user after transport and numerous benefits could
arise from renewables use These include energy bill savings and reduced air
pollution in urban settlements To harness the renewable potential by 2030, the
Dominican Republic should consider promoting further educational and training
initiatives This would improve the understanding of renewables opportunities
particularly of solar and biomass technologies for household, commercial and
industrial applications The following table summarises the main findings on
renewables development relating to REmap estimates in the buildings sector The
major potential for renewables use in direct applications in buildings could
both decrease consumer energy bills and increase the renewables share in the
energy mix Key action areas for renewable energy use in end-use sectors To
ensure renewables are successfully integrated in the years ahead,  number of
obstacles need to be overcome They include high initial investment costs for
renewable installations, fossil fuel subsidies, high interest rates, limited
access to financing for equipment purchase, lack of end-user confidence in the
technology and few experienced installers Law  already incentivises renewable
technologies in end-use sectors, in buildings through exemptions on import
duties for solar thermal components or collectors, for example, but further
efforts are needed ● Reactivate sugar cane production land and increase
agricultural yields Some years ago, sugar cane was cultivated on around 350 000
hectares of Dominican Republic land (Instituto Interamericano de Cooperación
para la Agricultura, 2007) However, sugar cane production has declined
significantly so today only around 100 000 hectares of land are used for this
purpose Given the vast experience of the sugar industry, the unused arable land
presents an opportunity to decrease dependency on   imported transport fuels and
boost activity in the sector and control mechanisms, which will ensure that
renewable installations are fully functional and reach their optimal efficiency
This is needed to retain the interest and trust of end-users in these
technologies and sustain market development Barbados is  success story in the
development of direct uses of renewables, particularly in solar thermal
applications By 2009, almost half the island’ homes had water heating systems
(Energy Transition Initiative, 2015; UN Environment Programme, ) Some key
measures included programmes to improve local skills of solar water heating
technicians and financial incentives such as low-interest loans aimed at
manufacturers Improvements in agricultural yields can make  significant
contribution to feedstock availability, both considering the direct use of the
feedstock ( to produce conventional ethanol) or its residues ( taking advantage
of the higher amount of bagasse after sugar cane production) The low sugar cane
production yields also offer  major opportunity for improvement However, this
needs to be realised sustainably without resulting in increased water stress,
excessive fertiliser application etc ● Include urban planning and promote
renewable energy at the municipal level to adopt it more rapidly through local
action As population and economic growth accelerate urbanisation, city demand
for clean, reliable and affordable energy will increase exponentially
Significant urban planning efforts are therefore key to integrating more
renewables in heating and cooling and also electric mobility Local governments,
at state or municipality level, can play an important role here by encouraging,
enabling and regulating the increased uptake of renewable energy Even cities
that do not directly control power generation have options to drive clean energy
use,  supporting low-carbon transportation solutions including the
implementation of charging stations (IRENA, 2016f) As managers of local
infrastructure, cities and local governments can develop solutions that
integrate renewable energy (IRENA, 2016a) and can set an example by integrating
renewable technologies into public buildings All this needs to be held together
by sound national policy and planning with common goals and enforcement
mechanisms Industry ● feedstock storage to ensure Sufficient continuous daytime
and harvest-time supply Bioenergy (including renewable waste) can provide
industrial process heat at all temperatures and scales but is not
straightforward option Its use in other sectors means there is competing demand
for this limited resource, and supply logistics can be difficult Sufficient
onsite storage is required, and in many cases customised solutions are needed
This is particularly important because most industry plants have  continuous
need for energy to produce heat By contrast, biomass feedstocks are seasonal
Bagasse, one of the main residues exploited in the Dominican Republic, is one
example Transport ● Develop electric vehicle infrastructure It is important to
develop the necessary infrastructure to enable the uptake of electric vehicles
and to account for the role of electric mobility coupled with electricity
generation based on renewables in energy system planning Charging points need to
be readily accessible to make electric vehicles an attractive option On the
other hand, charging stations will not be an attractive investment until more
electric vehicles create the necessary demand for infrastructure (IRENA, 2016a)
Infrastructure development plays  significant role in raising the number of
early adopters and could be one way to achieve  breakthrough ● industry along
the entire Build  solid renewable technology value chain with high expertise and
quality assurance to help develop successful renewable markets Manufacturers,
system designers, distributors and installers need to have enough expertise and
quality compliance in the use, installation and maintenance of renewable
technologies This too will enable direct renewables to thrive Government can
support this by defining standards, certification   Increasing home, public, and
workplace charging options is crucial In addition to charging point expansion,
charging needs to be rapid (IRENA, 2016a) However, this is likely to be  minor
concern in the Dominican Republic because vehicles cover fairly short distances,
making this an opportunity for electric vehicle deployment Republic is  country
with growing population and energy demand It is thus in  good position to
integrate renewables in the residential and commercial segments since it is
easier to build for renewable energy use than to retrofit (IRENA, 2016a)
Renewables can ride on this growth if measures are introduced to stimulate their
use in the construction and renovation of buildings Examples include command and
control mechanisms such as building codes and technology standards or incentives
such as lower interest loans or end-user fiscal incentives When promoting
renewables in buildings, the whole range of technology options should be
considered Examples include different arrangements and types of solar thermal
collectors for heating and cooling, anaerobic digesters producing methane for
cooking or water heating and PV panels for electricity production ● Open up an
avenue for advanced biofuels Given the opportunity to use excess bagasse from
industrial applications, the Dominican Republic could develop expertise in
advanced biofuels production This will be critical in the long term because
there are limits to the production of land-intensive conventional biofuels
Bioenergy waste streams arising from industrial applications should also be
utilised for advanced liquid biofuels production However, this means developing
technology and creating finance resources for advanced biofuels capacity, which
up until now has been subject to only limited commercial development ● Optimise
the use of building space available for renewable installations One factor to
take into account when different renewable technologies are proposed is the
optimal use of rooftop and other available spaces to install different
technologies This is essential, especially in cities rising vertically such as
Santo Domingo Maximising buildings-integrated PV at the same time is another
possibility Buildings ● Embed codes and standards that integrate renewable in
buildings construction or renovation and make them part of urban development The
Dominican technologies Figure 37: Rooftop area covered by renewable energy
technology in REmap in 2030 Solar cooling – direct use % PV rooftop –
residential 19% Solar thermal – SWH-commercial 10% PV rooftop with storage –
residential % Solar thermal SWH-residential % Total  million m2 PV rooftop –
commercial 20% PV rooftop for cooling (AC) – alone (no electricity gen) 25% PV
rooftop with storage – commercial %   Figure 38 shows rooftop area distribution
by renewable technology segment as estimated in REmap by Most rooftop space will
be taken up by PV rooftop applications Even with all this potential installed,
only % of total available rooftop in the Dominican Republic in 2030 would be
covered by  renewable energy installation There are changes to the sector mix of
total demand in REmap Following the decline in traditional use of bioenergy, the
buildings share of total demand falls below 10%, which in absolute terms halves
total demand The share of transport and power generation in total bioenergy
demand increases significantly; demand for power generation doubles and for
transport increases by over 500% compared to the Reference Case ● Provide
accessible financial options for households to purchase renewable energy
technologies The widespread use of modern renewables requires new programmes
making modern renewable technologies (solar water heaters, efficient cook
stoves, solar cooling, PV installations etc) more affordable to low-income
households This could be complemented by other types of economic or fiscal
support In remote areas, this will also be  key to modern and universal energy
access These can take the form of government initiatives but also presents
opportunities for other stakeholders, including the private sector Many schemes
could be designed to fund and/or support households in acquiring renewable
energy technology According to IRENA estimates, annual primary bioenergy supply
could amount to  PJ More than three-quarters of this total derives from
agricultural residues and waste Potential for energy crops and forestry products
is rather limited Industry and power generation will be the main source of
demand for agricultural harvesting and processing residues Biogas and municipal
solid waste will be used to  great extent by the power generation sector
(landfill gas) and for cooking in buildings This is also where forestry products
( charcoal) for modern cook stoves will be used To  great extent, the transport
sector will rely on sugar cane for conventional ethanol production  small share
of demand will be met by bagasse,  harvesting residue, for advanced ethanol
production Finally, feedstocks for minor biodiesel production will be imported
Bioenergy market development  breakdown of primary energy use in the Dominican
Republic is shown in Figure The Reference Case sees  total annual demand of 42
PJ bioenergy in Buildings, power generation and industry each account for
approximately  third of total demand in the country There is  potential to meet
demand according to the high end of the supply (according to IRENA estimates
shown in Table ) with limited reliance on imports However, mobilising feedstock
supply will not be easy Markets for bioenergy will need to be created to realise
Figure 38: Breakdown of primary bioenergy use in Dominican Republic, 2030 REmap
Reference Case Buildings 35% Buildings 10% Power 27% Transport 18% Total 42
PJ/yr Total 66 PJ/yr Power 41% Industry 33% Industry 31% Transport %   Figure
39: Bioenergy supply potential in Dominican Republic for primary biomass, 2030
100 Wood construction, demolition and furniture waste )   /   (               80
Wood logging and processing residue 60 Energy crop from forest land 40 Animal
manure & post-consumer household waste Agro-processing residue 20  Harvesting
residue  Low High this potential, implying  dual policy effort in supply on the
one hand and demand on the other level Biogas digesters are not used at present
and need to be introduced into rural areas Three main challenges need to be
overcome in relation to demand: Substituting traditional uses of bioenergy by
modern forms of energy makes  significant impact on sustainability when their
hidden costs ( collection time) are also considered In addition, it reduces
household air pollution ) Traditional uses of bioenergy: in the Reference Case,
demand is already very close to the low end of the supply range (as shown in
Table ) so that it can technically be met with local resources However, the
outcome is alarming when demand and supply are compared at the feedstock level
Buildings require 14 PJ of bioenergy in total of which 10 PJ is traditional uses
of bioenergy for cooking Total volume of forestry product supply is  PJ –
significantly lower than the bioenergy demand for cooking This points to
potential deforestation in  country with already limited forest resources
Furthermore, traditional uses of bioenergy often result in indoor air pollution,
major cause of premature death Hence improvements are needed in the efficiency
of conversion technologies and appliances currently used with traditional
bioenergy as well as in charcoal production for clean cook stoves and cooking )
Liquid biofuel use in transport sector: transport is the other major challenge
IRENA’ estimate is conservative in terms of the supply potential of energy crops
(sugar cane) amounting to around  PJ This represents around 40 000 hectares of
land use per year (based on average ethanol yield of  460 litres per hectare) As
observed in Section , 100 000 hectares of land could be used for sugar cane
production without disturbing food/feed production Assuming this land is used,
total conventional ethanol supply is doubled – and it is the main technology for
increasing the renewables share in transportation Bagasse used to make advanced
biofuels increases the renewables share in the Under REmap Options, demand for
bioenergy in buildings declines significantly, and the traditional uses of
bioenergy are replaced either by its modern forms or LPG Modern forms of
bioenergy include charcoal and biogas According to REmap estimates, production
for charcoal needs to more than double compared today’   sector To date,
advanced biofuels production in the region is low, as in the rest of the world
The production costs of these fuels are much higher than their conventional
equivalents The Dominican Republic already benefits from rich solar, wind and
geothermal resources to supply renewable electricity Given limited bioenergy
availability and competition from other sectors, bioenergy is not the first
choice However, bioenergy combusted to generate both heat and electricity in CHP
plants can be viable Power plants fired by bioenergy are dispatchable like their
fossil fuel counterparts and can contribute to baseload power generation  small
market for liquid biofuel use already exists in the transport sector  market
needs to be created through blending mandates and/or volumetric targets by
taking into account the projected growth in the sector’ demand for total energy
Law  in chapter  on the special regime of biofuels, already lays down the first
foundations for incentives for biofuels production and for blending non-
renewable fuels with liquid biofuels to Since the legal framework is already in
place, CNE should next gradually introduce blending mandates to encourage the
formation of the market Depending on how markets evolve, incentives could be
expanded beyond As  first step, demand needs to be created by setting targets
that can make use of the synergies from bioenergy for medium- and high-
temperature process heat, dispatchable power and transport fuels This means
accounting for feedstock seasonality and prioritising the development of the
most resource-effective, least emission-intensive and most cost-effective
bioenergy pathways across all end-use sectors The main supply-side challenges
relate to mobilising  continuous supply of affordable and sustainable bioenergy
feedstocks  significant share of bioenergy supply in the country will originate
from agricultural residues and waste These feedstocks are sustainable but
typically not collected and currently have no market  collection and recovery
system should be developed while maintaining sustainability criteria Sugar cane
yields should be improved to reach levels in advanced countries The Dominican
Republic surface area is small, and import dependency will be limited
Nevertheless,  strong logistics system will be required to distribute feedstocks
across the country to conversion plants and end-users Up until now, there has
been limited production of advanced biofuels, and its increase requires more
than blending targets Research and development support and technology innovation
will be key to accelerating deployment of the most cost-effective routes of
production The sustainability aspects of biofuels need to be taken into
consideration when creating the market This will mean not just meeting  target
but also deploying the most resource- effective pathways with the least
intensive GHG emissions ) Creating  market for industrial heating and power
generation: industrial heating and power generation are the two largest markets
after transport for bioenergy in the Dominican Republic Bioenergy is  readily
available alternative to fossil fuels to generate process heat at various
temperature levels The main issues in the industry sector include the need for
continuous bioenergy supply to run processes, and space to store feedstocks
However, low- temperature and some medium-temperature processes can also be
supplied with energy from non-bioenergy renewables Examples include solar
thermal, geothermal or heat pumps if  resource is available Agriculture is one
of the main economic activities in the Dominican Republic so experience and
channels exist These can be developed on the basis of the existing market for
energy crops For instance, some sugar mills also cultivate and trade other
energy crops used to feed process heat in industry on land not suited to sugar
cane production This may be  minor activity today but could be easily expanded
To ensure supply, it will be necessary to harvest farm residues along with post-
consumer waste and create  supply market and logistics system across the country
This must be affordable as well as stable when local harvests fluctuate
RENEWABLES COSTS AND SAVINGS IN REMAP DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  Investment needs
Costs of renewables in the Dominican Republic Total annual average investment
needed in renewable energy technology deployment in  ( capital investment in
renewable capacity for power generation and end-use sectors) amounts to USD 695
million (see Table 15) USD 245 million is required each year to fulfil the
Reference Case, and an extra USD 450 million per year would be needed to
implement the REmap Options38 Table 16 provides an overview of substitution
costs by sector for 2030 based on the business and govern ment perspectives
National prices are based on  discount rate of 12% and take into account energy
tax and subsidies in energy prices in the Dominican Republic International
prices are based on  discount rate of 10% and exclude tax and subsidies in
energy prices In both the business and government perspective, most of the
industry and buildings options are cost-effective (except modern uses of solid
biomass and SWAC in the business perspective) In the power sector 90% of the
renewable energy supplied with REmap Options is cost-effective This is  result
of the country’ high dependency on expensive oil product imports38 All power
sector REmap Options substitute oil products and coal but even when PV or wind
technologies are compared with natural gas generation, they are still cost-
competitive40 Most of the additional investment39 is needed for the power sector
(USD 344 million per year) as shown in Table 15, especially wind (USD 155
million per year, shown in Figure 40) Bioenergy technologies (including the
capacity to produce liquid biofuels and biomethane for transport) also require
an extra USD 105 million each year beyond the Reference Case Bioenergy for
heating technologies in industry (process heat) and buildings (mainly for
cooking) will require additional investments of USD 56 million per year on
average Investment in solar heating and cooling systems will require  total
annual average of USD 34 million Table 17: Average annual investment needs for
renewable energy capacity by sector,  Reference Case USD million per year 245
213 28   REmap Options USD million per year 450 344 60 34 12 REmap USD million
per year 695 557 88 37 13 By sector Power Industry – heating and cooling
Buildings – heating and cooling Transport + + + + + = = = = = 38 These costs
exclude infrastructure ( additional generation or transmission capacity in the
power sector or electric vehicle charging stations) and enabling technology
costs ( grid integration) 40 The estimated levelised cost of energy (LCOE) in
this study for 2030 is USD /kWh for onshore wind, USD /kWh for utility-scale PV
and USD /kWh for natural gas power generation 39 Additional investment needs
represent the difference between investments needed in the REmap case and the
Reference Case   of renewable energy Table 17 shows the substitution costs of
REmap Options in 2030 for the Dominican Republic (the same information as
plotted in the two figures) The option cost ranges from USD -72/GJ to as high as
USD +103/GJ in the government perspective The business perspective starts off
with options costing as low as USD -110/GJ and ends with options as expensive as
USD +42/GJ In both cases, over 80% of the energy from these options is cost-
competitive and therefore incurs  negative substitution cost Table 18: Average
substitution costs of REmap Options by sector, 2030 Business perspective
Government perspective USD/GJ USD/GJ --Industry - -Buildings -17 Transport
--Power --Average – all sectors Most of the bioenergy technologies in the
business perspective experience low substitution costs and would generate
savings when compared to the petroleum product alternative Onshore wind,
cogeneration with bagasse, landfill gas generation and decentralised PV incur
the lowest sub stitution cost for on-grid power generation Solar heaters and
coolers in industry and buildings are cost-competitive This is explained by
their low capital costs and the expensive petroleum products or electricity used
as an alternative In the transport sector, battery electric two- or three-
wheelers and public buses are the cheapest REmap Option in the business
perspective This is due to the substitution of costly conventional fuels
Conventional biofuels Using the small amounts of bioenergy and waste from
industrial processes to generate process heat as well as solar process heat is
cost-effective option In the government perspective, the average cost of sub-
stituting the selected technology options in each sector is lower than in the
business case This is explained by the exclusion of taxes and subsidies from
energy prices Figure 41 and Figure 42 rank the costs of each REmap Op tion and
show its contributions to the increased share Figure 40: Average annual
investment needs for renewable energy technologies,  250 Reference Case Remap
Options                )   /   200 150         ( 100 50                  -
/                       Figure 41: Renewable energy cost-supply curve by
renewable energy resource, business perspective, 2030 )         ( )         (
-                 )      )       )     )            (          (   )         (
)         (      )        (       )         (
(   )             (                )       -   (          )       -   (
(                         )         (     50      )         (   )       -      /
(                 )                         )       (                 40
30                            20                        10      Reference Case
-10        /        ( -20 -30 -40 -50 % % % 12% 15% 18% 21% 24% 27% % Share of
modern renewable energy in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Solar thermal
Moderng bioenergy for power Solar PV Onshore wind Liquid biofuels for transport
Biogas Hydropower Moderng bioenergy for end-use SWAC Renewable electricity for
end-use follow and would also generate savings when replacing conventional
gasoline or diesel The bottom-up CO2 emissions estimate of sectors covered in
this analysis amounts to 20 million Mt CO2 per year in 2010 (or  tonnes CO2 per
capita per year)41 In the Reference Case, total energy related CO2 emissions in
the Dominican Republic increase to 35 million tonnes in 2030 (or  tonnes CO2 per
capita) This is an alarming result, given that GHG emission reduction targets in
the country’ INDC is 25% by 2030, compared with  tonnes CO2 equivalent per
capita in This implies that total GHG emissions in 2030 should be at  level of
tonnes CO2 equivalent per capita (for all sectors including energy) Therefore,
energy related CO2 emissions alone are already above the total GHG objective
under the Reference Case developments  Benefits of REmap Options Figure 43 shows
primary energy supply trends in  in the Dominican Republic under the Reference
Case and REmap REmap Options would cut fossil fuel demand by 21% compared to the
fossil fuel consumption in the Reference Case The savings range from 19% for oil
products to 34% for coal Total oil demand in REmap would be close to 2010 levels
By comparison, coal rises 230% in Remap in  (compared to 400% rise in the
Reference Case over the same period) Likewise, total renewable energy supply in
REmap grows about 240% over the same period (compared to 65% in the Reference
Case) 41 For this same year, total energy related GHG emissions amount to
tonnes CO2 per capita   Figure 42: Renewable energy cost-supply curve by
renewable energy resource, government perspective, 2030 )            /    (   )
( )            )        )         (             )            (   )             (
-      (  )         (                  )                    (   )         (
)        (                    )        )         (   (
)       -   (        )       -   (                        )         (     (
70 )       (                                      60       )
50         40  30                 20 10      -10 Reference Case        /
( -20 -30 -40 -50 -60 -70 % % % 12% 15% 18% 21% 24% 27% % Share of modern
renewable energy in total ﬁnal energy consumption (%) Solar thermal Moderng
bioenergy for power Solar PV Onshore wind Liquid biofuels for transport Biogas
Hydropower Moderng bioenergy for end-use SWAC Renewable electricity for end-use
If all REmap Options identified in this study are put in place, total CO2
emissions reduce to 27 million tonnes (or  tonnes CO2 per capita) This is 23%
lower than the Reference Case in 2030 (or an annual absolute volume of  million
tonnes CO2), as shown in Figure These reductions would be an important step in
meeting GHG emission reduction targets in the country’ INDC for industry,
buildings and power sectors would already result in annual savings of USD
billion in 2030 from the substitution of non-renewable technologies and fuels
The power sector shows the greatest potential for cost reductions with this
particular energy mix The transport sector REmap Options would be implemented
for less than USD 190 million per year The power sector accounts for around 70%
of that total mitigation potential Meeting these emission reduction targets and
making greater reductions means accelerating renewables deployment and energy
efficiency measures to reach the emissions target reduction by Reduced
externalities from avoided CO2 and air pollutant emissions estimated in this
roadmap42 also yield savings Externalities related to air pollution (impacts on
human health and agriculture) result on savings of USD - billion per year
Furthermore, at an assumed 42 The five air pollutants assessed include ammonia,
mono-nitrogen oxides, particulate matter, sulphur dioxide and volatile organic
compounds Table 17 shows  number of financial indicators for the Dominican
Republic The package of REmap Options   Figure 43: Total primary energy supply
in Dominican Republic,  )   /   (                 600 500 400 300 200 100
Base year Reference Case REmap 2010 2030 Coal Gas Traditional biomass Modern
bioenergy (liquid and gaseous) Solar PV Oil Hydro Modern bioenergy (solid) Solar
thermal Wind carbon price of USD  per tonne, related externalities could save
USD - billion each year Since the savings largely offset the costs, policy
makers should also consider innovative measures which could help balance the
potential of renewables offering savings in some technologies and sectors This
would support the implementation of the REmap Options incurring some extra costs
when compared to the non-renewable substitute When accounting for the savings
derived from the substitution of non-renewable technologies and reduced
externalities, total annual savings could amount to USD  billion- billion per
year43 If the REmap Options are analysed individually, some result in savings
and others incur additional costs REmap Options incurring additional costs
require economic support, which amounts to less than USD 120 million per year in
This represents around % of the total potential savings in REmap In addition,
the REmap mix estimated for the Dominican Republic cuts fossil fuel imports
Simply introducing REmap Options substituting oil and coal products decreases
annual fuel input by about 91 PJ ( 170 ktoe) and save up to USD  billion  year
in fuel costs About three-quarters of these savings correspond to electricity
generation fuel savings 43 The costs of renewables have been compared with the
non- renewable energy technologies assuming  relatively high growth in crude oil
prices to This and the assessment of externalities has been carried out on the
basis of standard parameters which may overestimate the savings in the island
context   Figure 44: Energy-related CO2 emissions,  40 Reference Case emissions
35 Mt           35 23% reduction  Mt 30 25 )   /   (          -       20 15 10
2010 REmap 2030 Reduction in 2030 due to REmap Options CO2 emissions Table 19:
Financial indicators for renewable energy use in Dominican Republic, government
perspective Annual energy system costs and savings, 2030 (Remap vs Reference
Case) (USD billion per year in 2030) System costs from REmap Options - Industry
- Buildings - Transport  Power - Savings from reduced externalities  to  Reduced
externalities from outdoor air pollution  to  Reduced externalities from indoor
air pollution (traditional biomass)  to  Reduced externalities from climate
change  to  System costs from Remap Options and reduced externalities - to -
Incremental subsidy needs 15    SUGGESTIONS FOR ACCELERATING RENEWABLE ENERGY
UPTAKE This roadmap has shown that the Dominican Republic has the potential to
raise its renewable energy share to 27% by This would result in an annual
consumption of 87 PJ ( 080 ktoe) of final renewable energy About half this
potential is in the power sector and the other half in the direct use of
renewables in end-use sectors, namely heating, cooling and transport improve the
environment and reduce externalities related to the human health impacts of
fossil fuel by USD - billion per year by Finally, the country’ fossil energy
bill can be cut by USD  billion per year Fulfilling this potential raises
number of challenges In this roadmap, challenges specific to the power sector
and end-use sectors are separately identified If the potential of technologies
in REmap are implemented, the renewable energy share in the power sector reaches
44% This is significantly higher than the 25% target in Law 57-In heating
sectors, the renewable energy share can reach 43% and 41% for buildings and
industry respectively In transport, it could work out as high as % Existing
energy plans and targets in the Dominican Republic do not account for this
potential, especially in end-use sectors In the power sector, the challenges
fall mainly into institutional, economic and technical Technical challenges
include generation adequacy and flexibility, adequate electric grid development,
management of variability, limited predictability of variable renewable power
and management of instantaneous penetration levels for variable renewable power
End-use challenges can be broadly categorised around limited consideration in
planning and limited awareness of the major potential offered by renewable
energy technologies For bioenergy, it will be important to create markets and
ensure affordable and reliable supply while maintaining sustainability In terms
of technology mix, bioenergy has considerable potential to account for about
half the total final energy mix because it can replace fossil fuels in different
applications across the energy system Most importantly, onshore wind and solar
PV show exponential growth between now and 2030 with total installed generation
capacities reaching  GW and  GW respectively Their combined output would
represent 25% of total electricity generation by 2030 meaning VRE would
represent  considerable share of the country’ total power output As far as the
Dominican Republic policy landscape is concerned, these are the high-level
suggestions for dealing with the specific challenges described above: ● In light
of the vision in REmap, establish clear and consistent renewable energy targets
Ensure they are consistent with other national energy strategies and  stable
institutional and regulatory framework with the right financial incentives to
attract renewables investments Realising the renewable energy share estimated in
this roadmap would require an average annual investment of USD 695 million
between now and When these investments are annualised, and the annual operation,
maintenance and fuel costs accounted for, renewables actually result in savings
compared to the costs of non- renewable energy technologies that they substitute
This energy mix yields  number of important benefits in CO2 emissions relating
to energy could be reduced by up to 23% compared to the baseline level in the
same year This means only the accelerated deployment of renewables suggested by
REmap provides the important step the Dominican Republic needs to fulfil its
INDC Moreover, renewables would ● Ensure enough dispatchable generation is
available to provide the firm capacity and flexibility required by the power
system Design appropriate incentives for this purpose supported by updated
generation expansion plans with intermediate targets ● Align transmission
planning with renewable energy targets and assess the cost and benefits   of
grid expansion and other local balancing measures to efficiently manage possible
grid congestion areas and touristic parts of the country This market also needs
to make use of synergies with the power sector and plan for related
infrastructure and financing needs Define measures in line with planning for
renewable energy deployment and transmission capacity to guarantee economic
levels of curtailment Explore the feasibility of flexibility measures to manage
it efficiently ● ● Set targets for bioenergy use in applications lacking any
other renewable energy alternative and where bioenergy creates added value to
the system Promote the uses of its most resource- efficient and cost-effective
pathways to ensure sustainability ● Devise and introduce appropriate incentives
and market mechanisms to promote  flexible power system able to handle the new
operational conditions imposed by the expected high share of variable renewables
This roadmap provides  detailed overview of the realistic potential of
renewables in the Dominican Republic by Fulfilling the REmap Options by 2030
will require significant effort to plan the intermediate targets and measures to
achieve them, particularly in the power sector The findings of this roadmap thus
need to be complemented by detailed technical and economic studies on operating
and planning the interconnected systems containing  high share of VRE ● Define
codes and standards for buildings construction and renovation that take account
of renewables such as solar water heating and cooling Integrate renewables into
energy and urban planning to accelerate their uptake by ensuring cost-effective
energy supply to the population IRENA looks forward to further supporting the
energy transition in the Dominican Republic, particularly by conducting any
studies necessary This research will be needed to prepare for the integration of
the large share of solar and wind energy identified in this analysis, as well as
the possible impacts of REmap Options on the power market All this is inscribed
in the context of the work the Agency carries out for SIDS ● Plan and develop
strategy for renewables use in industry by paying particular attention to the
technical/economic design, operational hours and temperatures of industrial
processes ● Create  market for liquid biofuels in transport and promote electric
mobility in congested urban   REFERENCES ACQ  ASOCIADOS,  Información
Hidrológica ACQ  ASOCIADOS, Santo Domingo  com/hidrologicahtm , Prospectiva de
la Demanda de Energía de República Dominicana 2010-National Energy Commission,
Santo Domingo, and Fundación Bariloche, San Carlos de Bariloche CDEEE
(Corporación Dominicana de Empresas Eléctricas Estatales), Informe de Desempeño
del Sector Eléctrico Agosto Dominican Corporation of Public Electrical
Companies, Santo Domingo CNE, 2014b Balances Nacionales de Energía  (Data
provided directly by CNE) National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo CDEEE,
Planificación del Sistema de Distribución en  Dominican Corporation of Public
Electrical Companies, Santo Domingo CNE, Plan Energético Nacional  (2010)
National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo CNE, Diagnóstico  definición de líneas
estratégicas del sub-sector eléctrico, Informe final National Energy Commission,
Santo Domingo CDEEE, EDE (Empresas de Distribución Eléctrica) and World Bank,
Proyecto de Modernización Red de Distribución  Reducción de Pérdidas Eléctricas:
Estudio de Impacto Ambiental (EIA) Dominican Corporation of Public Electrical
Companies, Electric Distribution Companies, Santo Domingo, and World Bank,
Washington  CNE, forthcoming Diagnóstico subsectorial para el plan indicativo  –
Energías renovables  biocombustibles Dirección Fuentes Alternas  Uso Racional de
la Energía, National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo Central Bank of the
Dominican Republic, Informe de la Economía Dominicana – Enero-Diciembre Central
Bank of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo CNE,  Actualización del Plan
Indicativo del Subsector eléctrico de la República Dominicana National Energy
Commission, Santo Domingo CNE (Comisión Nacional de Energía), 2016a Information
on electricity statistics provided by direct communication with CNE National
Energy Commission, Santo Domingo CNE and Fundación Bariloche, Resultados
Preliminares Prospectiva Energética de la República Dominicana 2013 al 2030
(Data shared directly by CNE, LEAP prospectiva dominicana  -14) National Energy
Commission, Santo Domingo, and Fundación Bariloche, San Carlos de Bariloche CNE,
2016b Programa Medición Neta: Cantidad de usuarios  capacidad instalada
Diciembre National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo CNE, 2016c Renewable energy
status up to March 2016 (Data provided by CNE) National Energy Commission, Santo
Domingo Cruz Castillo, , Análisis de la Pobreza Energética de República
Dominicana (No Documento de Trabajo ) National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo
CNE, 2016d Off-grid generation data on generation and capacity (Data provided by
CNE) National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo Di Bella,  et al, Energy
Subsidies in Latin America and the Caribbean: Stocktaking and Policy Challenges
(Working paper No WP) International Monetary Fund, Washington  CNE, 2016e Energy
map Sist Inf Geográfica National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo  gobdo/#
-maps,  Dominican Republic – boundaries, provinces Maps,
php?num_car=5298&lang=en CNE, Diagnóstico de la Situación Actual: Sector
Eléctrico (Draft) National Energy Commission, Santo Domingo -maps,  Dominican
Republic – boundaries, provinces, names Maps,  php?num_car=5300&lang=en CNE,
2014a Actualización de la Prospectiva de la Demanda de Energía De República
Dominicana   DominicanToday, “IDB wants to know if the country can tap its
geothermal energy”  dominicantodaycom/dr/technology//29/ IDB-wants-to-know-if-
the-country-can-tap-its -geothermal-energy PVLIB-Python” Presented at the 43rd
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference IEA (International Energy Agency), World
Energy Balances 2015 edition (Database) Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD)/IEA, Paris Edmundus,  et al, “Thermal Power Plant
Operating Regimes in Future British Power Systems Increasing Renewable
Penetration”, Energy with Conversion and Management, Elsevier IEA, Thermal Power
Plant Economics and Variable Renewable Energies OECD/IEA, Paris IEA and the
World Bank, Sustainable Energy for All 2015—Progress Toward Sustainable Energy,
Global Tracking Framework OECD/IEA, Paris, and World Bank, Washington  EIRGRID
and SONI, 2016a Operational Constraints Update EirGrid and the System Operator
for Northern Ireland, Dublin EIRGRID and SONI, 2016b RoCoF Alternative &
Complementary Solutions Project (No Phase  Study Report) EirGrid and the System
Operator for Northern Ireland, Dublin IICA (Instituto Interamericano de
Cooperación para la Agricultura), Atlas de la agroenergía  los biocombustibles
en las Américas:  etanol Inter- American Institute for Cooperation on
Agriculture, San José El Dinero, “Sistemas aislados de electricidad: Ejemplos de
eficiencia”    /     /   te    -         -   -             - ejemplos-de-
eficiencia/ Ingenieros  Economistas Consultores (INECON), Actualización del
Estudio para la Determinación  Ajuste de las Tarifas De Suministro de Energía
Eléctrica  Clientes Regulados (Tarifa Técnica)  del Valor Agregado De
Transmisión (Peaje) INECON, República Dominicana, Santo Domingo ERCOT,
Competitive Renewable Energy Zones (CREZ) Transmission Optimization Study
Electric Reliability Council of Texas, Austin ETED (Empresa de Transmisión
Eléctrica Dominicana), 2013, Revisión del Plan de Expansión de Transmisión
2013-Dominican Electric Transmission Company, Santo Domingo Institute of
Americas, Energy security in the Dominican Republic and the Pacto Electrico
Institute of Americas, La Joya IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency),
2016a REmap 2030 –  Renewable Energy Roadmap REmap, International Renewable
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi  ETI, Solar Hot Water Heater Industry in Barbados,
Playbook Lesson Learned – Phase : Project Preparation Energy Transition
Initiative,  Department of Energy, Washington  OPD (Observatorio Político
Dominicano), “Los desechos sólidos en la República Dominicana: su proceso
destino final” Observatorio Político Dominicano de la Fundación Global
Democracia  Desarrollo (Funglode)  php/analisis-gobiernolocal/ 1915-los-
desechos- solidos-en-la-republica-dominicana-su-proceso-- destino-final IRENA,
2016b The true cost of fossil fuels: Externality cost assessment methodology
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi IRENA, 2016c REmap: Roadmap for
Renewable Energy Future: 2016 Edition International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu
Dhabi IRENA, 2016d IRENA REsource Renewable Energy Statistics IRENA Data Stat,
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi  org/gateway/dashboard/
Holmgren,  et al, “PVLIB Python 2015” Presented at the IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic
Specialist Conference (PVSC), New Orleans, pp – doi:1109/ PVSC7356005 IRENA,
2016e Scaling up variable renewable power: the role of grid codes International
Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi Holmgren,  and Groenendyk, ,  “An Open Source
Solar Power Forecasting Tool Using   %C3%B3ndelSENI/Coordinaci%C3%B3nySupervisi
%C3%B3ndeTiempoRealaspx IRENA, 2014a  Renewable Energy Roadmap (REmap 2030):
Cost Methodology International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi OC-SENI,
2015c, Estudio restricciones Operativas del Sistema de Transmisión 2016-OC-SENI,
Santo Domingo IRENA, 2014b Global Bioenergy: Supply and Demand Projections
(Working Paper) International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi OC-SENI, 2015d,
Informe Mensual de Transacciones Económicas Diciembre OC-SENI, Santo Domingo
Killeen, , “Don’ siesta on sustainability: How renewables can reinvigorate the
Dominican Republic (part )”, Climate and Energy, Worldwatch Institute Blog
Worldwatch Institute, Washington,   blogsworldwatchorg/dont-siesta-on-
sustainability- how-renewables-can-reinvigorate-the-dominican- republic/ OC-
SENI, 2014a Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo OC-SENI, 2014b Informe Mensual de
Transacciones Económicas Diciembre OC-SENI, Santo Domingo OC-SENI, 2013, Memoria
OC-SENI, Santo Domingo Lew et al,  Wind and solar curtailment National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL), Denver OC-SENI, 2012, Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo
OC-SENI, 2011, Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo Liu, , Masera,  and Esser, , World
Small Hydropower Development Report 2013: Dominican Republic United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), Vienna, and International Center on
Small Hydro Power (ICSHP) Available from www smallhydroworldorg OC-SENI, 2010,
Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo OC-SENI, 2009, Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo OC-
SENI, 2008, Memoria OC-SENI, Santo Domingo Martínez, , “Determinación de índices
de penetración eólica en el Sistema Eléctrico Nacional Interconectado de
República Dominicana” Instituto Global de Altos Estudios en Ciencias Sociales,
Santo Domingo, and Universidad Pontifical Comillas, Madrid OC-SENI,  Consumo de
Combustible Declar Consumo Combust OC-SENI, Santo Domingo
B3ndelSENI/Programaci%C3%B3ndelSENIaspx? EntryId=21961 Ministry of Economy,
Planning and Development, Ley -12 Estrategia Nacional de Desarrollo Ministry of
Economy, Planning and Development, Santo Domingo OLADE (Organización
Latinoamericana de Energía), Aspectos Regulatorios  Tarifarios – Caso República
Dominicana OLADE (Latin American Energy Organization), Quito NREL (National
Renewable Energy Laboratory), Energy Snapshot: Dominican Republic NREL, Denver
OMG,  “Guía de negocios: Electricidad” OMG, Santo Domingo  electricidad/ NREL,
Wind and solar curtailment (Conference Paper) NREL Sandia National Laboratories,
PVPerformance Modelling Collaborative, Sandia National Laboratories, US
Department of Energy,  OC-SENI (Organismo Coordinador del Sistema Eléctrico
Nacional Interconectado), Transacciones económicas Informes – Funcionamiento del
Mercado OC-SENI, Santo Domingo  INFORMES/FuncionamientodelMercado/Transacciones
Econ%C3%B3micasaspx SE4All (Sustainable Energy for All),  República Dominicana:
Evaluación Rápida  Análisis de Brechas SE4All, Vienna Superintendencia de
Electricidad (SIE), Resolución SIE--RCD GREEN WHEELS DOMINICANA Electricity
Superintendency, Santo Domingo OC-SENI, 2015a Informe anual de operación real
OC-SENI, Santo Domingo OC-SENI, 2015b Informes Diarios de Operacion Coord
Supervicion Tiempo Real OC-SENI, Santo Do-  mingo Ueckerdt,  et al,
“Representing power sector variability and the integration of variable
renewables in long-term energy-economy models using residual load   USDA (
Department of Agriculture), GAIN REport Dominican Republic: Sugar annual, 2014,
GAIN Report USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, Washington  duration curves”
Energy 90, Part , 1799–doi:1016/energy006 UNEP,  Success stories: Solar Energy
in Barbados Green Economy United Nations Environment  Programme,
greeneconomy/success-stories- Nairobi Worldwatch Institute, Harnessing the
Dominican Republic’ Sustainable Energy Resources Worldwatch Institute,
Washington,  UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change),
Dominican Republic Intended Nationally Determined Contribution UNFCCC, Bonn
Worldwatch Institute, Estrategia para un sistema de energía sustentable:
Aprovechamiento de los recursos eólicos  solares de la República Dominicana
Worldwatch Institute, Washington,  UN and the World Bank, Sustainable Energy for
All (SE4All),    ANNEXES ANNEX : SUMMARY OF RESULTS Reference Case 2030 321
REmap 2030 328 Unit 2010 2014 221 275 Total final energy consumption - TFEC
Total renewable energy consumption (incl electricity and direct uses; incl
traditional biomass) Total renewable energy consumption (incl electricity and
direct uses; excl traditional biomass) Share of renewable energy in final energy
consumption of direct uses (excl electricity; incl traditional biomass) Share of
modern renewable energy in final energy consumption of direct uses (excl
electricity; excl traditional biomass) Share of total renewable energy use (incl
traditional biomass) in TFEC PJ 37 38 52 87 PJ     19 21 41 87 PJ
18% 14% 12% 17% % % % % 17% % 17% 14% 16% 27% % Share of modern renewable energy
use (excl traditional biomass) in TFEC % % 13% 27% %   ANNEX : COMMODITY PRICE
PROJECTIONS Commodity price projections were taken from the following: ●
Commodity prices as  first point for determining price projections were based on
number of sources These include data provided by local experts and CNE and the
Latin American Energy Organisation (OLADE) database on energy prices and IRENA
assessments from other countries in the region ● Biomass prices provided by
IRENA bioenergy supply and cost assessment 2030 average government prices
excluding taxes and subsidies Commodity Unit (USD/GJ) 05 Crude oil (USD/GJ) 32
Steam coal (USD/kWh) 27 Electricity buildings (household/commercial) (USD/kWh)
36 Electricity industry (USD/GJ) 25 LPG household (USD/GJ) 17 Oil products
industry (fuel oil, diesel) (USD/GJ) 49 Oil products electricity generation
(fuel oil, diesel) (USD/GJ) 99 Diesel for transport (USD/GJ) 13 Gasoline for
transport (USD/GJ) 00 Biodiesel for transport (USD/GJ) 00 Conventional
biogasoline for transport (USD/GJ) 00 Advanced biogasoline for transport
(USD/GJ) 32 Primary bionergy (surplus forest and non-forest land) (USD/GJ) 32
Biomass from surplus forest land (USD/GJ) 32 Biomass from surplus forest land
(USD/GJ) 29 Bioenergy residue – agro-processing (USD/GJ) 91 Bioenergy residue –
crop harvesting Bionergy residue – animal manure & post-consumer household waste
(USD/GJ) 19 (USD/GJ) 00 Traditional biomass (USD/GJ) 16 Municipal waste   ANNEX
: TECHNOLOGY COST AND PERFORMANCE IN THE DOMINICAN POWER SECTOR IN 2030 Average
Capital costs for power generation technologies are largely IRENA assessments
but include localised capacity factors based on the Reference Case projections
for energy production44 Overnight capital cost USD/kW  500 Operation and
maintenance costs USD/kW per year 50 Capacity factor % 35 Conversion
efficiency44 % 100 Technology/units Hydropower (small)  500 30 35 100 Hydropower
(large)  500 60 30 100 Onshore wind  400 14 18 100 Solar PV
(residential/commercial) Solar PV (residential/commercial) with battery storage
700 60 18 100  650 60 25 100 Solar PV off-grid with battery storage  000 10 20
100 Solar PV (utility) 500 13 70 38 Biomass co-firing (retrofit)  300 83 70 35
Biomass anaerobic digester  800 45 70 32 Landfill gas internal combustion engine
300 52 80 30 Coal  100 17 39 42 Oil products  500 38 40 42 Diesel (gen-set) 44
The table provides the conversion efficiencies used when estimating primary
energy Primary energy is, for instance, crude oil and lumps of coal before
conversion into the gasoline and electricity – the “final energy” – that reaches
consumers Different organisations use different ways to estimate primary energy
In the REmap analysis, the Physical Energy Content method is used This method,
employed by the IEA and Statistical Office of the European Union (EUROSTAT),
renewable electricity (, wind, solar PV and hydropower) and biofuels are counted
in primary energy as they appear in the form of secondary energy (, using  100%
efficiency to convert them into primary energy equivalents), while geothermal,
CSP electricity and nuclear electricity are counted using average process
efficiencies (, %) to convert them into primary energy equivalents   ANNEX :
RESOURCE MAPS FROM IRENA’ GLOBAL ATLAS Solar resource map, average annual GHI
9574 /m2 892 /m2 328 /m2 063 /m2 654 /m2 423 /m2 192 /m2 783 /m2 519 /m2 954 /m2
164 /m2  – watts Source: IRENA Global Atlas (irenamasdaracae/), map data:
Vaisala, 2016, base map layer: 2015 Global power lines OpenStreetMap ( The maps
shows Vaisala’ Global Solar Dataset  km with units in /m² per day Vaisala’
Global Solar Dataset provides average annual GHI at   km spatial resolution
Average values are based on more than ten years of hourly GHI data They are
derived from actual, half-hourly, high-resolution visible satellite imagery
observations via the broadband visible wavelength channel at   arc minute
resolution Vaisala processed this information using  combination of in-house
research and algorithms published in peer-reviewed scientific literature Further
details for the Dominican Republic resource or other maps can be found in the
IRENA Global Atlas site:    Wind resource map, wind speed mean at 100 metres
height  (hidden)  /  /  /  /  /  /  /  / 10 / 11 / 12 / Source: IRENA Global
Atlas (irenamasdaracae/), map data: Technical University of Denmark (DTU), 2015,
base map layer: 2015 Global power lines OpenStreetMap ( DTU Global Wind Atlas:
onshore and 30 km offshore wind climate dataset accounting for high resolution
terrain effects The Global Wind Atlas provides  high resolution wind climatology
at 50, 100 and 200 metre hub heights above the surface for the whole world
(onshore and 30 km offshore) These layers have been produced using microscale
modelling in the Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program (WAsP) They capture
small-scale spatial variability of wind speeds due to high-resolution orography
(terrain elevation), surface roughness and surface roughness change effects The
layers shared through the IRENA Global Atlas are served at   km spatial
resolution Further details for the Dominican Republic resource or other maps can
be found in the IRENA Global Atlas site:    ANNEX : EXISTING POWER GENERATION
PLANTS AND TRANSMISSION INFRASCTRUCTURE FROM CNE MAPS Existing power generation
plants and transmission infrastructure (as of August 2016) Source: CNE maps
(2016e) – (Esri, HERE, DeLorme, Intermap, increment  Corp, GEBCO, USGS, FAO,
NPS, NRCAN, GeoBase, IGN, Kadaster NL, Ordnance Survey, Esri Japan, METI, Esri
China (Hong Kong), swisstopo, MapmyIndia, © OpenStreetMap contributors, and the
GIS User Community) For further details and other features of the energy maps
please visit the CNE maps website:    ANNEX : GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS ON INDICATORS
FOR DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Units Latest available data 2030 2030 assumption details
Extrapolation based on historical growth trends Population million (2013)
Extrapolation based on historical growth trends Passenger cars per  000 people
units 94 (2013) 127 Extrapolation based on historical population growth Public
transport bus stock units 14 192 (2010) 18 890 Based on CNE (2014a) population
assumptions for energy projections Number of households million 67 (2010) 48
Extrapolation based on historical growth (2013) Available rooftop area –
residential km2 Extrapolation based on historical growth (2013) Available
rooftop area – commercial km2   IRENA Headquarters   ox 236, Abu Dha bi  nit
Ara  Emira te  IR ENA  nnovati   and Techn ol  gy Ce ntr  Rob   -Schum an- Pla
tz  531 75   nn Germ  ny ww irena rg IRENA Headquarters   Box 236, Abu Dhabi Un
it   Arab Emirates IR EN  In novati on and Techn ol ogy Centr  Rob   - Schuman-
Platz  53175  onn Germ any ww irena rg                  :
Copyright © IRENA 2016