Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework : Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/GTM/  UNDP within the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  This country programme document
is aligned with the general government policy for the period , and the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,  agreed with the
Government of Guatemala The country programme document contributes to the ’atun
National Development Plan: Our Guatemala 2032 national priorities, which also
integrates national commitments to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
The general government policy1 asserts that the State must ensure institutional
strengthening, through  continuous modernization process that reviews and
redefines public duties It recognizes the need for  robust institutional
framework to address pressing challenges and generate growth opportunities for
vulnerable groups that have historically been left behind  Despite efforts to
fight corruption, the Corruption Perceptions Index2 shows that Guatemala dropped
eight points between 2012 and 2020, when it ranked 149th out of 180 countries
An analysis by the former Presidential Commission on Human Rights showed that
conflicts increased from ,704 in 2015 to ,431 in Land and natural resource
exploitation are the main sources of conflict  According to the National
Population Census XII and the National Housing Census VII (2018), per cent of
the population are women However, only per cent of Congressmen are women (among
whom only 88 per cent are indigenous women) and 94 per cent of all mayors in the
country are women (with no indigenous women) Forty- six per cent of the people
live in rural areas  Access to efficient and transparent justice is one
challenge the country faces, with the Global Impunity Index3 ranking Guatemala
59th out of 69 countries and rating the justice system category with the lowest
score  Despite the downward trend in the rate of homicides of women (2010: ;
2020: 24), levels of violence against women are alarming: the Public Prosecutor’
Office reported an increase in violence against women (from 57,741 cases in 2019
to 60,199 in 2020) and acknowledged 136 femicides in The justice system has
received an average of 231 complaints daily in  The World Bank characterizes the
economy of Guatemala as stable, with an average growth of  per cent in the last
five years However, this stability has not translated into progress in human
development or in reducing inequality, as 59 per cent of the people live in
poverty and 23 per cent in extreme poverty Those figures might rise as  result
of the COVID-19 pandemic The ranking of Guatemala on the 2020 Human Development
Index is 663 (127th out of 189 countries), and its Gender Inequality Index
ranking is 479, indicating some of the highest inequalities in Latin America and
the Caribbean According to official records, per cent of the population lives in
multidimensional poverty However, for indigenous people (41 per cent of the
population) the figure rises to 80 per cent  The Gini coefficient, calculated by
UNDP and the World Bank, shows that income inequality stands at The Bank points
out that Guatemala has the sixth-highest rate of chronic malnutrition in the
world and the highest in the region Furthermore, chronic child  General
government policy for the period , Government of Guatemala, 2020  Transparency
International, 2021  University of the Americas, Puebla, 2020  Civil National
Police   DP/DCP/GTM/ malnutrition affects 47 per cent of all children under
five, and 58 per cent of indigenous children The Guatemalan government has low
revenues, with per cent of gross domestic product collected in 2020, according
to the Bank of Guatemala This limits capacities for public and social
investments The Core Diagnostic Instrument5 of 2019 found that only per cent of
the population was covered by social protection programmes Nevertheless, in 2020
the Government implemented major social programmes that reached more than
million families Guatemala has the second-highest entrepreneurship rate in the
world (per cent in 2019), according the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor
According to the National Statistics Institute, per cent of employed people work
in informal activities (that figure rises to per cent in rural areas, and per
cent for indigenous people) In 2018, 66 per cent of men were economically active
and 34 per cent of women On average men received  monthly income 12 per cent
higher than women Thirteen per cent of economically active women are employed as
domestic workers7 Guatemala has one of the highest rates of non-internet users
in the region, with only 43 per cent mobile internet subscribers In recent
years, migration by the elderly, young people, and unaccompanied children has
increased, including per cent of women (2018 census) Remittances have played
dominant role in the national economy, benefiting approximately  million people
Guatemala is located in  geographical area with high vulnerability to natural
phenomena, being one of the 15 countries most affected by climate change9
worldwide and the seventh in terms of risks associated with natural disasters10
It belongs to the group of mega-diverse countries The main challenges are: the
expansion of unsustainable agriculture; soil erosion caused by logging and
forest fires; and contaminated water These result in great human and material
costs, particularly for women and people who depend on traditional production
systems11,12 The independent country programme evaluation, 2019, shows that UNDP
played an integrating and facilitating role in inter-agency collaboration and in
building synergies with for development partners During multidimensional
analysis of information was key to leading the United Nations socio- economic
response framework from  technical perspective the COVID-19 crisis, technical
capacity its The experience of UNDP, and its capacities to address conflict at
national and local levels, were highlighted in the evaluation as key to ensuring
the sustainability of development results The consultation workshops on the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework recognized that one
added value brought by UNDP was its programmatic and operational capacity to
systematically manage  range of projects addressing  variety of development
challenges and funded by different donors with high quality and transparency
standards The country programme evaluation found that UNDP responded
successfully to national development priorities and was an impartial and trusted
partner whose technical  Inter-agency social protection assessment, 2019  United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
2019)  National Statistics Institute, 2018  Common country assessment for
Guatemala, United Nations in Guatemala, 2019  Global Climate Risk Index 2020,
Germanwatch 10 Risk index of most disaster-prone countries in the world, United
Nations University in Tokyo, Japan 11 Strategy for gender mainstreaming and
climate change to support the nationally determined contribution, Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources, 2020 12Analysis of the socio-economic effects
and impacts of COVID-19 in Guatemala, United Nations in Guatemala, 2020
DP/DCP/GTM/ capacities allowed the creation of spaces for dialogue across
sectors and with multiple stakeholders The evaluation recognized the work of
UNDP in municipal strengthening and inter- sectoral collaboration, under the
principles of sustainable resource management, disaster risk reduction, and
resilience in local development processes Finally, the evaluation noted that
UNDP should promote more strategic and inclusive interventions to strengthen
comprehensive security and justice systems for peacebuilding and reconciliation
II Programme priorities and partnerships The theory of change reflected in the
Cooperation Framework and the country programme document considers that
institutional effectiveness is  necessary condition for achieving transformative
and innovative development results at national and local levels This programme
will contribute to tackling key development challenges affecting the country and
especially vulnerable populations, particularly indigenous people, women, youth,
and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, leaving no one behind
Consultations with more than 500 stakeholders, including women and indigenous
people, were taken into account The proposed country programme, which is aligned
with the UNDP Strategic Plan, , implements the signature solution of
strengthening accountable and inclusive good governance and uses the regional
approach to productivity, inclusiveness, and resilience The vision of UNDP is to
contribute to national efforts towards sustainable, resilient, equitable and
inclusive development, using  participatory and innovative approach It
contributes directly to four of the 12 Cooperation Framework outcomes, but given
the inclusive and multidimensional approach to development, it will contribute
significantly to other outcomes It will promote gender equality and women’
empowerment and will prioritize local-level interventions UNDP, UNFPA, the
United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and UN-Women, given their interest in
working in an integrated and coherent manner and building on their collaborative
advantages, have agreed to promote, through their respective programmes, the
coordination mechanisms needed to leave no one behind and to accelerate
achievement of the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
strengthening the nexus between peace, development, and humanitarian action
Strong institutions The theory of change behind this priority is: if State
institutions are strengthened and transformed with innovation at national and
local levels, and if greater levels of transparency and inclusiveness are
generated, then the response to the needs of the population will be efficient,
effective, and sustainable UNDP will support the Presidential Secretariat for
Planning and Programming in building capacities to tailor national and sectoral
plans at local levels, and in developing participatory local development plans
In coordination with the Executive Coordination Secretariat of the Presidency
and the Secretariat for Planning and Programming, municipal governments will
strengthen their leadership, management, and strategic planning capacities for
local development and governance, implementing innovative solutions within the
framework of deconcentration and decentralization of efficient, user-oriented
public services, with cultural relevance, transparency, and  gender approach,
thus achieving integrated Sustainable Development Goal UNDP will promote
innovation in technology use, data generation, information systems development,
and gender analysis to strengthen evidence-based decision-making at the national
and local levels These efforts, undertaken in collaboration with the National
Statistics Institute and the Ministry of Interior, will strengthen the
development of public   DP/DCP/GTM/ policies emphasizing citizen security With
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and UNICEF,
UNDP will support national efforts to reduce the existing digital divide in
access to information and communications technologies UNDP will provide
technical support to inter-institutional coordination mechanisms led by national
institutions in social and economic cabinets, integrated rural development, and
science and technology alliances amongst others To fight corruption, UNDP will
support the State Attorney’ Office, the General Comptroller’ Office, and the
Ombudsman’ Office, as well as the Superintendency of Tax interinstitutional
coordination Administration, capacities in strengthening technical and their
Under the leadership of national or local State institutions, UNDP, with other
United Nations agencies and civil society organizations, will promote the
development of capacities and mechanisms for citizen participation by building
consensus strategies and inclusive social auditing using  human rights, gender,
and cultural relevance approach UNDP will collaborate with the Supreme Electoral
Tribunal in developing strategies to prevent and mitigate potential conflicts
arising from electoral processes, and in increasing citizen participation in the
2023 elections, particularly that of women and indigenous people in coordination
with UN-Women and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
With the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration, UNDP will cooperate with national institutions to
integrate  human mobility perspective into national and local-level plans,
policies, and programmes through  participatory process with returnee
populations, using  gender approach UNDP will promote the creation and
dissemination of global, regional and national knowledge to contribute to
strategic and inclusive post-COVID-19 decision-making processes on human
development and democratic governance, including fiscal policies and budget
allocation, with  focus on social inclusion and care work Peace, security and
justice The theory of change for this priority states that if security and
justice institutions have innovative tools and technologies to generate and
analyse data, and if State institutions and citizens are strengthened to address
conflict causes, then they will contribute to the design, implementation and
evaluation of public policies that offer transparent, innovative, efficient and
culturally sensitive justice, diminishing social conflicts and guaranteeing
inclusive participation With the justice system, UNDP will use an inclusive,
people-centred approach to support the Constitutional Court, the Judiciary, and
the Ombudsman’ Office in strengthening their institutional capacities to enable
access to justice in  transparent, innovative and efficient manner UNDP will
support the fight against impunity by strengthening the management capacities of
the Special Prosecutor’ Office against Impunity and the technical support units
for prosecutors in the Public Prosecutor’ Office, among others South-South
cooperation – mainly with Honduras and El Salvador – and triangular cooperation
will be facilitated UNDP will continue to support collaboration, coordination,
and dialogue efforts between justice institutions and civil society
organizations for access to restorative and transformative justice with
development approach With the legislative body, support and access to
international best practices will be provided to legislative commissions upon
request to enrich the discussions surrounding legal frameworks for structural
issues and sustainable development   DP/DCP/GTM/ UNDP will support the national
and local architectures for dialogue and peace Comprehensive and inclusive
dialogue and mediation capacities of public institutions will be strengthened
through expertise and innovative tools The capacities of civil society for
comprehensive and constructive approach to development dialogue and conflict
management will also be strengthened UNDP will support the State in
strengthening the technical, political, and operational capacities of public
institutions for women, with special emphasis on those responsible for
preventing violence against women It will promote the development of protocols
to address sexual harassment in the workplace Building resilience for adaptation
to climate change The theory of change for this priority states that: if
technical, financial and operational capacities for  coordinated response to the
impacts of climate change are strengthened, and if resilient recovery processes,
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity are promoted, then natural
resources management and human development will be effectively and sustainably
achieved UNDP will strengthen inter-institutional and intersectoral coordination
platforms for development planning, climate change adaptation and mitigation,
biodiversity and protected areas management, food security, and disaster risk
reduction management UNDP will support institutions and for municipalities
environmental and natural resources planning UNDP will promote inclusive and
participatory municipal development planning processes and encourage economic
and socially sustainable land-use practices, climate change adaptation measures,
risk management, and green economy, with  special emphasis on their impact on
women’ livelihoods UNDP will promote () strategic alliances with national and
local institutions to advance green financing strategies and mechanisms; and ()
sustainable productive chains based on agricultural good practices and
international high quality standards for national and international markets the
capacities of national government to regulations and protocols implement
policies, strategies, UNDP will promote local multidimensional development with
gender perspective, emphasizing the provision of basic services, access to
decent housing, social protection, natural resources, environment and low-
emission renewable energy management, and local economic development, including
wood-saving stoves UNDP will strengthen municipal financial management
capacities to enhance gender- and results-based budgets to respond to local
sustainable development priorities UNDP will promote strategic alliances to
design and implement innovative nature-based financial solutions that foster the
adoption of adaptation and mitigation measures, considering social roles and
gender inequalities, to facilitate  greener and more resilient economy UNDP will
enhance integrated territorial management, promoting the sustainable development
of cities and creating conditions for joint public and private investment to
support and expand the accessibility of services, technology, innovation and
production infrastructure UNDP will enhance inter-institutional capacities and
coordination mechanisms for the sustainable management of natural resources,
protected areas, agricultural practices adapted to the effects of climate
change; and – with national institutions and the Food and Agriculture
Organization – the integrated management of water and coastal marine resources,
in coordination with municipalities With Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Honduras and Mexico, UNDP will promote South-South
cooperation on biodiversity in coffee production areas, governance and water
management basin levels, reviewing and implementing nationally determined
contributions, integrated solid waste management, and financial solutions for
biodiversity and climate change   DP/DCP/GTM/ UNDP will support the Executive
Secretariat of the National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction, strengthening
its capacities to promote integration and inter-institutional coordination of
the disaster risk reduction coordination system at the national, regional,
departmental, municipal and local levels Likewise, UNDP will enhance disaster
risk prevention, preparedness, response and recovery, promoting women’
participation in leadership roles in those processes UNDP will support the
Executive Secretariat in designing and implementing communication and public
awareness strategies that promote  culture of disaster reduction and provide
timely, relevant information on the effects of disasters Under this approach
UNDP, with Colombia and Ecuador, will promote South- South cooperation with
respect to post-disaster damage, needs assessment and the use of assessment
tools Sustainable and inclusive socioeconomic development The theory of change
states that, if the public institutions are strengthened for implementing an
effective social protection system with gender perspective, if citizens are
informed about social programmes, if financial inclusion of vulnerable
populations is achieved and if capacities for the competitiveness of
entrepreneurs and micro, small and medium-sized enterprises are strengthened,
then there will be significant progress in human development and the root causes
of migration will be addressed In coordination with UNFPA, UNICEF, OHCHR and the
World Food Programme, UNDP will deepen its alliance with the Ministry of Social
Development to strengthen the national social protection system, using  gender
perspective and prioritizing vulnerabilities faced by people in crisis and
shocks Coordination, collaboration, and partnerships with other public
institutions, private sector and civil society organizations will be promoted
for effective territorial coordination and regional exchange of best practices
Using  multidimensional and life-cycle approach, UNDP will support the
implementation of  gender-sensitive household social registry to identify and
select households living in poverty, also promoting women’ leadership and
empowerment UNDP will also support implementation of the Multidimensional
Poverty Index, using  territorial approach to measure the main deprivations
faced by people living in poverty and extreme poverty, and to target social
assistance and protection In collaboration with UNICEF, and within the framework
of the government priority ‘Great National Crusade for Nutrition’, UNDP will
support the capacity-building efforts of the Ministry of Public Finance and the
Secretariat of Food Security and Nutrition to identify multiyear budget
financial gaps and determine costing and funding sources, using  results- based
management approach These efforts will be coordinated with the Ministry of
Health and Social Assistance, the Ministry of Social Development, and the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food UNDP will support the efforts of the
Ministry of Economy, the Bank of Guatemala and the Superintendency of Banks to
consolidate the national strategy for financial inclusion, , to help households
engaged in informal economic activities gain access to financial services and
improve their standard of living and well-being, considering gender inequalities
In alliance with other institutions, UNDP will identify catalytic actions to
promote the productive use of remittances In support to the implementation of
the national policy for decent employment, 2017- 2032, and in partnership with
other United Nations organizations, national entities, municipalities and the
private sector, UNDP will develop technical training and labour market insertion
processes – mainly for youth, women, and persons with disabilities – to
contribute to employment access opportunities and income-generating activities
and to promote labour and tax formalization UNDP will promote the development of
strategic alliances between the private sector at national and local levels,
municipal entrepreneurship centres, agricultural producers’   DP/DCP/GTM/
associations, industries, the banking sector, and national institutions, to
promote financial education training processes, with  gender, green economy,
human rights and business approach the competitiveness of micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises and their insertion into the formal market innovative
alternative mechanisms strengthening to enhance to UNDP will collaborate with
the Government in developing and implementing gender- sensitive strategies
towards the recovery of the informal sector, which was impacted by COVID-19
and/or by natural disasters, and which lacks access to the labour and social
protection systems III Programme and risk management Guatemala is vulnerable to
the effects of climate change and natural disasters, which generate substantial
development setbacks UNDP will collaborate with the Executive Secretariat of the
National Coordinator for Disaster Reduction to develop disaster risk prevention
and management strategies and will support early recovery solutions Guatemala
has high levels of social conflict This programme will address the structural
causes of conflict and will strengthen dialogue and peace capacities Due to high
levels of gender violence, UNDP will implement  programmatic prevention line of
action Guatemala faces significant innovation and development challenges The
UNDP Acceleration Lab will contribute to addressing these COVID-19 has
highlighted the importance of technological modernization in public institutions
to guarantee adequate services to citizens UNDP will coordinate efforts with the
National Secretariat of Science and Technology and other public institutions to
stimulate the generation, dissemination, transfer and use of technological
modernization COVID-19 has also highlighted challenges to governance, including
gender-based violence and inequality As  mitigation measure, UNDP will promote
comprehensive cross-cutting approach to address COVID-19 in all its projects
With UNDP technical leadership, the United Nations has prepared the COVID- 19
socioeconomic impact assessment and response plan in support of government
actions to mitigate the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-The limited scope for
national and local budget allocation to sustain and scale up the development
results achieved by the projects poses  challenge The management capacities of
municipal governments will be strengthened and capacities for social budgeting
will be supported The findings and recommendations of the Independent Country
Evaluation and other evaluations will be used as references for this cycle Risks
will be monitored through close compliance with institutional requirements The
programme will apply UNDP social and environmental standards and accountability
and grievance redress mechanisms All projects will include gender analysis and
plan to achieve gender equality, and will prioritize local-level interventions
This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for
results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels
with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the Programme and
Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework The programme
will be nationally executed If necessary, national execution may be replaced
with direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to
force majeure The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in
coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial
risks Cost definitions   DP/DCP/GTM/ and classifications for programme and
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects The country
office stands out for its administrative management and will aim to continue
responding with high-quality standards to implement the programme effectively
and efficiently, seeking continuous improvement in process flows and maintaining
satisfactory audit results, green dashboards, and accountability The programme
will be implemented based on the diversification of strategic alliances and
funding sources IV Monitoring and evaluation Regional best practices, results
achieved and lessons learned identified in programme and project evaluations
will contribute to the national priorities enumerated in the general government
policy, and to the Sustainable Development Goals The country programme will be
monitored in line with the Cooperation Framework, and UNDP will contribute to
prepare United Nations country team annual reports through the ‘UN INFO’
platform The platform seeks to support public institutions in generating and
analysing statistical data on sustainable development, for evidence-based policy
decision-making and to measure progress on the results obtained UNDP will
collaborate with the National Statistics Institute on citizen security and
social protection; the Ministry of Interior on citizen security; and the
Ministry of Social Development on the targeting and prioritization of social
programmes Alliances with academia and research institutions will be
strengthened to produce and analyse information using  multidimensional approach
The indicators, with their respective baselines and targets, are disaggregated
according to the groups identified in this programme, and each project will
assure the monitoring of gender gaps, including the gender marker and budget
Available resources will be tapped to improve capacity in the data collection
and gender-disaggregated analysis of the progress of programme results, drawing
on strategic alliances with research institutes and collaboration with the UNDP
Global Policy Network and the regional centre, as well as the inter-agency
efforts of the statistics cluster and the monitoring and evaluation sub-cluster
Capacities of the Acceleration Lab will be embedded in the programme, including
the identification of local solutions, exploration of new data sources and
learning through experimentation, to allow the application of innovative tools
for participatory monitoring and evaluation processes, with gender-disaggregated
visual representations data and geo- referencing   DP/DCP/GTM/ Annex Results and
resources framework for Guatemala () National priority or goal: Institutional
Strengthening, Security and Justice (Sustainable Development Goals , 10, 11 and
16) General government policy (GGP): Responsible, transparent and effective
government Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No
(Strong institutions, outcome No ): By 2025, State institutions improve
democratic governance, efficient and transparent management of resources, and
evidence-based decision-making, including the use of information and
communication technologies Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  Accelerate
structural transformations for sustainable development Estimated cost by outcome
(in $ thousands) Cooperation Framework outcome indicator(), baselines, target()
Data source and frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Indicative
country programme outputs (including indicators, baselines, targets) Major
partners / partnerships / frameworks Number of municipalities in middle category
(with population over ,500) of General Municipal Management Index Baseline 2018:
Target 2025: 23 Presidential Secretariat for Planning and Programming
(SEGEPLAN), biannually Government institutions Regular   Increased capacities of
State institutions for efficient and innovative public management and the
implementation of evidence-based policies Other: 43,377 Autonomous institutions
and control bodies Number of institutions and departmental technical units with
tools and methodologies for efficient public management, including digital
technologies and big data Municipalities Guatemalan Corruption Perception Index
Baseline 2020: 25 Target 2025: 29 Transparency International, annually Civil
society organizations (CSOs) Baseline 2021:  Target 2025:  Source: UNDP,
annually Women, indigenous people and youth organizations; society organizations
working for transparency, Number of new institutionalized public information
access tools for evidence-based decision-making Private sector: Chambers of
commerce Baseline 2021:  Target 2025:  Source: UNDP, annually Donors: United
States Agency for International Development Government of Guatemala Norway,
Increased capacities of State institutions and citizens for awareness,
prevention, and compliance with anti-corruption measures Number of institutions
at national and local level with tools for the quality of spending and  greater
culture of accountability and transparency Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 11
Source: UNDP, annually Number of institutions and civil society organizations
that create local audit and accountability tools Baseline 2021: 10 Target 2025:
22 Source: UNDP, annually 10  DP/DCP/GTM/  Increased decision-making spaces
where women, youth, indigenous peoples, people with disabilities and returnees
participate Number of development plans that include proposals from youth,
women, returnees and indigenous people Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 13 Source:
SEGEPLAN, annually  Knowledge products available for State institutions and
citizens, which contribute to strategic decision-making about the integral
development of the country Number of sustainable development knowledge products
produced Baseline 2021: 11 Target 2025: 22 Source: UNDP, annually Number of
development solutions, mapped, experimented and explored for learning and
potential scaling Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 10 Source: UNDP, annually
National priority or goal: Institutional strengthening, security and justice
(Sustainable Development Goals , 10, 11 and 16) GGP: Responsible, transparent
and effective government Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving
UNDP No  (Peace, security and justice, outcome No ) By 2025, strengthened State
institutions increase citizen security, access to justice and the transformation
of conflicts, seeking greater coordination at the national and local levels
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  Accelerate structural transformations
for sustainable development Number of homicides per 100,000 population, by sex
Baseline 2019: Men: Women:  Target 2025: Men: Women:  Ministry of Interior,
annually  Security, justice and peace institutions have the capacities, tools
and innovative technologies to offer transparent, transformative and efficient
justice Government institutions Regular: ,436 Other: 35,183 Autonomous
institutions and control bodies Number of innovative tools implemented by
justice institutions to reduce impunity and support institutional modernization
Municipalities, Civil Society: Indigenous and ancestral authorities Baseline
2021: 17 Target 2025: 35 Source: Judicial System, annually The Global American,
annually Global Impunity Index Baseline 2020: 66 Target 2025: 87 Private sector:
Number of normative frameworks, protocols and 11  DP/DCP/GTM/ College of
Engineers of Guatemala tools developed for the effective access of women and
indigenous peoples to justice, and transformative reparations Donors:
Peacebuilding Fund UNDP Norway Sweden Switzerland European Union USAID Baseline
2021:  Target 2025: 12 Source: UNDP, annually  Increased inter-institutional
spaces of State and citizen institutions to address the structural causes of
conflict, at national and local levels Number of inter-institutional
coordination mechanisms established at central and local levels with  gender
perspective to deal with conflict Baseline 2021: Target 2025:  Source:
Presidential Commission for Peace and Human Rights, annually Number of
institutions, CSOs and private sector entities with strengthened capacities to
deal with conflict Baseline 2021: Target 2025: 12 Source: UNDP, annually
Increased capacities and tools of State institutions for data creation and
analysis for the prevention of and comprehensive approach to violence against
women, girls and adolescents at national and local levels Number of
institutional protocols for the prevention of sexual and workplace harassment
Baseline 2021: Target 2025:  Source: UNDP, annually Number of municipalities
with strengthened Women’ Directorates for the prevention of violence against
women, girls and adolescents Baseline 2021: Target 2025:  Source: Executive
Coordination Secretariat of the Presidency, annually 12  DP/DCP/GTM/ National
priority or goal: Access to water and natural resources management and land-use
planning (Sustainable Development Goals , 10, 11 and 12) Cooperation Framework
(or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No  (Environment, outcome No ) By 2025,
the State of Guatemala strengthens its policies, strategies and programmes that
promote mitigation and adaptation to climate change, the governance of
territories, natural resources and ecosystems, improving the comprehensive
management of environmental, climatic, health, hydrological and geodynamic
risks, with an integrated approach, and guaranteeing the sustainable use of
management of natural resources, with an emphasis on the most vulnerable
population groups and territories Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome
Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises Strategic Plan indicator  Number of
municipalities with sub- national mechanisms for mitigating risks to urban
centres Baseline: 14 Target:36 Government institutions Regular:   Government
institutions have increased capacities to respond to the effects of climate
change Municipal management ranking SEGEPLAN, biannually Other: 138,968
Autonomous institutions and control bodies Existence of approved strategic
action plan for the Motagua Basin, shared with Honduras Municipalities Baseline
2021: No Target 2025: Yes Source: Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
(MARN), annually Strategic Plan indicator  Number of hectares under sustainable
forest or land management Baseline:  Target: 78,000 National Council for
Protected Areas (CONAP) and National Forestry Institute, annually Civil society:
Local and national CSOs, think tanks and academia  Local governments with
greater capacities and innovative tools for the efficient and differentiated
provision of basic services, biodiversity, basins management and access to
decent housing Private sector: Palm oil sector Banking sector Coffee sector
Number of categorized and re-categorized protected areas for biodiversity
management that include  municipal approach Donors: Adaptation Fund Global
Environment Facility European Union German Agency for International Cooperation
Baseline 2021: Categorized: ; re-categorized:  Target 2025: Categorized: ; re-
categorized:  Source: CONAP, annual Number of municipalities with the capacity
to manage and increase financial resources Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 15
Source: SEGEPLAN, annually Number of municipal services provided with efficiency
and innovation criteria Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 14 Source: SEGEPLAN,
annually  Government institutions and municipalities with greater capacities for
preparedness, response and post-crisis recovery Number of government
institutions and municipalities with tools for preparedness, 13  DP/DCP/GTM/
response and recovery Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 10 Source: UNDP, annually
Number of implemented actions on risk management awareness Baseline 2021:
Target 2025:  Source: UNDP, annually  Networks of local producers (men and
women) with greater capacities for resilience, adaptation to climate change,
landscape conservation, sustainable use of natural resources in production
processes, with cultural relevance Number of production chains or producer
networks with sustainable practices implemented Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 28
Source: MARN, annually National priority or goal: Poverty reduction and social
protection, (Sustainable Development Goals , , , , , 10 and 16); employment and
investment, (Sustainable Development Goals ,  and 16); GGP: Social development
Cooperation Framework (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP No  (Social
development, outcome No ) By 2025 State institutions are making progress in the
design and implementation of  comprehensive social protection system,
contributory and non-contributory, seeking greater coverage and quality with
equity Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome  Advance poverty eradication in
all its forms and dimensions Strategic plan indicator  Number of policy measures
in place to increase access to social protection schemes Baseline:  Target:
Ministry of Social Development, annually  The State has greater capacities for
implementation of the national social protection system at national and local
levels, prioritizing women, youth and indigenous people Government institutions
Regular: 200 Other 11,880 Autonomous institutions and control bodies Number of
households included in pilot exercise of  social household register
Municipalities Baseline 2021:  Target 2025: 20,000 Source: MIDES, annually Civil
society: Local and national CSOs academia Diagnosis of bottlenecks for the
sustainability of the Grand National Crusade for Nutrition Private sector
Chambers and trade associations Technical Training Institute Global Compact
Guatemala Network Baseline 2021: No Target 2025: Yes Source: Secretariat of Food
and Nutritional Security, annually  Entrepreneurs, micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises have greater capabilities, including digital ones, to develop their
competitiveness and Donors: Multi-Partner Trust Fund 14  DP/DCP/GTM/ Government
of Guatemala labour formalization, according to the needs of women, youth,
indigenous people and people with disabilities Number of partnerships that
strengthen the entrepreneurship ecosystem and contribute to economic
reactivation Baseline 2021:  Target 2025:  Source: UNDP, annually Number of
community development and entrepreneurial ventures that enhance the livelihoods
of women, youth and indigenous peoples Baseline 2021:  Target 2025:  Source:
UNDP, annually 15