Table of Contents:  UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework: Page:  II Programme priorities and
partnerships………………………………………………… …………: Page:  III Programme and risk management
…………………………………………………………………: Page:  IV Monitoring and evaluation
…………………………………………………………………………: Page:  DP/DCP/JAM/  UNDP within the United Nations
Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework  The programme is
aligned with the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework (UNMSDCF) , the national priorities outlined in “Vision
2030 – Jamaica National Development Plan” and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-The
programme will focus on four priorities: () social resilience and inclusion; ()
citizen safety and security and the rule of law; () climate change resilience;
and () sustainable natural resource management  Jamaica,  small island
developing State with  population of ,726,000, has made notable strides in areas
central to its vision to make Jamaica, “the place of choice to live, work, raise
families and do business” The Government has prioritized the attainment of the
Sustainable Development Goals, which are 91 per cent aligned with Vision 2030
and associated national planning documents In 2019, Jamaica attained  Human
Development Index value of 734, placing it in the high human development
category However, when discounted for inequality, the value fell to 612,  loss
of per cent Despite  fall in the poverty rate of  percentage points, to per
cent, rural poverty is still relatively high at 15 per cent With  Gender
Inequality Index of 0396, ranking 88 of 162 countries, Jamaica needs to
accelerate efforts to advance gender equality  Jamaica has  relatively developed
social protection system, as outlined in its comprehensive Jamaica Social
Protection Strategy However, the main social protection programme, the Programme
of Advancement Through Health and Education, does not adequately benefit all
vulnerable groups, with persons with disabilities being the most disadvantaged
Notably, there also remains  need for improving service coverage for other
vulnerable groups such as women and persons living with HIV and AIDS  Jamaica
registered  historically low unemployment rate of  per cent7 in January 2020,
attributable to  decline in female unemployment Youth unemployment, however,
remained high at 19 per cent,   per cent decrease over the same period in
Furthermore, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic severely impacted the
Jamaican economy due to  drastic decline in tourism revenue, accounting for one
third of gross domestic product (GDP) This decline led to job losses, resulting
in   per cent increase in unemployment and  contraction in the economy of 10 per
cent The pandemic negatively impacted micro, small and medium-sized enterprises
(MSMEs), with an estimated 30 per cent9 having had to discontinue their
operations since March Considering the adverse economic impacts of the pandemic,
the Government provided 25 billion Jamaican dollars in economic stimulus
targeting vulnerable groups, unemployed persons and MSMEs Additional policy
measures are needed to accelerate socioeconomic recovery through innovative
solutions, research and development and improved digital infrastructure  Crime
and violence pose  significant threat to the country’ socioeconomic development
With the region’ highest homicide rate, Jamaica recorded ,323 murders10 in Young
males aged  are the main victims and perpetrators of violent crimes This
challenge is exacerbated by the use of illicit small arms and light weapons
Additionally, sexual and gender-based violence11 remains  concern, with more
than one in every four women  Planning Institute of Jamaica, Planning Institute
of Jamaica, Vision 2030: National Development Plan, 2009, pg vi  Vision 2030 and
planning documents are estimated to be per cent aligned to the Goals according
to the rapid integrated assessment done by UNDP in 2016 and the voluntary
national review report on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development published by the Planning Institute of Jamaica (2018)  UNDP, Human
Development Report, 2020, The Next Frontier: Human Development and the
Anthropocene  Ibid  United Nations Common Country Analysis: Jamaica, Statistical
Institute of Jamaica, January Planning Institute of Jamaica, UNDP, Social and
economic impact of the COVID-19 and policy options in Jamaica, 10 Jamaica
Constabulary Force, 2020 11 Williams, Carol Watson, Women’ Health Survey 2016:
Jamaica, UN-Women, /13 2117644 DP/DCP/JAM/ experiencing intimate partner and
sexual violence in their lifetime Justice system reform is essential to combat
crime and thus remains  priority Despite improvements, institutional capacity
gaps remain, namely equitable access to and quality of justice services related
to human rights and the rule-of-law institutions, especially for women and other
vulnerable groups Another threat to the country’ socioeconomic development is
its vulnerability to extreme weather events and climate risks This has severe
impacts on livelihoods as the most vulnerable often suffer income and
productivity losses  The country’ biodiversity and natural resources fuel its
economy, but several environmental challenges hinder environmental
sustainability and natural resource management As such, improving the island’
resilience to natural hazards and climate change is integral to achieving Vision
2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals For example, attaining the national
target of 33 per cent of electricity generation from renewables by 2030 will
require  shift in Jamaican dependency on fossil fuels as an energy source
Additionally, an expansion of the Jamaican blue economy, currently responsible
for approximately  per cent of GDP, is critical Notably, 61 per cent of the
population live in communities within five kilometres of the coast Therefore, it
is imperative to safeguard the economic and social value of highly vulnerable
coastal communities and infrastructure to support sustainable development  The
Common Country Analysis identified key economic accelerators including expanding
the blue and green economies; advancing justice reform and tackling crime and
violence; addressing social resilience and inclusion; protecting biodiversity;
and enhancing resilience to climate change and natural disasters UNDP
continuously demonstrates its comparative advantage in: () developing policies;
() promoting gender equality and women’ empowerment; () developing the
capacities of national organizations in the rule of law, energy, climate change
and mitigation; and () fostering inclusion while addressing socioeconomic
inequalities of vulnerable groups The UNDP convenor role has facilitated the
formation of strategic cross-sectoral partnerships to address development
challenges, including governance, citizen security and the COVID-19 pandemic
UNDP has also displayed agility and responsiveness to national disasters and
crises in the countries served by the multi- country office in Jamaica,12
including the Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos Islands  The independent country
programme evaluation and project evaluations show that UNDP has established
strong reputation in Jamaica through its support, transparency, accountability
and access to funding The evaluation underscored that the UNDP programme is
aligned to national development priorities While the programme achieved some
notable results, the UNDP aim to achieve transformational results under social
protection was impeded by limited financial resources The evaluation highlighted
opportunities to scale up access to justice, social cohesion, human security and
resilience programming UNDP work to advance sustainable energy and increase
national capacities to use and manage its biodiversity is noteworthy, as is the
enhancement of environmental resilience in the Bahamas and the Turks and Caicos
Islands UNDP also made solid contributions to strengthen the country’ capacity
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by supporting an improved
institutional and coordination framework through analytical documents such as
the voluntary national review report, the road map for the Goals and support for
innovative financing  The ability of UNDP to provide multidimensional policy
advice allows for support to Governments to develop and implement policies to
accelerate recovery The UNDP capacity to leverage and connect the Government to
its global network will be paramount in improving the Jamaican capacity to
address challenges through South-South and triangular cooperation initiatives
UNDP will leverage its knowledge and innovative capacity to translate new ideas
into practical development solutions in new ways, namely through increased
engagement of youth, women and communities, which produces gender-responsive and
risk-informed 12 In addition to Jamaica, the multi-country office serves the
Bahamas, Bermuda, Cayman Islands and the Turks and Caicos Islands  /13
DP/DCP/JAM/ policies UNDP will support new priority areas like the blue economy
by leveraging regional coordination mechanisms such as the Caribbean and Brazil
North Shelf Large Marine Ecosystems Given the need for an integrated United
Nations response, the new programme will ensure that programmatic results are
delivered through innovative solutions, joint programming and an enhanced
research development agenda Strategic partnerships will be fostered with the
United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the
United Nations Children’ Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to explore joint programming to
support the United Nations country team in the areas of human rights, gender
equality, reduction of violence against women and girls, youth development and
women’ empowerment II Programme priorities and partnerships The vision of this
UNDP multi-country programme is to support the Governments of the Bahamas,
Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Jamaica and Turks and Caicos Islands in reducing
multidimensional poverty through gender-responsive, inclusive, sustainable and
equitable social and economic development pathways towards the achievement of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development The four programme priorities
emerged from  two-tiered consultative and validation process with the
Government, civil society and private sector stakeholders The four programme
priorities – social resilience and inclusion, citizen safety and security and
the rule of law, climate change resilience, sustainable natural resource
management – are aligned to the outcomes of the UNMSDCF and will contribute to
the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals Led by the office of the
Resident Coordinator, the UNMSDCF planning and development processes included
United Nations agencies, government and key regional partners to ensure
strategic programming and promotion of  common understanding The programme
development process was facilitated through national-level consultations with
UNICEF, the United Nations Population Fund and UN-Women, which allowed the
agencies to pool their comparative advantages within  single strategic framework
that aligns with and supports the achievement of Vision This new programme will
integrate the six UNDP signature solutions guided by productivity, inclusion and
resilience Cross-cutting strategies will include: () evidence-based decision-
making; () demand-driven and locally owned development solutions; () human
rights-based and gender-inclusive development; and () innovation and
digitalization Additionally, UNDP will support the Governments of the Bahamas,
Bermuda and Jamaica in developing and accessing innovative financing and in
utilizing tools such as the investor maps for the Sustainable Development Goals
by leveraging its existing partnerships with strategic United Nations partners,
including UNICEF and the United Nations Capital Development Fund, international
financial institutions, the private sector and other non-traditional development
partners UNDP will also engage in South-South and triangular cooperation to
further develop the nascent Jamaican development finance ecosystem With  focus
on community-level programming, UNDP will seek to strengthen the abilities of
civil society organizations (CSOs) to enhance their capacities, services and
advocacy skills Social resilience and inclusion The outlined initiatives and
strategies will be critical contributors to Jamaica achieving its national
development priorities and Sustainable Development Goal  (poverty reduction) It
is envisaged that under this pillar, UNDP will improve the social and economic
resilience of vulnerable groups such as women, youth, persons with disabilities,
persons living with HIV and AIDS and those employed in the informal economy The
programmatic logic implies that if efforts are made to expand social services
and advance the socioeconomic empowerment of vulnerable communities, then there
will be improved social and economic resilience and /13  DP/DCP/JAM/ inclusion
of the targeted populations To this end, UNDP will leverage its comparative
advantage and build on previous results and partnerships to support gender-
responsive programming by bridging the digital divide at the local level;
supporting the development and implementation of local sustainable development
plans to strengthen local governance; expanding local entrepreneurship
initiatives to ensure the inclusion of youth, persons with disabilities and
victims of gender-based violence; increasing access to markets for MSMEs within
the agriculture and tourism sectors; and increasing access to financing for
women- and youth-led businesses In alignment with signature solution  of its
Strategic Plan, 2022=2025, UNDP will collaborate with UNESCO and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS to support national efforts to enhance
economic empowerment of target groups through capacity-building and the
establishment of community-based social enterprises With key consideration for
the differentiated needs of men and women, UNDP will support the expansion of
social services to vulnerable groups, enabling increased access and inclusion
The institutional capacity of relevant non-governmental organizations will be
strengthened to complement national efforts to improve data collection and
analysis; enhance social accountability interventions such as participatory
planning through policy dialogues; expand policy-based solutions which reduce
stigma and discrimination; and expand private sector engagement to increase
employment opportunities for vulnerable populations Interventions will primarily
be focused on Jamaica with joint programming opportunities in the Bahamas and
Turks and Caicos Islands reaching women and youth in key sectors Additionally,
through multi-country programming, South-South and triangular cooperation
opportunities will be maximized to ensure the systemization of lessons learned
and the adoption of best practices to enhance programme development and
implementation Success under this priority area will include partnerships with
the Jamaican Ministry of National Security, Ministry of Labour and Social
Security, Ministry of Education and Youth and Information, the Planning
Institute of Jamaica, Private Sector Organisation of Jamaica, Jamaica Social
Investment Fund and the Jamaica Business Development Corporation The programme
will engage with CSOs such as Jamaica AIDS Support for Life, Eve for Life and
Equality for All Foundation UNDP will explore joint programming with other
United Nations agencies such as UN-Women, and the International Labour
Organization to accelerate the overarching principle of leaving no one behind
UNDP will seek to complement the work of international partners such as the
United States Agency for International Development, Inter- American Development
Bank, the Bahamas Development Bank, the World Bank and local foundations of
multinational private sector organizations Citizen safety and security and the
rule of law Complementary to social resilience and inclusion is the enhancement
of citizen safety and security and the rule of law The key assumption is that if
the capacities of State and non-State actors are strengthened to ensure
equitable access to and delivery of justice services, then there will be
improved institutional effectiveness of justice service delivery and capacities
to reduce crime and violence Through this priority area, UNDP will strengthen
institutions, legislation and justice services that advance the rights and
equitable outcomes for all, especially women, girls and other disadvantaged
groups Additionally, focus will be given to enhancing the Government’ capacity
to reduce crime and family violence, emphasizing the inclusion of vulnerable
populations In support of national development goal , “the Jamaican society is
secure, cohesive and just”, UNDP in partnership with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin America and the Caribbean
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, will support the
Government’ efforts to reduce the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
Specifically, attention will be directed at improving the institutional
capacities of national and subnational organizations in crime reduction and  /13
DP/DCP/JAM/ prevention mechanisms while strengthening policy and legislation To
address the continued prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence, UNDP will
collaborate with other United Nations agencies to support the ongoing
implementation of the National Strategic Action Plan to Eliminate Gender-Based
Violence in Jamaica, the economic empowerment of men and women who are impacted
by violence and the mainstreaming in local plans of strategies to prevent sexual
and gender-based violence UNDP will continue to support justice reform by
enhancing the capacities of rule-of-law institutions and expanding justice
services and awareness for all Specifically, UNDP will support the establishment
of robust case and records management systems through digital technology Efforts
will focus on strengthening the legislative and regulatory frameworks for
providing alternative justice services and improving the institutional
capacities of the Ministry of Justice and its agencies This will increase access
to and knowledge of justice services for the most vulnerable and enhance trust
and confidence in the justice system UNDP will support the Ministries of
Justice, of National Security and of Gender, Entertainment, Sports and Culture,
and the Bureau of Gender Affairs to implement their established plans and
strategies to mainstream gender and the human rights-based approach These
interventions will involve partnerships with other United Nations agencies and
community-based organizations UNDP will seek to complement the work of
international partners such as Global Affairs Canada and the European Union By
developing strong institutions to carry out justice reform, reduce sexual and
gender-based violence and enhance the security of citizens, UNDP will contribute
to the sustainability of the programme Climate change resilience This outcome
assumes that if the capacities of State and non-State actors are strengthened,
then key Jamaican sectors will be better positioned to advance  low-carbon
development pathway UNDP will focus on strengthening policy and legislative
frameworks in key sectors, promoting low-carbon solutions through the use of
renewable energy and energy-efficient technologies, and developing nature-based
solutions to strengthen local climate change adaptation capacities UNDP will
continue supporting the Governments of the Bahamas and Jamaica to meet their
national and international climate change obligations and advance ratification
of relevant treaties and declarations UNDP will introduce innovative ways to
advance nature-based solutions for climate change adaptation at the sectoral and
community levels, focusing on key sectors such as agriculture and tourism UNDP
will work with  diversity of partners including the Climate Change Division, the
Department of Environmental Planning and Protection, the Ministries of Housing,
Urban Renewal and Climate Change and of Local Government and Rural Development,
and the University of the West Indies The costs to achieve nationally determined
contributions and to advance climate change adaptation can be prohibitive and
require innovative approaches to mobilize resources UNDP will support the
Governments of the Bahamas, Bermuda and Jamaica in: () forging public- private
partnerships; and () piloting blended finance instruments to strengthen
resilience to climate change and shocks Additionally, given the vulnerability of
the countries covered by the multi-country office to natural hazards, multi-
country programming will be  key strategy to strengthen disaster preparedness
and management frameworks; build the capacities of local institutions to utilize
innovative tools; and improve the resilience of MSMEs South-South cooperation
will be leveraged with regional organizations such as the Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency to provide the requisite technical support for
disaster risk reduction, response and recovery /13  DP/DCP/JAM/ Sustainable
natural resource management In this priority area, the change pathway assumes
that if environmental management capacities are strengthened and key principles
and practices are mainstreamed nationally, then there will be inclusive and
sustainable management of Jamaican natural resources and  faster transition to
greener productive sectors The pathway assumes that the advancement of research
and the development and deployment of innovative financing instruments in
emerging blue and green economies will contribute to sustainable and equitable
growth The key UNDP strategies include: () policy and legislative improvements;
() institutional strengthening for natural resource management; () expansion of
alternative livelihoods for vulnerable communities; and () the promotion of
sustainable environmental practices in key productive sectors to reduce
environmental degradation and protect critical ecosystem services UNDP will
support the integration of biodiversity protection and conservation in policies
and planning frameworks, and strengthening the institutional and governance
capacities of regulatory bodies for improved monitoring and enforcement of
environmental regulations UNDP will continue to support the Governments of the
Bahamas and Jamaica in meeting their obligations to multilateral agreements and
programmes such as those related to biodiversity, chemicals, waste and marine
ecosystems Interventions will be anchored within key government agencies,
including the National Environment and Planning Agency; Forestry Department;
Mines and Geology Division; the Department of Environmental Planning and
Protection; and the Ministry of Housing, Urban Renewal and Climate Change Guided
by the strengthened policy frameworks, UNDP will implement and scale up pilot
interventions that demonstrate improved natural resource management practices at
the local level These interventions will be deployed in ecologically sensitive
areas with genetic resources and areas affected by the extractive industries
Solutions that reduce land degradation, protect biodiversity and enable
alternative livelihoods while improving access and promote benefit-sharing
regimes will be prioritized To enable these results, UNDP will expand public-
private partnerships while ensuring the inclusion of persons with disabilities,
youth, women and rural and coastal populations To promote research and
development in this area, strategic partnerships will be leveraged with local
think tanks, academia and the private sector Through South-South and triangular
cooperation, UNDP will seek to introduce innovation and acceleration labs
locally III Programme and risk management Several threats and opportunities
could impede the achievement of programmatic results An underlying threat to all
priority areas is the country’ vulnerability to external shocks and natural
hazards which may delay the attainment of the development goals Additionally,
the contraction of the economy resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and emerging
developmental challenges could exacerbate social and gender inequalities
nationally In response, UNDP will continue to provide gender-sensitive technical
and policy advisory support for recovery programming with risk identification as
key element The pandemic presents an opportunity for UNDP to strengthen its
support to the Government by introducing cutting-edge technology to advance the
digitalization of public services, test innovation and advance research and
development while establishing new partnerships with diverse stakeholders These
measures will help to mitigate risks to the UNDP programme and assist the
countries covered by the multi-country office in advancing their development
agendas Social, economic, political and environmental threats may impact
programme priorities UNDP will conduct periodic reviews of the programme in
consultation with government and other stakeholders to mitigate the possible
risks While developing alternate livelihoods through strengthening the green
economy can catalyse rural economic development, the over- exploitation of
natural resources for commercial purposes must be mitigated by implementing
robust safeguards and ensuring that women, youth and other vulnerable groups are
not left  /13 DP/DCP/JAM/ behind Another critical risk to the programme is the
limited availability of fiscal space and concessional financing by the
Government, which may negatively affect the achievement of programme objectives
UNDP will continue its dialogue with the Government to promote efficient fiscal
policy measures that could help to expand fiscal space, including accommodating
grant expenditures UNDP will expand resource mobilization efforts to focus on
non-traditional donors and will encourage the use of third parties as
implementing partners where possible Another risk to the achievement of
programme priorities includes shifts in national priorities and implementation
delays emanating from general elections UNDP will continue to maintain an
impartial stance with the Government to facilitate the achievement of Vision
2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals This multi-country programme document
outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and
resources assigned to the programme at the country level Accountabilities of
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country
programmes is prescribed in the organization’ programme and operations policies
and procedures and internal control framework The programme will be nationally
executed and coordinated with the Planning Institute of Jamaica, which is the
Government’ interlocutor If necessary, national execution may be replaced by
direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force
majeure The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in  coordinated
fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks Cost
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will
be charged to the concerned projects The enterprise risk management policy and
the social and environmental standards will be used to ensure that the work of
the multi-country office upholds the principles of leaving no one behind, human
rights, gender equality and women' empowerment, sustainability and resilience,
accountability, meaningful participation of stakeholders and transparency The
UNDP stakeholder response mechanism and project-level grievance redress
mechanisms will be used to address grievances arising during project
implementation This integrated approach will be grounded in continuous
consultation, reporting and monitoring To ensure effective delivery of quality
results, flexible instruments including engagement facility and innovative joint
programming will be used The engagement facility modality will facilitate
agility and responsiveness to ad hoc developmental priorities identified by the
Government, including gender-responsive policy development, capacity-building
and disaster recovery In support of the “Delivering as One” principle, UNDP will
continue to leverage non-traditional donors to support the Government in
responding to development challenges UNDP will use joint programming to address
cross-cutting issues leveraging the technical expertise from other United
Nations agencies to address complex problems such as addressing sexual and
gender-based violence and varying human insecurities The multi-country office
will pursue  robust multi-path resource mobilization strategy targeting both
traditional and non-traditional funders to respond to the dynamic post-COVID- 19
financial landscape Strategic programmatic reviews will be conducted to assess
changes in the development context and operations of the multi-country office
and the resultant need to adjust the programmes targets and interventions based
on available resources business continuity plan has been put in place and will
be constantly monitored and updated to ensure staff safety and security while
maintaining the continuity of essential functions during  critical incident IV
Monitoring and evaluation Monitoring and evaluation of the programme will be
undertaken in collaboration with programme partners and beneficiaries The
achievement of outputs and outcomes will be /13  DP/DCP/JAM/ measured through
two-tiered process centred on adaptive management, learning and evidence and
maximizing synergies within and across programme portfolios Lessons learned from
all projects will be used to inform the development of new projects and advance
current projects As necessary, pilot projects will be undertaken to test
innovative solutions with the intent of scaling up successful interventions UNDP
will use project-level results frameworks to monitor outputs annually Emphasis
will be placed on disaggregation of data (by sex, age, geographic location and
vulnerable groups) and the inclusion of gender indicators in the monitoring and
evaluation plans to facilitate improved targeting and monitoring of the
programme Results review meetings with implementation partners and beneficiaries
will be hosted annually to review progress, assess data quality and results and
devise corrective actions The harmonized approach to cash transfers, spot checks
and financial audits will complement regular programme monitoring for
stakeholders To ensure the continued relevance of the programme, annual
programme reviews will be conducted with the Planning Institute of Jamaica to
highlight the contribution of programmes results to national development
priorities and the Sustainable Development Goals The programme review meeting
will also be used for horizon scanning to gain insights on emerging development
needs To facilitate monitoring and reporting of the indicators of the UNMSDCF,
partnerships will be fostered with other United Nations agencies for joint
evaluations, knowledge-sharing and evidence-based joint programming Efforts will
be advanced to promote  results-based management culture and gender
mainstreaming at the national level and within the United Nations system
Specifically, internal capacities in data collection and gender analyses will be
strengthened to support informed implementation and reporting Specialized
training will be provided to implementing partners in results-based management
to enhance data quality and results reporting UNDP will continue to strengthen
the Government’ capacity to monitor, evaluate and report progress on Vision 2030
and the Sustainable Development Goals UNDP will strengthen partnerships with the
Statistical Institute of Jamaica and academia to increase the availability of
data to track progress towards the Goals Data generated from the recently
developed external cooperation monitoring information system platform will be
used to monitor outcome indicators biennially and assess the UNDP contribution
to achieving development results In response to the identified gap in outcome-
level monitoring,  midterm evaluation of the programme will be conducted
Emphasis will be placed on making monitoring more inclusive and gender-
responsive Therefore, community-based participatory approaches such as photo
voice13 will be used to improve the quality of results generated and local-level
monitoring of activities 13 Process in which people usually those with limited
power use video and/or photo images to capture aspects of their environment and
experiences and share them with others The process empowers them to inform
others and to be actively involved in decisions that affect their own lives and
their community’ development  /13 DP/DCP/JAM/ Annex Results and resources
framework for Jamaica () NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Jamaicans are empowered to
achieve their fullest potential Sustainable Development Goals: ,  and
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF  People in the Caribbean
and communities actively contribute to and benefit from building and maintaining
safer, fairer, more inclusive and equitable societies RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN
OUTCOME: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and
rights-based approach to human agency and human development Data source and
frequency of data collection, and responsibilities Cooperation Framework outcome
indicator(), baselines, target() Indicative country programme outputs (including
indicators, baselines targets) Major partners / partnerships frameworks
Estimated cost by outcome ($) Indicator  Existence of legal frameworks to
promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sex
(SDGindicator) Vision 2030 - Medium Term Socioeconomic Framework (MTF),
biennially Output : Marginalized groups, particularly the poor, women, people
with disabilities, are empowered to gain universal access to basic services and
non-financial assets to build productive capacities and benefit from sustainable
livelihoods and jobs Government Ministries of National Security (MNS); of Labour
and Social Security; of Education and Youth and Regular: $681,000 Other:
$,559,100 Information; Indicator  Number of partnerships created to facilitate
enabling environment for the expansion of decent work and livelihoods Baseline
(2022):  Target (2026):  Source, frequency: UNDP, annual of Gender,
Entertainment, Sports and Culture (MGESC) Baseline: No Target: Yes Jamaica
Social Investment Fund Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) Jamaica Business
Development Corporation Indicator  Number of people accessing non-financial
services, disaggregated by sex [IRRF14] Baseline (2022):  females  males Target
(2026): 200 females, 100 males Source, frequency: UNDP, annual Bureau of Gender
Affairs (BGA) Private sector Private Sector Organization of Jamaica (PSOJ)
Output  Government has strengthened policy and institutional mechanisms to fight
structural barriers for the empowerment of vulnerable and marginalized groups
Civil society organizations Jamaica AIDS Support for Life Eve for Life Equality
for All Foundation Indicator  Number of partnerships raising awareness to
eliminate discriminatory social norms Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):  Source,
frequency: UNDP, annual International development partners European Union UN-
Women UNICEF UNESCO United Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean 14 UNDP integrated results and
resources framework 10  DP/DCP/JAM/ United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Jamaican society is secure, cohesive, and
just Sustainable Development Goals: , 12 and 16 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME
INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF : Regional and national laws, policies, systems and
institutions improve access to justice and promote peace, social cohesion, and
security RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  – Structural transformations
accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions Indicator
Rule of law index MOJ, PIOJ, biennially Regular: $420,000 Government Ministry of
Justice (MoJ) MNS BGA Ministry of Local Government and Rural Output  Rule of law
and national human rights institutions and systems strengthened to expand access
to justice and combat discrimination, with  focus on women and other
marginalized groups Baseline: 57 Target: 41 Other: $,883,197 Development (MLGRD)
Indicator  Number of strengthened institutions and systems supporting the
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human rights obligations:
The rule of law and justice [IRRF] Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):  Source,
frequency: MOJ, annual International development partners Global Affairs Canada
UNICEF UNFPA UN-Women Indicator  Number of individuals who have access to
justice, disaggregated by sex, persons with disabilities and youth [IRRF]
Baseline (2022):  Target (2026): 400 (250 females, 150 males) Source, frequency:
MOJ, annual Output  Government has strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for the operationalization of gender-responsive mechanisms to address
violence Indicator  Number of multisectoral policy and legislative frameworks
updated to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence [IRRF]
Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):  Source, frequency: MGESC; annual Indicator
Existence of  comprehensive legal and policy framework to reduce crime and
violence Baseline (2022): Work started Target (2026): In place Source,
frequency: MNS, annual  11 DP/DCP/JAM/ NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Jamaica has
healthy natural environment Sustainable Development Goals , , , 11, 13
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF :
Caribbean people, communities and institutions have enhanced their adaptive
capacity for inclusive, gender-responsive disaster risk management and climate
change adaptation and mitigation RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  –
Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk Indicator  Extent
to which national disaster risk reduction strategies are in line with the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction  are adopted and implemented MTF,
biennially Output : Government and private sector capacities enhanced to
implement solutions for energy efficiency and transitioning to low emission
energy and transport systems Regular: $750,000 Government Ministry of Ministry
of Housing, Urban Renewal and Climate Change (MHURECC) Climate Change Division
Ministry of Transport and Mining MLGRD Ministry of Science, Energy and Other:
$,380,862 Indicator  Number of solutions applied to accelerate the transition to
improved energy efficiency and clean energy Baseline (2021):  Target (2026):
Source, frequency: UNDP, annual Baseline: Partially Target: Largely Technology
Output : Disaster management authorities have strengthened systems to enable
gender-responsive and risk-informed development investments, including for
response to and recovery from crisis Academia University of the West Indies
Private sector Automobile Associations of Jamaica PSOJ Indicator  Number of
South-South and triangular cooperation partnerships that deliver measurable and
sustainable development benefits for participants Baseline:  partnerships
Target:  partnerships Data source: Agreements/ Memorandums of understanding
International development partners Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office
of the United Kingdom Global Affairs Canada UN-Women FAO Indicator  Number of
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises with recovery plans and systems in
place disaggregated by female and male led MSMEs Baseline (2022):  Target
(2026): 20 Source, frequency: PIOJ, annual NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Jamaica
has  healthy natural environment Sustainable Development Goals , , 12, 15, 17,
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP : UNMSDCF :
Caribbean countries manage natural resources and ecosystems to strengthening
their resilience and enhancing the resilience and prosperity of the people and
communities that depend on them RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome  –
Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk MTF, biennially
Government Regular: $314,000 12  DP/DCP/JAM/ Indicator  Environmental
performance Index Output : Environmental management institutions have
strengthened gender-responsive policy, institutional mechanisms to address
conservation, sustainable use and equitable benefit- sharing of natural
resources, in line with international conventions and national legislation
MHURECC BGA MLGRD National Environment and Planning Other: $,500,839 Baseline:
Target: Agency (NEPA) Mines and Geology Division Indicator  Number of gender-
responsive measures in place for conservation, sustainable use and equitable
access to and benefit- sharing of natural resources, biodiversity, and
ecosystems: Private sector PSOJ () Policy frameworks () Legal and regulatory
frameworks () () Financing frameworks International development partners
European Union UN-Women Institutional frameworks Baseline (2022):  Target
(2026): () ; () ; () ; ()  Source, frequency: PIOJ, BGA, annually Output :
Government, local communities, private sector entities have strengthened
capacities to implement sustainable management of natural resources solutions,
including sustainable commodities and green and inclusive value chains Indicator
Natural resources that are managed under  sustainable use, conservation, access,
and benefit-sharing regime: () Area of existing protected area under improved
management (hectares-ha) () Area under sustainable forest management (hectares)
[IRRF ] Baseline (year): () 33,085 ha; () TBD Target (2026): () 75,000 ha; ()
600 ha; Source, frequency: NEPA, annual Indicator  Number of sustainable
livelihood options implemented at the community level reaching women, youth and
special interest communities Baseline (2022):  Target (2026): Source, frequency:
UNDP, annual Indicator : Number of Nature-based solutions deployed to reduce
land degradation, promote restoring degraded ecosystems and enhance climate
resilience Baseline (2022):  Target (2026):  Source, frequency: NEPA, annual  13