                ’              Page ii October 2009 Page  Jamaica’ Energy Policy
Table of Contents List of Tables List of Figures List of Acronyms
Acknowledgements Message from the Hon Prime Minister Message from the Hon
Minister of Energy & Mining Jamaica’ Energy Management Framework Vision of
Jamaica’ Energy Sector 2009 – 2030 Executive Summary Introduction Overview and
Context Global Trends and Emerging Issues Related to Energy Profile of Jamaica’
Energy Sector SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’ Energy Sector Jamaica’ Energy Demand
Projections to 2030 Jamaica’ Energy Policy Framework to 2030 Goal : Jamaican’
use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for conservation and
efficiency Goal : Jamaica has  modernized and expanded energy infrastructure
that enhances energy generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are
safely, reliably, and affordably transported to homes, communities and the
productive sectors on  sustainable basis Goal : Jamaica realizes its energy
resource potential through the development of renewable energy sources and
enhances its international competitiveness, energy security whilst reducing its
carbon footprint Goal : Jamaica’ energy supply is secure and sufficient to
support long-term economic and social development and environmental
sustainability Goal : Jamaica has  well-defined and established governance,
institutional, legal and regulatory framework for the energy sector, that
facilitates stakeholder involvement and engagement Goal : Government ministries
and agencies are  model/leader in energy conservation and environmental
stewardship in Jamaica Goal : Jamaica’ industry structures embrace eco-
efficiency for advancing international competitiveness, and move towards
building  green economy Proposed Energy Sector Indicators and Targets
Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework Annexes Annex : Key
Accomplishments in the Energy Sector –  Annex : Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008
iii iii iv  vii viii viiii ix xi    12 16 18 20 25 28 31 33 37 40 42 44 48 51 52
58                ’              Page ii Annex : List of Organizations
Participating in National Consultations and Stakeholder Discussions Annex :
Glossary of Key Terms 62 65 List of Tables Table : Jamaica’ Energy Demand
Projections to 2030 18 Table : Energy Sector – Indicators and Targets 44 Table :
Key Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008 59 List of Figures 10 Figure : Household
Consumption KWH/month 2000 – 2008 12 Figure : Petroleum Consumption by Activity,
2008 13 Figure : Jamaica’ Energy Supply Mix (2008) 15 Figure : JPSCO
Transmission System 23 Figure : Vision and Goals for Jamaica' Energy Sector 35
Figure : Jamaica’ Energy Supply Matrix 2008 – 2030 Page iii Jamaica’ Energy
Policy  List of Acronyms BAU BOE CARICOM CBO CHP CNG CSAP DSM ECE EEU GDP GEF
GHG GOJ IAEA ISO IPCC JPSCO KMA KWH LNG MDA MEM Mt MW NGO NWC PCJ SIDS SWOT
Business as Usual Barrel of Oil Equivalent Caribbean Community Community Based
Organization Combined heat and Power Compressed Natural Gas Comprehensive
Sustainability Assessment Policy Demand Side Management Energy Conservation and
Efficiency Energy Efficiency Unit Gross Domestic Product Global Environmental
Facility Greenhouse Gas Government of Jamaica International Atomic Energy Agency
International Standards Organization Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Jamaica Public Service Company Kingston Metropolitan Area Kilowatt Hour
Liquefied Natural Gas Ministry, Department and Agency Ministry of Energy and
Mining Million tones Megawatts Non-Governmental Organization National Water
Commission Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Small Island Developing States
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats                ’
Page iv Acknowledgements The development of this Policy was led by the Ministry
of Energy and Mining, with the input of  wide cross-section of stakeholders in
the public and private sectors as well as the non-government organizations (NGO)
and community based organizations (CBOs) The work set out here has been
accomplished by the willingness of many individuals and organizations to lend
their time and expertise The Ministry of Energy and Mining wishes to acknowledge
their contributions and to express its sincerest gratitude for all those who
have helped this policy development process The involvement of stakeholders
through consultations, meetings and workshops ensured that all major issues were
effectively explored and that the strategic direction outlined in the policy
would meet Jamaica’ current energy needs and those required to We thank all the
various entities and members of the public who reviewed the Energy Policy Green
Paper 2006 - 2020 and forwarded to us, ideas, comments and suggestions; and
those persons who participated in the national consultations, too many to list
here Your comments and suggestions were reviewed and many have been incorporated
in this current version of the policy document Special mention must be made of
the following persons who spent many hours reviewing comments, researching,
providing technical analysis, and writing this document: Dr the Hon Carlton
Davis, former Cabinet Secretary and Consultant to the Ministry of Energy and
Mining; Zia Mian, Director General, Office of Utility Regulations; William
Saunders, Energy Consultant; Ruth Potopsingh, Group Managing Director, Petroleum
Corporation of Jamaica; Ryan Evans, Cabinet Office; Leonie Barnaby, Office of
the Prime Minister; Fitzroy Vidal, Senior Energy Engineer of the Ministry of
Energy and Mining; Marcia Forbes, former Permanent Secretary of the Ministry;
and Hillary Alexander, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Energy and Mining
and the rest of her hard-working staff Page  Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Message
from the Hon Prime Minister  welcome the opportunity to present Jamaica’
National Energy Policy 2009 – The policy is timely especially in light of the
increasingly important role of energy in the socio-economic development of our
country Jamaica’ future is inextricably linked to finding cost-effective,
environmentally sustainable energy solutions The formulation of this policy and
importantly, its implementation, are critical in helping Jamaica to achieve
national development Developed using the clearly defined GOJ Policy Making
Framework and Guidelines, the policy is designed to establish linkages with
other sectors of the economy to achieve coherence and fulfil its goals As we
pursue the path to developed country status by 2030, we have aligned our energy
policy to facilitate international competitiveness of our industry structures,
enhance human development prospects and contribute to environmental protection
The policy is consistent with promoting and enhancing the well-being of all
Jamaicans The National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030 examines the energy situation
we face and proposes  range of options and strategies which the Government is
committed to pursue over the short, medium and longer term These options range
from consciously incorporating energy conservation measures in our daily lives
to modernizing the nation’ energy infrastructure The policy balances issues
relating to energy demand and supply, energy security, safety, conservation and
development of renewable energy technologies Through this policy Jamaica can
help to lead the Caribbean and other small island developing states in
aggressively changing dependence on petroleum The work has just begun  ask every
Jamaican to come on board and be part of this very important implementation
process to 2030 as we create “ modern, efficient, diversified and
environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and
institutional framework” Bruce Golding,                 ’              Page vi
Message from Hon Minister of Energy & Mining The search for cleaner, safer, more
reliable, cheaper sources of energy and better ways to use it unites countries
all around the world, large and small, rich and poor Energy is the critical
issue of our time This policy shows Government’ commitment to enabling Jamaican
business and industry to access energy so that they can be competitive on the
international market; and for individuals and households to have the energy they
need to manage their daily lives in this modern economy This policy will create
and advance, “ modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable
energy sector…” This National Energy Policy is fully consistent with Vision 2030
Jamaica – National Development Plan and will support the achievement of Jamaica’
national vision, “Jamaica the place of choice to raise families, live, work and
do business”  cornerstone of this policy is diversifying our energy base We will
find new ways to power our economy and to reduce the amount of energy we use We
will explore indigenous sources of energy and clean technologies, thereby
injecting life into research institutions and generating new, “green” jobs at
time when new jobs are so sorely needed This policy will also enable us to
reduce pollution and thereby protect the health of all Jamaicans as they go
about their daily business It will demonstrate that Jamaica is  responsible
global citizen as we minimize our emissions of greenhouse gases, and reduce our
carbon footprint As former US President, Jimmy Carter said, “by acting now we
can control our future instead of letting the future control us” This policy
must now be brought to life by specific strategies, programmes and actions,
underpinned by  comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework that will
address areas such as: finding new sources of energy; creating new financial
incentives; promoting energy conservation; creating green buildings and so on We
all have  part to play in ensuring that we achieve the goals set out in this
policy - government ministries, departments and agencies, private businesses
large and small, our bauxite industry, our manufacturing sector, teachers and
other educational leaders, researchers, communities, students, our hoteliers,
architects, engineers and contractors and most importantly you and me – all
Jamaicans - helping to secure our energy future and leading this ‘land of wood
and water’ toward sustainable prosperity James Robertson,  Page vii Jamaica’
Energy Policy  Jamaica’ Energy Management Framework Jamaica’ energy management
framework and particularly this policy will support the implementation of Vision
2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan, particularly National Outcome #10 –
Energy Security and Efficiency and is therefore consistent with, and part of the
overarching vision for achieving developed country status by The National Energy
Policy and its relationship to Vision 2030 Jamaica as well as Government’
policy-making framework are presented in the matrix below: “Jamaica, the place
of choice to live, work, raise families and do business” (Jamaica' National
Vision) “ modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy
sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy
security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an
appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework” (Vision of Jamaica'
Energy Sector) Goal : Goal : Goal : Goal : Goal : Goal : Jamaica realizes its
energy resource potential through the development of renewable energy sources
and enhances its international competitiveness, energy security whilst reducing
its carbon footprint Jamaica has  well- defined and established governance,
institutional, legal and regulatory framework for the energy sector, that
facilitates stakeholder involvement and engagement Jamaica has  modernized and
expanded energy infrastructure that enhances energy generation capacity and
ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and affordably transported to
homes, communities and the productive sectors on  sustainable basis Jamaica’
energy supply is secure and sufficient to support long- term economic and social
development and environmental sustainability Jamaica’ industry structures
embrace eco- efficiency for advancing international competitiveness and moves
towards building  green economy Goal : Government ministries and agencies are
model/leader in energy conservation and environmental stewardship in Jamaica
Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for
conservation and efficiency Energy Strategies and Key Actions to 2030
Implementation Framework (Energy Specific Plans, Vision 2030 Jamaica Action
Plans/3yr Corporate Plans of Ministries, Agencies and Departments) Monitoring
and Evaluation Framework (Energy Indicators) Policy Review (-yearly, and
consistent with GOJ Policy Review Framework)  As articulated in Vision 2030
Jamaica – National Development Plan                ’              Page viii
Vision of Jamaica’ Energy Sector 2009 – 2030  modern, efficient, diversified and
environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and
institutional framework2 The long-term strategic vision is built on ten (10)
fundamental elements as follows:  An energy sector that provides affordable
energy supplies to all consumers throughout Jamaica with the capacity to meet
long-term growth in demand; and one that contributes to the international
competitiveness of the productive sectors of the economy  An energy sector that
is supported by greater awareness by the Jamaican public of the importance of
energy and its use in their daily lives and the contribution that each can make
to the responsible and efficient use of this vital commodity  An energy sector
that is focused on the modernization and expansion of the energy infrastructure
( generation, transmission and distribution systems) to ensure safety,
affordability, reliability and competitive advantage  An energy sector that is
driven by private sector investment within  policy and regulatory framework that
fosters investments, competition, efficiency,  level playing field and
transparency  An energy sector that provides long-term energy security to
producers and consumers in Jamaica, including security of supply and, to the
fullest extent possible, long-term price stability  An energy sector supported
by databases that are accurate and precise to enable analysis, forecasting and
overall management of the sector, especially information related to the
transportation sector  An energy sector that is environmentally sustainable with
significantly increased use of economically viable renewable energy sources
Modified from Vision 2030 Jamaica Energy Sector Plan Page ix Jamaica’ Energy
Policy   An energy sector that reflects  sustained improvement in the ways in
which energy is used, through greater energy efficiency, reduced energy
intensity and better energy conservation and management  An energy sector that
possesses the flexibility and creativity to adopt and adapt to new and
appropriate energy technologies (such as fuel cells, small nuclear plants) that
may emerge over the long-term An energy sector with an appropriate institutional
framework to support and facilitate the effective implementation of the policy
supported by all relevant stakeholders, including the public and private
sectors, educational institutions as well as non-governmental and community
based organizations The institutional framework will include among others:
mechanisms for improved coordination and organization between and within energy
agencies; capacity building to face the challenges regarding fossil fuel
supplies and costs                ’              Page  Executive Summary  his
document presents Jamaica’ National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030 which is designed
to ensure that by 2030 Jamaica achieves:  modern, efficient, diversified and
environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and
institutional framework This Policy document represents the revision to the
Energy Policy Green Paper 2006- 2020 based on national consultations and
comments received by  wide cross-section of society as well as current realities
facing Jamaica; and in keeping with the country’ long term plan to achieve
developed country status by 2030 as articulated in Vision 2030 Jamaica –
National Development Plan This Strategic Framework– the goals and strategies
underpinning this National Energy Policy – is comprehensive and is expected to
be durable to 2030 and beyond, yet be flexible and adaptable to meet new
challenges and opportunities as they arise This Strategic Framework also
addresses both supply and demand energy issues the country faces and as such
places priority attention on seven key areas:  Security of Energy Supply through
diversification of fuels as well as development of renewables  Modernizing the
country’ energy infrastructure  Development of renewable energy sources such as
solar and hydro  Energy conservation and efficiency  Development of
comprehensive governance/regulatory framework  Enabling government ministries,
departments and agencies to be model/leader for the rest of society in terms of
energy management  Eco-efficiency in industries By focusing on the seven
priority areas listed above, the National Energy Policy will ensure that the
country minimizes the effects of volatile and rising crude oil prices, takes
advantage of renewable resources and promotes conservation and efficiency in the
use of energy resources amongst all sectors of the society The ultimate outcome
of achieving the seven goals of this policy will be the provision of more
affordable energy supplies to Jamaican consumers, an improved competitive base
for the country, as well as sustainable growth and development of the nation
Page xi Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Jamaica National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030:
Securing Jamaica’ Energy Future will facilitate the achievement of the
fundamental elements of the vision for Jamaica’ energy sector and is built on
the following basic principles: It provides  framework for the sustainable
management of energy resources and for development of viable renewable energy
resources, with the latter expected to represent no less than 20% of the energy
mix by 2030 It is long-term and comprehensive It will advance new,
environmentally friendly technologies to increase energy supplies, particularly
in the transport sector, and encourage cleaner, more efficient energy
production, conversion and use It will establish linkages with other sectors of
the economy to achieve policy coherence and fulfill its goals It is fully
consistent with other aspects of Government policy, particularly Vision 2030
Jamaica – National Development Plan It utilizes an integrated approach towards
yielding  cleaner environment,  stronger economy, and  sufficient supply of
energy for the country’ future – balancing environmental protection with energy
production It seeks to raise the living standards of Jamaicans and contribute to
our country becoming “…the place of choice, to live, work, raise families and do
business”, recognizing that to do so our country must fully integrate its
energy, environmental, and economic policies, and move us into the realm of the
green economy and onto the path to sustainable prosperity It will enhance
Jamaica’ regional and global competitiveness through efficiency in the use of
energy The achievement of the Vision for the sector will be realized by
translating the policy into strategies and specific areas of action such as
diversification of our existing fuel sources, development of renewable sources
of energy, biofuels and waste-to-energy programmes, to name  few These
strategies and actions will be administered via the corporate and operational
plans through  range of organizations, starting with the Ministry of Energy and
Mining and its agencies, and also including other Ministries, agencies and
departments such as the ministries of Transport and Agriculture as well as the
Ministry with the responsibility for the environment                ’
Page xii Overview and Context The Jamaican economy is characterized by high
energy intensity and low efficiency and is almost completely dependent on
imported oil Petroleum consumption is concentrated in three areas, namely:
bauxite/alumina, power generation and transport The recent cycle of oil price
volatility and the global emphasis on environmental issues have re-focused
energy supply security and the environmental sustainability agendas for both
energy import-dependent and exporting economies Uncertainty of oil prices is
prompting developing economies such as ours to rethink the fundamentals of our
energy policies Access to energy at affordable prices has thus become the focus
of the energy security agendas of oil import-dependent economies  comprehensive
program of efficiency improvement and energy diversification is required for
Jamaica to provide high-quality, affordable, environmentally-friendly energy and
to reduce the country’ dependence on high-cost imported oil Energy
diversification will involve moving from an almost total dependence on petroleum
to  strategic mix of other sources, including natural gas, coal, petcoke,
nuclear, and renewable energy such as solar, wind, and biofuels In the short to
medium term, natural gas would be the fuel of choice for generation of
electricity and the production of alumina This diversification will require an
enabling regulatory and legislative environment and development of institutional
capacity In the longer term more sustainable and cheaper fuel options must, and
will be identified and developed Jamaica’ National Energy Policy will support
Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan, provide the enabling
environment for the achievement of the national outcome of “ secure and
sustainable energy supply for our country” as articulated in the Plan and the
implementation of the two national energy strategies: to diversify the energy
supply and to promote energy efficiency and conservation It would also provide
support for the achievement of two other national strategies articulated in the
Plan, namely “adaptation to climate change” and “to contribute to the effort to
reduce the global rate of climate change” The Energy Policy will ensure that
linkages are established with other sectors such as agriculture, transport,
construction, bauxite, and finance to achieve policy coherence and fulfill the
country’ energy goals Jamaica’ Energy Policy Framework  The Strategic Framework
underpinning this National Energy Policy is comprehensive and will be sustained
to 2030 and beyond yet be flexible and adaptable to meet new challenges and
opportunities as they arise The framework includes the short- to medium-term as
well as long-term strategic directions for the government, private sector and
industry as well as civil society Page xiii Jamaica’ Energy Policy  The Vision
and Strategic Framework contained in this National Policy reflect the
contributions of the stakeholders represented on the Prime Minister’ Task Force
on Energy; National Energy Task Force; the Vision 2030 Jamaica Task Force on
Energy; and stakeholders and members of the general public who participated in
the island- wide consultations undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Mining
during the development of the Policy The policy presents seven goals, the
accomplishment of which will enable Jamaica to achieve the country’ energy
vision of  modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy
sector providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy
security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an
appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework These goals are
described below Goal : Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively pursue
opportunities for conservation and efficiency Achievement of this goal will
result in improving efficiency in the key energy- consuming areas of the power
generation, bauxite/alumina production, transportation and building design and
construction Jamaicans will become more aware of energy conservation practices
and will be helped in reducing energy consumption by:  comprehensive and well
coordinated continuous public education programme; the introduction of
incentives; greater availability of energy-saving products and devices; research
that leads to adoption of, and adaptation to new and emerging energy
technologies; improvements in energy infrastructure; and appropriate legislation
Goal : Jamaica has  modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances
energy generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely,
reliably, and affordably transported to homes, communities and the productive
sectors on  sustainable basis When this goal is accomplished, Jamaica will have
modernized energy infrastructure consisting of energy-efficient plants and
distribution systems including  protocol for: replacing old and inefficient
generating plants; and  refinery that produces higher- valued refined petroleum
products in order to replace imports and compensate for the potential switch
from oil-fired to natural gas power plants This will be in  liberalized energy
industry that promotes competition governed by appropriate regulations Goal :
Jamaica realizes its energy resource potential through the development of
renewable energy sources and enhances its international competitiveness and
energy security whilst reducing its carbon footprint                ’
Page xiv Opportunities for further development of indigenous renewable energy
resources such as solar, hydro, wind and biofuels, will be explored with the
goal of increasing the percentage of renewables in the energy mix to 20% by The
development of renewable energy sources will not only reduce the country’
dependence on imported oil but will also provide new employment opportunities
towards building Jamaica’ green economy Increased use of renewables will also
result in lowering the level of air pollution, ensuring  smaller carbon
footprint for Jamaica and better enable compliance with international
conventions on climate change Goal : Jamaica’ energy supply is secure and
sufficient to support long-term economic and social development and
environmental sustainability Under this Goal, Jamaica will reduce the percentage
of petroleum in the country’ energy supply mix from the current 95%
Diversification priorities for the short, medium, and long term will be based on
cost, efficiency, environmental considerations and appropriate technologies This
will protect the country from disruptions in oil supply and price volatility
Components in the more diversified energy source mix will include both
indigenous and foreign options such as natural gas, coal, petcoke, nuclear
sources as well as renewable energy sources The country will pursue its oil and
gas exploration efforts with  view to incorporate any commercial volumes
discovered into the country’ energy strategy There will also be the
strengthening of existing multilateral, regional and bilateral partnerships and
cooperative arrangements and develop new ones that best advance Jamaica’ energy
interests Goal : Jamaica has  well-defined and established governance,
institutional, legal and regulatory framework for the energy sector that
facilitates stakeholder involvement and engagement Achievement of this goal will
remove policy inconsistencies and provide  coherent policy and regulatory
framework to facilitate competition in the energy supply system, enable the
introduction of diverse sources of energy into the system, and provide
integrated monitoring and enforcement of regulations, all overseen by agencies
and organizations with the capacity and tools to guide the energy sector Goal :
Government ministries and agencies are  model/leader in energy conservation and
environmental stewardship in Jamaica Government ministries, departments and
agencies will be models of efficient energy usage and environmental stewardship,
resulting in  reduction in the high public sector consumption of energy and
other resources and providing  stimulus for private sector and community action
Goal : Jamaica’ industry structures embrace eco-efficiency for advancing
international competitiveness and move towards building  green economy Page xv
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  This goal recognizes that the private sector is the
engine of  nation’ economy When this goal is achieved, private sector firms and
industry will be equipped to implement innovative energy management programmes,
using clean, energy efficient technologies and institutionalizing energy
conservation practices Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Framework The
implementation of this Policy will be led by the Ministry of Energy and Mining,
with the support of several other departments and agencies of Government as well
as non- state stakeholders including the private sector, NGOs and CBOs The
involvement of all stakeholders is fundamental to the successful implementation
of this Policy The Ministry of Energy and Mining will have the dual
responsibilities of articulating the policy and coordinating the monitoring of
its implementation The first role will require it to set out clear guidelines to
its departments and agencies and other sister ministries and their departments
and agencies Petrojam Ethanol Storage Tank Aligned to this Policy will be
strategic plans and action plans developed for each of the goals and aligned to
the energy sector plan and the action plan developed under Vision 2030 Jamaica –
National Development Plan It is expected that each strategic plan will be
developed for three years and will be further aligned and find expression with
the - year rolling Corporate Plan and budget of the Ministry In order to ensure
that desired outcomes of the National Energy Policy are being achieved, the
effectiveness of the policy will be periodically assessed to identify when
complete review or alteration is appropriate                ’              Page
xvi Introduction  his document presents Jamaica’ National Energy Policy 2009 –
It presents Jamaica’ first long term Energy Policy and is structured to ensure
that Jamaica achieves by 2030:  modern, efficient, diversified and
environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and
institutional framework Over the years, energy policy in Jamaica has been
outlined in various documents, with the most recent being the 1995 Energy Policy
and the Green Paper – The Jamaica Energy Policy 2006 – This Policy document
represents the revision to the Green Paper  based on national consultations3 and
comments received by  wide cross-section of the society, current realities
facing Jamaica, and is in keeping with country’ long term plan to achieve
developed country status by 2030 – Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development
Plan In the development of the policy, use was also made of the Comprehensive
Sustainability Assessment Policy (CSAP) Tool Framework 2008 to ensure that  wide
range of economic, social and environmental issues were adequately addressed in
the policy towards enabling sustainability For several countries, particularly
developed countries with emission reduction targets, their energy policy is
linked to or framed within the context of climate change mitigation and moving
towards  low carbon economy Although developing countries do not have emission
reduction targets at present, the matter is now being discussed in the
development of  new carbon trading regime post 2012 when the provisions of the
Kyoto Protocol end In any case, “no regrets” mitigation actions such as energy
conservation and development of renewable energy sources have positive impacts
in terms of economic, social and environmental considerations and are included
in this Policy Some Supply Side Issues Addressed:   Energy resources Energy
transmission and distribution Energy infrastructure  Some Demand Side Issues
Addressed:    Energy consumption Energy efficiency Behavioural change The
Policy identifies  mix of short- to medium-term as well as long term strategic
directions and actions for the government, private sector and industry as well
as civil society It must be noted that many elements of this policy are
currently being undertaken  Based on the Consultation Code of Practice for the
Public Sector Page  Jamaica’ Energy Policy  The Strategic Framework (that is,
the sector goals and strategies) underpinning this National Energy Policy is
comprehensive and is expected to be durable to 2030 and beyond yet be flexible
and adaptable to meet new challenges and opportunities as they arise The
Strategic Framework also addresses both supply and demand energy issues the
country faces and so places priority attention on seven key areas:  Security of
Energy Supply through diversification of fuels as well as development of
renewable energy sources  Modernizing the country’ energy infrastructure
Development of renewable energy sources such as solar and hydro  Conservation
and efficiency in use of energy  Development of  comprehensive
governance/regulatory framework for the energy sector  Enabling government
ministries and agencies to be models/best practice for the rest of society in
terms of energy management  Eco-efficiency in industries By focusing on the
seven priority areas listed above, the National Energy Policy will ensure that
the country mitigates the effects of volatile and rising crude oil prices, takes
advantage of renewable and non-renewable resources and promotes conservation and
efficiency in use of energy resources amongst all sectors of the society The
ultimate outcome of achieving the seven goals will be the provision of more
affordable energy supplies to Jamaican consumers, an improved competitive base
for the country, as well as sustainable growth and development of the nation
Jamaica National Energy Policy 2009 – 2030: Securing Jamaica’ Energy Future will
facilitate the achievement of the fundamental elements of the vision for
Jamaica’ energy sector and is built on the following basic principles: It
provides  framework for the sustainable management of energy resources and for
development of viable non-renewable and renewable energy resources, with the
latter expected to represent no less than 20% of the energy mix by 2030 It is
long-term and comprehensive It will advance new, environmentally friendly
technologies to increase energy supplies, particularly in the transport sector,
and encourage cleaner, more efficient energy production, conversion and use It
will establish linkages with other sectors of the economy to achieve policy
coherence and fulfill its goals It is fully consistent with other aspects of
Government policy, particularly Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan
’              Page  It utilizes an integrated approach towards yielding
cleaner environment,  stronger economy, and  sufficient supply of energy for the
country’ future – balancing environmental protection with energy production It
seeks to raise the living standards of Jamaicans and contribute to our country
becoming “…the place of choice to live, work, raise families and do business”,
recognizing that to do so our country must fully integrate its energy,
environmental, and socio-economic policies, and move into the realm of the green
economy and onto the path to sustainable prosperity It will enhance Jamaica’
regional and global competitiveness through efficiency in the use of energy The
achievement of the Vision for the sector will be realized by translating the
policy into strategies and specific areas of action such as renewables,
diversification, biofuels and waste-to-energy to name  few These strategies and
actions will be administered via the corporate and operational plans of  range
of organizations, starting with the Ministry of Energy and Mining and its
departments and agencies, and also including other Ministries and their
departments and agencies such as the Ministries of Transport and Agriculture as
well as the Ministry responsible for the environment This Policy Development
Process included the inputs of various stakeholders in the public and private
sectors as well as from non- governmental and civil society organizations The
policy development benefited from island- wide consultations as well as
information received from various groups including academia and industry groups
The Policy is structured as follows: Executive Summary Member of Academia,
provinding input at  national consultation Introduction Overview and Context
Global Trends and Emerging Issues Related to Energy Profile of Jamaica’ Energy
Sector SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’ Energy Sector Jamaica’ Energy Demand
Projections to 2030 Jamaica’ Energy Policy Framework to 2030 Implementation,
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework Annexes Page  Jamaica’ Energy Policy
Overview and Context  amaica has provided almost all its citizens with access to
electricity; 90% of households have access, whereas approximately one-quarter of
the world’ people are unable to use electricity to meet their day-to-day needs
However, the power generation sector that provides electricity to households,
businesses, industries and municipalities, accounts for almost  quarter of the
country’ petroleum imports/consumption and is characterized by high cost, low
reliability, low power generation efficiencies and high system losses In
general, the Jamaican economy is characterized by high energy intensity and low
efficiency and is almost completely dependent on imported oil Petroleum
consumption is concentrated in three areas, namely: bauxite/alumina, power
generation and transport, with the latter using automotive fuels (gasoline and
diesel oil) which are the most expensive fuel  comprehensive program of
efficiency improvement and energy diversification is urgently required for
Jamaica to provide high-quality, affordable, environmentally- friendly energy
and to reduce the country’ dependence on high-cost imported oil Energy
diversification will involve moving from an almost total dependence on petroleum
to increase the contribution of other sources, including natural gas, coal,
petcoke, nuclear, and renewable energy such as solar, wind, and biofuels In the
short to medium term, natural gas would be the fuel of choice for generation of
electricity and the production of alumina This diversification will require an
enabling regulatory and legislative environment and development of adequate
institutional capacity In the longer term more sustainable and cheaper fuel
options must, and will be identified and developed Energy underpins our modern
economy The recent cycle of oil price volatility and the global emphasis on
environmental issues have re-focused energy supply security and the
environmental sustainability agendas for both energy import- dependent and
exporting economies Uncertainty of oil prices is prompting developing economies
such as ours to rethink the fundamentals of our energy policies Access to energy
at affordable prices has thus become  top priority of the energy security
agendas of oil import-dependent economies                ’              Page
Energy services can be produced from both conventional (nonrenewable fossil
fuel- based) and renewable sources of energy Jamaica is almost completely
dependent on imported oil Traditionally, Jamaica has depended on petroleum
supplies from Venezuela, Mexico, and Trinidad & Tobago, supplemented by
purchases on the spot market However, our long term energy security is
threatened by diminishing global oil reserves vis--vis demand and long-term
sustained rising oil prices, political uncertainties in key oil- producing
regions; and the potential impacts of natural disasters on oil production and
transportation infrastructure  comprehensive and sustained program of efficiency
improvement and energy diversification will be introduced to provide high-
quality, affordable, environmentally- friendly energy (to the maximum extent
possible) towards reducing the country’ dependence on high-cost imported oil In
particular, the high price of electricity to businesses and other end users will
be targeted As such, improved efficiencies in the conversion of primary fuels to
electricity and its transportation, distribution and use is  major strategy to
make the Jamaican economy more competitive in the regional and international
market place Solar Panels at Cornwall Regional Hosptial in Montego Bay
Supporting Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan The National Energy
Policy will support Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan This 21-year
plan is based on  fundamental vision to make “Jamaica, the place of choice to
raise families, live, work and do business,” and on guiding principles which put
the Jamaican people at the centre of the nation’ transformation The Plan sets
out fifteen national outcomes that are designed to enable  major transformation
of Jamaica from  middle income developing country to one which affords its
citizens world class standards in key areas such as health, education,
nutrition, basic amenities (such as energy and water supply) and access to
environmental goods and services (clean air, freshwater etc) One of the fifteen
national outcomes is “Energy Security and Efficiency” Page  Jamaica’ Energy
Policy  Vision 2030 Jamaica presents two national strategies to “provide  secure
and sustainable energy supply for our country” These are:  Diversify the energy
supply  Promote energy efficiency and conservation Jamaica’ National Energy
Policy will provide the enabling environment, including legislative support for
the achievement of this national outcome of  secure and sustainable energy
supply and the implementation of the two national energy strategies Key Linkages
with Economic Sectors The Energy Policy will establish linkages with other
sectors of the Jamaican economy in order to achieve policy coherence and fulfill
the achievement of the country’ energy goals To this end, related policies and
strategic plans to be developed, for example, those related to renewables,
biofuels, public sector procurement, taxes and incentives, conservation and
efficiency as well as transport and agriculture will be harmonized with this
policy Agriculture – The development of biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel
will be part of agriculture and land use policy and plans, especially given the
conflicts between land and water use for food versus biofuels The agriculture
sector uses 75% of the country’ water, obtained mainly from aquifers using
electric/petroleum-fueled deep well pumps Implementing water-conserving
irrigation systems as well as encouraging energy conservation in the
agricultural sector will not only result in less water being consumed for
agriculture but will also reduce the energy needs of the agriculture sector as
well Consideration must also be given to use of treated recycled water from
waste treatment plants in the agricultural and industrial sectors Transportation
–The transport sector strategy will discourage the importation of inefficient
motor vehicles by linking the tax regime to mileage per gallon and the engine
capacity The transportation policy will encourage measures such as energy
conservation, including: efficient traffic management; car pooling; park and
ride; use of clean fuels to minimize pollution; flexi-work hours and tele-
commuting; an efficient public/urban mass transit transport system; encouraging
non- motorized transport; and, promoting vehicle and road maintenance programs
Supporting legislation and infrastructure for use of biofuels will be put in
place The Jamaica Urban Transit Company Buses                ’              Page
transportation policy also will encourage more efficient modes of transport such
as barges especially for bulky materials like aggregates The possibility of
enhanced coastal and rail transport will be kept under constant review Once
natural gas is introduced into Jamaica’ energy supply mix, the transport fleets,
where applicable, will be converted to CNG and in the longer term  CNG supply
network must be developed to enable private motorists to convert to natural gas
based motor vehicles Construction, Housing, Offices, Factories and Hotels – The
construction industry will be held to the standards outlined in the Energy
Efficient Building Code; this will require architects and engineers to design,
build and renovate buildings and factories to incorporate energy efficient
lighting and cooling systems and building material and employ energy-efficient
construction methodologies Consideration also will be given to providing
incentives for constructing carbon neutral buildings that would use no energy
from the national power grid Energy conservation and efficiency must and will be
promoted among, government entities, factories, offices, homeowners and
hoteliers Bauxite – Mechanisms will be provided to encourage the bauxite/alumina
industry to take greater advantage of co-generation potential to supply energy
to the national grid New technologies also need to be introduced to reduce the
energy cost of alumina production to make it internationally competitive Greater
application of combined heat and power (CHP) concept, already used in the this
industry will be encourage to enable capture of waste energy, reduce cost and at
the same time allow for export of surplus electricity to the national grid
Finance – The Ministry of Finance and the Public Service will develop and
implement  program of incentives and fiscal measures to enable and support:
investments in modern facilities and infrastructure in the energy sector; energy
efficiency and conservation; and development of renewable energy options The
domestic financial sector will actively seek to participate in investing in
energy sector development It will be important for adequate information to be
disseminated and incentives created to enable the participation of local
financial institutions in the financing of energy projects, particularly those
related to renewable energy, LNG and power generation plants  system of shared
decision-making will be stated and agreed upon This will ensure that decisions
of the Ministry of Finance related to energy will be collaborative and would
also ensure that those decisions are consistent with the National Energy Policy
Page  Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Global Trends and Emerging Issues Related to
Energy   the World Energy Outlook 2008, the International Energy Agency (IEA)
referred to the world’ energy system as being at  crossroads, with current
global trends in energy supply and consumption being
unsustainable—environmentally, economically and socially The IEA identifies
need for an energy revolution to address two central energy challenges: securing
the supply of reliable and affordable energy; and effecting  rapid
transformation to  low-carbon, efficient and environmentally responsible system
of energy supply Although, access to energy is not one of the Millennium
Development Goals, it is considered fundamental to facilitate the achievement of
these said Goals Climate Change It has been widely accepted that human-induced
Climate Change is happening The Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), stated that “Warming of the
climate system is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of increases
in global average air and ocean temperatures, widespread melting of snow and ice
and rising global average sea level (2007)” The burning of fossil fuels is the
single largest contributor to emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon
dioxide and nitrous oxide that contribute to climate change and global warming
Jamaica signed and ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and
its Kyoto Protocol As  non-Annex  Party to the Protocol, Jamaica is not bound by
specific targets for greenhouse gas emissions However, there are obligations to
foster adaptation to the potential impacts Although Jamaica does not
significantly contribute to the global problem of climate change, as  small
island developing state, the country is highly vulnerable to the effects of
climate change Coastal inundation, sea level rise, and damage by extreme weather
events are among the chief concerns for Jamaica arising from climate change The
country’ energy-related infrastructure, including power lines, generating
plants, service stations and wind farms must have safeguards in place to handle
these challenges Under the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), developed countries are required to
reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to an average of % against 1990 levels
over the period 2008-These targets must be met primarily through national
measures, but there are additional means of meeting the targets through three
market mechanisms under the Protocol The Clean Development Mechanism allows
developed countries to purchase certified emission reduction credits from
projects in developing countries which result in reduced emissions and
contribute to sustainable development                ’              Page
Although developing countries do not have emission reduction targets at present,
the matter is now being discussed at the global level in the development of  new
carbon trading regime post 2012 when the provisions of the Kyoto Protocol end
Energy and the Environment The burning of fossil fuels is the single largest
contributor to emissions of greenhouse (GHG) gases such as carbon dioxide and
nitrous oxide that contribute to global warming and climate change The
development and implementation of  national energy policy is therefore an
important component for the achievement of sustainable national development and
must balance issues relating to demand, supply, energy security, conservation
and development of renewable energy technologies Mitigation efforts such as
energy efficiency and conservation programmes, and alternative energy sources
such as solar, wind, hydropower, and biofuels to produce energy will not only
reduce the country’ import energy bill, diversify its energy supply, and reduce
its dependence on non renewable fossil fuels but also contribute to the
reduction in global emissions of greenhouse gases and global warming and the
disastrous consequences of climate change and its effects on the environment
including, beach erosion, degradation or bleaching of coral reefs, marine
species and other natural ecosystems that live along the coastline The
development, deployment and wide-scale use of new, clean technologies in
industry for example, emitting fewer greenhouse gases and other air pollutants
is also essential in pollution reduction and the protection of human health
There are several policy and regulatory initiatives concerned with energy use
and environmental protection in Jamaica The Policy on Environmental Stewardship
of Government Operations has been drafted as part of the Government of Jamaica’
goal of enabling GOJ entities to become more efficient in their operations,
generating significant cost savings while eliminating or minimizing adverse
impacts on the environment The Environmental Stewardship Policy speaks to among
other things, energy conservation, water conservation and fleet management -
aspects of government operations that have an impact on the overall use of
energy An Environmental Management Systems Policy and Strategy Green Paper for
Jamaica has been prepared An Environmental Management System (EMS) is
management tool which enables an organization, whether in the public or private
sector, to address the impacts of its products, processes and services on the
environment, including its use of energy and management of waste The Jamaica
Ambient Air Quality Standards were promulgated by the Natural Resources
Conservation Authority (NRCA) in Air Quality Regulations were also promulgated
in Some of the main features of the air quality regulations include Page
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  an air pollutant discharge licensing system and the
payment of discharge fees for emissions or discharges to the environment The Air
Quality Regulations include  requirement that all holders of  licence to
discharge air pollutants, complete  Summary Report of Annual Actual Emissions
for Regulated Pollutants and Greenhouse Gases Carbon Trading/Auction Carbon
credits are  key component of national and international attempts to reduce the
growth in concentrations of greenhouse gases  Carbon Emissions Trading Policy is
now being developed to address Jamaica’ participation in the Clean Development
Mechanism and its position regarding carbon neutral status in sectors such as
the tourism industry Energy Conservation and Efficiency Conservation and
efficiency are often considered the most promising sources of energy available
because they save energy for future use and buy us time to explore and develop
new energy technologies Household consumption kWh/month 2000 - 2008      /
Household consumption kWh/month  2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Year
Energy conservation in this document refers to practices and actions that reduce
the amount of energy that is used ( walking instead of driving  car) whereas
energy efficiency refers to changing technology so that less energy is used to
accomplish the same task ( driving  more fuel-efficient vehicle) While education
and changing attitudes are the core requirements for effecting energy
conservation and can be accomplished at little or no cost, increased development
of and access to energy-saving technologies and products are also required to
increase energy efficiency and usually requires initial investment that will be
recouped over the long-term Figure : Household Consumption KWH/month 2000 – 2008
In the case of Jamaica, average electricity consumption of Jamaican households
as depicted in the figure above was 164 kWh/month in 2008, down from 200 kWh/per
month in This reduction was due largely  response by citizens to high
electricity                ’              Page 10 prices in an attempt to reduce
their monthly bills, but was also based on the implementation of various energy
conservation initiatives and programmes that have been put in place over the
last ten years including, training programmes in environmental stewardship
implemented across the public sector and increased availability of energy
efficient consumer products such as energy-saving bulbs Oil, Coal and Natural
Gas are likely to remain the main fuel sources used globally to 2030, despite
increases in the use of nuclear and renewable energy Renewable Energy Renewable
energy sources diversify  country’ energy supplies and reduce its dependence on
non-renewable fossil fuels which will eventually be depleted Renewable energy
sources are also cleaner than fossil fuels, emitting fewer greenhouse gases and
other air pollutants that are responsible for harming human health The
development of renewable alternative energy technologies is proceeding
throughout the world due to increased demand driven by concerns around climate
change and energy security by citizens in both developed and developing
countries This is contributing to competitive cost structures for renewables
although they remain, on average, more expensive than fossil fuels The REN21
Renewables Global Status Report released in May 2009, showed that in 2008, for
the first time, more renewable energy than conventional power capacity was added
in both the European Union and United States, showing  "fundamental transition"
of the world' energy markets towards renewable energy It must be noted that all
this development was supported through subsidies and government recovery plans
Wigton Wind Farm During 2008,  number of governments worldwide enacted new
renewable energy policies, and many countries set ambitious renewable energy
targets Today, at least 73 countries have renewable energy policy targets, up
from 66 at the end of Jamaica will have its renewable energy policy in place by
early Countries are viewing the renewable energy industry as  way to stimulate
their economies and create jobs without increasing carbon emissions  Renewables
Global Status Report Update 2009 Page 11 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Profile of
Jamaica’ Energy Sector  amaica’ energy sector faces  number of challenges The
sector is characterized by: an almost complete dependence on imported petroleum;
high rates of energy use; inefficient electricity supply systems; and an
inadequate policy and regulatory framework These issues must and will be dealt
with as Jamaica moves to create by 2030:  modern, efficient, diversified and
environmentally sustainable energy sector providing affordable and accessible
energy supplies with long-term energy security and supported by informed public
behaviour on energy issues and an appropriate policy, regulatory and
institutional framework The energy sector in Jamaica is dominated by imported
petroleum, which meets over 90% of the nation’ energy needs Due to the energy
intensity of the aluminum/bauxite industry in Jamaica, per capita energy
consumption is high when compared with most developing countries Cooking &
Lighting % Petroleum Consumption by Activity, 2008 Other % Road & Rail 21%
Bauxite/Alumina 30% Shipping 14% Electricity Generation 23% Aviation % Figure :
Petroleum Consumption by Activity, 2008                ’              Page 12
The main energy-related characteristics of Jamaican economy are: ) High
dependence on imported oil (in 2008 oil imports accounted for 95% of the primary
energy supplies mix (see Figure at right); This dependency makes Jamaica
vulnerable to increases in the price of oil as was the case in 1973 and more
recently in the past six () years when the annual average spot peak price of
crude oil on the international market increased by 288% from US$25 per barrel in
2002 to US$97 in 2008 Wind Wind % % Hydro Hydro % % Petroleum Petroleum 95% 95%
Figure : Jamaica’ Energy Supply Mix (2008) Energy Supplies Mix ) The oil import
bill in 2008 increased significantly (% higher than in 2007) due to increasing
crude oil prices For the first time the oil import cost surpassed Jamaica’
export earnings of US$ million for the year ) Approximately % of the energy
supplies mix comes from other sources – % from hydro and % from wind ) In 2008,
three areas, namely bauxite/alumina (%), power/electricity generation (%), and
transport (%) accounted for the largest share of petroleum consumption by volume
or 79% of the oil consumption In terms of cost, the transport sector is the
single highest ) Internal energy per capita consumption, including the energy
intensive bauxite sector is , and excluding the bauxite sector it is  )
Efficiency of energy conversion and use is low The conversion efficiency of old
steam generation plants is less than 30% With modern technologies such as
combined cycle turbines; this efficiency can be improved to over 50% System
losses in transmission and distribution represent 23% of total output (as
estimated by the Office of Utilities Regulation) ) Growing demand for automotive
fuels (gasoline and diesel oil) is at  rate of % per annum In 2008 the
automotive fuels consumption was estimated at  million barrels of oil equivalent
- boe (% of oil demand which cost about 31% of foreign exchange expenditure)
Page 13 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  ) While Jamaica Public Service Company (JPS)
retains  monopoly on the transmission and distribution of electricity the
production regime has been liberalized to include generation of electricity by
private producers for their own use or for sale to the national grid In 2008,
total generating capacity in Jamaica was approximately 818 megawatts (MW), which
included 217 MW capacity provided by independent power producers ) Lack of an
appropriate and dynamic regulatory framework to address the range of issues and
challenges the sector faces, including: pricing of electricity and petroleum
products; old generation plants; tax and pricing structure for road users;
system loss; and the development of renewable generation capacity ) Low power
generation efficiency and reliability (about 40% of the generation capacity is
over 30 years old and need to be replaced) The proportion of diesel oil based
generation capacity in the total generation capacity mix (34%) is high and
requires expensive fuel                ’              Page 14 The Electricity
Sector Figure : JPSCO Transmission System Jamaica has in excess of ,200 km of
transmission lines The Electricity Sector in Jamaica is vital to the stability
of the society and plays  critical role in the viability and modernization of
the Jamaican economy It is often considered as the main life blood for
development and the improvement in the standard of living of the people The
generation stock of over 818MW is largely oil based and is comprised of over 30%
of its capacity that goes well beyond its economic life 30% of total generation
is supplied by Private Power Partners under the Independent Power Purchase
Agreements The transmission system includes  network of more than 1200 km of 138
kV and 69 kV lines The primary distribution system operates at voltages of 12
kV, kV and 24 kV and altogether there are more than 12,000 km of distribution
lines Over the past few years JPSCo has experienced an increase in system losses
This increase is attributed to an increase in technical losses due to load
increases as well as an apparent increase in non technical losses, which are
estimated to be approximately 12% of the energy supplied by JPSCo Page 15
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  SWOT Analysis of Jamaica’ Energy Sector  or the energy
sector in Jamaica, the identification of strengths and weaknesses represents the
internal assessment of the sector while the consideration of opportunities and
threats represents the analysis of the impact of the external environment on the
sector The SWOT analysis, along with the issues and challenges and the profile
of the energy sector presented above, form the basis for identifying goals and
strategies that will be employed to apply the strengths and address the
weaknesses of the sector, and capitalize on the opportunities and mitigate the
threats for the long-term development and sustainability of the sector The SWOT
analysis for Jamaica’ energy sector is presented in the matrix below
’              Page 16 Strengths Weaknesses Jamaica has  well developed power
supply and distribution system with more than 90% of the population having
access to electricity High dependence on imported petroleum Lack of known
indigenous fossil fuel sources High energy import bill High cost of electricity
Old/aging electricity generation plant - Over 40% of the power generation
Jamaica is endowed with  very high potential for the use of renewables in the
form of solar, wind and biomass production The country has  well established
network of petroleum system is old and in need of replacement/retirement supply
and distribution system Aged technology of the local petroleum refinery Lack of
detailed and up-to-date data for determining renewable energy The ethanol
dehydration industry is well established There are diverse opportunities for co-
generation Existence of  regulatory framework The process of market
liberalization has been established The privatization of energy sector entities
and private sector projects Low refinery utilization factor Electricity system
experiences high heat rate (low generation efficiency) High technical and non-
technical electricity system losses High energy intensity of economy relative to
productivity (as measured by the participation Jamaica had played  pioneering
role in the development and energy intensity index – ratio of energy consumption
to GDP) implementation of demand side management (DSM) programmes through the
assistance of the World Bank, GEF, CIDA and the Inter American Development Bank
Lack of timely implementation of energy sector plans and projects Inefficient
energy use in production and consumption across all sectors Low level of
adaptation of new energy technologies Importation and use of energy-inefficient
motor vehicles (based on type, size, age and fuel use) Inefficient and
inadequate public transportation system in KMA and other urban and rural areas
Inefficient movement of traffic in urban centres Inefficient land transport
modes for cargo and passengers Use of charcoal and firewood as energy sources
Dependence of alumina sector on bunker oil Energy inefficiencies in alumina
sector Lack of consensus or certainty about long-term future of energy sector
Slow development of renewable energy resources Low levels of public action on
energy conservation Weak enforcement powers of regulatory agencies Threats –
External Environment Opportunities – External Environment Existence of
technologies to exploit natural energy sources Favourable relations with energy-
rich countries in CARICOM, Continued volatility and high reliance on imported
petroleum Delays in the policy decision regarding diversification fuel and
timing of the Caribbean region and other regions project implementation High
demand for renewable fuels in the United States Continued international interest
in energy investments in Securing the necessary investments in an acceptable
time-frame to enable diversification of fuel sources; replacing old and
inefficient generators and refurbishing others; reducing transmission losses;
and developing an efficient transportation system so as to reduce dependence on
private transportation Jamaica Ability to earn carbon credits under the Kyoto
Agreement Potential for development of renewable energy sources Ongoing
improvements in mass transit and public Non-delivery of promised capacity from
cogeneration Linkage of Petrojam prices to Gulf reference prices Jamaica’
economic status as price-taker in international energy markets Potential impact
of natural hazards on energy sector Geo-political influences on international
energy supply and demand Contribution of greenhouse gases to climate change
Potential impact of emissions and contaminations from sector, including
transportation systems Renewable fuel technologies for motor vehicles
Opportunities for cogeneration and CHP particularly in respect of sale/export to
the national grid contribution of greenhouse gases to climate change Potential
loss of international economic competitiveness of Jamaica due to high energy
costs and inefficient energy use Page 17 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Jamaica’ Energy
Demand and Projections to 2030 Three growth scenarios have been developed to
project future energy demand:  business as usual (S1)  implementing efficiency
improvement and conservation programs (S2)  efficiency improvement plus fuel
diversification (S3) Under business as usual (assuming the price of oil at US$
100/barrel in 2008 dollars), the cost of imported energy is projected to
increase from US$  billion in 2008 to US$  billion by The implementation of an
effective efficiency improvement and conservation program is projected to reduce
the energy demand by two million barrels of oil equivalent (boe) in 2015 and by
million boe in The resulting reduction in the energy import bill is projected at
US$129 million in 2015 rising to US$555 million by The introduction of  national
diversification program is projected to increase the annual savings by US$711
million in 2015 and US$ billion by Investments in these programs are considered
cost-efficient The projection summary is presented in the Table below Table :
Jamaica’ Energy Demand Projections to 2030 Jamaica Energy Demand Projections -
2030 Energy Demand (Million boe) GDP Growth Energy Demand Growth ( % pa) Year %
S1 S2 S3 2005 2006 2007 2008    -    -    -    - ,613 ,068 ,072 ,195 ,325 ,463
,609 ,893 ,179 ,493 ,838 ,218 ,635 ,613 ,068 ,072 ,177 ,288 ,405 ,528 ,764 ,999
,254 ,530 ,830 ,079 ,613 ,068 ,068 ,149 ,232 ,320 ,410 ,582 ,750 ,929 ,119 ,322
,538 2009 - - - - 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                        2016
2017 2018 2019             2020     2021     ,093 ,426 ,768                ’
Page 18 Jamaica Energy Demand Projections - 2030 Energy Demand (Million boe) GDP
Growth Energy Demand Growth ( % pa) Year %             S1 S2 S3 2022 2023 2024
2025                 ,596 ,149 ,757 ,425 ,159 ,966 ,802 ,210 ,653 ,134 ,655 ,221
,013 ,274 ,551 ,847 ,162 ,498 2026 2027 2028             ,852 ,835 ,855 2029
10,826 ,501 ,236  2030     126 11,896 ,223 ,641 Growth Scenarios:   - Business
as Usual (BAU)   - Efficiency Improvement Measures and fiscal Regimes   -
Efficiency improvement plus fuel diversification 933 Increased Renewables 2010
2011 ,072 ,172 ,072 ,154 ,071 ,126 Assuming % renewables GDP growth after 2020
constant 2012 2013 2014 ,276 ,384 ,498 ,240 ,328 ,420 ,185 ,245 ,307 Renewables
% 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 ,693 ,942 ,214 ,512 ,814 ,573 ,775 ,994 ,230 ,464
,404 ,545 ,695 ,854 ,004 Renewables 15% 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 ,191 ,578 ,001
,430 ,823 ,758 ,979 ,291 ,601 ,871 ,199 ,387 ,586 ,774 ,922 Renewables 20% 2025
2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 ,319 ,944 ,630 ,385 ,214 10,124 ,220 ,664 ,145 ,668
,235 ,850 ,125 ,394 ,679 ,983 ,307 100 ,652 Renewables 20% Page 19 Jamaica’
Energy Policy  Jamaica’ Energy Policy Framework to 2030  nergy in its many forms
underpins the modern economy It powers industrial production, transport,
telecommunications and IT systems It underpins our way of life by enabling the
services of the modern home, such as refrigeration, cooking, air conditioning
and entertainment It is imperative for Jamaica’ economic and social development
for the cost of energy to be reduced significantly over the medium term It is
important to recognize that high energy costs are primarily associated with the
cost of electricity generation, as Jamaica has relatively low gasoline prices
and tax rates for  non-oil producing country To realize the Vision of the energy
sector this Policy will: Ensure the security of energy supplies (availability
and accessibility to adequate energy by all Jamaicans at affordable prices) to
achieve sustainable long-term economic growth,  competitive edge and holistic
development Develop sustainable and cost efficient strategies to effectively
manage the challenge of volatile oil prices and to reduce the cost of imported
energy and consequently the cost to the consumer Increase the efficiency of
power plants in order to reduce the cost of electricity generation in the public
system and the bauxite and alumina industry Stabilize power generation capacity
and transmission systems to ensure cost efficient and uninterrupted supplies
(short, medium and longer term) Promote energy efficiency and conservation
(reducing oil intensity and energy consumption), particularly in the areas of
power generation, bauxite/alumina production, transport, and water supply
systems Achieve energy and economic sustainability, whilst fully addressing the
national/regional/global environmental concerns Undertake risk assessment and
management to inform the building of new transmission and distribution
infrastructure, the financing of new generation capacity and diversification of
the energy supply mix Solar panel on outdoor lighting at Institute of
Sustainable Development, UWI                ’              Page 20 Establish
strong core institutional capacity to develop and implement  comprehensive
sector strategy, the necessary clear and comprehensive regulatory framework, and
relevant programs and projects Build monitoring and supervisory capabilities in
the energy sector Develop  long-term strategy which fully recognizes where
feasible and appropriate the importance of renewables for power generation
capacity Stimulate co-operation between the public and private sectors and
academic institutions in energy research and development This National Energy
Policy 2009 – 2030 will pursue the overall goal of developing an energy sector
that contributes to long-term economic competitiveness, improved quality of life
for all and  healthy natural environment This will be achieved by:  Reducing
the over- dependence on imported oil by examining other alternatives This
Strategic Framework underpinning this National Energy Policy is comprehensive
and will be sustained to 2030 and beyond yet be flexible and adaptable to meet
new challenges and opportunities as they arise This will include the short- to
medium-term as well as long term strategic directions for the government,
private sector and industry as well as civil society  Diversifying the country’
energy supply mix to achieve greater energy self-sufficiency by optimizing
development and utilization of indigenous energy resources The Vision and its
Strategic Framework contained in this National Policy reflect the contributions
of the stakeholders represented on the Prime Minister’ Task Force on Energy;
National Energy Task Force; the Vision 2030 Jamaica Task Force on Energy;
stakeholders and members of the general public who participated in the island-
wide consultations undertaken by the Ministry of Energy and Mining during the
development of the Policy  Taking advantage of emerging technologies that will
reduce the country’ dependence on fossil fuels and improve the efficiency of
generating electricity  Ensuring that energy is used efficiently by reducing
energy lost and wasted and by using appropriate energy types During the medium
term, diversification is necessary because the fundamentals indicate continued
high and volatile prices for oil and less so with the alternatives (natural gas,
coal and renewables) The objective now is to pursue natural gas because of: 
Ensuring that energy Availability Cost of fuel and capital Environmental impact
criteria to inform alternatives chosen resource development and utilization in
the country is accomplished with as minimal negative impacts as possible on the
natural environment Over the long term Jamaica’ energy sector will develop the
flexibility and capacity to adopt, adapt and develop Page 21 Jamaica’ Energy
Policy  emerging technologies that support its policy goals The increase in oil
prices has stimulated technological advances in developing alternative energy
sources in the developed world, improving efficiency in energy production and
consumption, and in other areas Emerging technologies which could become
relevant to the development of the energy sector in Jamaica over the planning
timeframe to 2030 include fuel cells, second generation bio-fuels, efficient
solid state thermoelectric converters for solar energy and small nuclear
technology plants in keeping with health, safety and sound environmental
practices Unforeseen advances also could come from so-called "disruptive"
technologies, which have the potential for significantly altering energy
production, distribution and use Vision for Jamaica’ Energy Sector to 2030
modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy sector
providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy
security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an
appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework Goals of National
Energy Policy There are seven inter-related goals underpinning this policy, all
designed to achieve the vision for the Energy Sector Though not necessary listed
in order of priority, together, achievement of these goals will result in
significant improvement in the energy efficiency of the country, throughout the
supply, storage, transportation , transmission, distribution, usage and the
general handling of the energy resources within the country The result will be
more affordable energy supplies, that is safe, secured, accessible and in
harmony with the environment These goals are listed below Goal : Jamaicans use
energy wisely and aggressively pursue opportunities for conservation and
efficiency Goal : Jamaica has  modernized and expanded energy infrastructure
that enhances energy generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are
safely, reliably, and affordably transported to homes, communities and the
productive sectors on  sustainable basis Goal : Jamaica realizes its energy
resource potential through the development of renewable energy sources and
enhances its international competitiveness, energy security whilst reducing its
carbon footprint Goal : Jamaica’ energy supply is secure and sufficient to
support long-term economic and social development and environmental
sustainability                ’              Page 22 Goal : Jamaica has  well-
defined and established governance, institutional, legal and regulatory
framework for the energy sector, that facilitates stakeholder involvement and
engagement Goal : Government ministries and agencies are  model/leader in energy
conservation and environmental stewardship in Jamaica Goal : Jamaica’ industry
structures embrace eco-efficiency for advancing international competitiveness
and moves towards building  green economy Page 23 Jamaica’ Energy Policy
modern, efficient, diversified and environmentally sustainable energy sector
providing affordable and accessible energy supplies with long-term energy
security and supported by informed public behaviour on energy issues and an
appropriate policy, regulatory and institutional framework Goal : Goal : Goal :
Jamaica has  modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances energy
generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and
affordably transported to homes, communities and the productive sectors on
sustainable basis Goal : Jamaica realizes its energy resource potential through
the development of renewable energy sources and enhances its international
competitiveness, energy security whilst reducing its carbon footprint Goal :
Goal : Jamaica has  well-defined and established governance, institutional,
legal and regulatory framework for the energy sector, that facilitates
stakeholder involvement and engagement Jamaica’ industry structures embrace eco-
efficiency for advancing international competitiveness and moves towards
building  green economy Goal : Jamaicans use energy wisely and aggressively
pursue opportunities for conservation and efficiency Jamaica’ energy supply is
secure and sufficient to support long-term economic and social development and
environmental sustainability Government ministries and agencies are
model/leader in energy conservation and environmental stewardship in Jamaica
Figure : Vision and Goals for Jamaica' Energy Sector The Strategic Framework The
strategic framework charting the direction for the energy sector 2009 – 2030 is
presented below The strategic framework includes: Policy Goals Sector Strategies
and Key Actions to 2030 Key Implementing Agencies Wigton Wind Farm
’              Page 24 PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Jamaicans use energy wisely and
aggressively pursue opportunities for conservation and efficiency CONSERVATION
AND EFFICIENCY Achievement of this goal will result in improving the use of
energy in the key energy- consuming areas of power generation and
bauxite/alumina production, transportation and building design and construction
Jamaicans will also become more aware of energy conservation practices and will
be helped in reducing energy consumption by: continuous public education, the
introduction of incentives; greater availability of energy-saving products and
devices; research that leads to adoption and adaptation of new and emerging
energy technologies; improvements in energy infrastructure; and appropriate
legislation Key Issues Addressed: Low levels of awareness of energy conservation
practices by both large and small consumers Jamaica’ high energy intensity index
Low levels of energy efficiency in key sectors such as bauxite/alumina and power
generation Low levels of energy efficiency from building designs, electrical
installations and low levels of energy consumption by end use devices Strategies
and Key Actions to 2030: Provide incentives/disincentives for the development
and use of innovative technologies to improve energy efficiencies Provide
incentives/disincentives for the use of innovative/clean technologies in power
generation, mining and manufacturing to improve energy efficiencies Create
relevant legislation to support required investments in efficiency Promote
energy conservation and efficiency in the transport sector by:  Promoting
imports of more fuel efficiency vehicles  Levying taxes on petrol at appropriate
levels to encourage conservation  Provision of adequate infrastructure for
transition to alternative energy vehicles Infrastructure improvement and
enforcement of maximum axel weight standards Increasing mass transit
opportunities and utilization   Page 25 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Implement demand
side management programmes that promote public awareness of the importance of
responsible energy use Facilitate the introduction of energy-saving devices
LED, solar panels, solar street lighting Employ energy-saving approaches in
building design and construction Promote energy conservation in the public
sector, particularly in the water supply systems Develop and implement effective
education and training programmes on energy conservation at all levels of the
education system Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs) Infuse energy conservation
issues in sectoral policy development ( in tourism policy, health policy, water
policy etc) Implement appropriate tax and pricing structure for road users that
reflect environmental costs and other externalities Undertake studies and
conduct consultations with stakeholders on taxation levels for petroleum fuels
(such as gasoline, diesel, kerosene, natural gas) with  view to instituting
system designed to enhance efficiency and conservation This system will be
consistent with regional and international trends and best practices Review
(ongoing) previous and existing demand-side energy management programmes for
performance, strengths, weakness and lessons learned Develop institutional
capacity to implement demand-side energy management programmes Develop and
implement  relevant and sustained public energy information programme and
information database Develop and implement programmes to influence market
behaviour toward and promote efficient use of energy including the use of
energy-efficient appliances, equipment, and building designs; setting and
enforcing standards for public sector organizations; and public awareness and
educational programmes                ’              Page 26 Update, apply and
enforce the Energy Efficiency Building Codes to support efficient use of energy
in buildings Develop an energy information clearing house Provide incentives for
the installation of solar water heaters and solar lights installed where
applicable, in the public and private sectors and in communities Introduce
mobile weighing monitoring mechanism to enforce the axel weight Key Implementing
Agencies and Partners: Ministry of Energy and Mining Ministry of Transport and
Works Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Office of the Prime Minister Bureau of
Standards Ministry of Finance and the Public Service Management Institute for
National Development Page 27 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  PRIORITY AREA # Goal :
Jamaica has  modernized and expanded energy infrastructure that enhances energy
generation capacity and ensures that energy supplies are safely, reliably, and
affordably transported to homes, communities and the productive sectors on
sustainable basis ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE When this goal is accomplished, Jamaica
will have  modernized energy infrastructure consisting of energy-efficient
plants and distribution systems including  protocol for replacing old and
inefficient generating plants and  refinery that produces higher- valued refined
petroleum products in order to replace imports and compensate for the potential
switch from oil-fired to natural gas power plants This will be in  liberalized
energy industry that promotes competition governed by appropriate regulations
Key Issues Addressed: Old and inefficient steam-generating plants Jamaica’ high
energy intensity index High cost emergency solutions involving gas turbines
using high-cost fuels High cost of electricity Heat rates inconsistent with
international standards Low levels of capacity utilization of refinery Low
efficiency of energy production and consumption Unsafe practices as  result of
theft in electricity and illegal operations in petroleum trade Disaster
preparedness and emergency management of the sector Strategies and Key Actions
to 2030 Implement least economic cost solutions for the supply of energy,
including source, conversion and distribution Ensure continuity and consistency
of energy supply and distribution at the most economically available prices
Through  competitive basis, retire the old generation plants and replace them
with modern plants to improve the conversion efficiency                ’
Page 28 Establish  system to identify and replace old and inefficient
units/plants with more fuel efficient and cost efficient technologies and plants
Establish  combined cycle capacity to replace old and inefficient units/plants
with more fuel efficient and cost efficient technologies and plants Upgrade the
petroleum refinery (PETROJAM) to ensure that it functions as the least cost
option for petroleum supplies to Jamaica, thereby increasing capacity
utilization and output of lighter and higher-value refined petroleum products
thus replacing imports and compensating for the potential switch from oil-fired
to petcoke and natural gas power plants Establish necessary enabling environment
to encourage local and foreign financing of energy sector projects Implement
appropriate energy distribution and transmission systems Strengthen regulatory
enforcement powers to ensure timely implementation of agreed PETROJAM Oil
Refinery benchmarks and standards Unbundle generation and transmission &
distribution creating an energy efficient electricity structure Unbundle
existing vertically integrated industry structures and establish and implement
common carrier and common access principles, where demonstrated to be
technically and economically feasible Facilitate greater energy efficiency and
lower energy costs in the bauxite and alumina industry and in the manufacturing
sector Review and complete rural electrification programme including use of
alternative energy sources Ensure continuity and consistency of energy supply
and distribution Review quality standards for energy supplies Page 29 Jamaica’
Energy Policy  Make contingency arrangements to lower the risk of disruption to
critical utilities and essential services in the event of disasters and other
emergency situations Strengthen the capacity of the government’ electrical
inspectorate and the petroleum safety inspectorate to adequately monitor and
control incidences of illegal operations Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:
Ministry of Energy and Mining Office of Utilities Regulations Jamaica Public
Service Company Limited Independent Power Producers PEROJAM Petroleum
Corporation of Jamaica Office of the Prime Minister Jamaica Bauxite Institute
’              Page 30 PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Jamaica realizes its energy
resource potential through the development of renewable energy sources and
enhances its international competitiveness, energy security whilst reducing its
carbon footprint RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES Opportunities for further development
of indigenous renewable energy resources such as solar, hydro, wind and biofuels
will be explored under this goal The strategies and actions undertaken will be
designed to Increase the percentage of renewables in the energy mix with
proposed targets of 11% by 2012, % by 2015 and 20% by Increased percentage of
renewable in the country’ energy mix will reduce the dependence on imported oil
Increased use of renewables also will result in lowering the level of air
pollution,  smaller carbon footprint for Jamaica and better compliance with
international conventions on climate change Key Issues Addressed: Dependence on
imported energy supplies Low levels of exploitation of renewable energy sources
Jamaica’ carbon footprint Environmental degradation Strategies and Key Actions
to 2030: Develop diversification priorities based on cost, efficiency,
environmental considerations and appropriate technologies and competitiveness
Prioritize renewable energy sources by economic feasibility criteria,
environmental considerations including carbon abatement Promote the development
of efficient and low cost renewable plants with  size of 15 MW or more on
competitive basis through  level playing field Introduce  strategy that ensures
that less than 15MW of renewable energy plants will be built on no-objection
basis using base opportunity cost and negotiable premium cap and 15MW or more to
be obtained on  competitive basis through the OUR process Page 31 Jamaica’
Energy Policy  Develop an inventory of all potential sources of wind, solar and
renewable technologies and ranked according to their economics with full
economic impact analysis Introduce incentives, where feasible, and  plan of
action for implementation to foster the development of wind, solar and renewable
technologies This will require the review by the relevant regulatory authority
of existing renewable power generators to afford them such incentives that may
be available, to encourage the sustainable development of the sector The
creation of an enabling legislative and regulatory framework will be  priority
Encourage research, development and implementation of qualified renewable energy
projects Introduce ethanol blends to replace methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)
as fuel additive Comply with international conventions on climate change and
global warming Implement incentives to encourage tertiary institutions to
develop research programmes for the application and implementation of renewable
energy technologies Key Implementing Agencies and Partners: Ministry of Energy
and Mining Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Office of Utilities Regulation
Centre of Excellence for Renewable Energy Office of the Prime Minister
Scientific Research Council Launch of the Ethanol – 10 Programme in Jamaica
’              Page 32 PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Jamaica’ energy supply is secure
and sufficient to support long- term economic and social development and
environmental sustainability ENERGY SECURITY Under this goal, Jamaica will plan
to increase its supply of energy to meet projected increases in long-term
demand, whilst at the same time seek to increase its energy security to reduce
its vulnerability to potential disruptions in energy supplies Jamaica also will
reduce the contribution of petroleum to the country’ energy supply from the
current 95% Diversification priorities for the short, medium, and long term will
be based on cost, efficiency, environmental considerations and appropriate
technologies This will protect the country from disruptions in oil supply and
price volatility Components in  more diversified energy source mix will include
both indigenous and foreign options and could include natural gas, coal,
petcoke, locally derived oil, nuclear sources as well as renewables and will
involve strengthening existing multilateral, regional and bilateral partnerships
and cooperative arrangements and creating new ones that best advance Jamaica’
energy interests Consideration will also be given to exploration for exploitable
fossil fuel energy resources Key Issues Addressed: Dependence on imported
petroleum High imports of petroleum products Energy security related to
disruptions in supply and price volatility National energy diversification
programme Reduction in emissions from the generation and transmission of energy
Air pollution Sector Strategies and Key Actions to 2030: Determine the fuel
diversification programme for the short, medium and longer term Develop
diversification priorities based on cost, efficiency, environmental
considerations and appropriate technologies Diversify energy sources by type and
geographic location Research and develop alternate fuels for the transportation
sector ( liquid fuels from organic matter and CNG) Page 33 Jamaica’ Energy
Policy  Facilitate the use of more fuel-efficient vehicles in the transport
sector as well as the use of diesel, CNG when it becomes available and bio-fuels
Identify and develop indigenous non-renewable sources of energy and necessary
enabling environment to encourage private sector participation Develop
framework for the introduction of natural gas Construct new energy-efficient
generating facilities on  phased basis to meet increasing demand Establish an
enabling environment for the development of the renewable resources through
private sector participation Develop and implement  fast track generation plant
retirement and replacement program Review and revise existing regulations to
make provisions that ensures adequate inventory levels to cushion any short-term
disruption in supply Secure long-term contracts for energy raw materials and
energy products from regional and extra-regional suppliers Review options for
other potential indigenous non-renewable sources of Petrojam Storage Tanks
energy Develop and implement  public education programme through the print
media, television, radio and island wide meetings/seminars Undertake
comprehensive oil and gas exploration programme Review and apply appropriate
models for production and development of potential oil and gas resources Promote
strategic partnerships between the public and private sectors to finance and
develop energy diversification projects                ’              Page 34
Develop the institutional capacity and regulatory framework to explore the
establishment of small nuclear power generation plants in the event that nuclear
power generation proves feasible for Caribbean Small Island Development States
(SIDS) Engage in multilateral, regional and bilateral partnerships and
cooperative arrangements that best advance Jamaica’ energy interests Facilitate
stronger links with energy sector and academic institutions to drive the
adoption and adaptation of new technologies in the energy sector Introduce
National Vehicle Emissions Standards and Regulations to reduce vehicular
emissions Introduce bio-diesel and ethanol blends to replace methyl tertiary-
butyl ether (MTBE) as fuel additive Key Implementing Agencies and Partners:
Ministry of Energy and Mining Office of Utilities Regulation Petroleum
Corporation of Jamaica Centre of Excellence for Renewable Energy Office of the
Prime Minister Page 35 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Jamaica’ Energy Supply Matrix to
2030 The energy matrix below represents  realistic strategy for the Jamaica
energy situation going forward to These percentages are mere projections and may
be subject to change based on the introduction of new and renewable energy
sources The energy supply mix shows that in 2008 Jamaica’ supply mix consisted
of 95% petroleum and % renewables The supply mix is expected to have marked
changes by 2012 when petroleum is expected to represent 67% of the mix, natural
gas 15%, petcoke/coal % and renewables % By 2030, the share of petroleum in the
supply mix is expected to be only 30%, with natural gas accounting for as much
as 42% of the mix and renewables 20% This information is present graphically in
the figure below Figure : Jamaica’ Energy Supply Matrix 2008 – 2030 Energy
Supply Matrix 2008 - 2030 Petroleum Natural Gas Petcoke/Coal Renewables Other
15 20   15  26 42 95 67 52 30 2008 2015* 2020* 2030*                ’
Page 36 PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Jamaica has  well- defined and established
governance, institutional, legal and regulatory framework for the energy sector,
that facilitates stakeholder involvement and engagement GOVERNANCE AND
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK Achievement of this goal will facilitate the removal of
policy inconsistencies and will provide  coherent policy and regulatory
framework to facilitate competition in the energy supply system, enable the
introduction of diverse sources of energy into the system, and provide
integrated monitoring and enforcement of regulations, all overseen by agencies
and organizations with the capacity and tools to guide the energy sector Key
Issues Addressed: Limited protocols for the supply of electricity to the
national grid Competition in the energy supply to develop cost efficient
mechanisms Private sector participation in the energy production/distribution
Legal framework (laws, regulations) Low capacity of organizations, agencies and
regulatory bodies in the energy sector Strategies and Key Actions to 2030: Amend
existing legislation and regulations or promulgate new ones where necessary to
ensure responsible market behaviour and promote industrial harmony Rationalize
the number of existing Acts governing the sector through the introduction of new
modern industry legislation Establish regulatory regimes for the petroleum
sector in order to ensure efficient procurement, sourcing, indexation and
pricing of petroleum and petroleum products on most competitive basis and in
transparent manner Remove inconsistencies in the legislative framework of the
energy sector Empower the regulatory agencies with enforcement powers to improve
the efficiency of the system and compliance with established benchmarks,
procedures and standards Page 37 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Develop necessary
regulatory framework for the introduction of diversification fuels Reduce system
losses on the power system by introducing stiff penalties for power thefts and
enhancing the enforcement powers of the regulatory agencies Enhance the
enforcement powers of the regulator to ensure compliance with established
procedures and standards as well as the efficiency monitoring mechanisms on
continued basis Develop the institutional framework to coordinate policy with
energy initiatives and provide integrated monitoring and enforcement of
regulations Promote  market based approach and increased competition in the
sector including  transparent procurement process for new capacity and sourcing
from private producers (both renewable and non-renewable energy sources) Develop
regimes for pricing of electricity and petroleum products that will balance
requirements for competitiveness with the long-term viability of the sector
Conduct studies to include net metering and wheeling in the tariff rates and
introduce appropriate mechanisms for net metering and wheeling procedures and
standards to encourage the development of renewable energy and cogeneration
opportunities Develop appropriate tax and pricing structure for road users that
reflect environmental costs and other externalities Promote  market based
approach and increase competition in the sector by use of transparent
procurement processes for new capacity Implement policy regarding the
development and export of co-generation and renewables electricity to the
national grid by private sector and citizens at large Review on an ongoing basis
the existing legal framework for performance, strengths, weakness, and lessons
learnt, to formulate and implement programmes of legal reforms                ’
Page 38 Review on an ongoing basis the existing internal regulatory framework
for performance, strengths, weakness and lessons learnt, while recognizing the
implications of external dimensions, to formulate and implement programmes of
regulatory reforms Review and modify existing institutional framework and
industry structure for energy sector toward achievement of policy objectives
Provide appropriate incentives for industry stakeholders to facilitate sector
development including diversified, renewable and low cost energy sources and
demand side management programmes Petroleum Company of Jamaica Service Station
Monitor and regulate procurement and pricing of energy products and inputs Key
Implementing Agencies and Partners: Ministry of Energy and Mining Office of
Utilities Regulation Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Office of the Cabinet Page
39 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Government ministries and
agencies are  model/leader in energy conservation and environmental stewardship
in Jamaica GOVERNMENT IS  LEADER IN ENERGY CONSERVATION Government ministries,
departments and agencies will be models for environmental stewardship, resulting
in  reduction in the high public sector consumption of energy and other
resources and providing  stimulus for private sector and community action Key
Issues Addressed: High public sector energy consumption Weak and unsustainable
energy conservation and efficiency efforts across Government Strategies and Key
Actions to 2030: Implement Government of Jamaica Policy on Environmental
Stewardship (2008) Ministries, departments and agencies develop and implement
environmental stewardship action plans, with special emphasis on energy and
fleet management Develop  specific programme of energy management for the
National Water Commission, the single largest consumer of energy in the public
sector, focusing on intensification of loss reduction, improvement in pumping
efficiency and the introduction of  distributed storage programme which will
facilitate better management of pumping operations Fast track the implementation
of energy efficiency programmes (the recommendations of the energy audits
undertaken) in hospitals and other areas of the public sector, based on the
findings of various earlier studies and energy audits Establish energy
conservation and efficiency (ECE) protocols for the operation of public sector
facilities and entities including the appointment of an energy coordinator for
each facility Expand the role of the Energy Efficiency Unit (EEU) within the
Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) to provide technical assistance for ECE
initiatives in the public and private sectors                ’              Page
40 Key Implementing Agencies and Partners: Ministry of Energy and Mining
Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica National Water Commission Ministry of Transport
and Works Office of the Prime Minister Cabinet Office Ministry of Finance and
the Public Service Management Institute for National Development Page 41
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  PRIORITY AREA # Goal : Jamaica’ industry structures
embrace eco- efficiency for advancing international competitiveness, and move
towards building  green economy ECO-EFFICIENCY IN INDUSTRY This goal recognizes
that the private sector is the engine of  nation’ economy When this goal is
achieved, private sector firms and industry will be equipped to implement
innovative energy management programmes, using clean, energy efficient
technologies and institutionalizing energy conservation practices Key Issues
Addressed: Lack of energy management programmes in private sector Low levels of
energy efficiency and conservation among industry structures Limited use of
cleaner technologies Environmental Management Systems in Jamaican organizations
Move towards  green economy Strategies and Key Actions to 2030: Provide
incentives for the development and use of innovative technologies to improve
energy efficiencies Provide incentives for the use of innovative/clean
technologies in mining and manufacturing to improve energy efficiencies
Facilitate greater energy efficiency and lower energy costs in all sectors
Provide incentives where applicable to encourage employment of high levels of
capital to increase use of cleaner technologies Establish, implement and enforce
emissions standards Develop the capacity of local companies to improve their
processes and energy efficiencies Promote the development and implementation of
environmental management systems in the manufacturing sector (ISO 14001) Develop
“green jobs” based on renewable energy resources                ’
Page 42 Key Implementing Agencies and Partners: Ministry of Energy and Mining
Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Ministry of Industry, Investment and Commerce
Jamaica Trade and Invest Ministry of Finance and the Public Service National
Environment and Planning Agency Page 43 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Proposed Energy
Sector Indicators and Targets  he proposed indicators and targets for the Energy
Sector over the period 2009 - 2030 are presented in Table  below These
indicators are the building blocks of the monitoring and evaluation system
Targets will be set in collaboration with the Ministry’ departments and agencies
along with other key ministries ( transport and works) and their departments and
agencies Table : Energy Sector – Indicators and Targets Baseline 2008 Targets
2015 Comments Sector Indicators 2030 2012 Energy Sources 15392 14000 12700 6000
Energy intensity index (EII) BTU/US$ Unit of output (Constant Year 2000 $US)
Percentage diversification (%) Percentage of energy form indigenous sources,
including co-generation (%) Renewable Energy 11% % % 20% Percentage of
renewables in energy mix Energy Consumption from Renewable Sources as Percentage
of Total Energy Consumption (%) Electricity Average Heat Rate for Electricity
Generation – Public Providers (BTU/KWh) Average Heat Rate for Electricity
Generation – Public and Private Providers (BTU/KWh) System Losses in Electricity
Transmission and Distribution –Technical (%) System Losses in Electricity
Transmission and Distribution                ’              Page 44 Sector
Indicators Baseline 2008 Targets 2015 Comments 2030 2012 Non-Technical (%)
System Losses in Electricity Transmission and Distribution – Total Public
Electricity System – Average Service Availability Index (%) Public Electricity
System – Average Service Reliability Index (%) Public Electricity System –
Capacity Factor (%) Public Electricity System – Load Factor (%) Public
Electricity System – Customer Average Interruption Duration Index (minutes)
Percentage of Total Households with Electricity (%) 92 94 100 Efficiency
Improvement of Large Customers/Sectors Bauxite Sector Energy Intensity Index of
the Bauxite Industry (BTU/$US100 unit of output in Constant Year $US) Transport
Percentage of vehicles using biofuels % of fuel efficient vehicles as  % of
total vehicles on the roads Percentage of energy from biofuels % change in
energy consumption by NWC Hotels Energy Efficiency Index Percentage of energy
from Page 45 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Baseline 2008 Targets 2015 Comments Sector
Indicators 2030 2012 renewable sources Percentage of heating provided by solar
water heating Industries Energy Efficiency Index Percentage of energy from
renewable sources Percentage of energy from other indigenous sources % increase
in the use of cleaner technologies by industry Cement Manufacturing Energy
Efficiency Index Percentage of energy from renewable energy Percentage of energy
from other indigenous sources Sugar Energy Efficiency Index Percentage of energy
from bagasse Percentage of energy from renewable energy Percentage of energy
from other indigenous sources Offices and Commercial Space Energy Efficiency
Index Households Energy Efficiency Index Percentage of Household Income Spent on
Fuel (%) Percentage of Household Income Spent on Electricity (%) Percentage of
households using LNG Average percentage of energy consumption from indigenous
’              Page 46 Baseline 2008 Targets 2015 Comments Sector Indicators
2030 2012 sources Environment     Greenhouse gas emissions (Mt per annum) Other
Annual Oil Imports as Percentage of Merchandise Export Earnings (%) Annual Oil
Imports as Percentage of GDP (%) Page 47 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Implementation,
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework  he implementation of this Policy will be
led and facilitated by the Ministry of Energy and Mining, several other
departments and agencies of Government as well as non-state stakeholders
including the private sector, NGOs and CBOs The involvement of all stakeholders
is fundamental to the successful implementation of this Policy as it is fully
recognized that the energy sector has many linkages with other sectors such as
transportation, agriculture and environment Key Roles and Responsibilities The
key players in the implementation of Jamaica’ National Energy Policy and their
roles and responsibilities are identified and articulated below: Ministry of
Energy and Mining will have the dual responsibilities of articulating the policy
and coordinating the monitoring of its implementation The Ministry of Energy and
Mining will provide leadership for the achievement of an efficient, diversified
and sustainable energy sector through the implementation of this comprehensive
energy policy that addresses Jamaica’ current and future energy needs in the
context of its resources and global energy trends In addition, the Ministry
along with its agencies shall be responsible for establishing the legislative
and policy framework to support and to implement the strategies, plans and
programs for achieving the seven policy goals It will do this by setting clear
guidelines to its agencies and other sister ministries and agencies for the
general medium and long-term energy strategy planning The Ministry and its
agencies also will work with several other Government entities5 and agencies as
well as other partners and stakeholders in the public and private sectors to
ensure policy coherence and efficient policy implementation It will work
alongside its agencies and other MDAs to review and revise energy targets based
on the results of monitoring and evaluation Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica
will consistent with the Petroleum Act of 1979, work proactively towards the
implementation of Jamaica’ National Energy Policy while promoting sustainable
development, not only in energy, but also in other areas of national importance
with the aim to fostering energy security The PCJ will undertake the development
and promotion of Jamaica' indigenous energy resources and all forms of renewable
energy In seeking to diversify Jamaica' energy sources, the PCJ will explore the
use of non-traditional forms of fuel sources, such as Liquefied Natural Gas
(LNG), and will build on its institutional capacity to be better able to
undertake the varied and challenging initiatives  Ministry with responsibility
for the environment, NEPA, Ministry of Transport and Works, Forestry Department,
Mines & Geology Division; National Water Commission etc                ’
Page 48 The Ministry responsible for the environment and its agencies will
collaborate with the MEM, the Ministry of Transport and Works, the Ministry of
Health, in terms of environmental stewardship, pollution control, disposal of
hazardous wastes, natural resource conservation Climate change mitigation
efforts will also be encouraged and supported The Ministry of Finance and the
Public Service will work alongside the Ministry of Energy and Mining in the
areas of providing incentives/disincentives for the development of the energy
sector Monitoring and Evaluation Framework The Ministry of Energy and Mining
will be accountable for implementing the National Energy Policy through various
plans, programmes and interventions that are aligned with the Strategic
Framework of the Policy and consistent with Vision 2030 Jamaica – National
Development Plan The proposed indicators and targets outlined in this policy
represent the foundation of  robust results-based monitoring and evaluation
system to ensure that the seven goals outlined will be achieved This system will
build on existing national and sectoral monitoring and evaluation frameworks and
will be highly participatory The Cabinet, as the principal body with
responsibility for policy and the direction of the Government, has ultimate
responsibility for implementation of the National Development Plan
Implementation Framework - Strategic Plans and Action Plans Aligned to this
Policy will be various strategic plans and action plans that would enable the
development of key actions to support the sector strategies articulated in this
policy document Strategic Plans and/or actions plans will be developed for each
of the goals contained in this policy and aligned to the energy sector plan and
action plan developed under Vision 2030 Jamaica – National Development Plan
These plans will provide detailed information on specific actions to be
undertaken, on the implementing agencies or stakeholders, timelines and costs It
is expected that each strategic plan and/or action plan will be developed for
three years, with the first one being 2009 – 2012 and will be further aligned
and find expression with the Corporate Plan and Budget of the Ministry Over the
life of the policy, seven such strategic/action plans will be prepared This
approach will enable the Ministry to effectively review at the end of each
period the currency of information in the policy document, and to make necessary
changes to the overall direction of the policy Page 49 Jamaica’ Energy Policy
Policy Review  policy is  guiding principle established to sanction in advance
actions to be taken in the future The consequences of policy actions are never
fully known in advance and for this reason, it is essential to monitor and
evaluate policy actions after they have occurred In order to ensure that desired
outcomes of the National Energy Policy are being achieved, the effectiveness of
the policy must be assessed This process will help to identify when  complete
review or alteration is appropriate It is expected that after the first six ()
months of implementation, the Ministry of Energy and Mining will conduct an
assessment in order to identify and rectify problems that become evident at
start up Thereafter, policy reviews will take place as necessary based on
results of ongoing monitoring and evaluation                ’              Page
50 ANNEXES Page 51 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  ANNEX  Key Accomplishments in the
Energy Sector –                 ’              Page 52 Electricity sector JPSCo
was privatized with 80% ownership transferred to an overseas investor, Mirant
Corporation of Atlanta, USA and operate under  new All Island Electricity
License of Since privatization of JPSCo, the company has installed 120MW of new
combined cycle power generation capacity at Bogue in St James Independent power
providers now account for 30% of electricity generation The generation side of
electricity was fully liberalized in The Office of Utilities Regulation was
established in 1997 as  multi-sector regulator for electricity and other
utilities Under the Rural Electrification Programme, ,000 km of low voltage
distribution lines were constructed and approximately 70,000 rural homes
electrified Approximately 90% of households island-wide now have access to
electricity Electricity prices now reflect true cost However, Government’ policy
continues to provide  lifeline rate, which benefits monthly consumers of less
than 100kWh per month This cross-subsidy is provided by those consumers using
more than 101kWh per month Petroleum sector Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) has
replaced fuel wood as the primary household fuel in 84% of Jamaican homes,
improving the standard of living and easing the rate of deforestation for fuel
supplies The stamp duties were removed, making it easier for new traders to
enter the market to import petroleum products into the country The deregulation
of petroleum imports has partially achieved its objectives, creating more
competition between the marketing companies The Caracas Agreement was signed
between the Governments of Jamaica and Venezuela in 2000, and was renewed
annually, providing for ,000 barrels/day In August 2005 the PETROCARIBE
Agreement replaced the Caracas Accord Within the framework of the PETROCARIBE
Agreement, Venezuela,  member of OPEC, will extend credit facilities to
countries of the Caribbean on the basis of  bilateral fixed quota; there are no
price concessions Under the PETROCARIBE Bilateral Agreement that Jamaica
entered,  quota of 21,000 barrels of oil per day may be accessed under special
financing terms Government reviewed the experiences of the 1980s oil exploration
and updated the analysis of exploration data using new technology As  result of
this review the Government issued  number of licences to overseas prospectors
for both onshore and offshore exploration  feasibility study was conducted on
the introduction of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) to the Jamaican market for use
primarily in the electricity and bauxite sectors The study was funded by the
international community Page 53 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Renewable and
Alternative Energy The Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) established the
Centre of Excellence for Renewable Energy (CERE) in 2006 to ensure that Jamaica
will regularly implement new ideas and methods in renewable energy Jamaica
became part of the Caribbean Information Platform on Renewable Energy (CIPORE),
the information and communication system for the exchange of Renewable Energy
information for the region It will provide information on renewable energy
projects for the thirteen participating Caribbean territories The GOJ
facilitated the expansion of this industry by the following concessions
Reductions of import duty from 30% to % on all renewable energy equipment  Zero
rating for GCT purposed on renewable energy equipment Co-generation
cogeneration implementation strategy was drafted with special focus on the sugar
industry utilizing bagasse as one of its main sources in the energy mix  total
of MW of cogeneration capacity was brought on stream of which MW was produced by
Jamaica Broilers and 11 MW by Jamalco Subsequently, the Jamaica Broiler’
production was suspended and Jamalco reduced its available export capacity to
approximately  MW as  result of the expansion in production capacity of 250,000
tons Wind The Government of The Netherlands, as part of its overall policy
objective to meet its target of reducing % of its GHG emissions below 1990
levels, collaborated with the Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica (PCJ) and
Renewable Energy Systems (RES) Ltd in to develop  MW wind farm project in
Wigton, Manchester This system averages  MW due to variation in wind speed This
was  Clean Development Mechanism project under the Kyoto Protocol In the three
years since it began operations in April 2004, the Wigton Wind Farm has sold
€424,763 ($39 million) of carbon credits  further €251,490 ($23 million)
generated in the past year is yet to be verified  small 225 KW wind system was
introduced at Munro College in 1996, initially selling to JPSCo; however this
system has since encountered technical problems and no longer provides supplies
to the grid Hydro Government rehabilitated six of the mini-hydro plants, which
were privatized to the JPSCo, and now account for 22 MW of capacity to the
system                ’              Page 54 Solar Two demonstration
photovoltaic schemes supplying non-grid electricity to 45 homes in deep rural
Jamaica have been established; these communities are Middle Bonnet in St
Catherine and Ballymony in St Ann It is estimated that more than 5000 solar
water heater units are now installed in Jamaica The surge has been due mainly to
the DSM / World Bank funded programme Under this programme special financing
arrangements were made available to purchasers The National Housing Trust (NHT)
is offering solar water heater loans of up to $100,Costs for  SWH unit begin at
$75,000 for  family of four with  return expected within two to three years
Water heating currently accounts for up to 30 per cent of  domestic light bill
Biofuels In 2005,  US$10 million ethanol plant was commissioned and re-commenced
production and export of fuel ethanol to the USA, using Brazilian feedstock
Jamaica became  participant in the Tri-Lateral Co-operation in the area of Bio-
fuels which will see technical assistance and support from the governments of
Brazil and the United States of America to help satisfy our domestic demand from
locally produced biofuels including bio diesel The Government created the Bio-
fuels Task Force,  brainchild of the Ministries of Energy and Agriculture to
pursue options that will benefit both the Energy and Agriculture sectors For the
period 1996 to 1998, ten new digesters were constructed while five digesters
were repaired Over 150 assessments were carried out In 2000 work was completed
on  20 m3 bio-digester at the Vere Technical High school campus Using  feedstock
of mainly pig slurry gas is produced to energize  chicken brooder, canteen and
laboratory burners The ministry of Mining and Energy and the School
administration jointly funded this project Plans were formulated to continue
this kind of collaboration to construct and refurbish plants across the island
Energy Conservation and Efficiency The government provided GCT exemption on over
30 items to increase energy efficiency and conservation The demand side
management and energy efficiency programme introduced in 1996 has had some
positive impact on the residential lighting market  study commissioned by the
World Bank in 2005 to determine the impact of the demand side management
(February 20, 2006) programme showed an estimated 28 MWh/year reduction in
demand for electricity, eliminating the need for  to  MW of peak capacity Page
55 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  In 1996, the Jamaica Bureau of Standards had the
Energy Efficiency Building Code (EEBC), developed in 1992, declared  voluntary
national standard This EEBC represents the first effort at producing an energy
efficient building code in Jamaica and the Caribbean The logical next step is to
have the code declared  mandatory national standard by the Government and to
have the support of the various Parish Councils and the Kingston and St Andrew
Corporation in the enforcement of this standard By applying the EEBC, there is
potential for  30% energy saving for commercial buildings, amounting to
reduction from the present 260-kilowatt hours per square meter each year, to
180-kilowatt hours per square meter when the EEBC is used Government approved an
initial allocation of US$10 million to establish the Energy Fund to finance
energy conservation and efficiency projects The Government, through PCJ,
undertook  project funded by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to
provide energy conservation measures at four hospitals and to conduct energy
audits at five others The government distributed  million compact fluorescent
light bulbs,  gift from the Government of Cuba, to Jamaican households Transport
sector Jamaica phased out lead in gasoline during the period 1998 - 2000; only
unleaded gasoline is now available at service stations Jamaica established the
National Vehicle Emissions Standards in This will need to be accompanied by
appropriate regulations The Government has taken  decision to phase out MTBE6 as
an octane enhancer in gasoline and to replace it with ethanol creating E10:
mixture of 10% ethanol and 90% gasoline This phasing out commenced in the third
quarter of International/legal sector Jamaica signed and ratified the Kyoto
Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change The Forest Conservancy
(TFC),  newly formed Jamaican non-governmental agency, initiated  private forest
plantation programme to allow Jamaicans to participate in carbon trading This
means that tree farmers will be able to sell Carbon Credits to foreign companies
in developed countries which are trying to comply with pollutant emission
standards arising from the Kyoto Protocol  Methyl tertiary-butyl ether is
water-soluble additive to gasoline that can easily render large quantities of
groundwater non-potable                ’              Page 56 Education sector
Tertiary-level courses and research on energy conservation, efficiency and
renewable energy were established at the University of the West Indies, Mona and
the University of Technology, Jamaica UWI established the Solid State
Electronics Research Laboratory, which focuses on the development and
utilization of alternate energy sources through photovoltaic cells The Physics
Department offers undergraduate courses in solar power; Wind & Hydro power; and
Integrating Alternative Energy  new post graduate course in Energy Efficiency
and Renewable Energy Technologies in the faculty of Pure and Applied Sciences
was expected to commence in the academic year 2000 - At UTech,  course in
mechanical engineering entitled Energy Production Systems is offered and about
50% of it covers the sub-topic entitled Renewable Energy Resources Energy
conservation is included under this sub-topic In electrical engineering, modules
on energy conservation and renewable energy are offered to undergraduate degree
students The Ministry of Education has incorporated energy issues, including
conservation and renewable energy in the Revised Primary Curriculum (Grades -)
and the Reform of Secondary Education (ROSE) (Grades -) Science syllabus The
Caribbean Examinations Council offers  course in Environmental Science for the
Caribbean Advanced Proficiency Examination (CAPE) level; this course includes
examination of energy issues The Joint Board of Teacher Education developed two
teacher education courses on Environmental Education for teachers in early
childhood / primary and secondary programmes; these courses include discussion
of energy issues The Management Institute for National Development offers the
“Holistic Governance: Sustainable Development in Action” Programme that includes
courses in Environmental Management and Stewardship (which include topics
related to energy) targeted at all levels of the public sector Numerous non-
formal environmental education initiatives are conducted in schools by NGOs and
government agencies such as PCJ and NEPA, which raise awareness about energy
issues including pollution, conservation and renewable energy Page 57 Jamaica’
Energy Policy  ANNEX  Energy Statistics 2004 - 2008                ’
Page 58 The table below provides key energy statistics over the period 2004 to
2008 Table : Key Energy Statistics 2004 – 2008 Energy Indicators 2004 2005 2006
2007 2008  Percentage of renewables in energy mix  56  Energy Consumption per
Capita (BOE)  Greenhouse Gas Emission (Mt per annum) Electricity Consumption in
the Public Sector (KWh) Total Energy Consumption (‘000 Barrels) Petroleum Based
Aviation Gasoline ,789 ,572 ,984 ,931 ,599 Turbo Fuel 864 886 929 903 925 LPG 39
39 34 11 18 Kerosene ,378 ,583 ,505 ,301 ,295 Gasoline ,979 ,538 ,004 ,827 ,661
ADO 151 249 342 234 247 ADO Bunker 14,086 15,288 17,032 17,516 16,372 Fuel Oil
25,309 27,161 28,830 28,723 27,117 Total Petroleum 24,499 26,292 27,678 26,039
26,039 Total Petroleum (BOE) Alternative Energy 134 151 166 160 158 Hydropower
MWh Page 59 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Energy Indicators 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
83 94 104 99 98 Hydropower 000 BOE 32 50 55 52 49 Wind MWh 20 32 34 32 31 Wind
000 BOE 66 53 32 36 48 Coal 000 Tonnes 323 259 187 176 233 Coal 000 BOE 196 186
Charcoal - BOE 695 467 602 591 Bagasse - BOE 585 556 Fuelwood - BOE ,980 ,594
927 899 362 Alternative Energy - BOE 26,401 27,985 28,605 28,518 26,401 Total
Petroleum and Alternative Energy 000 BOE Petroleum Consumption By Activity
,075,623 ,247,835 ,373,380 ,079,884 ,835,304 Road and Rail Transportation
368,356 ,636,028 ,239,911 ,972,826 ,805,615 Shipping 104,791 37,066 14,338
28,477 26,004 Cement Manufacture ,792,975 ,577,438 ,983,596 ,931,222 ,598,706
Aviation ,225,912 ,555,261 ,390,163 ,654,238 ,274,571 Electricity Generation
,444,053 ,799,121 ,551,792 ,807,899 ,392,039 Bauxite/Alumina Processing 75,993
40,283 50,055 61,491 43,764 Sugar Manufacturing 902,939 924,730 963,531 912,116
931,853 Cooking and Lighting Petroleum Refinery 223,266 164,247 331,788 362,947
355,076                ’              Page 60 Energy Indicators 2004 2005 2006
2007 2008 135,991 163,261 181,695 198,995 136,634 Other Manufacturing 022
180,749 83,935 80,332 73,584 Other Prepared by the Energy Economics and Planning
Unit, Ministry of Energy and Mining, 2009 Page 61 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  ANNEX
List of Organizations Participating in National Consultations and Stakeholder
Discussions                ’              Page 62 This Policy Development
Process included the inputs of various stakeholders in the public and private
sectors as well as from non-governmental and civil society organizations The
policy development benefitted from island-wide consultations as well as from
information received from various groups including academia and industry groups
The development process also benefitted from input and review of all Ministries
of GOJ Below is  list of the various organizations that participated in the
national consultations While we tried to capture all organizations here, if you
have been inadvertently omitted, rest assured that your comments were not  JR,
‘’ Company AIJCFA ALPART Andrew United Church Automatic Control Eng Ltd
Automobile Dealers Assoc Bahia Principe Hotel Baija Partners Ltd Barefoot
Environmental Solutions BH Paints () Ltd Boucher Park Braeton Citizens Assoc
Bridgeport Branch Library - Paints Campbell’ Greens Inc Caretaker Catholic
Pastoral Centre Chamber of Commerce Children’ World Academy Christa Villa Hotel
Christiana Potato Growers Church of God of Prophecy Churches Co-op Credit
Constituency Office, East St Thomas ECO-TEC El Greco Resort Fair Trading
Commission Frome Technical High School  Gleaner Co Ltd Global Travel Golden
Shore Resort Golf View Hotel Green Energy Technologies Guardian Asset Management
Half Moon Club Holiday Inn Sunspree Hotel Gloriana & Spa IP Isratech Ja Ltd JIS
JAECOM Limited Jamaica - Clubs Jamaica - Clubs Jamaica Broilers Jamaica Library
Service Jamaica Observer Jamaica Railway Corp JAS, Cave Valley JBU Brotherhood
JBU Brotherhood Jimmy Palmer &Associates JLP Caretaker, Bath JN Small Business
Loans JNBS JNBS Foundation JPSCO Kennedy Communications Kiwanis Club KSAC Lions
Club          MAC Limited Manchester - Clubs Manchester Parish Council
Manchester Parish Library Manchester PDC Mandeville Weekly Mannings School
Marcant Jamaica Maxie Dept Stores Mayberry Investments Mayor’ Office, Savanna-
la-mar MBJ Airports Ltd Page 63 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Melrose Primary &Jr High
Middleton Primary Ministry of Transport & Works Montego Community College Morant
Bay Vendor’ Assn Moravian Church Ja & Cay Is Mount Royal Dev Rural Agricultural
Development Authority  Citizens’ Assoc  Corp SDC SERHA Shaun Jones Texaco Small
Business Assoc Small Business Assoc Solar Lighting & More Southboro Citizens
Assoc SSDO St Thomas Baptist Youth St Thomas Brotherhood St Thomas Parish
Council St Thomas PDC STARDO STATIN Supt of Police Technical Engineer, PCJ The
Book & Star Place Torrington Community Transport Sector University of the West
Indies Westmoreland Parish Council Westmoreland Parish Council Wincar Dev Constr
Ltd Winston Trading Co Ltd National Environment and Planning Agency National
Housing Trust New Haven Citizens Assoc New Testament Church Northern Caribbean
University NSWMA PCJ PETCOM Planning Institute of Jamaica Portmore Chamber of
Commerce Portmore Community College Portmore Cultural Development Committee
Portmore Municipal Council Portmore Shopping Centre Porus Primary School Post &
Telecom Dept President, Vendors Assn Pyramid Tour Co Robbie’ Restaurant ’
Page 64 ANNEX  Glossary of Key Terms Alcohol: The family name of  group of
organic chemical compounds composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen The series
of molecules vary in chain length and are composed of  hydrocarbon plus
hydroxyl group; CH()-(CH())-OH (, methanol, ethanol, and tertiary butyl alcohol)
Alternative-fuel vehicle (AFV):  vehicle designed to operate on an alternative
fuel (, compressed natural gas, methane blend, electricity) The vehicle could be
either  dedicated vehicle designed to operate exclusively on alternative fuel or
no dedicated vehicle designed to operate on alternative fuel and/or  traditional
fuel Ash: Impurities consisting of silica, iron, alumina, and other non-
combustible matter that are contained in coal Ash increases the weight of coal,
adds to the cost of handling, and can affect its burning characteristics Ash
content is measured as  percent by weight of coal on an "as received" or  "dry"
(moisture-free, usually part of  laboratory analysis) basis Automotive fuels:
Gasoline, diesel oil, LPG, CNG, and Biofuels Average household energy
expenditures:  ratio estimate defined as the total household energy expenditures
divided by the total number of households Base load: The minimum amount of
electric power delivered or required over  given period of time at  steady rate
Base load capacity: The generating equipment normally operated to serve loads on
an around- the-clock basis Base load plant:  plant, usually housing high-
efficiency steam-electric units, which is normally operated to take all or part
of the minimum load of  system, and which consequently produces electricity at
an essentially constant rate and runs continuously These units are operated to
maximize system mechanical and thermal efficiency and minimize system operating
costs BAU: Business as Usual scenario (assuming no policy action is taken) Bi-
fuel vehicle:  motor vehicle that operates on two different fuels, but not on
mixture of the fuels Each fuel is stored in  separate tank Biodiesel: Any liquid
biofuel suitable as  diesel fuel substitute or diesel fuel additive or extender
Biodiesel fuels are typically made from oils such as soybeans, rapeseed, or
sunflowers, Page 65 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  or from animal tallow Biodiesel can
also be made from hydrocarbons derived from agricultural products such as rice
hulls Biofuels: Liquid fuels and blending components produced from biomass
(plant) feedstocks, used primarily for transportation Biomass: Organic non-
fossil material of biological origin constituting  renewable energy source (
Bagasse, Fuelwood, other cellulose material) BOE (boe): The abbreviation for
barrels of oil equivalent (used internationally) British thermal unit (btu): The
quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of  pound of liquid water by
degree Fahrenheit at the temperature at which water has its greatest density
(approximately 39 degrees Fahrenheit) Btu: The abbreviation for British thermal
unit() Btu conversion factors: Btu conversion factors for site energy are as
follows: Electricity: Natural Gas: Fuel Oil No: Kerosene: Gasoline: Ethanol:
Methanol: Fuel Oil No: LPG (Propane): Wood: ,412 Btu/kilowatt-hour ,031
Btu/cubic foot 135,000 Btu/gallon 135,000 Btu/gallon 120,215 Btu/gallon 80,430
Btu/gallon 61,225 Btu/gallon 138,690 Btu/gallon 91,330 Btu/gallon 20 million
Btu/cord Bunker fuels: Fuel supplied to ships and aircraft, both domestic and
foreign, consisting primarily of residual and distillate fuel oil for ships and
kerosene-based jet fuel for aircraft The term "international bunker fuels" is
used to denote the consumption of fuel for international transport activities
Note: For the purposes of greenhouse gas emissions inventories, data on
emissions from combustion of international bunker fuels are subtracted from
national emissions totals Historically, bunker fuels have meant only ship fuel
Capacity utilization: Capacity utilization is computed by dividing production by
productive capacity and multiplying by Carbon credits: Carbon credits are  key
component of national and international attempts to reduce the growth in
concentrations of greenhouse gases One carbon credit is equal to one ton of
carbon Greenhouse gas emissions are capped at  certain maximum level and then
markets are used to allocate the emissions among the group of regulated sources
The idea is to allow market mechanisms to drive industrial and commercial
processes in the direction of low emissions or less "carbon intensive"
approaches Greenhouse gas reduction projects generate                ’
Page 66 credits and can be used to finance carbon reduction initiatives between
trading partners and around the world There are two distinct types of carbon
credits Carbon offset credits and carbon reduction credits Carbon offset credits
consist of clean forms of energy production, wind, solar, hydro and biofuels
Carbon reduction credits consist of the collection and storage of carbon from
our atmosphere through reforestation, forestation, ocean and soil collection and
storage efforts Both approaches are recognized as effective ways to reduce the
global emission of greenhouse gases Carbon dioxide (CO2):  colourless,
odourless, non-poisonous gas that is  normal part of Earth' atmosphere Carbon
dioxide is  product of fossil-fuel combustion as well as other processes It is
considered  greenhouse gas as it traps heat (infrared energy) radiated by the
Earth into the atmosphere and thereby contributes to the potential for global
warming The global warming potential of other greenhouse gases is measured in
relation to that of carbon dioxide, which by international scientific convention
is assigned  value of one () Carbon intensity: The amount of carbon by weight
emitted per unit of energy consumed  common measure of carbon intensity is
weight of carbon per British thermal unit (Btu) of energy When there is only one
fossil fuel under consideration, the carbon intensity and the emissions
coefficient are identical When there are several fuels, carbon intensity is
based on their combined emissions coefficients weighted by their energy
consumption levels Carbon sequestration: The fixation of atmospheric carbon
dioxide in  carbon sink through biological or physical processes Carbon sink:
reservoir that absorbs or takes up released carbon from another part of the
carbon cycle The four sinks, which are regions of the Earth within which carbon
behaves in  systematic manner, are the atmosphere, terrestrial biosphere
(usually including freshwater systems), oceans, and sediments (including fossil
fuels) Clean Development Mechanism: Known as CDM, the element of the Kyoto
Protocol that allows developing countries to trade carbon credits derived from
the implementation of energy efficiency projects The CDM is designed to provide
finance to projects that will contribute to sustainable development in the
country where the project is located To qualify under the CDM  project must go
beyond ‘business as usual’ and reduce emissions below what they ‘would have
been’, assuming normal economic development Climate change:  term used to refer
to all forms of climatic inconsistency, but especially to significant change
from one prevailing climatic condition to another In some cases, "climate
change" has been used synonymously with the term "global warming"; scientists,
however, tend to use the term in  wider sense inclusive of natural changes in
climate, including climatic cooling In the environmental literature, it often
refers to human-induced climate change Coal:  readily combustible black or
brownish-black rock whose composition, including inherent moisture, consists of
more than 50 percent by weight and more than 70 percent by volume of
carbonaceous material It is formed from plant remains that have been compacted,
hardened, Page 67 Jamaica’ Energy Policy  chemically altered, and metamorphosed
by heat and pressure over geologic time Coal analysis determines the composition
and properties of coal so it can be ranked and used most effectively Coal gas:
Substitute natural gas produced synthetically by the chemical reduction of coal
at  coal gasification facility Coal gasification: The process of converting coal
into gas The basic process involves crushing coal to  powder, which is then
heated in the presence of steam and oxygen to produce  gas The gas is then
refined to reduce sulphur and other impurities The gas can be used as  fuel or
processed further and concentrated into chemical or liquid fuel Cogeneration:
The production of electrical energy and another form of useful energy (such as
heat or steam) through the sequential use of energy Cogeneration system:  system
using  common energy source to produce both electricity and steam for other
uses, resulting in increased fuel efficiency Coke (coal):  solid carbonaceous
residue derived from low-ash, low-sulfur bituminous coal from which the volatile
constituents are driven off by baking in an oven at temperatures as high as ,000
degrees Fahrenheit so that the fixed carbon and residual ash are fused together
Coke is used as  fuel and as  reducing agent in smelting iron ore in  blast
furnace Coke from coal is grey, hard, and porous and has  heating value of
million Btu per ton Coke (petroleum):  residue high in carbon content and low in
hydrogen that is the final product of thermal decomposition in the condensation
process in cracking This product is reported as marketable coke or catalyst coke
The conversion is  barrels (of 42  gallons each) per short ton Coke from
petroleum has  heating value of 024 million Btu per barrel, also known as
petcoke Combined cycle: An electric generating technology in which electricity
is produced from otherwise lost waste heat exiting from one or more gas
(combustion) turbines The exiting heat is routed to  conventional boiler or to
heat recovery steam generator for utilization by  steam turbine in the
production of electricity This process increases the efficiency of the electric
generating unit Combined cycle unit is an electric generating unit that consists
of one or more combustion turbines and one or more boilers with  portion of the
required energy input to the boiler() provided by the exhaust gas of the
combustion turbine() Combined heat and power (CHP): is the use of  heat engine
or  power station to simultaneously generate both electricity and useful heat,
also known as cogeneration Compact fluorescent lamps or bulbs (CFL): These are
also known as "screw-in fluorescent replacements for incandescent" or "screw-
ins" Compact fluorescent bulbs combine the efficiency of fluorescent lighting
with the convenience of  standard incandescent bulb There are many styles of
compact fluorescent, including exit light fixtures and floodlights (lamps
containing reflectors) Many screw into  standard light socket, and most produce
similar colour of light as  standard incandescent bulb Compact fluorescent bulbs
come with ballasts                ’              Page 68 that are electronic
(lightweight, instant, no-flicker starting, and 10 to 15% more efficient) or
magnetic (much heavier and slower starting) Other types of compact fluorescent
bulbs include adaptive circulation and PL and SL lamps and ballasts Compact
fluorescent bulbs are designed for residential uses; they are also used in table
lamps, wall sconces, and hall and ceiling fixtures of hotels, motels, hospitals,
and other types of commercial buildings with residential-type applications
Compressed natural gas (CNG): Natural gas which is comprised primarily of
methane, compressed to  pressure at or above ,400 pounds per square inch and
stored in special high- pressure containers It is used as  fuel for natural gas
powered vehicles Cord of wood:  cord of wood measures  feet by  feet by  feet,
or 128 cubic feet Cubic foot (cf), natural gas: The amount of natural gas
contained at standard temperature and pressure (60 degrees Fahrenheit and 73
pounds standard per square inch) in  cube whose edges are one foot long Demand
Side Management: actions that influence the quantity or patterns of use of
energy consumed by end users Eco-efficiency: Creating more goods and services
with less and less use of resources, waste and pollution; coined by the Business
Council for Sustainable Development Energy: The capacity for doing work as
measured by the capability of doing work (potential energy) or the conversion of
this capability to motion (kinetic energy) Energy has several forms, some of
which are easily convertible and can be changed to another form useful for work
Most of the world' convertible energy comes from fossil fuels that are burned to
produce heat that is then used as  transfer medium to mechanical or other means
in order to accomplish tasks Electrical energy is usually measured in kilowatt-
hours, while heat energy is usually measured in British thermal units (Btu)
Energy conservation: Practices and actions that reduce the amount of energy that
is used Energy efficiency: Changing technology so that less energy is used to
accomplish the same task Ethanol (CH3-CH2OH):  clear, colourless, flammable
oxygenated hydrocarbon  type of alcohol, ethanol is typically produced
chemically from ethylene, or biologically from fermentation of various sugars
from carbohydrates found in agricultural crops and cellulosic residues from
crops or wood It is used as  gasoline octane enhancer and oxygenates (blended up
to 10 percent concentration) Ethanol can also be used in high concentrations
(E85) in vehicles designed for its use The lower heating value, equal to 76,000
Btu per gallon Flexible fuel vehicle:  vehicle that can operate on: ()
alternative fuels (such as M85 or E85) () 100-percent petroleum-based fuels ()
any mixture of an alternative fuel (or fuels) and  petroleum-based fuel Page 69
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Flexible fuel vehicles have  single fuel system to
handle alternative and petroleum-based fuels Flexible fuel vehicle and variable
fuel vehicle are synonymous terms  value (coal): Free-on-board value This is the
value of coal at the coal mine or of coke and breeze at the coke plant without
any insurance or freight transportation charges added Fossil Fuel: Any naturally
occurring organic fuel formed in the Earth’ crust, such as oil, coal, and
natural gas Gas turbine plant:  plant in which the prime mover is  gas turbine
gas turbine consists typically of an axial-flow air compressor and one or more
combustion chambers where liquid or gaseous fuel is burned and the hot gases are
passed to the turbine and where the hot gases expand drive the generator and are
then used to run the compressor Gigawatt (GW): One billion watts or one thousand
megawatts Gigawatt-thermal (GWth): the amount of thermal (as opposed to
electrical) power produced Gigawatt-hour (GWh): One billion watt-hours Green
Economy7 - The Green Economy is an emerging marketplace that seeks to optimize
the synergy among three sets of values: social, environmental and financial This
is most commonly referred to as the "triple bottom line" By definition, the
Green Economy is: Environmentally sustainable, based on the belief that our
biosphere is  closed system with finite resources and  limited capacity for
self-regulation and self-renewal We depend on the earth’ natural resources, and
therefore we must create an economic system that respects the integrity of
ecosystems and ensures the resilience of life supporting systems Socially just,
based on the belief that culture and human dignity are precious resources that,
like our natural resources, require responsible stewardship to avoid their
depletion We must create  vibrant economic system that ensures all people have
access to  decent standard of living and full opportunities for personal and
social development Locally rooted, based on the belief that an authentic
connection to place is the essential pre-condition to sustainability and justice
The Green Economy is  global aggregate of individual communities meeting the
needs of its citizens through the responsible, local production and exchange of
goods and services Greenhouse gas: Gases in the atmosphere that absorb and emit
radiation within the thermal infrared range Common greenhouse gases in the
Earth’ atmosphere include water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
(low-level or atmospheric) ozone, and chloro- fluorocarbons (CFCs) These gases
are the primary contributors to climate change  From Global Citizen’ Centre –
’              Page 70 Heat content: The amount of heat energy available to be
released by the transformation or use of  specified physical unit of an energy
form (,  tonne of coal,  barrel of oil,  kilowatt- hour of electricity,  cubic
foot of natural gas, or  pound of steam) The amount of heat energy is commonly
expressed in British thermal units (Btu) Note: Heat content of combustible
energy forms can be expressed in terms of either gross heat content (higher or
upper heating value) or net heat content (lower heating value), depending upon
whether or not the available heat energy includes or excludes the energy used to
vaporize water (contained in the original energy form or created during the
combustion process) Heat rate: Amount of energy input needed to produce one
kilowatt hour of electricity The energy output of one kilowatt is ,This when
divided by the energy content of fuel needed to produce one kilowatt of
electricity gives the efficiency factor In 2007 JPSCo’ energy input to produce
one kilowatt hour of electricity is estimated at 12,623 Btu This translates to
an efficiency factor of % ICENS: International Centre for Environmental and
Nuclear Sciences Independent power producer (IPP):  corporation, person, agency,
authority, or other legal entity or instrumentality that owns or operates
facilities for the generation of electricity for use primarily by the public,
and that is not an electric utility IPP/IPPs: Independent Power Producer/ Joule
(): The meter-kilogram-second unit of work or energy, equal to the work done by
force of one newton when its point of application moves through  distance of one
meter in the direction of the force; equivalent to 107 ergs and one watt-second
JPSCo: Jamaica Public Service Company Kilowatt (kW): ,000 watts Kilowatt-hour
(kWh):  measure of electricity defined as  unit of work or energy, measured as
kilowatt (,000 watts) of power expended for  hour One kWh is equivalent to ,412
Btu Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change: An
international agreement that sets binding targets for 37 industrialized
countries and the European community for reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
Liquefied natural gas (LNG): Natural gas (primarily methane) that has been
liquefied by reducing its temperature to -260 degrees Fahrenheit at atmospheric
pressure Liquefied petroleum gases (LPG):  group of hydrocarbon-based gases
derived from crude oil refining or natural gas fractionation They include
ethane, ethylene, propane, propylene, normal butane, butylenes, isobutane, and
isobutylene For convenience of transportation, these gases are liquefied through
pressurization They are usually delivered by tank truck and stored near the
building in  tank or cylinder until used One common use is cooking gas Page 71
Jamaica’ Energy Policy  Megawatt (MW): One thousand kilowatts Megawatt-hour
(MWh): One thousand kilowatt-hours MTBE: Methyl tertiary-butyl ether is  water-
soluble additive to gasoline Net metering: an electricity policy for consumers
who own (generally small) renewable energy facilities, such as wind, solar power
or home fuel cells which enables consumers to sell the excess to the local
utility, offsetting their purchases from the utility at other times NWC:
National Water Commission Octane rating:  number used to indicate gasoline'
antiknock performance in motor vehicle engines The two recognized laboratory
engine test methods for determining the antiknock rating, , octane rating, of
gasolines are the Research method and the Motor method To provide  single number
as guidance to the consumer, the antiknock index ( + )/, which is the average of
the Research and Motor octane numbers, was developed Oil Intensity Index: Volume
of oil required to produce one dollar of constant GDP OUR: Office of Utilities
Regulation PBMR: Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (emerging nuclear technology which
is expected to facilitate electricity generation from smaller sized and cost
effective plants) PCJ: Petroleum Corporation of Jamaica Peak demand: The maximum
load during  specified period of time Petcoke: See Coke (petroleum) Renewable
energy resources: Energy resources that are naturally replenishing but flow-
limited They are virtually inexhaustible in duration but limited in the amount
of energy that is available per unit of time Renewable energy resources include:
biomass, hydro, geothermal, solar, wind, ocean thermal, wave action, and tidal
action Spot market (natural gas):  market in which natural gas is bought and
sold for immediate or very near-term delivery, usually for  period of 30 days or
less The transaction does not imply  continuing arrangement between the buyer
and the seller  spot market is more likely to develop at  location with numerous
pipeline interconnections, thus allowing for  large number of buyers and sellers
The Henry Hub in southern Louisiana is the best known spot market for natural
gas System (electric): Physically connected generation, transmission, and
distribution facilities operated as an integrated unit under one central
management or operating supervision                ’              Page 72 System
losses: Electric energy lost in the process of generating electricity as well as
due to the transmission and distribution of electricity Transmission and
distribution losses (& Losses): Electric energy lost due to the transmission and
distribution of electricity Much of the loss is thermal in nature There are two
types of losses: ) technical, and ) non-technical Generally an efficient system
would have these losses in the % to % range Transport fuels: Auto fuels;
kerosene or turbo fuel (- and -) for aviation; marine diesel and bunker fuel for
shipping; and electricity (railways) Transportation sector: An energy-consuming
sector that consists of all vehicles whose primary purpose is transporting
people and/or goods from one physical location to another Included are
automobiles; trucks; buses; motorcycles; trains, subways, and other rail
vehicles; aircraft; and ships, barges, and other waterborne vehicles Vehicles
whose primary purpose is not transportation (, construction cranes and
bulldozers, farming vehicles, and warehouse tractors and forklifts) are
classified in the sector of their primary use UTECH: University of Technology,
Jamaica UWI: University of the West Indies Waste heat recovery: Any conservation
system whereby some space heating or water heating is done by actively capturing
by product heat that would otherwise be ejected into the environment In
commercial buildings, sources of water- heat recovery include refrigeration/air-
conditioner compressors, manufacturing or other processes, data processing
centres, lighting fixtures, ventilation exhaust air, and the occupants
themselves Not to be considered is the passive use of radiant heat from
lighting, workers, motors, ovens, etc, when there are no special systems for
collecting and redistributing heat Watt (): The unit in which power (the rate at
which energy is used) is measured See also kilowatt Watt-hour (Wh): The amount
of Watts of energy used in one () hour See also Kilowatt-hour Wheeling: The
ability of an energy consumer to select their own energy supplier, or "wheel in"
energy from one or more different suppliers; the movement of electricity through
local grid for use in another area Wind energy: Kinetic energy present in wind
motion that can be converted to mechanical energy for driving pumps, mills, and
electric power generators Wind power plant:  group of wind turbines
interconnected to  common utility system through  system of transformers,
distribution lines, and (usually) one substation Operation, control, and
maintenance functions are often centralized through  network of computerized
monitoring systems, supplemented by visual inspection Page 73 Jamaica’ Energy
Policy