ENERGY PROFILE Chad COUNTRY INDICATORS AND SDGS  Access to electricity (%
population)  Access to clean cooking (% population)  Renewable energy (% TFEC)
Energy intensity GDP per capita  Real GDP growth rate  %    100%  %
/          80%  %   60% -%          -%  '  -% 40%    -% 20% 11%   -%  %% 2018
2019 2020 2021 %  2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  Per capita
renewable capacity  Air particulate matter (PM2)  Public flows to renewables
Urban Average Rural WHO safe 45   40 70  35 60 30 50        / )  25     /   ( 40
20       30    15   11 20 10  10      2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 TOTAL ENERGY SUPPLY (TES)
Total energy supply in 2020 Total Energy Supply (TES) Non-renewable (TJ) 2015 15
789 2020 25 901 Renewable (TJ) 70 910 75 912 Oil Total (TJ) 86 699 101 813 25%
Gas Renewable share (%) 82 75 Nuclear -% Coal + others Growth in TES Non-
renewable (%)  + +75% Renewables Renewable (%) + + Total (%) ++ Renewable energy
supply in 2020 Primary energy trade Imports (TJ) 2015  485 2020 102 % %
Hydro/marine Exports (TJ) Net trade (TJ) 295 312 287 827 269 272 269 170 Wind
Solar Imports (% of supply) Exports (% of production) Energy self-sufficiency
(%)  79 433  72 365 Bioenergy 100% Geothermal RENEWABLE ENERGY CONSUMPTION
(TFEC) Renewable TFEC trend Renewable energy consumption in 2020 Electricity
Commercial heat Bioenergy 76 Geothermal Solar direct % 75 74 80 73 72 71 70 60 )
( 50   40     30     100% 20 10 %  2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020  17% Industry
Consumption by sector Industry (TJ) Transport (TJ) Households (TJ) 2015 908  58
463 2020 950  61 938 Transport Households Other Other (TJ) 11 572 13 088 82%
ELECTRICITY CAPACITY Installed capacity trend Renewable capacity in 2022 Non-
renewable Fossil fuels Renewable Hydro/marine Hydro/marine Bioenergy Solar  Wind
Bioenergy  Geothermal Total  282        286 99 Other Non-RE  Solar  Renewable
share     80% 100 Nuclear Wind Geothermal Hydro/marine 19% Solar 100% Wind   52%
Bioenergy   29% Geothermal Capacity change (%)  Non-renewable  ( Renewable
Hydro/marine     Solar   Wind  Bioenergy Geothermal  Total   + 17  + 320    +
) % (  60%                      )  Net capacity change (GW)  40% Fossil fuels
Renewable     20%  % %   2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022  Net capacity
change in 2022 (MW)  Non-renewable Hydro and marine               2017 2018 2019
2020 2021 2022 Solar Wind Capacity utilisation in 2021 (%)   Fossil fuels 13%
Nuclear Bioenergy Geothermal Hydro/Marine   Solar 20% Wind 92% Bioenergy 52%
Geothermal  20 40 60 80 100 ELECTRICITY GENERATION Electricity generation trend
Generation in 2021 Non-renewable Renewable Hydro and marine Solar Wind Bioenergy
Geothermal Total GWh 326 19      345 % 94       100 Fossil fuels Nuclear Other
Non-RE Hydro/marine Wind Solar Bioenergy Geothermal Renewable share  100%
80%  )    ( ) % (      Per capita electricity generation (kWh) 60%       -
Total Renewable 25           40% 20  15  10 20%   %   % 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 LATEST POLICIES, PROGRAMMES AND LEGISLATION
ENERGY AND EMISSIONS Energy-related CO2 emissions by sector Elec & heat
generation CO2 emissions in Elec & heat Other Industrial Transport Other
Buildings %%  Coal + others            Gas       Oil  100%  2016 2017 2018 2019
2020 2021 CO2 emission factor for elec & heat generation Avoided emissions from
renewable elec & heat Emitted CO2 RE Avoided CO2 TCD Africa World  000   500
000                /   500 ENERGY AND EMISSIONS   000         500 929    000 508
500   2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Avoided
emissions based on fossil fuel mix used for power Calculated by dividing power
sector emissions by elec + heat gen RENEWABLE RESOURCE POTENTIAL Distribution of
solar potential Distribution of wind potential Chad World Chad World 100% 100%
80% 80%               60% 60%                           40% 40% 20% 20% % % <260
>1060 <  -   -   -   -   -  > Wind power density at 100m height (/m2) Annual
generation per unit of installed PV capacity (MWh/kWp) Biomass potential: net
primary production Indicators of renewable resource potential   Solar PV: Solar
resource potential has been divided into seven classes, each representing  range
of annual PV output per unit of capacity (kWh/kWp/yr) The bar chart shows the
proportion of  country' land area in each of these classes and the global
distribution of land area across the classes (for comparison)     Onshore wind:
Potential wind power density (/m2) is shown in the seven classes used by NREL,
measured at  height of 100m The bar chart shows the distribution of the country'
land area in each of these classes compared to the global distribution of wind
resources Areas in the third class or above are considered to be  good wind
resource   200 Biomass: Net primary production (NPP) is the amount of carbon
fixed by plants and accumulated as biomass each year It is  basic measure of
biomass productivity The chart shows the average NPP in the country (tC/ha/yr),
compared to the global average NPP of - tonnes of carbon 10   tC/ha/yr  11 =
Global average of - tC/ha/yr Sources: IRENA statistics, plus data from the
following sources: UN SDG Database (original sources: WHO; World Bank; IEA;
IRENA; and UNSD); UN World Population Prospects; UNSD Energy Balances; UN
COMTRADE; World Bank World Development Indicators; EDGAR; REN21 Global Status
Report; IEA -IRENA Joint Policies and Measures Database; IRENA Global Atlas; and
World Bank Global Solar Atlas and Global Wind Atlas Additional notes: Capacity
per capita and public investments SDGs only apply to developing areas Energy
self-sufficiency has been defined as total primary energy production divided by
total primary energy supply Energy trade includes all commodities in Chapter 27
of the Harmonised System (HS) Capacity utilisation is calculated as annual
generation divided by year-end capacity  ,760h/year Avoided emissions from
renewable power is calculated as renewable generation divided by fossil fuel
generation multiplied by reported emissions from the power sector This assumes
that, if renewable power did not exist, fossil fuels would be used in its place
to generate the same amount of power and using the same mix of fossil fuels In
countries and years where no fossil fuel generation occurs, an average fossil
fuel emission factor has been used to calculate the avoided emissions These
profiles have been produced to provide an overview of developments in renewable
energy in different countries and areas The IRENA statistics team would welcome
comments and feedback on its structure and content, which can be sent to
statistics@irenaorg IRENA Headquarters Masdar City  Box 236, Abu Dhabi United
Arab Emirates  Last updated on: 8th August, 2023